UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Idea Generation Sequences Using Hidden Markov Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/10m1h3r5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Wang, Hao-Chuan

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Idea Generation Sequences Using Hidden Markov Models
Hao-Chuan Wang (haochuan@cs.cmu.edu)
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
individual idea generation and the socio-cognitive process
regarding how social interactions influence individuals’
ideation. It is plausible to model idea generation as a
Markov stochastic process based on the observation that the
generation of a later idea may be influenced by ideas that
have been triggered. Previous work has modeled idea
generation as Markov chains (Brown et al., 1998). The
modeling formalism was effective and simple, but did not
show adequate modularization and abstraction that modern
cognitive theories have generally agreed upon.
The objective of the work is to address the limitation of
prior work by introducing Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
(Rabiner, 1989) and its variants to model idea generation.
Hidden states in HMMs are leveraged as a computational
device to model non-observable memory retrieval processes
during idea generation have been theorized by Nijstad &
Stroebe (2006) but not yet fully explored through
computational modeling.
This paper consists of three components. First, we review
the state-of-the-art research on cognitive modeling for idea
generation. We then train HMMs with empirical data to
model individual idea generation. To demonstrate the
utility, we perform two analyses made possible by HMM,
including (1) examining the structures of mental images and
(2) examining the transitions of mental states behind idea
generation sequences. Lastly, we model interactive idea
generation in groups using Input-Output HMM (IO-HMM)
(Bengio & Frasconi, 1996). As the third analysis of the
paper, we compare two plausible modeling structures of IOHMM and discuss possible ways that interactive
communication may affect idea generation.

Abstract
The paper presents computational models for investigating
cognitive and socio-cognitive processes in the task of idea
generation. We employed Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and
its variants to model memory structures and processes in idea
generation that have been theorized descriptively but not
implemented and tested computationally. Existing algorithms
and methods for HMM provide a new path to examine these
invisible structures and processes, and the influence of social
interactions in brainstorming groups.
Keywords: Idea Generation; Cognitive Modeling; Hidden
Markov Model

Introduction
In the past decades, laboratory experiments on group idea
generation have demonstrated many interesting phenomena
regarding human creativity and how group may affect the
mind. One persistent finding is the phenomenon called
process loss that real brainstorming groups characterized by
information sharing and social interactions actually generate
significantly fewer unique ideas than nominal groups in
which individuals work alone and their ideas are pooled
together afterward (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987; Brown et al.,
1998; Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006; Wang & Rosé, 2007). The
finding is contrary to the popular belief that working in
groups is better than alone or social interactions would be
beneficial for creative tasks.
In search for theoretical explanations for process losses in
group brainstorming or group idea generation, historically,
laboratory experiments played the major role in testing
plausible explanations. Classic explanations are mostly at
the social level, such as production blocking due to turn
taking, social loafing (“free riding”), and evaluation
apprehension. Controlled experiments were able to test
hypotheses about these social factors and established
causation (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987). Recently, resurging
interests on the research of idea generation have shifted the
focus to the cognitive aspects, in particular, how interactions
between two or more individual cognitive systems lead to
observed group outcome. The socio-cognitive approach
explain the target group phenomenon as a consequence of
interactions between individuals, and therefore one’s
memory retrieval and verbalization is affected by partners’
behaviors. However, studying cognitive processes in social
contexts through behavioral studies could be expensive and
methodologically constrained. For example, it could be
difficult to manipulate participants’ behaviors for testing
cognitive explanations and at the same time ensure the
authenticity of social interactions.
Computational modeling of human cognition is
potentially useful for studying the cognitive process of

Cognitive Modeling for Idea Generation
Idea generation can be viewed as a process of searching
for ideas in the long-term memory (LTM), in which
concepts are assumed to store in network structures,
namely the associative memory (Nijstad & Stroebe,
2006). Thinking of one concept may activate another
concept through encoded associations. The generation
of a later idea thus may possess dependency on previous
ideation. For example, when thinking ideas for the
problem, “how to improve university parking”, the idea
of encouraging students to walk is more likely to cooccur with the idea of encouraging students to ride
bicycles but probably not the idea of increasing the
parking fee. From the view of cognitive modeling, the
possible local dependency between consecutive ideas in
idea generation sequences is one of the salient features
that a cognitive modeling framework strives to capture
and describe.
Two existing cognitive modeling frameworks for idea
generation are both based on the assumption that
107

spreading activation in associative memory drives the
production of ideas and related behavioral phenomena.
(Brown et al., 1998; Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006). Brown et
al. (1998) modeled idea generation as a Markov chain
consisting of transitional probabilities for a set of idea
categories without assuming hidden states. In this model,
every specific idea is assumed to have only one
categorical label. To generate a specific idea requires
accessing the predefined category that the idea is
associated with. At each time stamp, one may either
generate a within-category idea that is under the same
category as the previous idea, or transit to another
category and generate an idea from the new one. This
modeling approach is easy to handle, and was shown
useful in simulating idea generation at individual and
group levels. However, despite its simplicity, as Nijstad
& Stroebe (2006) argued, employing only a probabilistic
transitional matrix to describe idea generation behaviors
failed to acknowledge established cognitive theories that
possess higher degrees of complexity and modularity.
Also, the assumption that every idea associates with only
one category is debatable
Nijstad & Stroebe (2006) proposed an alternative
modeling approach as an attempt to better incorporate
cognitive theories. Based on a well-established theory
of associative memory (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981),
Nijstad & Stroebe’s SIAM (Search for Ideas in
Associative Memory) model assumed that memory
retrieval primarily consists of two stages. First, an image
r containing a central concept, related concepts, and
properties associated with concepts is retrieved from
LTM to the working memory (WM).
Ideas are
subsequently generated from the activated image r. The
SIAM model explicitly draws parallels between idea
generation and free recall to avoid overly specializing
idea generation and to explain related phenomena based
on general cognitive theories. However, the SIAM
model is at best a procedural flowchart but not a fully
parameterized computational model. The model is
useful for hypothesis formation and testing, which
emphasizes on the direction of prediction but not precise
quantification. The model cannot produce simulations
with sufficient details, such as predicting which idea is
more/less likely to occur given the current mental state.
To bridge the gap between Brown et al.’s pragmatic
approach of Markov chain modeling and Nijstad &
Stroebe’s theory-driven approach, we propose to use
HMM as a computational device of modeling that
captures observable ideation outputs and theorized, nonobservable activation of memory sub-structures (e.g.,
images in SIAM). The HMM approach is plausible based
on these discussions. Recent success in using HMM to
model various cognitive processes, such as eye
movements (Feng, 2006) and cognitive load in teamwork
(Fan et al., 2007), also motivates this approach.
To model idea generation, we assume that semantic
memory is partitioned into sub-structures called mental
images and can be represented as hidden states in HMM.
Ideas are output symbols emitted from the hidden states.
The observed semantic dependency between consecutive
ideas can be explained by having ideas generated from
the same or different states. Theorized processes like

Table 1: Codes for the “Debris Flow Hazard” idea
generation task
1

Steep mountain slope

12

Ineffective water
drainage

2

Fragile geological
condition

13

Illegal sand mining

3

Deforestation

14

4

Growing shallow root
plants

15

5

Intense rainfall

16

6

Earthquake

17

7

Excavating slope toe
Excessive urban
development
Inadequate soil and
water conservation
Building houses on
the steep slope
Improperly dumping
waste soil

18

8
9
10
11

19

Excessive earth and
water pressure
Ineffective flood
prevention
People living in
unsafe areas
Lack of information
and education
Lack of awareness
Bad policy and/or
execution

20

[Unrelated idea]

21

[Proposal of solution]

22

[End of ideation]

abandoning the current image and activating a new one
or exhausting ideas from a few images may be captured
by probabilistic transitions between hidden states. In this
way, we may employ HMM to model individual idea
generation in which external cues are absent. Given this
foundation, we further use IO-HMM to account for the
influence of overhearing others’ ideas on individuals in
brainstorming groups.

Modeling Individual Idea Generation
Dataset and Preprocessing
We trained HMM for individual idea generation by using a
dataset consisting of 226 Taiwanese high school students’
idea generation sequences on a brainstorming topic in the
domain of Earth Sciences. These students were asked to
answer the question, “What are possible factors for the
happening of Debris Flow Hazards (DFH)?” DFHs are
natural hazards frequently occurred in Taiwan. Students
worked individually to generate a list of ideas on the openended question in 30 minutes.
Their responses were coded manually as one of the 19
valid ideas identified by domain experts. For responses that
are not identified as any of the 19 valid ideas, the code
“unrelated idea” was assigned. For responses that were
related but talking about possible solutions for the hazard,
the code “solution” was assigned (the task asked for
underlying factors, not solutions). At the end of each idea
sequence, we appended another unique code, “end of
ideation”, to indicate running out of ideas. Therefore a total
of 22 codes were used to code each idea sequence. Table 1
shows a brief summary of the coding scheme. Two
independent coders coded the dataset as reported in Wang,
Chang & Li (in press). The inter-coder agreement achieved
the level of Kappa = .77, which was satisfactory. Among the

108

Figure 1: Likelihood-based cross-validation for
choosing the number of hidden states
226 sequences (one from each student), the longest
sequence consisted of 16 codes, and the shortest consisted
of 3 codes.

Learning Parameters of HMM

Figure 2: Emission probabilities of the 8-state HMM

We assumed that individual idea generation can be
modeled by HMMs with n hypothetical hidden states,
where 3≤n≤10. Since hidden states are not observable,
deciding the best n is a critical step. We used leave-oneout cross-validation (CV) (i.e., 226 folds CV) to avoid
over-fitting and select the most generalizable model. At
each fold, we held one sequence as the testing data and
trained an n-state HMM model using the rest 225
sequences. We tested the likelihoods of the testing data
given the trained model. The summation of loglikelihoods derived through cross-validation was
employed as the goodness of fit index. We trained
HMMs by employing an implementation of the BaumWelch algorithm included in the HMM toolbox for
Matlab (Murphy, 1998). When estimating emission
probabilities, we utilized the popular add-one smoothing
technique to add one imaginary count to each observable
codes.
Figure 1 shows the goodness-of-fit scores
(summations of log-likelihoods computing from leaveone-out CV) associated with each of the n-state HMMs.
From the comparison, HMM with 8 hidden states was
the optimal. We decided to use the 8-state model in
following analyses.

1998). The same idea may be accessed through different
mental images with varied emission probabilities. For
example, code 10, the idea that “building houses in steep
slopes” could be detrimental, was associated with other
ideas in different mental images with different semantic
relations. In mental image 4 (q=4), code 10 was
associated with code 5 (“intense rainfall as a factor for
DFH”) probably through the inference that intense
rainfall on a excavated slope is more likely to cause
DFH. While in mental image 6 (q=6), code 10 appeared
to associate with code 2 (“fragile geological condition”)
and code 3 (“deforestation”), and the semantic relation
that connect them were different from the relation
between code 10 and code 5.
The observation is consistent with Nijstad & Stroebe’s
SIAM model that mental images may have fuzzy
boundaries and overlap. Our computational model
provides support of this view.

Analysis 2: Decoding Idea Generation Sequences
HMM as a computational theory for idea generation
makes it possible to decode observed idea generation
sequences and examine how mental images transit
during idea generation. This allows us to explore what
is the relation between the activation/transition of mental
images and idea generation performance. There have
been two competing views. Some argues that frequent
activations of new mental images may lead to worse
performance because one may have not generated all
possible ideas out of the old images. Also, triggering
images from long-term memory may be cognitively
more effortful. At the opposite, another view argues that
frequent activations of different mental images may be
more beneficial because brainstomers may avoid fixation
and think more diversely.

Analysis 1: Structure of Mental Images
Figure 2 shows the distribution of emission probabilities
in the 8-state model. The distributions reveal how ideas
are clustered around the mental images in HMM. It
makes sense that code 20 (unrelated ideas) and code 22
(end of ideation) correlate on some states (q=2 or 7)
since talking about unrelated ideas may signify that one
is situating at the state of running out of good ideas for
the brainstorming topic. Another observation is that
ideas were not clustered and categorized in only one way
as presumed by the Markov chain model (Brown et al.,
109

We further compare two students with same number of
total utterances but differential performance in idea
generation. Figure 3 shows transitional probabilities of
the 8-state HMM that we utilize to interpret the two
cases. Table 3 shows the decoded paths for the two
students. One salient feature of the low performing
student (S136), was to transit to mental image q2, and
then kept generating unrelated ideas until the end (see
Figure 2 for emission probabilities). Another observation
was that both students went through mental images q1
and q5 at the very beginning, and then following
different paths (either q2 or q4) that seemed to be
influential to the final performance. One implication
may be the importance of retaining the focus on the task
during idea generation. Exploration of off-task ideas
(e.g., transiting to q2) might just lead to continuous
distraction and end in low number of useful ideas.
Table 3: Profiles of two students

Figure 3: Transitional probabilities of the 8 state HMM
(showing only arcs with p>.03 for clarity)

Number of
between-state
transitions
*p<.05

.648*

B. Num.
total
utterances

C. Ideation
efficiency
(A/B)

-.095

.691*

#Unique
ideas

Decoded path of mental
image transitions

S208

12

9

[1 5 5 5 5 4 3 7 7 7 7 7]

S136

12

4

[1 5 5 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2]

Dataset and Preprocessing
The dataset consists of ideas on the same DFH task from 34
Taiwanese high school students. The 34 students worked in
groups of two, resulting in 17 dyads.
Each dyad
communicated and generated ideas over Instant Messaging
(IM). Ideas were manually coded by using the same coding
scheme with 22 codes that we mentioned above. We also
assumed that group members took strict turns to contribute.
By considering that some members of a dyad may not
always use their turns to contribute, and thus the other
member of the same dyad may dominate over several
consecutive time slices, a new code “empty” was used to
denote the situation that one did not contribute anything in
her/his turn. Also since off-task social talks were present in
these brainstorming episodes, the code “na” was added to
mark up that one did not attempt to generate an idea in a
specific turn. Among the 17 dyads, 7 were collected and
coded in the study presented in Wang et al. (2007). The
inter-coder agreement of the coding results reached
Kappa=.84. The rest 10 dyads were collected in an
unpublished follow-up study. The inter-coder agreement of
data coding over the 10 dyads achieved Kappa=.73.
Note that the size of the dataset is relatively small with
respect to the number of free parameters associated with IOHMMs. For example, if there are 24 possible codes for
inputs and outputs, and the number of hidden states is set to
3, the simplest IO-HMM model would still have 284 free
parameters that need to be estimated. To control for
complexity and increase generality, we reduced the number
of possible codes by grouping codes into four general

Table 2: Correlations (Pearson’s r) between mental state
transitions and measures of ideation performance
A. Num.
unique
ideas

#Total
utterances

Modeling Group Idea Generation

To explore the plausibility of the two views in the
context of the DFH task, we used the Viterbi algorithm
to compute the most probable paths of hidden state
transitions for idea generation sequence. We then
counted the number of between-state transitions for each
sequence and correlated it against measures of task
performance. For example, if one student’s path of
mental image transitions across five time slices is [1 1 1
3 5], the number of between-state transition is identified
to be 3, which includes the (start)-1 transition, 1-3
transition, and 3-5 transition. To account for the fact that
shorter idea generation sequences are inherently more
likely to transit less frequently and produce fewer unique
ideas, we only included long idea generation sequences
(number of total utterances ≥8) in the analysis.
Table 2 shows the results of the correlation analysis.
There were significant correlations between the number
of between-state transitions and the number of unique
ideas as well as ideation efficiency (number of unique
ideas divided by number of total utterances). In the
context of the DFH task, frequent activations and
transitions of mental images appear to be an indicator of
good ideation performance.

N=111

ID

110

Figure 4: Modeling dyadic idea generation with
direct social influences (with arc between X and Y)

Figure 6: Likelihood-based cross-validation for selecting IOHMMs
Figure 5: Modeling dyadic idea generation with only
influence of cognitive stimulation and interference
explanations? Do social factors further explain variance
that cannot be captured by cognitive explanations?
We trained two types of IO-HMMs with different
modeling assumptions to explore this question. In the first
type of IO-HMM, the direct-social model, as shown in
Figure 4, we assumed that at each time slice one’s idea
generation is affected by one’s own mental image and the
idea that her partner just verbalized. Note that partner ideas
may cause influence directly without the involvement of
mental image activation. This type of model therefore
represents the scenario that social factors have additional
capacity of explanation. In the second type of IO-HMM, the
cognitive-only model, as shown in Figure 5, the link
between X (partner idea) and Y(self idea) was removed.
However, the partner’s ideas may affect the activation and
transition of mental images. And idea generation is still
governed by mental images. In this way, the influence of
partner ideas arrives indirectly. This type of model refers to
the situation that social influences are fully mediated by
cognitive processes.
We trained n-state IO-HMMs, where 2≤n≤10, by using the
implementation of EM algorithm included in the Bayesian
network toolbox for Matlab (Murphy, 2001). Note that since
students of the same dyad produced two interdependent idea
sequences, we used the technique of leave-two-out CV to
avoid over-fitting in model selection. In each fold of
validation, two idea sequences from the same dyad were held
out as the testing data, and the rest of 32 sequences were used
in training. Therefore, a total of 17 training-testing folds were

categories: valid ideas, unrelated ideas, skipping-the-turn
(“empty”), and chitchat (“na”).

Analysis 3: Are Cognitive Explanations Sufficient?
As discussed at the beginning of this paper, one important
research topic in the literature of idea generation is
searching for explanations of the process loss phenomenon,
in which people performed worse when generating ideas
interactively in groups than working alone. Early work
focused primarily on using social or interpersonal factors
(e.g., production blocking, evaluation apprehension) to
explain process losses (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987). Recent
work focused more on cognitive explanations. Overhearing
partners’ ideas could be stimulating if partners’ ideas
successfully serve as priming cues for approaching ideas
that one has difficulty to access on her own. However,
partners’ ideas might also be inhibiting, if they are too
similar to one’s own ideas and constrain one’s exploration
of unvisited portions of the potential ideation space
(Dugosh, Paulus, Rolan, & Yang, 2000).
The relation and interaction between social and cognitive
factors remain understated at the current point. It appears
that some social factors may be further unrolled as a series
of cognitive operations. For example, Nijstad & Strobe
(2006) proposed that the effect of production blocking could
be explained by disruptions of image activation (i.e.,
cognitive interference) and idea forgetting when waiting for
turns to contribute their ideas. This raises the question that
with cognitive explanations at hand, do we still need social
111

Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: toward the solution of a riddle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3),
497-509.
Dugosh, K. L., Paulus, P. B., Roland, E. J., & Yang, H.
(2000). Cognitive stimulation in brainstorming. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology. 79(5), 722-735.
Fan, X. Chen, P-C., & Yen, J. (2007). Learning cognitive
load models for developing team shared mental models.
Proceedings of 8th International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling, 145-150.
Feng, G. (2006). Eye movements as time-series random
variables: A stochastic model of eye movement control
in reading. Cognitive Systems Research, 7, 70-95.
Murphy, K. (1998). Hidden Markov Model Toolbox for
Matlab. Retrieved, 2007, from the World Wide Web:
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Software/HMM/hmm.h
tml.
Murphy, K. (2001). Bayes Net Toolbox for Matlab.
Retrieved, 2007, from the World Wide Web:
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Software/BNT/bnt.html
.
Nijstad, B.A., & Stroebe, W. (2006). How the group affect
the mind: a cognitive model of idea generation in
groups. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
10(3), 186-213.
Raaijmakers, J.G.W., & Shiffrin, R.M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88(2), 93134.
Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov
models and selected applications in speech recognition.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 77(2), 257-286.
Wang, H-C., Rosé, C.P., Cue, Y., Chang, C-Y. Huang, CC., & Li, T-Y. (2007). Thinking hard together: the long
and short of collaborative idea generation in scientific
inquiry.
Proceedings of
Computer
Supported
Collaborative Learning 2007 (CSCL 2007).
Wang, H-C., Rosé, C.P. (2007). A process analysis of idea
generation and failure. Proceedings of the 29th Cogntive
Science Society Annual Meeting (CogSci 2007).
Wang, H-C., Chang, C-Y., & Li, T-Y. (in press).
Assessing creative problem solving with automated text
grading. Computers & Education.

executed for each model configuration varying in its structure
and the number of hidden states.
Figure 6 shows the goodness-of-fit scores (summations of
log-liklihoods derived through CV) associated with each
model configuration. We identified the best direct-social
model having four hidden states and the best cognitive-only
model having seven hidden states. We further compared the
two selected models by matching their performance in each
fold of the CV procedure. A paired Wilcoxon rank signed test
showed that the 7-state cognitive-only model fitted the data
better than the 4-state direct-social model (N=17, W+= 49.5,
p<.05). Direct social links did not increase the model’s
modeling capacity. Cognitive explanations appeared to be
simpler and sufficient in this domain.

Discussion and Future Work
In this paper, we developed cognitive models for individual idea
generation using HMM and group idea generation using IOHMM. We demonstrated the utility of the models by examining
several open questions in the literature of idea generation. It is
made possible to examine the semantic relations between ideas
emitted by the same image and to decode observed sequences
into transitions of mental states. We also took an initial look at
the relation between social and cognitive explanations for
interactive idea generation via this modeling approach.
We noted the limitation of using only the DFH task (a test-like
task that may leave little space for creativity) and the small
sample size. The current approach remains at its beginning and
needs to be further evaluated in other contexts.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge Susan Fussell, Jie Yang,
Ziv Bar-Joseph, Yi-Fen Huang, Chao-Lin Liu, Chun-Yen
Chang, and I-Pei Tung for their helpful inputs and comments.
The research, in cooperation with National Taiwan Normal
University, was supported in part by the National Science
Council (NSC), Republic of China grant number NSC 94-2511S-003-028.

References
Bengio, Y., & Frasconi, P. (1996). Input-Output HMMs for
sequence processing. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks, 7(5), 1231–1249.
Brown, V., Tumeo, M., Larey, T. S., & Paulus, P. B. (1998).
Modeling
cognitive
interactions
during
group
brainstorming. Small Group Research, 29(4), 495-526.

112

