UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Typicality: Extending the Prototype View

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8v50b6dg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Voorspoels, Wouter
Vanpaelmel, Wolf
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Typicality: Extending the Prototype View
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, concat, tiensestraat 102,
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Wolf Vanpaemel (wolf.vanpaemel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, concat, tiensestraat 102,
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Gert Storms (gerrit.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, concat, tiensestraat 102,
3000 Leuven, Belgium
prototype view states that categories are represented by
abstract summary representations, a prototype, and
translates typicality as the similarity of a category member
to this prototype. In this view, the concept vehicle is a
summary representation of what vehicles are like on
average, abstracted from specific instances of vehicles. The
typicality of car for the category vehicle then is the
similarity of car to the abstract prototype. On the other
hand, the exemplar view proposes that a category is
represented by previously encountered instances of the
category. Here, typicality is conceptualized as the summed
similarity of a category member to other members of the
category. In this view, the concept vehicle consists of
representations of previously encountered instances of
vehicles. The typicality of car is then its summed similarity
to all stored instances of vehicle.
While model-based comparisons of the prototype and the
exemplar view are abundant in artificial category learning
studies (e.g., Nosofsky, 1992), such comparisons have for a
long time been relatively absent in the study of natural
language concepts. One exception is a study by Voorspoels,
Vanpaemel and Storms (in press). They contrasted a
successful exemplar model – the generalized context model
(GCM; Nosofsky, 1984, 1986) – with a prototype model in
the prediction of typicality across a broad range of semantic
concepts. The results clearly indicated that natural language
categories are represented by their subordinate members
rather than by a summary representation. These results were
in line with earlier findings in natural language categories
(e.g., Storms, De Boeck, & Ruts, 2000), using different
approaches to prototype and exemplar models than
Voorspoels et al. (in press), as well as the general finding in
category learning tasks using artificial stimuli (e.g.,
Nosofsky, 1992).
In the study of Voorspoels et al.(in press), it was assumed
that the prototype of a category is the mean of a category,
representing the average position across all members on all
relevant dimensions. While this is arguably the most
widespread conception of a prototype, this assumption
constitutes a strong restriction as to what a summary
representation can consist of. For example, in superordinate
language categories, such as fruit, it seems counterintuitive
to think of a prototype being the average of members such

Abstract
In this study we re-evaluated earlier findings that natural
language categories are represented by an exemplar
representation rather than by a prototype representation.
Using a restricted prototype model, an exemplar model and a
“flying” prototype model, we predicted typicality ratings for
11 natural language categories from 2 semantic domains,
animals and artifacts. We showed that exemplar models
outperform prototype models when the prototype is restricted
to the average exemplar, but the opposite pattern emerged
when the prototype was free to move.
Keywords: natural
computational models.

language

categories;

typicality;

Introduction
One of the most important findings in the study of natural
language concepts is that categories show a stable, graded
category-membership structure. Members of natural
language categories differ in the degree to which they
belong to the category, the degree to which they are a good
example of a category. For example, people generally judge
a cow to be a better example of the category mammals than
a whale. In the same way, a car intuitively seems to be a
better example of the category vehicles than a zeppelin.
Since Rosch and Mervis’ (1975) hallmark paper on family
resemblances, this graded structure, generally referred to as
the typicality gradient, has become an important variable in
the study of natural language categories, being both
explanatory and in need of explanation. Typicality has been
demonstrated to be influential in a wide variety of cognitive
tasks (Hampton, 1993; Malt & Smith, 1984) as well as an
important predictor for priming effects (Rosch, 1977) and
performance in tasks of inductive reasoning (Rips, 1975)
and production (Hampton & Gardiner, 1983). Because of its
importance, typicality is also an important evaluation
criterion for models of concept representation. Any such
model should be able to give an account of the graded
category structure and correctly predict differences in the
typicality of subordinate members of a category.
Two contrasting views on category representation have
dominated the computational research on categories and
concepts, each giving a different account of the graded
internal structure of categories. On the one hand, the
757

caricatures to the extent that ideals are not dependent on the
interrelatedness of categories. Barsalou (1985) demonstrated
convincingly that ideal representations predict typicality
better than central tendency prototypes for goal-derived
categories. More recently, Lynch, Coley and Medin (2000)
demonstrated that for tree experts, ideal representations such
as extreme height and weediness predicted goodness of
example ratings better than similarity to the average tree.
Distinguishing between ideals and caricatures can prove to
be difficult, since both are characterized by extreme
dimensional values.
Related to these findings regarding non-central prototypes,
Ameel and Storms (2006) predicted typicality within several
natural language categories using a central tendency
prototype and a freely moving prediction point, searching
for the optimal prediction. They found that the optimal
predicting prototype was not attained by the central
tendency prototype but rather by a prototype that moved
away from the central tendency of the category, in the
opposite direction of the other categories (making it a
caricature).
The model used by Ameel and Storms (2006), further
referred to as flying prototype model, will also be used in
this study, to allow the prototype to deviate from a central
tendency prototype, and thus implementing the extended
notion of a prototype. The main aim of this study was to
evaluate whether earlier findings favoring the GCM in the
prediction of typicality hold true when using the flying
prototype model instead of a more restricted prototype
model.

as litchis, bananas and pumpkins. Moreover, it has already
been empirically demonstrated that, for some categories,
ideal dimensions and contrast categories play a role in
category membership that is more important than central
tendencies (e.g., Barsalou, 1985; Lakoff, 1987; Goldstone,
1996, 2003, Ameel & Storms, 2006). In the wake of these
findings, different conceptions of prototypes have been
proposed, such as ideals and caricatures. Therefore, when
contrasting the prototype view with other views, it seems
reasonable to extend the traditional notion of prototype as a
central tendency to other possible summary representations.
In this study we want to contrast a prototype model with an
exemplar model. Instead of only considering a central
tendency prototype, we also included freely moving
prototype, referred to as a “flying” prototype, to allow for
different alternatives to a central tendency prototype.
In the remainder of this paper, we will discuss in more
detail, how the notion of prototype can be extended. Then
we will present the dataset which was used, followed by a
review of the models that were used in this study,
implementing the underlying concepts of exemplar
representation, central tendency prototype and flying
prototype. After this, we will present and discuss the results
of the model fitting.

Types of prototypes
Arguably, the idea of a prototype as a central tendency of a
category is the most widespread. There are however several
reasons why a category representation would not be made
up by a central tendency prototype, a representation that is
the result of averaging across category members. Here we
will discuss two important findings which lead to the
notions of caricatures and ideals. We will discuss these
ideas in turn. We will use the term prototype without further
specification to refer to a summary representation, without
specifying whether it concerns a central tendency, caricature
or ideal prototype.
It has been shown that, at least for some categories and in
some circumstances, the representations of those categories
display exaggerations, deviations from the mean on certain
dimensions. The prototype of a category can in these cases
either be a caricature or an ideal. Categories are represented
by a caricature to the extent their representation is
determined by not being something else. Goldstone (1996)
characterizes caricatures as follows: “Caricatures […]
assume dimension values that depart from the central
tendency in the opposite direction from the central tendency
of other concepts […]” (Goldstone, 1996, p. 617). He also
empirically demonstrated that when concepts are
interrelated, caricatures show an advantage to central
tendency prototypes in categorizing tasks (Goldstone, 1996,
2003).
Another type of “deviant” prototypes, ideals are, like
caricatures, characterized by extreme values on certain
dimensions, either true of only a few category members or
true of none at all (Barsalou, 1985), but nonetheless present
in the summary representation. Ideal prototypes differ from

Data
For the present study we used goodness-of-example ratings
and a derived similarity measure of 11 categories, taken
from a recent norm study of De Deyne, Verheyen, Ameel,
Vanpaemel, Dry, Voorspoels, and Storms (in press). The set
contains five animal categories (birds, fish, insects,
mammals and reptiles) and six artifact categories (clothing,
kitchen utensils, musical instruments, tools, vehicles,
weapons), thus enclosing two semantic domains – animals,
containing 129 exemplars, and artifacts, containing 166
exemplars. Every category consists of 20 to 33 exemplars.
The categories used in this study are different from the ones
used in Voorspoels et al. (in press) because the flying
prototype has been found to be succesfull at predicting
typicality in representational spaces that contain possible
contrast categories (Ameel & Storms, 2006). The data we
used in this study allowed us to derive similarity matrices
including all exemplars of a semantic domain, leaving the
possibility of contrast effects open.

Derived similarity measure
In order to derive appropriate underlying representations of
the domains included in the study, a similarity measure for
each exemplar pair within a domain was needed. The data
set presented in De Deyne et al. (in press) does not include
similarity matrices for a whole semantic domain, but it does
758

sensitivity parameter, which magnifies or demagnifies the
psychological space. Formally, the scaled psychological
distance between two exemplars i and j is given by:

include generated exemplar features and their rated
applicability to each exemplar for each domain, with which
we were able to derive similarity measures for all exemplar
pairs within a domain.
For both domains, De Deyne et al. (in press) created an
exemplar by feature matrix containing all exemplars of a
domain and all features generated for the exemplars of a
domain. The animal domain matrix contains 129 exemplars
and 765 features, the artifact domain matrix contains 166
exemplars and 1295 features. Both matrices were filled in
by 4 participants, judging the applicability of each feature
for each exemplar (1 referring to applicable, 0 referring to
not applicable). The reliability of these ratings was
evaluated by applying the Spearman-Brown formula to the
split-half correlations, resulting in an estimated reliability of
.83 for the animal matrix and .81 for the artifact matrix (De
Deyne et al., in press).
To derive the similarity measure for the present study, we
started from the summed (across participants) feature-byexemplar matrix of each domain and correlated the feature
vectors of all exemplar pairs within a domain. These
correlations can be considered similarity measures for the
exemplar pairs, and were used to construct similarity
matrices for each domain.

1/ r

r⎞
⎛M
c
=
−
⎜
∑ wk x ik x jk ⎟
d ij
⎝ k =1
⎠

, (1)

where xik and xjk are the coordinates of exemplars i and j on
dimension k, wk a parameter reflecting the attention weight
for dimension k, M is the number of dimensions, and c is the
sensitivity parameter. The distance reduces to Euclidean
distances when r = 2 and city-block distances when r = 1.
Since Euclidean distances are generally accepted to be more
appropriate for integral dimensions (Shepard, 1964), we
fixed r at 2 in this study.
Similarity of a stimulus i to another stimulus j, is related to
psychological distance as follows:

η ij = exp(− d ij )

(2)

where dij is the scaled psychological distance between
exemplar i and j.
Typicality prediction Following Nosofsky (1988),
typicality of an exemplar is calculated by summing the
similarity of that exemplar to all other exemplars in the
category. Formally, the typicality of an exemplar i for
category A is then given by:
n
,
(3)
iA =
ij
j =1
where ηij is the similarity of exemplar i to exemplar j, with j
belonging to category A. The free parameters in the model
consist of M-1 dimension weights and a scaling parameter c.

Goodness-of-example
The exemplars of each category were rated by 28
participants for goodness-of-example on a likert-rating scale
ranging from 1 for very bad examples to 20 for very good
examples. The reliability of the judgments was evaluated by
means of split-half correlations corrected with the
Spearman-brown formula and ranged from .91 to .98 (De
Deyne et al., in press). In this study we analysed the
typicality ratings, averaged across participants.

T

Model review

∑η

Central tendency prototype model

All three models evaluated in this study, base their
prediction on an underlying spatial representation, in which
the exemplars of a category are represented as fixed points
in an M-dimensional space. The similarity between two
exemplars in this space is inversely related to the distance of
the two exemplars.
The typicality or goodness-of-example of an exemplar in a
certain category can be conceptualized as the similarity of
the exemplar to the category. The three models presented
below, differ with respect to what is understood by the
category, implying differences in typicality predictions.

In the central tendency-based prototype, typicality of an
exemplar in a category is the similarity of that exemplar to
the prototype of the category instead of the summed
similarity to all members of the category. As is typically
assumed in prototype models, the category prototype
(denoted by PA) in this model is the centroid of the
category’s exemplars in the M-dimensional space (i.e., the
point defined by averaging the coordinates of the exemplars
on all underlying dimensions). The prototype has the status
of an exemplar, consequently equation (1) and equation (2)
apply.
Formally, the typicality of exemplar i for category A is
given by:

The generalized context model
The GCM (Nosofsky, 1984, 1986) essentially assumes that
categorization decisions are based on similarity comparisons
with individually stored category exemplars.

T iA = η iP

Similarity The similarity between two exemplars is derived
from the distance of the exemplars in the M-dimensional
psychological space, adjusted by dimension weights, and a

A

,

(4)

where ηiPa is the similarity of exemplar i to the prototype of
category A. The free parameters of the model are identical to
those of the exemplar model.
759

optimal parameter values were searched by maximizing the
correlation between calculated and observed typicality. To
ensure the maximizing routine did not get trapped in local
maxima, we repeated this search several times. Generally
the variation in obtained correlations was rather small,
indicating optimal solutions were found. The resulting
correlations are displayed in figure 1, displaying three
dominant patterns.
First, it is clear from Figure 1 that the central tendency
prototype does a worse job at predicting the typicality
gradient of the natural language categories than does the
flying prototype. This finding is in line with what Ameel
and Storms (2006) have found. Note that in this study we
used a central tendency prototype model with freely varying
dimensions weights. This means that in terms of number of
free parameters, it has the same amount of free parameters
as the flying prototype model.
Second, figure 1 also shows that the GCM (solid lines)
does a better job at predicting typicality than the central
prototype model (dashed line). Although differences are not
always large, the GCM consistently outperforms the central
prototype model, except for the category reptiles in 4
dimensions and kitchen utensils in 2 and 3 dimensions. This
finding is consistent with the findings of Voorspoels et al.
(in press), who contrasted these two models across a
different set of natural language categories.
Finally, comparing the GCM with the flying prototype
model, it is obvious that the latter model convincingly does
the best job in predicting typicality for all categories
included in the study, across both semantic domains. From
three dimensions onwards, the flying prototype model
consistently outperforms both the GCM and the central
prototype model. These results suggest that there are
summary representations that, in these circumstances,
predict typicality better than the the exemplar representation
provided by the GCM. In other words, contrary to earlier
findings (Storms et al., 2000, Voorspoels et al., in press),
exemplar models do not seem to predict typicality better
than summary representations in all circumstances.
The remaining question then is whether these summary
representations are interpretable. Looking at the optimal
prototype’s position in 2 dimensional representations1, our
results seem to confirm the findings of Ameel and Storms
(2006). While our flying prototypes for some categories did
tend to move farther away from the central tendency
prototype than in Ameel and Storms (2006), for the majority
of the categories under study, the flying prototype moved
away from the central tendency, in the opposite direction of
the central tendencies of the other categories in the
representation of the semantic domain. This observation
corresponds to the notion of a caricature, and together with
the better performance in predicting typicality, seems to
suggest that rather than abandoning the notion of a summary
representation all together, extending the notion of a
prototype might be more fruitful.

The “flying” prototype model
The third model evaluated in this paper, referred to as the flying
prototype model, allows a summary representation to deviate
from the central tendency of a category, thus implementing the
extended prototype approach as described earlier. The flying
prototype model can still be seen as a prototype model in that
typicality is modeled as similarity to the prototype of a
category. The prototype in this model however is free to “fly”
within the M-dimensional psychological space, in order to find
an optimal prediction of typicality. In this way the prototype
can adopt other than average values, e.g. extreme values as in
ideal or caricature representations.
The model used in this study is mathematically identical to the
model used by Ameel and Storms (2006) to find optimal
prediction points. Typicality of item i in category A is
formalized as the similarity of the item to the category (see
equation (4)). Here however, the similarity of item i to category
A is given by:
M
ηiP = −
( xik − pk ) 2 ,
(5)
A
k =1

∑

where xik is the coordinate of exemplar i on dimension k and pk
is the coordinate of the prototype PA on dimension k. Contrary
to the central tendency-based prototype, PA is not restricted to
being the average of the category, but the coordinates of PA are
the free parameters in the model, enabling the prototype to
move freely in the M-dimensional space to optimize the
prediction. The number of free parameters thus equals the
number of dimensions of the underlying psychological space.
Note that, contrary to the GCM and the central tendency-based
prototype model, the flying prototype model does not make use
of attention weights. Given a certain psychological space, this
results in an equal number of free parameters for the three
models presented here.

Results
In order to obtain the underlying spatial representations, we
used the similarity matrices derived for both semantic
domains as input for a SAS MDS-analysis (SAS, V9).
Solutions in 2 to 10 dimensions were considered for further
analysis, as determining the number of underlying
psychologically relevant dimensions for semantic concepts
is not always obvious. As can be seen in Table 1, the stress
values of both domains show a clear monotonically
decreasing pattern, indicating the MDS-routine did not get
trapped in local minima.
Table 1. MDS-stress values for the 2 domains.
Animals
Artifacts

2D

3D

4D

5D

6D

7D

8D

9D

D10

.18
.16

.12
.10

.07
.07

.06
.06

.04
.05

.04
.05

.03
.04

.03
.04

.03
.03

For each category, in all considered dimensionalities, the
three models described earlier were fitted to the observed
typicality ratings (averaged across participants). The

1
While it is not impossible to do the same in higher
dimensionalities, this is not an easy task.

760

birds

1

fish

1

insects

1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

2

4

6

8

10

reptiles

1

0

2

4

6

8

10

Clothing

1

0

2

4

6

8

10

KitchenUtensils

1

0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

4

6

8

10

Tools

1

2

4

6

8

10

Vehicles

1
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

2

4

6

8

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

4

6

8

10

0

4

6

8

10

MusicalInstruments

2

4

6

8

10

Weapons

1

0.8

0

2

2

1

0.8

2

mammals

1

GCM
Central tendency prototype
Flying prototype

2

4

6

8

10

Figure 1. Correlations between observed and predicted typicality for the different categories in function of
dimensionality. Note that the exemplars of a category are embedded in spatial representations of the domain they
belong to (either animals or artifacts).
to the typicality data were caricature representations. This
finding suggest that, at least under the circumstances
implied in this study, there exist prototype representations
that give a better account for the typicality gradient in
natural
language
categories
than
exemplar
representations.
An important remark is in place here. As we have
already indicated, we based our prediction, as Ameel
and Storms (2006) did, on spatial representations of a
domain rather than isolated categories, contrary to
Voorspoels et al. (in press). Since these representations
contain possible contrast categories, part of the
strength of the flying prototype model in predicting
typicality might be due to contrast information inherent
in the underlying representation. We selected these
circumstances to test the flying prototype model
against other, more widely known models, to give it an
optimal chance at being competitive. Moreover, to
interpret the summary representations resulting from
the model, it is useful to see the category embedded in
a larger semantic domain. Future research should be
able to determine whether the results presented here
hold true for contrast unaffected representations, i.e.

Discussion
In this study we examined whether recent results favoring
an exemplar model over a prototype model in the
prediction of typicality in natural language categories
(Voorspoels et al., in press), were due to restricting the
prototype model to one possible notion of a summary
representation, the prototype as central tendency. To this
end, we contrasted the GCM (Nosofsky, 1984, 1986) with
a restricted prototype model and a prototype model that
allows different notions of a summary representation,
such as ideal prototypes and caricature prototypes. The
three models were contrasted in the prediction of
typicality across 11 natural language categories,
belonging to one of two semantic domains – animals and
artifacts.
Results confirmed earlier findings that the exemplar
model consistently outperforms the restricted prototype
model in the prediction of typicality in natural language
categories. However, the “flying” prototype model,
allowing ideal and caricature prototypes, in turn clearly
outperformed the GCM for all categories in both semantic
domains. In general, the prototype producing the best fits
761

Hampton, J. A., & Gardiner, M. M. (1983). Measures of
internal category structure: A correlational analysis of
normative data. British Journal of Psychology, 74, 491516.
Komatsu, L., K. (1992). Recent views of conceptual
structure. Psychological Bulletin, 3, 500-526.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Tall is
typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions, and graded
structure among tree experts and novices. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 41-50.
Medin, D. L., Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Nosofsky, R. N. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the
context model of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 10, 104114.
Nosofsky, R. N. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Nosofsky, R., N. (1988). Exemplar-Based Accounts of
Relations Between Classification, Recognition, and
Typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 700-708.
Nosofsky, R. N. (1992). Exemplars, prototypes, and
similarity rules. In A. F. Healy, S. M. Kosslyn, & R. M.
Shiffrin (eds.), From learning theory to connectionist
theory: Essays in honor of William K. Estes (Vol.1, pp.
149-167). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rosch, E. (1978). Cognitive representations of semantic
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 104, 192-233.
SAS Institute Inc, SAS STAT ® User’s guide 8, Cary,
NC: SAS Institute Inc., 1999. 3884 pp.
Shepard, R. N. (1964). Attention and the metric structure
of stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
1, 54-87.
Storms, G., De Boeck, P., & Ruts, W. (2000). Prototype
and exemplar-based information in natural language
categories. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 5173.
Voorspoels, W., Vanpaemel W., Storms, G. (in press).
Exemplars and prototypes in natural language
categories. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review.

for isolated categories. Note that extending the
representational space does not change the robust
finding that an exemplar-based approach outperforms a
prototype-based approach, in which the prototype is
restricted to a central tendency. This is an important
observation, since it shows that larger representational
spaces as such do not necessarily favor prototype-like
models.
Since part of the strength of the flying prototype model
in this study might be due to contrast information, it
would be interesting to adapt the GCM so that it too uses
information from contrast categories within the domain.
This could be implemented by translating typicality as a
function of similarity towards members of the same
category and members of other, contrasting categories. It
remains an open question whether expanding the GCM in
this way would tip the scales back in favor of exemplar
models.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this article is part of an
interdisciplinary research project (IDO/02/004) and
research project OT/05/27 sponsored by the Research
Council of the university of Leuven (IDO/02/004).
Both of these grants were given to the third author.
Correspondence concerning this article should be
addressed to Wouter Voorspoels, K.U. Leuven,
Department of Psychology, ConCat, Tiensestraat 102,
B-3000
Leuven,
Belgium.
Email:
wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be.
Website: ppw.kuleuven.be/concat.

References
Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2006). From prototypes to
caricatures: Geometrical models for concept typicality.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 402-421.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., Vanpaemel, W.,
Dry, M. J., Voorspoels, W., & Storms, G. (in press).
Exemplar by feature applicability matrices and other
Dutch normative data for semantic concepts. Behavioral
Research Methods.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and interrelated
concepts. Memory and cognition, 24, 608-628.
Goldstone, R. L. (2003). Conceptual interrelatedness and
caricatures. Memory & cognition, 31, 169-180.
Hampton, J. A. (1993). Prototype models of concept
representation. In I. Van Mechelen, J. A. Hampton, R.
S. Michalski, and P. Theunis (eds.), Categories and
concepts: Theoretical views and inductive data analysis
(pp. 67-95). London: Academic Press.

762

