UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Parsing Verb-Final Clauses in German: Garden-path and ERP Effects Modeled by a Parallel
Dynamic Parser

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0qx0m9c7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Vosse, Theo G.
Kempen, Gerard A.M.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Parsing Verb-Final Clauses in German:
Garden-path and ERP Effects Modeled by a Parallel Dynamic Parser
Theo G. Vosse (theo.vosse@fcdonders.ru.nl)

Cognitive Psychology Unit, University of Leiden
Wassenaarseweg 52, 2333 AK Leiden, The Netherlands

FC Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging
Kapittelweg 29, 6525 ER Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Gerard A.M. Kempen (gerard.kempen@mpi.nl)

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Cognitive Psychology Unit, University of Leiden
Wassenaarseweg 52, 2333 AK Leiden, The Netherlands

Abstract

lar to case-ambiguous NPs; and what is the time-course of
this process?
There is solid empirical evidence that in verb-final clauses
grammatical functions are assigned before the head verb is
processed (e.g. Konieczny, 1997; Kamide & Mitchell,
1999). These assignments must be preliminary because the
actual head and its argument structure are still unknown. For
example, consider sentence fragment (1)—a subordinating
conjunction followed by two case-ambiguous NPs.
(1) … dass Richard Künstlerinnen …
… that Richard
artists
…
Richard and Künstlerinnen can play any grammatical role:
nominative Subject (Subj), accusative Direct Object (DObj),
or dative Indirect Object (IObj). Based on the available empirical evidence, we can assume that the system prefers
Richard to be Subj, and Künstlerinnen DObj, or perhaps
IObj. This preference is so strong that it even influences
processing of unambiguously case-marked sentence fragments, such as
(2a) … dass der Bischof dem Kardinal …
… that the bishopSUBJ the cardinalIOBJ …
(2b) … dass dem Bischof der Kardinal …
… that the bishopIOBJ the cardinalSUBJ …
Although (2a) and (2b) are both fully grammatical, the noncanonical order in (2b) tends to be read somewhat slower
than canonical order (2a) (e.g. Scheepers & Vasishth, 2007).
Numerous empirical studies with a variety of experimental methods, including grammaticality judgments, reaction
times, self-paced reading, eye-movement tracking, ERPs,
and fMRI have unearthed aspects of how native speakers of
German parse and interpret pre-verbal NPs in subordinate
clauses (e.g., see Hemforth & Konieczny, 2000; Bader &
Bayer, 2006; and Bornkessel & Schlesewsky, 2006). Given
the space limitations of this paper, we focus on the empirical
phenomena observed in studies on a special group of subordinate clauses: those beginning with the conjunction dass
‘that’ followed by two maximally case-ambiguous animate
NPs, and ending with a single finite verb, as in (3a-f) below.
For these target structures, we will explore the comprehension effects that manifest themselves at or after the onset of
the clause-final head verb.
In this article, we take issue with the central assumptions
in two theories that have been proposed to account for the
key phenomena: The Linking and Checking Model (L&CM)
developed by Bader & Bayer (2006), and the Extended Argument Dependency Model (eADM) by Bornkessel &

Experimental sentence comprehension studies have shown
that superficially similar German clauses with verb-final word
order elicit very different garden-path and ERP effects. We
show that a computer implementation of the Unification
Space parser (Vosse & Kempen, 2000) in the form of a
localist-connectionist network can model the observed differences, at least qualitatively. The model embodies a parallel
dynamic parser that, in contrast with existing models, does
not distinguish between consecutive first-pass and reanalysis
stages, and does not use semantic or thematic roles. It does
use structural frequency data and animacy information.
Keywords: Unification-Space; word-order scrambling; German; ERP effects; parsing; connectionist modeling

Introduction: Word Order Variation
and Grammatical Function Assignment
German is a language with a relatively free word order. The
grammatical function of syntactic phrases is often indicated
by morphological markings. This allows language users to
produce these phrases in varying orders without confusing
the comprehender. However, not all phrases have morphological marks. Certain noun phrases (NPs), in particular
proper names and “bare” plural NPs (i.e., without determiners or adjectives), are highly ambiguous with respect to
morphological case. Hence, speakers and comprehenders
also use heuristics or preferences such as “subject before
object” for NPs without case-marking. Many German verbs
have their own case pattern. E.g., the verbs danken ‘thank’
and sehen ‘see’ both take a Subject and an Object—like
their English translation equivalents; but while sehen governs a Direct Object with accusative case, danken takes an
Indirect Object with dative case. Consequently, a simple
default interpretation of an ambiguous NP will not always
work and may cause “garden-path” effects and other comprehension difficulties.
A special word order phenomenon concerns the position
of verbs in main and subordinate clauses. In main clauses,
the finite verb occupies a relatively early position, often
preceding one or more of its arguments (Subject and Objects). In subordinate clauses, however, the finite verb follows all its arguments. This raises two questions: how does
the language comprehension system in speakers of German
assign grammatical functions to pre-verbal NPs, in particu261

Schlesewsky (2006). Both models assume a SERIAL parser.
We present a new PARALLEL model of parsing, implemented
as a localist-connectionist network. The model, nicknamed
SINUS, is the successor to the Unification Space parser by
Vosse & Kempen (2000). We will show that the dynamic
behavior resulting from the interplay of spreading activation
and lateral inhibition in the neural network can simulate the
essentials of the targeted comprehension phenomena.
Hence, the assumption of a serial parser with discrete firstpass and reanalysis stages is not warranted by the data.

nounced for dative-active than for dative experiencer
verbs.
Serial Parsing Architectures Both the EADM and the
L&CM parsers are serial in the sense that, when confronted
with ambiguity, they pursue only one possible analysis, and
consider further options only after earlier options have
failed. Both models assume a first-pass parsing preference
that assigns the function of Subj to NP1 and that of DObj to
NP2. As soon as a plural clause-final verb is processed, or
when the verb requires an IObj instead of a DObj, the initial
function assignment causes a problem. This triggers an operation in another phase whose nature and complexity differ
between verb types. The two models diverge widely with
respect to the hypothesized phases and processes. We cannot
and need not review the theoretical assumptions of the models here because our chief aim is to demonstrate that the
above pattern of results does not necessitate a serial parser
and can be simulated by a parallel, single-stage parsing
mechanism.
In the following Section, we describe the essential properties of SINUS, a parallel self-organizing dynamic parser that
we claim can simulate the target (and many related) phenomena at least qualitatively.

The Empirical Domain
The comprehension phenomena to be simulated by SINUS
have been obtained with sentences of the following types.
For overviews of the experimental data, see Bader & Bayer
(2006) and Bornkessel & Schlesewsky (2006). The NPs in
the target clauses are a singular animate (human) proper
noun (NP1) and a bare plural animate noun (NP2), as exemplified by the well-formed examples (3a-f).
(3a) … dass RichardSUBJ KünstlerinnenDOBJ sahSING
… that Richard saw artists
(3b) … dass RichardDOBJ KünstlerinnenSUBJ sahenPLUR
… that artists saw Richard
(3c) … dass RichardSUBJ KünstlerinnenIOBJ dankteSING
… that Richard thanked artists
(3d) … dass RichardIOBJ KünstlerinnenSUBJ danktenPLUR
… that artists thanked Richard
(3e) … dass RichardSUBJ KünstlerinnenIOBJ gefielSING
… that Richard pleased artists
(3f) … dass RichardIOBJ KünstlerinnenSUBJ gefielenPLUR
… that artists pleased Richard
Notice that the grammatical functions indicated by the subscripts are the ones required by the grammatical structure of
the clause, more specifically, by agreement between number
of the Subject and the SINGular or PLURal verb. In isolation,
the nouns themselves can be Subj, IObj or DObj.
The verbs in (3a-f) exemplify three syntactically different
classes: accusative verbs (sehen, governing DObj), dativeactive verbs (danken, with IObj), and dative-experiencer
verbs (gefallen, also with IObj). The former two classes are
known to prefer animate Subjects; the third group prefers
their Subj to be inanimate, their IObj animate. The empirical
phenomena to be simulated by SINUS can be summarized
as follows:
1. Strength of preferential function assignment to an animate NP1: Subj > IObj > DObj.
2. When, due to the requirements of subject-verb agreement, NP1 cannot be Subj, then the verb yields a
garden-path effect (3b/d/f) in comparison with their
counterparts (3a/c/e). As shown in reading time studies,
the strength of this effect is strongest for accusative
verbs, intermediate for dative-accusative verbs, and
mildest for dative-experiencer verbs.
3. These garden-path effects are accompanied by three
different ERP patterns at the verb. Compared to clauses
where NP1 is Subj (3a/c/e), the clauses with NP2 as
Subj yield an ERP wave with a positive deflection if the
verb is accusative. However, the deflection is negative
for both classes of dative-taking verbs—more pro-

The Unification Space
Unification Space 2000 & Performance Grammar
The Unification Space model by Vosse & Kempen (2000), a
single-pass model of human syntactic structure building,
accounts for a considerable range of parsing preferences and
garden-path phenomena. The model (henceforth called
US2000) is based on the Performance Grammar formalism
(PG; Kempen & Harbusch, 2002; Harbusch & Kempen,
2002). PG is a strongly “lexicalized” grammar—one assuming that the information needed to build grammatically correct sentences is associated with the individual lexical items.
In PG, the grammatical information—word class & subcategorization in particular—is represented in treelets called
LEXICAL FRAMES (somewhat similar to “elementary trees” in
Tree Adjoining Grammar). Figure 1a shows two such treelets—one represents the personal pronoun er ‘he’, the other
the finite verb schlief ‘slept’. The branches of the latter lexical frame indicate that schlief requires a Subj, and possibly
one or more Modifiers. Other verbal lexical frames may also
contain branches for DObj, IObj, and clausal complements.
The node in the top layer of a lexical frame is called the

NP
Head
Pron
er

S

S

Subj HD Mod*

Subj HD Mod*

NP

NP

v
schlief

PP

PP

Head
Pron v
er schlief

Figure 1. LEFT: Binding (dashed line) of lexical frames
associated with er and schlief. RIGHT: Derived tree.
262

node, the phrasal nodes in the third layer are FOOT
nodes.
Syntactic trees for word groups and sentences are constructed by UNIFYING the root node of one treelet with a foot
node of another treelet (the dashed line in Figure 1), provided that conditions on feature agreement and linear order
are satisfied. A dynamic node represents the fact that two
nodes are unified at a certain point in time. Whenever the
activation level of this node is above a certain minimum
value, root and foot node are supposed to be unified.
The lexical frames associated with the individual words of
a sentence often allow more unifications than the actually
correct one. In such cases, the model represents all these
possibilities simultaneously and invokes lateral inhibition to
make a selection. Parse trees thus emerge as the result of a
dynamic self-organizing process. This architecture enables
small revisions on the fly, without the need for discrete
stages of parsing.
ROOT

3.

4.

5.
6.

A localist-connectionist neural network
The US2000 model embodies a neurocognitive implausibility: It assumes that syntactic nodes and the connections between them can be created on-line. To address this issue, we
started the development of SINUS—a parsing mechanism
that is based on a “fixed” neural network, and where syntactic structure is represented in patterns of activation and inhibition, without the need for dynamic modifications to the
network’s connectivity. This project also provided an opportunity to improve the linguistic plausibility of the parser by
equipping it with a more sophisticated linear order component based on TOPOLOGIES. Our third goal was to remove a
shortcoming for which US2000 has been criticized (Kamide
& Mitchell, 1999): its lack of predictive parsing.
A topology is a one-dimensional array consisting of a
small number of slots. Every phrase has a topology associated with it, but in this paper we only address clausal topologies. In our current implementation, they have nine
slots, distributed over three “fields”: Forefield, Midfield and
Endfield. The notion of “topological fields” stems from traditional German linguistics. Every slot serves as a destination for one or more types of syntactic functions and constituents; and many constituent types have several optional
destinations. In terms of our present target structures, the
subordinating conjunction dass ‘that’ and the clause-final
verb fill the first and the last Midfield slots, whereas the
Subj-, IObj- and DObj-NPs each have several placement
options in between (thus giving rise to linear order flexibility and “scrambling” phenomena).
The SINUS network consists of a fixed number (eight in
the current implementation) of identical columns, each capable of representing properties of any incoming word,
whose connectivity derives from a symbolic grammar. The
columns are divided into six layers, each representing a specific grammatical resource. From bottom to top (Figure 2):
1. Input This layer represents the current input word. During a few processing cycles, it activates the morphosyntactic information from “its” lexical entry.
2. Word Category This layer represents the lexical head of
the frame(s) associated with the input word. Features

such as number, person and animacy are also found here.
Several categories can be active simultaneously.
Lexical Frame This layer represents the lexical frame
associated with the input word. Frames have features,
some of which stemming straight from the lexicon, others resulting from unifications. Multiple frames may be
active at the same time.
Unification This layer contains Unification nodes (Unodes) that represent virtual unification (the dashed line
in Figure 1). U-nodes receive activation from a root and
a foot node of two different frames, and possibly from
feature nodes. E.g., the activation level of a Subject Unode is influenced by the activation levels of the number
and person features involved. The influence of the root
node decreases slightly with distance.
Linear Order Nodes in this layer attempt to link Unodes to a free and legal topology slot, thereby guarding
the integrity of constituent order.
Topology Each node in this layer represents a slot in a
topology. Activation of these nodes indicates that the slot
is filled and signals to a potential new filler constituent
to look for an empty slot further to the right.
Topology
5

4

Unification

3

8

Lexical Frame

2

7

Category

1

6

er

schlief

Input

Figure 2. Activation spreading through the SINUS network.
The Linear Order layer is not shown.
From each layer, activation spreads to the adjacent higher
and lower layers. Within each layer, incompatible elements
inhibit each other. During each processing cycle, the activation level of all nodes is updated by adding feed-forward
activation from the layer below and feed-back activation
from the layer above; inhibition is subtracted, and activation
decay is added. Incoming activation is transformed via the
non-linear function in Appendix A.
Figure 2 shows SINUS at work for the simple clause Er
schlief ‘He slept.’ Node 1 in the Input layer (representing er)
is activated first. Activation spreads to node 2 in the Category layer (Pronoun), which in turn activates node 3 in the
Frame layer (NP). This activation spreads further to U-node
4 (Subj-NP), thus offering partial support for the Subject
role of er. The activation level of node 4 does not reach its
maximum level since it only has support from a foot node:
No root node that might serve as unification partner is seen
yet. Node 4 partially activates node 5 in the topology layer
263

(Forefield slot). In the mean time, input node 1 has ceased
to be active, which however doesn’t mean that the other
nodes cannot remain active: Since activation flows down
from 5 to 4, to 3, to 2, and back upward again, the nodes
sustain each other’s activation. This goes on for some time,
after which the next word enters and node 6 (schlief) becomes active. This activates node 7 (V) and node 8 (S). At
that moment, there is sufficient support for node 4 (Subject),
which now can reach it full activation level and also fully
activate node 5 (Forefield). At that moment, a parse can be
extracted: a clause headed by schlief with er heading the
Subj-NP and placed in the Forefield slot.
In order to extract the parse tree that SINUS represents at
a given moment: Collect the most active lexical frames per
column (two in the example: an NP- and an S-frame), and
unify those root-foot pairs whose U-node have the highest
activation in the footnode’s column.

Activation of Subj U-node

1.2
1
dass Richard schlief

0.8

* dass Richard schliefen

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1

21
Processing cycles after verb onset

Figure 3. Delayed unification due to missing subject-verb
agreement.
feed into the Unification layer of the next column and preactivate one or more grammatical functions; and the Lexical
Frame layer can do the same. At the same time, inhibition
from active U-nodes will suppress already active functions.
This dynamic interplay between partly converging and
partly opposing forces may be illustrated by the example in
Figure 2. After schlief ‘slept’ has entered column 2 and its
activation has reached the Topological layer, activated nodes
in that area of the network will spread activation to DObj,
IObj, and Mod U-nodes in column 3. Simultaneously, the
lexical frame of schlief will activate Subj and Mod there,
whereas the already active Subj function in column 1 will
inhibit its counterpart in column 3. Consequently, Mod will
gain most activation (albeit not very much) and slightly activate Category nodes PP and AdvP. Thus, the network may
the be said to “expect” a modifier after Er schlief. Had the
sentence been Er kaufte ‘he bought’ instead, the activation
pattern in column 3 would have been somewhat different:
The transitive verb kaufen also pre-activates the DObj Unode. This would cause this U-node to be the highest activated U-node in column 3, and the system would “expect” a
DObj and an NP. Below we will see that predictive parsing
plays an important role in parsing preverbal NPs.

Delayed Unification The activation of a Unification Node
does not only depend on the activation of its root and foot
nodes, but also on the outcome of a feature agreement
check. (The implementation of the checking mechanism
need not concern us here.) In the example Richard schlief
‘Richard slept’, the person and number features of Richard
and schlief agree, so there is no penalty for the Subject UNode in the form of inhibition. However, had we changed
the verb to the plural form schliefen, then the outcome
would have been different. Figure 3 shows the consequence.
When the verb is introduced, the Subject U-node has low
activation. When NP and S agree (the continuous line), the
activation of Subj quickly rises to maximum, but when they
do not agree (the dashed line), inhibition from other Unodes suppresses the Subject U-node. It does continue to
receive input activation from the verb, though, and after
some time it manages to overcome the inhibition (also
helped by feedback from the Unification to the Lexical
Frame layer; not discussed here). The resulting analysis is
identical to that of the correct sentence, but took more time.
Delayed binding could somehow be related to the appearance of a P600 component in the ERP signal elicited by
grammatical errors in input sentences (Hagoort, 2003). Below we will come back to this suggestion, since low unification speed is also one of the factors involved in the strength
of the garden-path effects elicited by our target sentences
(3b/d/f).

Computer simulations
Settings The model (which is fully deterministic; no random factors) consists of about 3000 PDP-like nodes, with
different parameters for each layer, and a small number of
control parameters (e.g., number of cycles for each input
word). In total, there are 32 free parameters. The structure of
the network was derived from a (simple) PG-grammar that
specifies the hierarchical structures and topologies for many
possible single-clause structures in German, with six types
of verbs, different types of NPs, determiners, adjectival,
adverbial and prepositional phrases. Lexical Frames activate
U-nodes for each of the functions they contain; e.g., an NP
frame with a noun head activates Determiner and Modifier
functions in all active columns; a frame for an intransitive
verb activates Subj nodes, an accusative-taking verb Subj
and DObj nodes, and a dative-taking verb Subj and IObj
nodes.
We trained the model using simulated annealing on a set
of eight sentences, two of which are part of the simulations
to be presented below: (3a) and (3c). The other sentences
trained the system for different orders (SVO, OVS, VSO)

Predictive parsing SINUS offers the possibility of provisionally assigning a grammatical function to a root node
before a suitable unification partner becomes available. E.g.,
although Richard is three-way case-ambiguous, in Richard
schlief, NP Richard is immediately analyzed as Subject,
before the verb has entered. This is a consequence of activation coming in from NP Richard and feedback from the topology. However, a U-node with only one active input
reaches a much lower activation level than one with two
comparable inputs. This makes these early assignments relatively easy to overcome.
Once activated, a node in one column can spread activation to nodes in the next-higher or next-lower layer of the
next column. For instance, the topological layer can feed
264

and/or contained case-unambiguous NPs with definite determiners. As the training set of eight sentences cannot
claim to be representative for the language input of an average language learner, we introduced two linguistic preferences by hand-coding a number of connection weights:
• The first Midfield slot after the subordinating conjunction
has a relatively strong preference to receive the Subj-NP,
a weaker preference for the IObj, and a dispreference for
DObj. No (dis)preferences were built into the other slots.
These measures reflect the outcome of a corpus frequency
study (Kempen & Harbusch, 2005).
• Dative-experiencer verbs send slightly less activation to
the Subj U-nodes, and slightly more to the IObj U-nodes,
in comparison with dative-active verbs. This is a somewhat ad hoc measure to reduce the Subj-before-IObj preference. (We are currently exploring a more principled
way, based on an animate-before-inanimate preference
that reduces the Subject-first preference. Subj-NPs of
dative-experiencer verbs tend to be inanimate.)
The trained model is capable of parsing common singleverb main and subordinate clauses of German.

More complications arise when the verb is plural. In all
three clauses, due to the requirements of feature agreement,
the activation for Subject role does not reach NP1 (S1 in in
Figure 4) but NP2 (S2). But whereas sahen conveys activation to both DObj NPs (D1, D2), dankten and gefielen send
it to the IObj NPs (I1, I2). Consequently, in the case of sahen, two nodes, D1 and S2, need to overcome the inhibition
from S1 and D2 in order to reach the correct analysis; and
this problem is even enlarged by activation received by D2
at the same time. Hence, for sahen it is much harder to reach
the correct analysis than for the dative verbs, where two
freshly activated functions (I1, I2) each receive less inhibition than D1, three nodes (I1, I2 and S2) conspire to suppress S1 and D2, and D2 does not receive activation. In fact,
(3d) and (3f) reach a correct analysis, but (3b) sticks to the
initial Subj-DObj parse.
The resulting time course of the parsing process for
clauses (3a-f) is summarized in Figure 5. The light grey
timelines denote periods of unstable analyses, starting with
the first fully correct one. Dark grey bars mark the period of
stable correct analyses—except for sahen, which from the
15th cycle onward yields a stable but incorrect Subj-beforeDObj analysis. The patterns agree with the size of the
garden-path effects obtained in psycholinguistic studies.

Simulation results The resulting model quickly assigns the
first case-ambiguous NP (Richard) the provisional role of
Subject. The U-node representing this assignment inhibits
its counterpart in the next column. Similarly, the IObj receives some activation and inhibits the IObj U-node in the
next column. Then, if the next input word is also a caseambiguous noun, it will become the DObj—this being the
only function that is not suppressed from the first column.
(We disregard here the very weak influences of U-nodes that
represent other grammatical functions, e.g. Prepositional
Object.) The upshot is a strong preference for an initial
Subj-before-DObj analysis of two fully case-ambiguous
NPs in a subordinate clause.
When the verb arrives, it sends activation to those Unodes in the preceding columns that correspond to their argument structure. This has the effect of boosting the activation levels of those nodes, provided that the agreement
checks succeed. For the accusative sah in (3a), this means
that the initial Subj-before-DObj analysis is reinforced. The
analyses of the five other clauses proceed less smoothly.
The activation that the two singular dative verbs dankte and
gefiel send to the IObj U-nodes in the preceding columns, is
sufficient for these U-nodes to win the competition with the
DObj U-node. Because of feature agreement, only the Subj
node for NP1 receives activation. Hence, Künstlerinnen will
end up as Indirect Object in sentences (3c) and (3e).
S2

S1

S2

I1

I2

I1

I2

D1

D2

D1

D2

Richard

Künstlerinnen

sahen

Richard

Künstlerinnen

unstable, correct parse
stable, correct parse
stable, incorrect parse

gefielen
dankte
gefiel
sah
0

5

10

15

20

Processing cycles after verb onset

Figure 5. Time course of the parsing process.
Useful information about the dynamic interplay of activation and inhibition is provided by the SUM of the activation
levels of all U-node at a given processing cycle. Figure 6
shows the development of this sum over time, onwards from
the cycle in which the verb enters. We plotted the INCREASE
of the summed activation. The time course of this sum score
for the three singular verbs rises relatively fast at virtually
identical pace, mainly because the Subject assignment need
not change. The sum score rises more slowly for the plural
2

Summed increase of U-node activation

S1

sahen
dankten

1.5

(3a) sah
(3b) sahen
(3c) dankte
(3d) dankten
(3e) gefiel
(3f) gefielen

1

0.5

dankten

0
0

Figure 4. Activation transmitted by sahen and dankten to Unodes in NP1 and NP2 columns (thick lines). Size of squares
reflects activation level at verb onset.

4

8
12
Processing cycles after verb onset

Figure 6. Increase of summed U-node activation
after verb onset, for sentences (3a-f).
265

16

dative-taking verbs, and then overshoots the curve for the
singular verbs—dankten for a somewhat longer time span
than gefielen—before finally stabilizing at the same level as
the singular verbs. When sahen ends the clause, the sum
score undershoots the singular-verbs curves for a considerable number of cycles (and fails to reach the correct parse).
This aspect of SINUS’ dynamics converges remarkably
with the qualitatively different ERP effects observed for the
clauses (3b/d/f): a positivity for sahen relative to sah; a
negativity for dankten relative to dankte, and a somewhat
weaker negativity for gefielen relative to gefiel. Given this
result, SINUS may be said to reflect an important aspect of
the ERP effects, at least in a qualitative sense.
It has been suggested before that parsing dynamics are
involved in ERP effects. Hagoort (2003) hypothesized that a
slow unification is a possible source of the SPS/P600 effect.
Our simulations support this hypothesis, with the modification that it is the summed activation speed of all unification
nodes rather than that of a single node. However, they do
not exclude other causes, such as a well-formedness check.
They also hint at the possibility that certain negativities
might find their origin in parser dynamics as well.
The limited space available prevents us from discussing
other aspects of the model here. But we can report that it
also shows the desired behavior for comparable all-singular
and all-plural clauses, with verbs in declarative main
clauses, and in direct questions with a fronted nonnominative wh-phrase.

Appendix A
The

exponential
P

(1 − eα

Ii

mapping

of

inputs

Ii

is

f

=

)/(1 − eαM ), where M is the sum of the maxi-

mum values of all inputs; f(0, 0, 0, …) = 0, and f(M1, M2,
M3, …) = 1. The shape of f is controlled by α, where α>0
gives a function with a positive first and second derivative.

Acknowledgements
The work reported here was supported by the Dutch Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) as part of Cognition
Program (PLUS project). We thank two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.

References
Bader, M., & Bayer, J. (2006). Case and Linking in Language Comprehension. Dordrecht: Springer.
Bornkessel, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2006). The Extended
Argument Dependency Model: A neurocognitive approach to sentence comprehension across languages. Psychological Review, 113, 787-821.
Hagoort, P. (2003). How the brain solves the binding problem for language: a neurocomputational model of syntactic processing. NeuroImage, 20, S18-S29.
Harbusch. K. & Kempen, G. (2002). A quantitative model of
word order and movement in English, Dutch and German
complement constructions. In: Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-2002), Taipei (Taiwan). San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Hemforth, B., & Konieczny, L. (2000). German sentence
processing. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kamide, Y., & Mitchell, D. C. (1999). Incremental pre-head
attachment in Japanese parsing. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14, 631-662.
Kempen, G., & Harbusch, K. (2002). Performance Grammar: A declarative definition. In: A. Nijholt, M. Theune &
H. Hondorp (Eds.), Computational Linguistics in The
Netherlands 2001. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Kempen, G. & Harbusch, K. (2005). The relationship between grammaticality ratings and corpus frequencies: A
case study into word order variability in the midfield of
German clauses. In: S. Kepser & M. Reis (Eds.), Linguistic Evidence—Empirical, Theoretical, and Computational
Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Konieczny, L., Hemforth, B., Scheepers, C., & Strube, G.
(1997). The role of lexical heads in parsing: evidence
from German. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12,
307-348.
Scheepers, C., & Vasishth, S. (2007). What behavioural
measures reveal about thematic reanalysis and the use of
structural frequency in verb-final sentence processing.
Paper submitted for publication, Department of Psychology, University of Glasgow.
Vosse, T., & Kempen, G. (2000). Syntactic structure assembly in human parsing: A computational model based on
competitive inhibition and lexicalist grammar. Cognition,
75, 105-143.

Discussion and future work
SINUS is a constraint-based, dynamic, self-organizing, parallel parsing system that can assign grammatical functions
before the lexical head is encountered, and predict properties of upcoming words and phrases. We have demonstrated
its capability of modeling differential garden-path and ERP
effects between superficially very similar German sentences, at least in a qualitative manner, without the need for
discrete first-pass parsing and reanalysis stages.
In future work, we have to broaden SINUS’ empirical
coverage, enabling it to model a wider range of psycholinguistic phenomena (in German and English), not only qualitatively but also quantitatively. This will require considerable extension of the system’s syntactic sophistication. As
for parsing German clauses with canonical and scrambled
constituent orders, we presently do not foresee a need to
invoke semantic (thematic) roles in explanations of gardenpath effects such as the ones discussed here. The only
meaning-related notion, we estimate now, is animacy.
SINUS generates an unexpected prediction for sentences
of the types featuring in the present article: Agreementbased reversal of Subject and Object functions should be
possible for accusative verbs that prefer an animate object
and an inanimate subject. Such verbs will behave like dankten. We hope to put predictions like this one to experimental
test.
Note The software used for the simulations is available for
research purposes. Contact one of the authors in order to
obtain the code or a demonstration version.
266

