UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonological Constraints on Children's Use of the Plural

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9hm9x301

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
ettlinger, Marc
Zapf, Jennifer A.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonological Constraints on Children’s Use of the Plural
Marc Ettlinger (marce@berkeley.edu)
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Linguistics
1203 Dwinelle Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA

Jennifer A. Zapf (zapfj@uwgb.edu)
University of Wisconsin-Green Bay
Department of Psychology and Human Development
2420 Nicolet Drive, MAC C310, Green Bay, WI 54311, USA
developmental trajectory of the plural, but also the ability to
articulate or perceive certain sequences of sounds.
The English plural is marked by the –s morpheme for
most nouns, which is pronounced [s], [z] or [əz] following
voiceless consonants (e.g. cats), voiced segments (e.g.
dogs), and stridents (e.g. watches) respectively. We argue
that an important part in learning to use this particular
morpheme involves the child’s developing ability to
produce the phonological form associated with the plural.
This is no trivial task given the fact that the plural suffix
is a fricative, a consonant produced by forcing turbulent air
through a narrow channel in the mouth (e.g. s, z, th), and
most English nouns are consonant final. This combination
of sounds results in a plural form with a complex coda: two
adjacent consonants at the end of the same syllable. Complex codas are generally marked: dispreferred crosslinguistically and illegal in some languages (e.g. Spanish,
Italian). Even in English, which allows complex codas, they
are governed by a strict set of constraints on what sequences
of consonants are allowed. For example, there are no English words with two consonants with the same manner and
place of articulation in the coda (e.g. no words like fedt or
fepb). This constraint is what gives rise to the –ed allomorph
for the past tense (e.g. seeded), for example.

Abstract
The correct use of an affix, such as the English plural or past
tense suffixes, is generally assumed to reflect mastery of the
relevant morphological process. An alternate view holds that
the use of an affix reflects not only morphological
competence, but also additional factors including syntactic,
semantic and phonological abilities. The present paper reports
on a set of experiments in support of this latter view
specifically examining the role of phonology on Englishspeaking children’s ability to produce the plural. Plural
productions were elicited from two-year-olds for nouns with
different codas, or endings (e.g. dogs vs. keys). The results
provide evidence that the production of the plural morpheme
–s is partly governed by children’s developing ability to
articulate or perceive the phonological form of the plural.
This supports a model of language learning in which the
acquisition of different components of grammar interact with
each other versus a model that is exclusively modular.
Keywords: morphology, phonology, language acquisition.

Introduction
Children learning a language demonstrate variable
production of grammatical morphemes in between the onset
of morphological knowledge and complete mastery as an
adult. One of the earliest acquired grammatical morphemes
is the regular English plural (Brown, 1973), appearing in
children’s speech as early as 18 months (Zapf & Smith,
2007; de Villiers & de Villiers, 1973). However, the
acquisition of this morpheme shows a slow, protracted
course of development and is not fully generalizable to all
new instances until as late as seven years of age (Berko,
1958). This variability, seen in the acquisition of many
grammatical morphemes, has generally been attributed to
maturing morphological competence (Marcus et al. 1992;
Pérez-Leroux & Roeper, 1999) or general processing
limitations (Bloom, 1990). An alternate view holds that this
variable production is instead the result of a confluence of
factors including semantic knowledge (Anisfeld & Tucker,
1968; Zapf & Smith, 2007), syntactic ability (Wexler, 1994)
and phonological constraints (Demuth, 1992). This paper
argues in favor of this latter account, specifically focusing
on the idea that limitations in phonological ability contribute
significantly to the variability in the production of
grammatical morphemes. As such, it is not only the
acquisition of morphology that contributes to the long

Sonority
This particular constraint is partially a manifestation of the
more general Sonority Sequencing principle (SSP; Sievers,
1881; Whitney, 1885), which expresses the generalization
that syllables rise in sonority through the onset to a peak at
the nucleus then fall in sonority through the coda. The sonority of the different classes of speech sounds is shown in
Table 1 and the validity of certain syllables according to the
SSP is shown in Figure 1.
Manner of articulation
vowel
glide
liquid
nasal
fricative
plosive

Example
i, e
y, w
r, l
n, m
s, z
d, t

Sonorous
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no

Table 1. Sonority of English phones
41

Vowel
x
Glide
Liquid
x
Nasal
Fric.
Plosive x
x
b u l b
SSP?
9

x

x
x

x x
b u b l
8

x
x
x
b l a k
9

Vankin, 2007; Ettlinger, Finn, & Hudson Kam, 2007; cf.
Hayes, 2007).

x
x

Acquisition of Complex Codas
The fact that complex codas are marked is reflected in phonological acquisition data in which children go through an
intermediate stage where simple codas are produced correctly and complex codas are not. For example, G (2;3-2;9),
a child acquiring English (Gnanadesikan, 1995), went from
producing no codas ([dʌ] duck) to correctly producing singleton codas ([gep] grape) but not complex codas ([fen]
friend), before finally being able to correctly produce complex codas. Also, Kirk and Demuth (2003) report higher
correct production of nasal (e.g. n, m) + s clusters than plosive (e.g. t, d) + s clusters (84% vs. 74% respectively) for
two-year-old children, suggesting that the sonority profile of
the complex coda in question also plays a role.
These limitations on phonological abilities clearly represent a potential factor for the production the plural morpheme since the acquisition of the plural generally occurs
around the same time that children are just beginning to
master the articulation of complex codas. Thus, the failure
to use the plural morpheme around the age of two may reflect an inability to articulate the consonant + s coda cluster
correctly in addition to lacking mastery of the morphology.

x x
l b a k
8

Figure 1: Demonstration of the validity of certain syllables
according to the SSP
While there is strong cross-linguistic evidence for the
ranking in Table 1, there is no consensus on how the sonority scale is manifested acoustically or articulatorily (Ohala,
1990). A number of phonetic correlates have been suggested
including perceptual salience, loudness (Ladefoged, 1993),
air flow (Goldsmith, 1995) and resonance (Clements, 2006).
and yet there is also considerable disagreement as to
whether the SSP is an independent linguistic concept
(Clements, 2006; Vaux, 2006) or is reflective of other more
basic phonetic or phonological facts. For example, Steriade
(1999) and Blevins (2004) argue that the SSP is a correlate
of the fact that the acoustic cues for consonants are difficult
to hear on neighboring segments that are not sonorous. Thus
the acoustic cues that signal to the listener of the t in fedt
are difficult to hear on the non-sonorant d as compared to on
the sonorous l in felt. Conversely, MacNeilage and Davis
(2000) argue that the SSP is a reflection of the idea that syllables are derived from a cycle of opening and closing the
mouth. Thus fedt is invalid because the mouth has already
completed a cycle by being closed on the d and so no additional segments are allowed in the syllable as compared to
felt where the jaw is still partially open for the l and can
accommodate additional segments so long as they are articulated with a closed jaw.
Because of the challenges associated with establishing a
fine-grained sonority scale, Table 1 also shows a broader
classification with sounds simply categorized as sonorous or
not. Sonorous sounds have the property of being produced
without turbulent airflow and also are voiced by default.
The crucial generalization using this rubric is that nonsonorants are easier to produce and/or easier to perceive
after sonorants in coda position while sonorants preferably
follow non-sonorants in onset position.
Whatever the actual correlates of the sonority scale, all
theories predict that fedt is invalid is because it includes a
sonority plateau: d and t have essentially the same sonority.1
Furthermore, there is evidence that the SSP is a concept
available to language learners at the earliest stages of phonological development (Berent, Steriade, Lennertz, &

Experiment 1
To test the hypothesis that phonology partially constrains
the correct use of the plural morpheme, we conducted a behavioral experiment eliciting productions from two-year-old
children. The experimental task, borrowed from Johnston,
Smith, and Box (1997), elicits productions by asking children to describe items to a blind-folded teddy bear. In the
present version, the child was presented on each trial with
an array of objects as illustrated in Figure 2. Each array included two sets: a set of one (S Set) and a set of more than
one (P set).

Figure 2: Sample stimuli sets from Experiment 1. In the
placement of objects during the experiment, the position of
the target was counter-balanced.
The child’s task was to tell the bear “to get” one of the
sets. On some trials, this was the S set and so a likely word
to indicate that set would be the singular term (e.g. spoon).
On the critical test trials the target set was the P set, potentially generating a plural noun (e.g. dogs). The nouns used
for the P set were varied such that some had codas (e.g. dog

1
The SSP is not the only factor dictating legal and illegal coda
clusters in English. For example, there is an interesting set of constraints on the appendix (Hammond, 1999; Vaux, 2006) licensing
coronal consonants (e.g. fund [fund], dumb [dum_]).

42

[dɑg]) and others did not (e.g. key [ki_]) with the resulting
plurals forms having either simple (e.g keys [kiz] or complex (e.g. dogs [dɑgz]) codas.

allows for the child to show what is known without aid from
the experimenter.
Each child received eight trials. The first two trials were
“warm up” trials in which the parent was first asked to tell
teddy what toys to get in order to demonstrate to the child
the task at hand. Immediately following, the child was asked
the same question. On the remaining six trials, only the
child was queried. Four of these remaining trials queried a
response to the P set and the remaining two trials queried a
response to the S set.

Method
Participants
Participants were 68 children between 23 and 30 months of
age (mean age = 26 months). All children were from monolingual speaking families drawn from a primarily middle
class town in the Midwestern United States.

Results and Discussion
On the critical P set trials, children used the plural 43% of the
time (n=86 tokens), the singular 23% of the time (n=46) and
their utterances did not include the noun in either the singular
or plural form 34% of the time (n = 69). In these trials children either said nothing, a deictic expression (e.g. “these”), or
something irrelevant (e.g. “drink Mommy”). When the noun
had no coda (e.g. key_) and the corresponding plural form had
a simple coda (e.g. keys) the plural was correctly produced
50% of the time (n=51) whereas when the noun had a coda
(e.g. truck) and the corresponding plural form had a complex
coda (e.g. trucks) the plural was correctly produced 35% of
the time (n=35). This difference is significant (χ2(1, N=201) =
3.82, p = .05). As predicted, two-year-old children’s plural
productions are influenced by whether the resulting plural
ended in a simple or complex coda. Complex codas, which
are marked and are acquired later than simple codas, are less
frequent in young children’s production, thus suggesting that
the development of this phonological ability influences the
production of the plural form.

Stimuli and Design
Seven words were selected for use in the current experiment.
All of these words are common nouns, which, by normative
standards, are known by 50% of children who are 20 months
of age (Fenson et al., 1994). Three of these words have
simple codas in their plural form (keys, bananas, cows) and
four of these words have complex codas in their plural form
(birds, dogs, pigs, trucks).
Four unique three-dimensional instances (varying from 9
to 25 cm on the longest dimension) were selected for each
of the seven target words. A previous study ensured all instances of the target nouns were readily recognizable by
two-year-old children (Zapf & Smith, 2007).
At the start of a trial the child was given the two sets of
toys to play with for no more than 30 seconds to minimize
subsequent choices based on toy preferences. Next, the
experimenter took back the toys and told the child, “In this
game I am going to cover teddy bear’s eyes and then show
you some toys! I will point to some of the toys on the table
and then I want you to tell teddy bear in words which toys
to get. Do you think you can do that for teddy bear?” At
this point, the experimenter covered the teddy bear’s eye
with a blindfold and arranged the objects into the two segregated sets (S and P). The experimenter said, “Can you tell
teddy to get ___?” as the experimenter pointed to either the
S set or the P set. After the child told Teddy what to “get,”
the experimenter took the blindfold off and Teddy “got”
what the child said. On each trial, Teddy retrieved whatever
the child verbally specified. If the child said nothing or
something ambiguous (e.g. “that”) the question was repeated once and if the child still did not respond or said
something that did not unambiguously indicate one set, the
experimenter went on to the next trial without Teddy retrieving anything. If the child used the singular form when a
plural was called for, Teddy “got” one instance.
The experimenter ended the trial by telling the child
“thank you” after Teddy picked up the object(s) mentioned
by the child. Additional feedback was not given, as our goal
was not to induce a learning effect throughout the experiment. Previous work by Bryant and Anisfeld (1969) has
shown that offering feedback allows the child to demonstrate what can be learned or acquired through the experimental session, whereas a situation without direct feedback

Experiment 2
Given that the results of Experiment 1 suggest that constraints on the production of complex codas are contributing
factors in limiting the appropriate use of the plural, the next
question is whether the difficulty associated with different
types of complex codas also has an effect. In particular, we
explored whether nouns with sonorant codas were correctly
pluralized more often than nouns with non-sonorant codas.
This particular question allows us to assess the role the SSP
has in the production of morphology.

Method
Participants
Participants were 68 children between 23 and 30 months of
age (mean age = 26 months). All children were from monolingual speaking families drawn from a primarily middle
class town in the Midwestern United States.

Stimuli and Design
Eight words with complex codas were selected for use in the
current experiment. As above, all of these words are common nouns. Four of these words have codas that are sonorant in their plural form (plane, spoon, car, bear) and four
43

than those comprised of non-sonorant + s mirroring patterns
of phonological development.
These data cannot be explained by frequency effects as
frequency predicts the opposite results. A survey of two
corpora of child-directed speech from CHILDES (MacWhiney, 1996) reveals that plosive + s coda complex codas are
far more frequent than sonorant + s complex codas (6525
vs. 2476). However, we find sonorant + s clusters are produced correctly far more frequently than stop + s complex
codas.
Thus, the greater markedness associated with complex
codas as compared to simple codas and with complex codas
that violate the SSP as compared to those that adhere to it,
in addition to reflecting cross-linguistic tendencies, also
captures rate of acquisition. This accords with the hypothesis of Jakobson (1941) that more marked structures are more
difficult to acquire. In this instance, this difficulty in phonological acquisition impacts morphological competence.
These results also suggest that the rate of acquisition of
the plural in English may not necessarily mirror the rate of
plural acquisition in other languages since the phonological
systems will be different. For example, in Italian the plural
is formed by changing the final vowel (e.g. libro – libri
‘book/s’) which does not increase phonological markedness.
This hypothetically opens the door for the plural to be acquired earlier since phonology is not a limiting factor. Conversely, in Spanish, where the plural is also formed with –s,
but nouns with codas receive an –es ending, plural forms
may be more complex than in Italian by virtue of having a
coda (e.g. libro ~ libros ‘book/s’) but not as complex as
English (e.g. cuidad ~ cuidades, ‘city/ies’, not cuidads).
Thus, production of the plural may be partially constrained
by phonological considerations, though not as much as in
English.
Broadly, phonotactic constraints provide a model for exploring the phonology-morphology interface and suggest a
principled explanation for some of the variable production
of grammatical morphemes. This lends support to theories
of language acquisition and performance that argue for interacting linguistic components (e.g. Bates, 1994; Jackendoff, 2002) over those that treat each subsystem as modular
(Chomsky, 1986; Fodor, 1983). This is particularly relevant
here where, at two years of age, the phonological development necessary for the production of a morpheme runs parallel to the morphological development. If myriad nonmorphological factors constraint the acquisition of morphology, as we have shown, then this interaction should be
reflected in a model of language acquisition.

of these words have codas that are non-sonorant in their
plural form (bird, dog, pig, truck).
The selection of objects and the children’s task in the
current study were identical to Experiment 1.
Each child received twelve trials. The first two trials
were “warm up” trials, as in Experiment 1. The following
ten queries were asked only of the child. Eight of the remaining trials queried a response to the P set and the remaining two trials queried a response to the S set.

Results and Discussion
Overall, children correctly produced the plural form in the P
set trials 50% (n=120 tokens) of the time. Otherwise, they
produced the singular 22% (n=52) of the time and said nothing, a deictic expression (e.g. “these”), or something irrelevant (e.g. “look, door”) 28% (n=67) of the time. For nouns
that had sonorant codas (liquids and nasals), the plural was
produced correctly 59% (n=68) of the time whereas for
nouns with non-sonorant codas (stops), the plural was produced 43% (n=52) of the time. This difference was significant (χ2(1, N=238) = 5.46, p < .05) suggesting that a greater
sonority drop within a complex coda facilitated production
of the plural. Therefore, in addition to producing the plural
more for simple codas compared to complex codas as shown
in Experiment 1, children also are more likely to produce
the plural for complex codas with a greater drop in sonority.
The results for both experiments are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Number and percent of correct articulated plurals
based on coda of plural form for both Experiments 1 & 2
Correct Incorrect Total
Experiment 1
Simple Coda (e.g. keys) 51 (50%) 51 (50%) 102
Complex Coda (dogs) 35 (35%) 64 (65%) 99
Total
86 (43%) 115 (57%) 201
Experiment 2
Son + s Coda (spoons) 68 (59%) 48 (41%) 116
Non-son + s (dogs)
52 (43%) 70 (57%) 122
Total
120 (50%) 118 (50%) 238

General Discussion
The present results indicate that children’s early use of the
plural is limited in part by the phonological properties of the
nouns being labeled. First, two-year-old children were more
likely to use the plural when the resulting plural form had a
simple, rather than complex, coda. This suggests that the
marked status of complex codas has an impact on the acquisition of this morpheme. Second, when the resulting coda
was complex, the plural form was correctly used more often
when the noun ended in a sonorant coda versus a nonsonorant coda. This second set of results demonstrates that
the use of the plural is also partly governed by the SSP and
the sonority profile of the coda. Plurals with complex codas
comprised of sonorant + s are produced correctly more often

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Katherine Demuth, Tamar Kushnir,
Carla Hudson Kam and Linda Smith for useful feedback and
discussion. This research was supported by a National
Institute of Mental Health grant (R01 MH60200). The
second author was supported by a National Institute of
Mental Health grant (T32 HD 07475). We thank Jennifer

44

Benson, Elizabeth Dahlberg, Leah Dudderar, Alex Lavallo,
and McKenzie Skipper for assisting in data collection.

Goldsmith, J. A. (1995). Phonological Theory. In J. Goldsmith
(Ed.) The Handbook of Phonological Theory (pp. 1-23). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

References

Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language. Oxford University Press.

Anisfeld, M. & Tucker, G. (1968). English Pluralization Rules of
Six-Year-Old Children. Child Development, 38, 1201-1217.

Jakobson, R. (1941). Kindersprache, Aphasie, und algemeine
Lautgesetze. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell [tr. Child Language, Aphasia and Phonological Universals, Mouton].

Bates, E. (1994). Modularity, domain specificity and the development of language. Discussions in Neuroscience, 10:136149.
Berent, I., Steriade, D., Lennertz, T., & Vaknin, V. (2007). What
we know about what we have never heard: Evidence from
perceptual illusions. Cognition, 104, 638-643.

Johnston, J. R., Smith, L. B., & Box, P. (1997). Cognition and
communication: Referential strategies used by preschoolers
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40(5), 964-974.

Blevins, J. (2004). Evolutionary phonology: The emergence of
sound patterns. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kirk, C. & Demuth, K. (2003). Onset/Coda Asymmetries in the
Acquisition of Clusters. XXX

Bloom, P. (1990). Subjectless sentences in child language. Linguistic Inquiry, 21, 491–504.

Ladefoged, P. (1993). A Course in Phonetics (3rd ed.). Orlando:
Harcourt Brace & Company.

Brown, R. (1973). A First Language: The Early Stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

MacNeilage, P., & Davis, B. (2000). On the Origin of Internal
Structure of Word Forms. Science, 288, 527 – 531.

Bryant, B., & Anisfeld, M. (1969). Feedback versus nofeedback in testing children’s knowledge of English pluralization rules. J. of Experimental Child Psychology, 8, 250-255.

MacWhinney, B. (1996). The CHILDES system. American
Journal of Speech Language Pathology, 5, 5-14.
Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M., Rosen, T.
J., and Xu, F.. (1992). Overregularization in Language Acquisition. (Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development). 57 (4, Serial No. 228).

Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of language: its nature, origins
and use. New York: Praeger.
Clements, G. N., (2006). Does sonority have a phonetic basis? In
E. Raimy & C. Cairns, (Eds.) Contemporary Views on Architecture and Representations in Phonological Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Ohala, J. (1990). Alternatives to the Sonority Hierarchy. In M.
Ziolkowski, M.Noske & K. Deaton (Eds.) Papers from the
26th Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society (pp.
319-338). Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.

Demuth, K. (1992). Accessing functional categories in Sesotho:
Interactions at the morpho-syntax interface. In Jürgen Meisel
(Ed.), The acquisition of verb placement: Functional categories and V2 phenomena in language development (pp. 83–
107). Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Pérez-Leroux, A. & Roeper, T. (1999). Scope and the structure
of bare nominals: Evidence from child language. Linguistics,
37, 927–960.
Sievers, E. (1881). Grundzüge der Phonetik. Leipzig: Breitkopf
und Hartel.

De Villiers, J. G. & de Villiers, P. A. (1973). A cross-sectional
study of the acquisition of grammatical morphemes in child
speech. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 2, 267-278.

Steriade, D. 1999. Alternatives to the syllabic interpretation of
consonantal phonotactics. In O.Fujimura, B.Joseph, &
B.Palek (Eds.) Proceedings of the 1998 Linguistics and Phonetics Conference (pp. 205-242). Prague: The Karolinum
Press.

Ettlinger, M., Finn, A., & Hudson Kam, C. (2007). The Effects
of Sonority on Word Segmentation: Evidence for a Phonological Universal. UC Berkeley Phonology Lab Annual Report. 630-653.

Vaux, B. (2006). The syllable appendix. In E. Raimy and C.
Cairns (Eds.) Contemporary Views on Architecture and Representations in Phonological Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D., &
Pethick, S. (1994). Variability in Early Communicative Development. (Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development). 59 (5, Serial No. 242).

Whitney, W. (1865). The relation of vowel and consonant. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 8, 357-73.
Zapf, J. A. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Meaning Matters In Children’s Plural Productions. Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninths
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. 743-748 Boston,
MA: Cascadilla Press.

Fodor, J. (1983). Modularity of mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Gnanadesikan, A. (1995). Markedness and Faithfulness Constraints in Child Phonology. In Kager, R., Pater J., & Zonneveld, W. (eds.), Fixing Priorities: Constraints in Phonological
Acquisition. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Zapf, J. A. & Smith, L. B. (2007). When do children generalize
the plural to novel nouns? First Language, 27, 53-73.

45

