UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processes and Constraints in Explanatory Scientific Discovery

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pq2w2m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Langley, Pat
Bridewell, Will

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Processes and Constraints in Explanatory Scientific Discovery
Pat Langley (langley@csli.stanford.edu)
Will Bridewell (willb@csli.stanford.edu)
Computational Learning Laboratory, CSLI
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Constructing Process Models

a variety of constraints among processes and the entities they relate. Unlike the hierarchical structures, these
constraints combine the benefits of search reduction with
modularity, and one can imagine how a scientific community might alter them as it matures. In ongoing work,
we are exploring methods for inducing these constraints
from experience with successful and unsuccessful model
structures, which may help explain the origin of such
principles in a variety of disciplines.
The distinction between process and constraint knowledge has been notably absent from the cognitive science
and philosophy of science literatures, yet it seems crucial to understanding the generation of scientific explanations. Processes provide the content from which scientists construct models, whereas constraints correspond
to theoretical principles about how to combine processes.
Knowledge about such constraints is often implicit, and
our work provides a formalism for making them explicit,
which in turn supports their controlled use in directing
search through the space of explanatory models.

In previous publications, we have reported a computational approach to constructing explanatory process
models of dynamic systems from time-series data and
background knowledge. We have not aimed to mimic the
detailed behavior of human researchers, but we maintain
that our systems address the same tasks as ecologists,
biologists, and other theory-guided scientists, and that
they carry out search through similar problem spaces.
Our initial research (Langley et al., 2002) introduced
an approach to model discovery that uses background
knowledge about generic processes in a scientific domain
to generate candidate model structures that relate a set
of continuous variables. For each model structure, the
method carries out a gradient descent search through the
parameter space, with random restarts, to fit the structure to observations. Generic processes serve as building
blocks from which to construct explanatory models.
We have applied this framework successfully to infer
plausible models of dynamic systems observed by ecologists (Asgharbeygi et al., 2006) and biologists (Langley
et al., 2006). These have included phytoplankton growth
in the Ross Sea, predator-prey interactions in protists,
gene regulation of photosynthetic activity, and water dynamics in a Danish fjord. Extensions have included making the approach robust with respect to noise (Bridewell
et al., 2005) and handling data sets with missing observations, both of which reduced variance across data sets
and lowered the squared error on novel test cases.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by NSF Grant No. IIS-0326059.
We thank Kevin Arrigo, Matt Bravo, and Ljupčo Todorovski for their contributions to the ideas presented here.

References
Asgharbeygi, N., Bay, S., Langley, P., & Arrigo, K.
(2006). Inductive revision of quantitative process models. Ecological Modelling, 194 , 70–79.

Two Forms of Scientific Knowledge

Bridewell, W., Bani Asadi, N., Langley, P., & Todorovski, L. (2005). Reducing overfitting in process model
induction. Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 81–88).

Unlike most early computational models of scientific discovery, which emphasized knowledge-lean induction of
descriptive laws, our recent research has emphasized
knowledge-laden construction of explanatory models.
However, our initial forays produced an important insight: adding generic processes to the background knowledge increases the search space, since it supports the
creation of more model structures. Clearly, the adage
about knowledge reducing search does not always hold;
it depends on the type of knowledge involved.
In response, we imposed a hierarchical organization
on process knowledge (Todorovski et al., 2005). This
reduced search, improved accuracy, and produced more
plausible models, but the hierarchy itself was cumbersome and unfamiliar to the scientists we interviewed. In
recent work, we have had more success by introducing

Langley, P., Sanchez, J., Todorovski, L., & Džeroski,
S. (2002). Inducing process models from continuous data. Proceedings of the Nineteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 347–354).
Langley, P., Shiran, O., Shrager, J., Todorovski, L., &
Pohorille, A. (2006). Constructing explanatory process models from biological data and knowledge. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 37 , 191–201.
Todorovski, L., Shiran, O., Bridewell, W., & Langley,
P. (2005). Inducing hierarchical process models in dynamic domains. Proceedings of the Twentieth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 892–897).

527

