UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Psychocomputational Models of Human Language Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tk312hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Sakas, William Gregory
Brizan, David Guy

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Psychocomputational Models of Human Language Acquisition
(PsychoCompLA-2008)
William Gregory Sakas (sakas@hunter.cuny.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Hunter College
Ph.D. Programs in Linguistics and Computer Science, The Graduate Center
City University of New York
695 Park Ave, New York, NY 10021 USA

David Guy Brizan (dbrizan@gc.cuny.edu)
Ph.D. Program in Computer Science, The Graduate Center
City University of New York
365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10016 USA
Keywords: language acquisition; syntax acquisition; language
learning; language change; computational; linguistics;
psycholinguistics; psychology; statistical; innateness; Universal
Grammar.

audible input stream. Though, how children might plausibly
apply statistical 'machinery' to the task of grammar
acquisition, with or without an innate language component,
remains an open and important question. One effective line
of investigation is to computationally model the acquisition
process and determine interrelationships between a model
and linguistic or psycholinguistic theory, and/or correlations
between a model's performance and data from linguistic
environments that children are exposed to.
Although the workshop program speaks to many facets of
psychocomputational language acquisition modeling, the
theme of the workshop this year is: Computational
resources: How much is just right, and does it matter? The
computational resources (e.g., number of calculations per
input datum, size of memory store, etc.) employed by
current psychocomputational modeling efforts vary
tremendously from model to model. However, two
important questions have rarely been addressed. How well
do a particular acquisition model's resources parallel the
resources employed by a human language learner? And,
how relevant (or not) is it to establish such a relationship?

Workshop Topic and History
The workshop is devoted to psychocomputational models
of language acquisition. By psychocomputational, we mean
computational models that are compatible with research in
psycholinguistics, developmental psychology and/or
linguistics.
This is the fourth meeting of the Psychocomputational
Models of Human Language Acquisition workshop
following PsychoCompLA-2004, held in Geneva,
Switzerland as part of the 20th International Conference on
Computational
Linguistics
(COLING-2004),
PsychoCompLA-2005 as part of the 43rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2005)
held in Ann Arbor, Michigan where the workshop shared a
joint session with the Ninth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2005), and
PsychoCompLA-2007 held in Nashville, Tennessee as part
of the 29th meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(CogSci-2007).

Invited Presenters

Workshop Description
The workshop will present research and foster discussion
centered around psychologically-motivated computational
models of language acquisition, with an emphasis on the
acquisition of syntax. In recent decades there has been a
thriving research agenda that applies computational learning
techniques to emerging natural language technologies and
many meetings, conferences and workshops in which to
present such research. However, there have been only a few
(but
growing
number
of)
venues
in
which
psychocomputational models of how humans acquire their
native language(s) are the primary focus.
Psychocomputational models of language acquisition are
of particular interest in light of recent results in
developmental psychology that suggest that very young
infants are adept at detecting statistical patterns in an

1

•

Rens Bod
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation,
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

•

Damir Cavar
University of Indiana, USA and Zadar University,
Croatia Gary Marcus, New York University, USA

•

Jeffery Lidz
University of Maryland, USA

•

Gary Marcus
New York University, USA

•

Josh Tenenbaum
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA

Damir Cavar, University of Indiana, USA and Zadar
University, Croatia Gary Marcus, New York University,

Submissions
Abstracts of research on the following topics were invited for
submission and review:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Nick Chater, University of College London, UK
Alex Clark, Royal Holloway University of London, UK

Models that address the acquisition of word-order;
Models that combine parsing and learning;
Formal learning-theoretic and grammar induction models
that incorporate psychologically plausible constraints;
Comparative surveys that critique previously reported
studies;
Models that have a cross-linguistic or bilingual
perspective;
Models that address learning bias in terms of innate
linguistic knowledge versus statistical regularity in the
input;
Models that employ language modeling techniques from
corpus linguistics;
Models that employ techniques from machine learning;
Models of language change and its effect on language
acquisition or vice versa.
Models that employ statistical/probabilistic grammars;
Computational models that can be used to evaluate
existing linguistic or developmental theories (e.g.,
principles & parameters, optimality theory, construction
grammar, etc.)
Empirical models that make use of child-directed corpora
such as CHILDES.

Rick Dale, University of Memphis, USA
Jeffery Lidz, University of Maryland, USA
Gary Marcus, New York University, USA
Lisa Pearl, University of California, Irvine, USA
William Gregory Sakas, City University of New York,
USA (Chair)
Josh Tenenbaum, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
USA
Charles D. Yang, University of Pennsylvania, USA

Audience
This workshop brings together researchers from cognitive
psychology,
computational
linguistics,
other
computer/mathematical
sciences,
linguistics
and
psycholinguistics working on language acquisition from a
wide variety of perspectives. Diversity and crossfertilization of ideas is the central goal.

On the Web
Abstracts and some full papers from all PsychoComp-LA
workshops are available on the internet at:
http://www.colag.cs.hunter.cuny.edu/psychocomp

Program Committee
Rens Bod, Institute for Logic, Language and Computation,
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
David Guy Brizan, City University of New York, USA
(Co-chair)

2

