UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rumelhart Symposium: Integrating Human and Machine Vision: In Honor of Shimon Ullman

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hq0k978

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Tarr, Micheal J.
Behrmann, Marlene
Koch, Christof
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rumelhart Symposium:
Integrating Human and Machine Vision: In Honor of Shimon Ullman
Symposium Organizer:
Michael J. Tarr (Michael_Tarr@brown.edu)
Symposium Presenters:
Marlene Behrmann (behrmann@andrew.cmu.edu)
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Christof Koch (koch@klab.caltech.edu)

Rafi Malach
(Bnmalach@wisemail.weizmann.ac.il)

Lois and Victor Troendle Professor of Cognitive
and Behavioral Biology
Computation and Neural Systems,
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125 USA

Morris and Barbara Levinson Professor of Brain Research
Department of Neurobiology,
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 76100 ISRAEL

Nikos Logothetis
(nikos.logothetis@tuebingen.mpg.de)

Michael J. Tarr (Michael_Tarr@brown.edu)

Fox Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences
Co-Director, Center for Vision Research
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences,
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912 USA

Director
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
72076 Tübingen, GERMANY

and sufficient function of the different ventral regions. Behavioral and imaging (structural, functional and diffusion
tensor) data from individuals with acquired and with congenital prosopagnosia will be presented as well as recent
findings from the domain of autism. Taken together, the
behavioral studies demonstrate that all of these individuals
are disproportionately impaired at face processing. However, in all cases, the deficit is more extensive, implicating
the perception of other classes of visual objects too, when
the demands of the testing are equated across all object
classes. Furthermore, a pronounced difficulty in deriving
configural (second-order relations) relationships between
components of the input may explain the disproportionate
difficulty with faces, relative to the other classes of objects.
The imaging studies map out an underlying neural circuit,
including core regions such as the fusiform gyrus, as well as
more distal regions, such as anterior temporal lobe and even
parts of frontal cortex, whose integrity is critical for computing the fine-grained configural information required to
support normal face processing. The disruption in the integrity of this neural circuit may account for the face and object
processing deficits in these impaired individuals.

Keywords: Vision; Object Processing; Computational Neuroscience; Shimon Ullman; Rumelhart Prize.

Introduction
The promise of cognitive science is rooted in combining
computational and empirical methods. Shimon Ullman’s
study of both artificial and biological vision demonstrates
the power of this approach in studying the mind and brain.
Among his many contributions, Shimon’s computational
models have provided working systems that offer theoretical
accounts of how humans recognize objects, perceive motion, probe their visual world for task-relevant information,
and create coherent representations of their environments.
At the same time, consideration of the neural bases of primate vision and human visual behavior has provided
Shimon with inspiration for his computational models, leading to solutions to difficult problems in artificial intelligence. By learning from biological systems, Shimon has
created novel and influential artificial intelligence systems.
Shimon is a fitting recipient of the David E. Rumelhart
prize in that his research addresses the theoretical foundations of perception, and draws heavily on both mathematical
and experimental investigations, as did the research of
David Rumelhart.

Christof Koch
What governs the trajectory of covert and overt eye
movements? I will describe our system level approach to
attentional selection in natural scenes. We implement a bottom-up spatial attentional selection mechanism via a saliency-map representation as originally conceived by Koch
and Ullman (1985). Approximately half of the inter-subject
variability in eye movement fixations of natural scenes under free viewing conditions can be explained by such a bot-

Overview of Presentations
Marlene Behrmann
The functional organization of the occipito-temporal visual pathway remains highly controversial. Studies of individuals with impairments in face and/or object recognition
present a unique opportunity to understand the necessary

381

exemplar in the array of templates they are sensitive to. It is
hypothesized that the ambiguity inherent in such multitemplate responses is resolved through lateral interactions
among the many neurons optimally sensitive to the same
object exemplar within the representation.

tom-up approach in static and dynamic scenes. If scenes
contain faces, a saliency-based approach with multi-scale,
face-specific channels can even be used to decode which
subject looked at what scenes based on the subject’s eye
movements. Finally, we describe how attentional selection
can be coupled to a biological-based hierarchical object
classification scheme. Current evidence suggests that such a
saliency-map is instantiated in the early (< 150 ms) responses of neurons in the lateral intraparietal sulcus and in
the frontal eye fields.

Michael J. Tarr
How is task-dependent feature diagnosticity reflected in
the neural representation of faces? We are investigating
these neural codes using the approach to face detection developed by Ullman, Vidal-Naquet and Sali (2002) and extending this method to the task of face individuation. The
diagnosticity of facial features (image fragments) for individuation was computed by means of the mutual information between face identity and fragment presence across a
set of faces varying in pose and expression. fMRI was then
used to explore whether diagnosticity is reflected in the neural responses of face-selective regions. Standard ROI-based
contrasts reveal that face-selective regions are sensitive to
detection, but not individuation, diagnosticity. In contrast, a
pattern classification analysis reveals that bilateral MFG is
sensitive to individuation, but not detection, diagnosticity.
Thus, neural responses associated with face detection and
individuation dissociate between diagnosticity for the two
tasks. We speculate that this dissociation reflects differences
in task-related computational demands: while detection
likely recruits face-selective regions globally, individuation
may recruit only subsets within the total neural population
of face-selective regions. Such results reinforce the idea that
feature codes for visual recognition are computed in a taskspecific manner and suggest that image fragments provide a
functionally meaningful descriptor of the representations
used by the primate visual system.

Nikos Logothetis
Research in my laboratory concentrates on the neural
mechanisms of perception and object recognition. Although
our basic research revolves around vision, we are also investigating the relationship between neural activity and perception using other sensory modalities. Such scientific questions require a multimodal methodological approach that
integrates information obtained from single units with that
derived from mass action potentials as well as from a number of activity-related, surrogate signals such as those monitored during noninvasive neuroimaging. Parallel to our ongoing neuroscientific research, therefore, we are working to
develop methodologies that will permit us to the study neural networks in the context of behavioral paradigms.
Rafi Malach
With the advent of fMRI a large body of research has focused on the fundamental issue of the neuronal representation of visual objects. These findings provide important
constraints on the type of representation that can be considered. First, each object representation appears to involve a
massive activation pattern, likely reaching millions of active
neurons for each object image. Second, in high-order object
areas, one finds strikingly “holistic” aspects of the representation, such as completion effects and gestalt properties pointing to neurons optimally responsive to fragments as
proposed by Ullman’s theoretical work, or even entire object templates. Finally, adaptation experiments reveal an
exquisite selectivity of the neuronal responses, even at subexemplar levels. Reconciling these different lines of evidence leads to a model in which each neuron in high-order
object areas is optimally responsive to a massive number of
different object templates. The receptive field of such neurons can be metaphorically envisioned as a “totem-pole”
where different object templates are stacked on top of each
other. Thus, such neurons respond when stimulated with any

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Robert J. Glushko and Pamela
Samuelson Foundation for their support of the Rumelhart
Prize and this symposium.

References
Koch C., & Ullman S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual attention: Towards the underlying neural circuitry. Human
Neurobiology, 4, 219-227.
Ullman, S., Vidal-Naquet, M., & Sali, E. (2002). Visual
features of intermediate complexity and their use in classification. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 682-687.

382

