UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity Between Propositional Elements Does Not Always Determine Judgments of
Analogical Relatedness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dr9n7mn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Minervino, Ricardo A.
Oberholzer, Nicolas
Trench, Maximo

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity between Propositional Elements does not always determine Judgments of
Analogical Relatedness
Ricardo A. Minervino (minervinor@jetband.com.ar)
Departamento de Psicología, Facultad de Ciencias de la Educación, Universidad Nacional del Comahue, H. Irigoyen 2000,
8324 Cipolletti, Río Negro, Argentina

Nicolás Oberholzer (oberholzer@fibertel.com.ar)
Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Independencia 3065, Piso 3
Buenos Aires, 1425 Argentina

Máximo Trench (maxtrench@fibertel.com.ar)
Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Independencia 3065, Piso 3
Buenos Aires, 1425 Argentina
literal similarity, both relational structures and attributes are
shared (Gentner, 1989). SME (Falkenhainer, Forbus &
Gentner, 1989), the computational implementation of the
theory, is a symbolic system which takes as inputs
propositional descriptions of the BA and the TA, and finds
the maximal (i.e., largest and deepest) coherent relational
match between the two, leaving aside isolated relations and
not considering attributes. Two elements are allowed to be
mapped only if they satisfy the following initial conditions:
(a) formal identity: elements must be of the same formal
type (objects, n-place relations, etc.); (b) semantic identity
for relations: relations can be mapped only if they are
identical in meaning. Once all local matches are generated,
the program incrementally coalesces them into a few global
mappings. Such mappings are structurally consistent, that
is, they satisfy the following constraints: (a) parallel
connectivity: if two predicates are put in correspondence,
their arguments must also be mapped; (b) one-to-one
mapping: each element in the BA must map to at most one
element in the TA and vice-versa. SME uses the established
mappings to suggest hypothesis about the TA. Finally, each
global mapping is given a syntactic evaluation based on the
number of local matches and the depth of the system of
matches (the systematicity principle). To make the semantic
identity condition for relations more flexible, Yan, Forbus
and Gentner (2003) coupled SME with rerepresentation
mechanisms aimed at detecting underlying commonalities
between similar but non-identical relations.
The multiconstraint theory conceives mapping as
determined by a conjunction of syntactic, semantic and
pragmatic constraints. ACME (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989),
the first computational implementation of the theory, is a
hybrid system that combines propositional representations
with connectionist-style processing. The program builds a
network in which nodes stand for mapping hypotheses
between formally identical elements, and weighted links
between nodes represent constraints. Symmetric excitatory
links are created between mapping hypotheses that satisfy
the constraint of parallel connectivity, and symmetric
inhibitory links are generated between mapping hypotheses
that violate the one-to-one constraint. Pragmatic constraints

Abstract
Most computational models of analogical mapping and
evaluation of analogical relatedness (e.g., SME, ACME and
LISA) reduce the effects of semantics on these processes to
the influence of similarities between propositional elements to
be paired. Two experiments were carried out to show that
people do not always follow this kind of similarities. In
Experiment 1, when comparing a single proposition base
analog with two alternative target analogs, participants judged
as more analogous those that did not share that type of
similarity. In Experiment 2 participants solved ambiguous
mappings between propositions framed within systems of
relations and tasks of cause identification. They favored
matchings between propositions lacking element to element
similarity. The implications of these results for computational
models of analogical thinking are discussed.
Keywords: analogy; similarity; mapping; rerepresentation.

Semantics in the dominant theories of
analogical mapping
Analogy is a powerful mechanism that takes part in many
and diverse cognitive tasks (Gentner, Holyoak & Kokinov,
2001). Through a mapping between a well-understood base
analog (BA) and a less-understood target analog (TA),
inferences can be drawn to enhance the representation of the
TA (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995). The
structure-mapping theory (Gentner, 1983, 1989) and the
multiconstraint theory (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Hummel
& Holyoak, 1997) have dominated the discussion of
analogical mapping and inference generation.
The structure-mapping theory postulates that knowledge
is represented in propositional form, and distinguishes
between: (a) entities: single elements that stand for objects;
(b) attributes: unary predicates representing properties of
objects; (c) first-order relations: multiplace predicates that
link two or more objects; (d) higher order relations:
predicates that link relations themselves. According to this
theory, in an analogy the two situations being compared
share a relational structure (systems of relations governed
by higher order relations), despite existing differences in the
attributes of the objects that compose the situations. In

921

externally provided with similarity scores, since overlapping
semantic units represent similarity between concepts.

are instantiated in ACME through a pragmatic unit that
favors mapping hypotheses involving elements that are
deemed relevant for the goals of the analogist. The program
implements the constraint of semantic similarity by
connecting mapping hypotheses to a special semantic unit
from which they receive an activation proportional to the
degree of previously known similarity between elements
(these similarity scores are provided by the programmers
following criteria akin to those entailed in IS-A networks).
Once the connectionist mapping-network is constructed, an
iterative algorithm operates to update connection weights.
The mapping network settles as a result of having identified
a set of correspondences that represent an optimal mapping.
Albeit implicitly, ACME implements an evaluation criterion
very similar to SME’s systematicity principle, favoring
bigger and deeper mappings. ACME’s treatment of
semantic similarity differs from SME’s in two important
aspects: (a) ACME takes into account similarities between
objects during mapping—according to this theory these
similarities have an effect on the evaluation of analogical
relatedness, while in the structure-mapping theory they only
count in judgments of literal similarity—; (b) if two
propositions maintain identical formal positions within their
analogs, they can be mapped even if their relations are not
semantically similar—in this way ACME is supposedly able
to discover new similarities (Hoyoak & Thagard, 1995).
LISA (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003), the second
computational implementation of the multiconstraint theory,
is a hybrid system that combines the semantic flexibility of
connectionist architectures with the sensitivity to structure
provided by symbolic models. Case roles and objects are
represented in working memory (WM) as distributed
patterns of activation over a collection of semantic units.
When a proposition such as LOVE (bill, mary) gets
activated, the semantic primitives of lover (e.g., emotion and
strong), fire in synchrony with the semantic primitives of
Bill (e.g., male and adult), while units representing the
beloved role are synchronized with units representing Mary.
Bindings are encoded and retrieved from long-term memory
(LTM) through a hierarchy of structure units. At the bottom,
predicate and object units link objects and case roles to their
semantic primitives. One level above, sub-proposition units
(SP) bind case roles to their fillers. At the top, proposition
units (P) bind together two or more SPs. In LISA’s LTM,
two analogs are represented as non-overlapping sets of
structure units. When the semantic primitives of a TA fire in
WM, structure units at all levels compete in responding to
patterns in WM. Across alternative base analogs, structure
units of the same type are linked by inhibitory connections.
Within a base analog, structure units of different type are
linked by excitatory connections, leading elements in base
and target to fire in synchrony. This synchrony of firing gets
preserved in LTM through static bindings called mapping
connections. Unlike ACME, pragmatic constraints don’t
need to be explicitly represented. As LISA’s performance is
sensitive to order effects, the programmers can allow
“important” elements to be entered first. Due to its
distributed representations, LISA doesn’t need to be

Shortcomings of the dominant theories of
mapping in their treatment of semantics
Most theories of analogical reasoning accept that two
situations can be analogous even when their corresponding
elements are not initially represented as having identical
meaning (Gentner & Kurtz, 2006). They require, however,
that some kind of identity between initially similar (but nonidentical) elements could be found, and they propose several
mechanisms for identifying those identities. We argue that a
limitation underlying all these mechanisms consists in
comparing base and target propositional elements separately
from the analogs and analogies in which they take part (for
similar criticisms, see Falkenhainer, 1990; Hofstadter &
FARG, 1995). Sometimes, this type of isolated comparisons
could turn out to be misleading. Consider, for example, the
following BA: Peter tried to unlock the house with the car
remote key. Suppose now that you are confronted with two
TAs: (a) Peter attempted to uncork the bottle with the
motorcycle key (TA1); (b) Peter attempted to wash his
hands with the hair gel (TA2). Which would you consider
as more analogous to the BA? Despite the existing
similarities between corresponding elements of the BA and
the TA1, some people will probably consider the TA2 to be
more analogous to the BA, considering them to be two cases
of, say, "being absent-minded and making action slips".
This descriptor seems to be less trivial than the one that
could be derived by simply concatenating the supraordinate
concepts induced from mapped propositional elements of
BA and TA1 (i.e., “trying to open something with a vehicle
key”).
Confronted with the task above, ACME would prefer the
mapping between the BA and the TA1, reflecting the higher
degree of similarity between their corresponding relations
(UNLOCKUNCORK) and objects (housebottle, car
remote keymotorcycle key). The alternative mapping
implies matching less similar relations (UNLOCK WASH)
and objects (househands, car remote keyhair gel).
LISA would resolve this ambiguous mapping in a similar
way. When the SP for Peter+unlocker fires in LISA’s WM,
it activates units for Peter and unlocker, transferring topdown activation to their semantic units. (e.g., human, male,
adult and open1, unlock1, physical1, respectively). This
pattern of semantic units in WM will excite all levels of
structure units corresponding to the TAs, which will
compete for activation. Human, male and adult will evenly
activate both units for Peter within the targets (i.e., the unit
for Peter as bound to uncorker and the unit for Peter as
bound to washer). At the same time, open1, physical1 will
excite the predicate unit uncorker, but only physical1 will
excite washer. As uncork1 and open1 will inhibit washer,
LISA begins to act as if unlocker corresponded to uncorker.
Analogous operations will cause LISA to act as if house
corresponded to bottle and unlocked corresponded to
uncorked. Accordingly, triggered by the SP car remote
key+instrument that was built for the BA, LISA will map
922

car remote key to motorcycle key and instrument to
instrument. Because uncorker is more active than washer,
the SP Peter+uncorker will receive more bottom-up input
than the SP Peter+washer. Analogous support will be
obtained by the target SP units bottle+uncorked and
motorcycle-key+instrument. Finally, as SPs excite the P
units to which they belong, the unit for UNCORK (peter,
bottle, motorcycle key) will become more active than
WASH (peter, hand, hair gel). LISA will thus prefer
mapping UNLOCK (peter, house, car remote key) to
UNCORK (peter, bottle, motorcycle key).
Even though SME would only take into account semantic
similarities between relations but not between attributes, it
would still choose the TA1 as more analogous. In fact, the
program would need to apply the rerepresentation
mechanisms proposed by Yan, Forbus and Gentner (2003).
Possibly the most suitable one for the example we are
analyzing would be decomposition. This mechanism
involves breaking down predicate representations into the
subcomponents that encode the meaning of the relational
term. Such decompositions are then compared to discover
identity matches among the components. In BA-TA1
applying decomposition could result in:

Experiment 1
Our first experiment followed Gentner and Kurtz’s (2006,
Exp. 1) procedure. For each task, participants received a BA
and two TAs. As these analogs were formally identical, a
one-to-one mapping could be built between the BA and any
of the two TAs. Participants were asked to choose the TA
they considered more analogous to the BA. The TA1 was
built substituting one or two verbs and one or two nouns in
the BA with verbs and nouns with very similar meaning (e.g.
uncork for unlock, motorcycle key for car remote key). In
contrast, in the TA2 the same base verbs and nouns were
replaced by verbs and nouns with less or no similar meaning
(e.g. wash for unlock, hair gel for car remote key). The BA
and the TA1 allowed a common description that could be
derived by concatenating the supraordinate concepts of the
mapped elements (e.g., to open something with a vehicle key).
The BA and the TA2 allowed a common description not
derivable from element similarities, but that was in our
intuition less trivial1 than the former (e.g., being absent
minded and making action slips). See Table 1 for an example.
Table 1: Example of experimental materials.

BA: UNLOCK (house) → CAUSE (UNLOCK (house),
OPEN (house))
TA1: UNCORK (bottle) → CAUSE (UNCORK (bottle),
OPEN (bottle)).
In this case an identical semantic element (open) is found
within the meanings of both predicates. However, it is
difficult to imagine how this method would reveal any
identity between the BA and the TA2, since unlock and
wash do not seem to share any identical semantic elements.
Hence, SME augmented with these rerepresentational
methods would also map the BA to the TA1.
It is clear that while these programs could be able to
generate a common descriptor for BA-TA1, such as “open
something with a vehicle key”, they cannot identify the
commonalities that give rise to a descriptor such as “being
absent minded and making action slips”. As a consequence,
they are not able to map the BA to the TA2. What leads all
these programs to choose the TA1 is the fact that they are
considering similarities between corresponding base and
target propositional elements in isolation. While ACME
estimates this type of similarity according to the closeness
of two elements within IS-A hierarchies, in LISA this
similarity is implicitly represented by the co-activation of
semantic primitives in WM. In SME, this similarity can be
revealed via re-representation mechanisms.
We will use the term element similarities to refer to
similarity between propositional elements. As the example
above suggests, element similarities are not always
sufficient to find the best analogical mapping, and can even
be misleading if superficial pairings that compete with more
profound ones are favored. Our first experiment was
developed to show that two analogs that share element
similarities could frequently be considered less analogous
than two analogs that do not share them. In other words, that
people do not always behave like SME, ACME and LISA.

Analog Example
BA
John gave a sweets to a girl in his class.
TA1 John shared a chocolate with a girl in his class.
TA2 John wrote a poem for a girl in his class.
a
In the original Spanish version “regalar” (i.e., to give a
present).
As was analyzed, in a task with this structure, SME,
ACME and LISA would map the units maintaining higher
element similarities. We predicted that participants would
prefer instead the mapping between units that involved
lower element similarities but admitted a less trivial
descriptor. In order to have independent measures of the
degree of element similarities between propositional
elements to be matched, we asked an independent group to
rate the similarity between the BA elements and the
corresponding elements in the TA1 and the TA2.

Method
Participants Sixty undergraduate students of Psychology at
University of Buenos Aires took part in the experiment.
Thirty received the analogical relatedness evaluation task
(analogy group) and 30 the element similarity rating task
(similarity rating group).
Materials Participants in the analogy group received six
critical and six filler analogical tasks. Fillers were
constructed in the same way as critical materials. To prevent
participants from inducing an association between nontrivial descriptors and lack of elements similarities, one of
1
The kind of descriptors applicable to a pair of analogs (e.g.,
trivial vs. non trivial) was not an independent variable in our
experiment, but just an informal intervention to prevent
participants from following element similarities.

923

As Gentner and Kurtz’s (2006) stimuli, our analogs
consisted in first order propositions. However, the concept
of analogy refers, strictu sensu, to a comparison between
two systems of relations (Gentner, 1989; Holyoak &
Thagard, 1995). In addition, the employed analogical
relatedness task is removed from the type of purposeful
activities in which analogical reasoning routinely
participates (e.g., problem solving, argumentation, etc.). In
Experiment 2 we sought to extend our findings using more
natural tasks, as well as materials that comprise mappings
between systems of relations.

the TA fillers shared both element similarities and the nontrivial descriptor with the BA, and the other neither of them.
The order of presentation of the TAs and the 12 tasks were
counterbalanced. The similarity-rating group received a list
with 32 pairs of concepts to be evaluated using a 5-point
Likert scale ranging from 1 (no similarity) to 5 (high
similarity). The order of presentation of the pairs was
counterbalanced.
Design and Procedure The independent variable was the
degree of element similarities between base and target
elements (high vs. low), a within-subjects variable. The
dependent variable was the chosen TA. For each of the
tasks, participants in the analogy group had to read a first
analog, consisting in a sentence that described a simple fact.
Afterwards, they were presented with two other analogs,
and they were asked “Which of these two facts do you find
more analogous to this first one?” The similarity-rating
group was asked to evaluate to what extent they considered
each pair of elements similar.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 participants used analogical reasoning to
identify the cause of a target effect. They were given a BA
consisting in a base cause (BC) and its effect. Afterwards,
they were told that the base effect reoccurred as a
consequence of a cause analogous to BC, and were given
two alternative target causes (TC1 and TC2) from which to
choose. In this way, the task used in Experiment 1
⎯judging which of two TAs was more analogous to a
BA⎯ shifted to one of deciding an ambiguous mapping
between a base proposition and two alternative target
propositions (both arguments of a second-order causal
relation). Adapting the example given in Experiment 1,
suppose that a BA stated that Peter tried to open the house
with the car’s remote key (BC), causing Mary, his wife, to
get worried (effect). The TA would state that, at a later time,
Mary got worried again. Then, participants would be
presented with two events: (a) Peter attempted to uncork the
bottle with the motorcycle key (TC1); (b) Peter attempted to
wash his hands with the hair gel (TC2). Under the
supposition that what caused the latter worry was analogous
to what caused the former, participants would have to
choose between TC1 and TC2.
The BC could be matched with any of the two TCs under
formal and pragmatic considerations. However, the
propositional elements of the BC shared more element
similarities with the corresponding elements in the TC1 than
in the TC2. We asked an independent group of participants
to rate the similarity between the BA elements and the
corresponding elements in the TA1 and the TA2. Table 3
shows an example of the employed materials.

Results and Discussion
The similarity rating task yielded 16 critical results, each of
which came out of comparing the rating mean for more
similar pairing against the rating mean for the corresponding
less similar pairing (e.g., rating mean for give-share vs. rating
mean for give-write). We computed t statistics for these
comparisons. In 13 cases the mean of the similarity ratings for
the more similar pairings was greater than the mean for the
less similar pairings. The three remaining comparisons
showed non-significant differences (due to space restrictions,
we cannot give more details about these results).
Table 2 shows the percentages of the analogy group
participants that chose, for each of the critical tasks, TA1 or
TA2. Data show that even though propositional elements of
the BA were rated as more similar to their corresponding
elements in the TA1 than in the TA2, participants in the
analogy group chose the TA2 as more analogous to BA than
TA1 in five of the six tasks (we found no trend in the
remaining task). Thus, participants’ responses to the
analogical relatedness task diverged from the mapping that
would be chosen by programs like SME, ACME or LISA.
People passed over element-to-element similarities, and
seemed to favor general descriptors that, although not
derivable
via
supraordination
of
corresponding
propositional elements, were nevertheless applicable to
propositions as wholes.

Table 3: Example of experimental materials.
Item
BC
B effect
TC1
TC2
T effect

Table 2: Percentages of TAs choices in the analogy
group.
T
1
2
3
4
5
6

TA1
30%
20%
47%
33%
27%
10%

TA2
70%
80%
53%
67%
73%
90%

Note. T: Task; b Significant at .01 level

χ2 (1, N =30)
9.60b
21.60b
.27
6.67b
13.07b
38.40b

Example
Lucas decided to go to spinning classes
Lucas’ wife became really happy
Lucas decided to attend relaxation lessons
Lucas decided to give up fast food
Lucas’ wife became really happy again

As already analyzed, in a mapping task like this,
SME, ACME and LISA would prefer mapping the two
causes whose corresponding elements maintain higher
element similarities. We predicted that participants in
this group would prefer instead the mapping that
924

Table 4: Percentages of TCs choices in the analogy group
and the target only group.

involved lower element similarities, but enabled, as we
supposed, the generation of more meaningful
descriptors. For each analogical task, participants in a
control group received the TA but not the BA, and were
asked to guess which of the two TCs could have
generated the target effect. If target-only participants
showed no bias towards a given TC, then preferences
among experimental participants could be attributed to
the influence of the BA, and not to a higher intrinsic
plausibility of a TC as a cause for the target effect.

T
1
2
3
4
5
6

Method

Analogy group
TC1 TC2
χ2
33% 67% 6.67b
27% 73% 13.07b
23% 77% 17.07b
43% 57% 1.07
17% 83% 26.67b
23% 77% 17.07b

Target-only group
TC1 TC2
χ2
60% 40%
2.40
57% 43%
1.07
50% 50%
.00
67% 33% 6.67b
63% 37% 4.27a
53% 47%
.27

A
χ2
4.29a
5.55a
4.27a
3.30
13.61b
5.71a

Note. In all cases N = 30 and df = 1. A: Association between
choice and condition; T: Task. a Significant at .05 level b
Significant at .01 level.

Participants Ninety students of Psychology at
University of Buenos Aires took part in the experiment.
Thirty were randomly assigned to the analogy group, 30
to the target-only group and 30 to the similarity-rating
group.

In five critical tasks participants preferred TC2 to TC1.
Data thus replicate results obtained in Experiment 1 (we
found no trend in the remaining task), with the upgrading
that the compared propositions of the first experiment were
now framed within a natural analogical task. People solved
the ambiguous mappings differently from SME, ACME and
LISA. The preference for TC2 in the analogy group cannot
be attributed, in any of the five tasks, to a higher intrinsic
plausibility of TC2 in the TA, since the target-only group
showed a preference for the TC1 or no preference at all. In
five out of the six tasks, we found an association between
TC choice and condition.

Materials Participants were presented with six critical
tasks and six filler tasks. The TCs were built in the
same way as TAs in Experiment 1, but were coupled
with a common effect. In both groups, presentation of
the TCs was followed by a question asking to choose
one of them. The order of the tasks and the TCs was
counterbalanced.
Design and Procedure The independent variables were
similarities between elements of the BC and the TCs
(high vs. low), a within-subjects variable, and condition
(analogy vs. target-only), a between-groups variable.
The dependent variable was the chosen TC. Participants
in the analogy group read the text describing the BA.
Afterwards, they read the text describing the target
effect. Once they had finished reading the BA and the
target effect, participants were asked: “Assuming that
what caused the first event was analogous to what
caused this last event, which of these two causes would
you choose?” Participants in the target-only group were
told that they would be given two unrelated tasks, one
of test comprehension and one of identification of
causes. After reading the irrelevant text, they were
presented with the target and the TCs. They were asked
to choose, following their own criteria, the TC they
considered to be more plausible as a cause for that
event.

General Discussion
Several authors (e.g., Falkenhainer, 1990; Hofstadter & the
FARG Group, 1995) have argued that both SME and
ACME inconveniently reduce the influence of semantics on
mapping to predetermined general-purpose similarities
between propositional elements of the analogs. We extended
this criticism to LISA.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that when judging analogical
relatedness between first order propositions analogs people
pass over element similarities and seem to follow global
descriptors that cannot be derived from element similarities.
Experiment 2 replicated these results inserting first order
propositions within systems of relations, and replacing the
analogical relatedness task with a more natural task
involving identification of causes. Unlike SME, ACME and
LISA, which would be biased towards element similarities,
our participants proved to resist them in favor of non trivial
descriptors that were not derivable from concatenating
supraordinated concepts of the paired elements.
The rerepresentation mechanisms that have been proposed
to discover identities between initially dissimilar facts fall
short of accounting for people’s ability to generate
descriptors that do not emerge out of element similarities.
In an interesting example provided by Kurtz (2005, p. 449)
illustrating human flexibility in making analogies, the BA
Amy wants to date Bill because he wears a leather jacket
was paired to the TA Richard admires Michelle because she
drives a Saab 900 convertible. According to Kurtz, wanting
to date and admiring are two cases of “a positive stance and

Results and Discussion
The element-to-element similarity rating task yielded
18 critical results. We computed t statistics for these
comparisons. In 16 cases the means of the similarity
ratings for the more similar pairings were greater than
the means for the less similar pairings. The two
remaining
comparisons
showed
non-significant
differences. Table 4 shows the percentages of
participants that chose TC1 and TC2 for the analogy
and target-only groups, together with their Chi square
statistics.

925

Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N. (Eds.)
(2001). The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2006). Relations, objects, and the
composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30, 609-642.
Hofstadter D. R., & the Fluid Analogies Research Group
(1995). Fluid concepts and creative analogies: Computer
models of the fundamental mechanisms of thought. New
York: Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). Analogical
mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13,
295-355.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264
Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Re-representation in comparison:
Building an empirical case. Journal of Experimental &
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 17, 447-459.
Reeves, M. L., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of
content and abstract information in analogical transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 3, 381-400.
Yan, J., Forbus, K., & Gentner, D. (2003). A theory of
rerepresentation in analogical matching. Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1265–1270). Mahwah, NJ: LEA

forward attitude towards a person”, at the time that wears
and drives “connote ownership of an object in a manner that
contributes to personal identity” (italics added). Its apparent
to us that this type of similarities cannot be identified
through IS-A networks, decompositions, or coactivations of
semantic units within distributed representations. They seem
to emerge from comparing whole facts via mechanisms that
deserve further exploration. Our data suggest that the
development of rerepresentation mechanisms capable of
opportunistically compensating our general bias towards
element similarities —well captured by dominant
computational models and supported by empirical evidence
(cf., e.g., Gentner & Kurtz, 2006; Reeves & Weisberg,
1994)—should be in the agenda of current models of
analogical mapping.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant PICT33150 from the
ANCyT of Argentina and Grant P030 from the University
of Buenos Aires.

References
Falkenhainer, B. (1990) Analogical interpretation in context.
Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 69-76). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical transfer.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

926

