UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Situated and Prospective Path Planning: Route Choice in an Urban Environment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8c33w8mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Wiener, Jan M.
Tenbrik, Thora
Henschel, Jakob
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Situated and Prospective Path Planning: Route Choice in an Urban Environment
Jan M. Wiener (mail@jan-wiener.net)
Centre for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Thora Tenbrink (tenbrink@uni-bremen.de)
FB10, University of Bremen, P.O. Box 330440, 28334 Bremen, Germany

Jakob Henschel (jakob.henschel@gmx.de) and Christoph Hölscher (hoelsch@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Centre for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany
and wayfinding experiments tend to focus on properties of
spatial memory such as its content, form, and structure (e.g.,
Gillner & Mallot, 1998). Route descriptions have been
investigated systematically with respect to the reflection of
spatial cognition in linguistic representations (Allen, 2000;
Klippel et al., 2005). However, it is unclear in how far the
described routes coincide with routes actually travelled. On
the one hand, both procedures involve planning processes
dependent on spatial memory and knowledge (Klein, 1979;
Denis, 1997). On the other hand, they differ in the availability
of spatial detail and veridicality during the incremental
development of the (planned or travelled) route (Tversky,
1981), as well as with respect to the requirement of
communicability (Denis, 1997:417). Furthermore, although
there is rich information in the literature on how addressees
affect linguistic descriptions (Clark, 1996), especially in the
spatial domain (Garrod & Sanford, 1988; Schober, 1993),
little is known about how addressees might actually affect the
route chosen for them in a requested description. In sum, the
question of how route descriptions (for self vs. other) and
actual navigation differ with respect to route choices has not
yet been studied systematically, nor does the available
evidence lead to unequivocal predictions.

Abstract
Prior research on route descriptions does not reveal much about
the relationship between mentally planning and describing
routes, and the routes chosen when actually travelling. This
paper addresses route choice in a familiar urban environment
under three different conditions: walking the route, planning
and describing the route for oneself, and planning and
describing the route for an addressee unfamiliar with the
environment. Results show that the chosen routes differ
systematically with respect to efficiency, number of turns and
streets, and street size. These findings reflect the impact of
incremental optimization by perceptually based updating
processes along with aspects of communicability and formulation for an addressee.
Keywords: Route planning; spatial memory; spatial cognition;
route descriptions.

Introduction
Imagine walking through your hometown when someone
asks you for directions. Which route do you describe? Is it the
same route that you would describe when asked how you
would get there? And, is that the same route you would take if
you actually walked there? Although all these situations
require planning routes with the same start location and
destination from spatial memory, the resulting routes will
differ systematically. For example, when giving directions,
you may want to choose a simple route that is easily
remembered. In contrast, when describing a route for
yourself, route complexity might be less important than
length. In both of these scenarios, the entire route has to be
planned in advance. When actually navigating to the
destination, in contrast, planning might primarily be done en
route, generating a detailed plan for immediate movement
decisions only (a hierarchical planning process; e.g., Wiener
et al., 2004). The present paper addresses human route
choices in an urban environment (Freiburg downtown) in one
situated and two prospective planning situations as just
described. Comparisons of different properties of the chosen
routes such as route length (i.e., route efficiency) and route
complexity allow for an increased understanding of human
route planning behavior.

The relationship of navigation, route planning,
and route descriptions
In the present study, we focus on two main distinctions: (a.)
whether or not planning and navigation coincide temporally
(situated vs. prospective planning); (b.) the addressee of the
description of the planned route (prospective self vs.
prospective other). So far, the wayfinding literature does not
reveal much about how route choice in actual navigation
relates to prospective route planning or to route descriptions.
Theoretically, it is conceivable that planning is not affected at
all by the ensuing task, be it actual navigation or an inadvance route description. In fact, some earlier accounts seem
to suggest that mental route planning involves a full internal
action plan prior to action onset (e.g., Leiser & Zilbershatz,
1989). In our scenario, this would entail that in both situated
and prospective planning, the entire route is planned in
advance, mentally represented in a pre-verbal format, and
remembered. In actual navigation, this route plan is then
simply executed. In the prospective planning tasks, the pre-

Knowledge about human path planning behavior in urban
environments is far from conclusive, as only a limited number
of studies address this important topic (e.g., Golledge, 1997,
1999; Gärling et al., 1986; Wiener et al., 2004). Navigation

851

towards detailed movement decisions (for instance, at
decision points such as junctions) on the basis of situated
spatial information. In prospective route planning, in contrast,
detailed spatial information needs to be derived from
memory, which is often inaccurate, incomplete, and distorted
in various ways (Tversky, 1981; Golledge, 1999). For
example, small side roads or alleys that allow for short-cuts
might easily be forgotten or overlooked during mental travel
planning, but not during actual navigation. As a result,
situated planning should lead to more complex and efficient
routes. This possibility is referred to as the "efficient-travel"
hypothesis.

verbal format is instead turned into a linguistic representation.
Accordingly, no systematic differences in route choices
should emerge. This possibility is henceforth referred to as
the "no-difference" hypothesis.
However, a range of earlier findings point in a different
direction. First of all, even if planning itself is not affected,
the process of verbalization may not be trivial. According to
Denis (1997) the description of routes requires a range of
complex cognitive operations such as activating a
representation, planning a route, and formulating a
procedure. Here linguistic factors only come into play at a
fairly late stage; in fact, it is consistent with this account to
assume a large overlap between the operations involved in
actual navigation, in-advance planning, and route
descriptions. Nevertheless, the requirement to verbalize may
affect the planning stage, as Denis (1997: 417) states:

Finally, one theoretical option remains. Conceivably, in
situated navigation, participants make spontaneous local
decisions without planning ahead and thus fail to consider any
available short cuts. In contrast, the requirement of planning
the entire route in advance in prospective planning may result
in more thorough and therefore optimized planning processes.
We refer to this possibility as the "optimal-planning"
hypothesis, which does however not seem to be supported in
the wayfinding literature.

"[A]lthough route planning is mainly a preverbal
operation, the choice of some routes or segments of routes
may be constrained by criteria linked to their
communicability. For instance, a detour may be easier to
describe than a shortcut devoid of distinctive landmarks.
As a consequence, the definition of a route not only takes
into account the ease of its execution, but also the fact that
the route has to be described verbally. The description is
intended to be easy to process and compatible with the
cognitive resources of its user."

Altogether, the evidence so far suggests that a) route choices
should differ systematically between actual situated navigation and prospective planning due to incremental planning
as well as verbalization processes, and b) addressees should
affect route choice because of the additional considerations of
cognitive resources and limited prior knowledge on the part
of the addressee. We tested these hypotheses in a naturalistic
real-world study which is reported next.

Although Denis does not provide empirical evidence for this
claim, it can be predicted from this statement that participants
will choose simpler routes when verbalizing the route than
when travelling it. We refer to this possibility as the
"verbalization-difference" hypothesis.

Methods

Moreover, the argument also implies that there is a potential
difference between addressees, as the latter part of Denis'
claim is only applicable for users who are not identical with
the speaker. Then, routes chosen for others should be
systematically less complex than routes chosen for oneself.
This assumption is henceforth referred to as the
"differentiated-addressee" hypothesis. This hypothesis is
consistent with the earlier literature on dialogue (Clark, 1996;
Garrod & Sanford, 1988; Schober, 1993), although there is no
empirical evidence so far that such considerations may
actually affect route selection. It can be expected that effects
of communicability as well as different requirements for self
vs. other are (at least in part) subject to conscious decision
and therefore accessible by way of questionnaires.

Participants
24 subjects participated in the experiment (mean age: 25.5
years; SD 6.0). All participants had lived in Freiburg for more
than 1 year. Good knowledge of the Freiburg downtown area
was a requirement, which was controlled for via a
questionnaire. A 3x3 within-subjects design was employed (3
different planning tasks in 3 different conditions as described
below).

Planning tasks
3 different start places were combined with destinations (here
called "planning tasks") in the downtown area of Freiburg
(see Fig. 1), each of them located close to prominent
landmarks or places.

Furthermore, the assumption that the planning process itself
remains unaffected by actual navigation seems highly
unlikely. In fact, earlier findings in the general area of
wayfinding demonstrate various incremental and hierarchical
planning processes across a broad variety of spatial tasks
(Golledge, 1999; Wiener et al., 2004). Applied to our
scenario, this means that when actually navigating a route,
planning can be expected to be at least partially incremental.
Hierarchical route planning would then involve first devising
only a coarse route plan (e.g., heading roughly in the intended
direction). Then the route would incrementally be refined

Conditions
The three conditions for each participant were as follows.
Situated planning (navigation): Participants were instructed
to walk from their current position (S1, S2, or S3) to the
corresponding destination (D1, D2, or D3, respectively) of the
current planning task. Half of the participants were asked to

852

concerning the route itself (cf. the distinction between error
levels outlined in Reason, 1990).

think aloud while walking in this condition. The language
was recorded and later transcribed.

Between different tasks, participants were led along transfer
routes to the start location of the next planning task (see
dashed lines in Figure 1). For the analysis, participants’ route
choices were either recorded by the experimenter during
navigation (situated condition) or derived from the
participants' route descriptions (prospective conditions). After
finishing the third planning task, participants were asked to
fill out a questionnaire addressing, inter alia, deliberate
criteria for route selection in each of the three conditions.
This was done only after performance so as to avoid raising
the participants' awareness of the study's aims.

Predictions
Based on the considerations outlined above, we hypothesized
that route choices should differ between all three conditions,
in particular with respect to efficiency and simplicity.
Specifically, actual navigation should result in shorter (and
possibly more complex) routes involving minor streets and
minimal short cuts, and planning for others should involve
simpler (and possibly longer) routes, involving major streets,
less curves, and an orientation towards salient landmarks,
than planning for oneself.

Figure 1: The three planning tasks: Start places are labeled
as S1-S3, destinations as D1-D3. The solid arrows depict the
beeline between them; dashed lines show the transfer routes
between navigation tasks.
Prospective planning self (description): Participants were
instructed to write down the route they would take if asked to
walk from their current position to the corresponding
destination.

Analyses
To analyze systematic differences in route choice behavior
between the different planning conditions, we characterized
the chosen routes according to the following criteria:

Prospective planning other (description): Participants were
instructed to write a route description for a person unfamiliar
with the area, who would have to remember the route (rather
than taking the description along).

Route efficiency. For each planning task we identified the
most efficient solution (i.e., the shortest possible path
between start location and destination). Route efficiency was
analyzed by calculating the length of the chosen routes and
comparing it to the length of the shortest possible path. Route
efficiency is described in percent above optimal (i.e., a
solution that is 10% above optimal relates to a route that is
10% longer than the shortest possible route). Lower numbers
therefore correspond to more efficient routes.

In all three conditions, the participants were free to choose
their own criteria for route selection; in particular, they were
not instructed to choose the shortest possible route.

Procedure
Each participant solved all three planning tasks (routes) in the
same order (cf. Figure 1). However, the order of the three
planning conditions (situated, prospective self, prospective
other) was balanced between participants. They were led to
the start location of each planning task and given the relevant
instructions for the current condition. Then they solved the
task by either walking to the destination (in the situated
planning condition) or writing a route description on a piece
of paper (in the prospective planning conditions). Since the
present focus is on route choice, it was crucial to ensure that
the intended route could be unambiguously identified in the
prospective planning conditions, in spite of errors and
memory limitations. Therefore, experimenter and participant
subsequently followed the written route descriptions and
walked to the destination. Participants were allowed to correct
errors such as wrong street names in their route description,
using a differently colored pen, while travelling the route.
However, they were not allowed to alter their choices

Number of turns. For each chosen trajectory (navigated or
described) we evaluated the number of turns along the path. A
turn was defined as a decision to deviate from the straight
ahead by more than 45°. Only decisions at intersections
where path alternatives were available were counted as turns.
Number of streets. For each route we counted the number of
different streets used (i.e., not just crossed) by the participant.
Together with the latter measure (number of turns) this
measure can be seen as a measure of complexity of the
chosen trajectory.
Street size. Three experts who were unaware of the
experiment and its hypotheses rated the streets in the Freiburg
downtown area according to their size on a scale from 1 (very
small) and 6 (very big). To do so, they were shown a map in
which all streets were sketched as simple black lines of equal
thickness. These ratings were then used to characterize path

853

conditions (t(23)=-2.47, p=.02 for situated vs. prospective
planning self; and t(23)=-2.59, p=.02 for situated vs.
prospective planning other), while no difference was found
between the two prospective planning conditions (t(23)=.41,p=.68).

choices in the three conditions in more detail. Each chosen
path was subdivided into parts, with each part being a fraction
of the entire path on a different street. To account for possible
differences in path length between conditions, these fractions
were normalized to sum up to 1 and were then multiplied by
the specific average rated size of the corresponding street. By
these means, a single value between 1 and 6 describing the
average street size for the entire path was obtained.

Number of Streets. The number of different streets along the
chosen paths differed between conditions (Figure 3, right).
On average, participants’ paths went along 5.88 streets in the
situated planning condition, 5.13 streets in the prospective
self condition and 4.63 streets in the prospective other
condition. Pairwise t-tests revealed significant differences
between the situated planning condition and the prospective
planning other condition (t(23)=3.98, p<.001). The
comparison of the situated planning and the prospective
planning self condition was marginally significant
(t(23)=1.94, p=.06); the two prospective planning conditions
did not differ significantly (t(23)=1.66, p=.11).

Linguistic material. To gain additional insight into the
underlying processes and motivations, two annotators
independently consulted the verbalizations produced during
the navigation task (task concurrent thinking aloud, Ericsson
& Simon, 1993) for evidence concerning incremental
planning procedures. Also, the results of the questionnaires
were analyzed with respect to the deliberate route selection
criteria that participants mentioned spontaneously, in answer
to two open questions asking about criteria and reasons for
choosing a particular route. These answers were categorized
into main criteria; then the number of people who referred to
these criteria in answer to one or both of these questions was
counted. The two coders agreed in 97.7% of the cases.

Results
Chosen Paths. Figure 2 displays the chosen routes for the
three different conditions in the second planning task.

Figure 3: left: Efficiency of the chosen routes;
right: Average number of streets used.
Number of Turns. The number of turns along the chosen
routes differed between conditions (Figure 4, left). On
average, path choices in the situated planning condition
featured most turns, followed by the prospective self and the
prospective other conditions. Pairwise t-test comparisons
revealed significant differences between the situated planning
and the prospective other planning condition (t(23)=2.61,
p=.02), while neither of the other differences was significant
(situated vs. prospective self: t(23)=1.33, p=.20; prospective
self vs. prospective other: t(23)=1.37, p=.19).
Street size. The average size of the chosen streets differed
between conditions (Figure 4, right). Specifically, participants
chose smaller streets in the situated condition than in the
prospective self and the prospective other condition. Pairwise
t-tests comparisons revealed significant differences between
the situated planning condition and the prospective self
(t(23)=-2.19, p=.04), as well as between the situated planning
condition and the prospective other condition (t(23)=-3.84,
p<.001). The two prospective planning conditions did not
differ significantly from each other (t(23)=-1.34, p=.19).

Figure 2: Route choices for the second navigation task
(Route 2). The thickness of the lines reflects the frequency
with which the corresponding street sections were chosen
Route efficiency. The efficiency of the chosen routes differed
between conditions (Figure 3, left). Specifically, participants
chose the most efficient routes in the situated planning (actual
navigation) condition (8.1% above optimal). Pairwise t-test
comparisons revealed significant differences between the
situated planning condition and both prospective planning

854

contrast, the criteria easy to find, suitable for strangers and
distinctive were mentioned exclusively in the prospective
planning other condition (six vs. zero cases). Thus, with
respect to the criteria mentioned spontaneously in the
questionnaire, planning for others differed systematically
from self-travel, at least in retrospect.

Discussion
Planning or describing a novel route through a well-known
urban environment is an everyday spatial task. However,
relatively little is known about the relationship between actual
navigation, planning, and description with respect to route
choice. In this work we studied route planning behavior in
three different situations: (i.) route planning for actual
immediate navigation (situated planning condition); (ii.) route
planning for future navigation (prospective planning self);
(iii.) route planning for a third person who is unaware of the
environment (prospective planning other). In the prospective
planning conditions, participants generated written route
descriptions.

Figure 4: left: Average number of turns for the chosen
paths; right: Average size of the chosen streets
Linguistic material. The informal inspection of taskconcurrent verbalizations revealed that of all 12 participants
whose linguistic data were recorded, 11 spontaneously
referred to planning processes during navigation; for most
participants this happened frequently rather than
exceptionally. This is even true for one participant who
describes a nearly complete route before setting out and then
mentions that he does not really think about the route any
longer, since it has already been planned. Nevertheless, after a
few minutes new considerations emerge, inspired by the
visual information provided by the environment. A more
typical example of an incremental route planning process
reflected verbally is the following: "I could now walk over
the Münsterplatz – and now I consider whether I should do
that, whether this might be a shortcut, that's possible – I think
that's what I'll do now." While the verbal data will not be
analyzed further at this point, they do contradict the "nodifference" hypothesis, and they also suggest that
verbalization is not the only difference between the
conditions (cf. the "verbalization-difference" hypothesis).

Results demonstrate clear differences between the different
planning situations. Participants generated shorter routes in
the situated planning condition than in the prospective
planning conditions (contrary to the "optimal-planning"
hypothesis stated above). Also, they chose smaller streets and
paths consisting of more turns and more different street
segments in the situated planning condition. These results
clearly disprove the "no-difference" hypothesis which states
that, when faced with a wayfinding task, routes are planned
entirely in advance in a pre-verbal fashion that allows for plan
execution in similar ways for both navigation and
verbalization purposes. According to the "verbalizationdifference" hypothesis, theoretically the different route
choices could be entirely due to communicability, i.e., the
requirement of verbalizing the planned route, rather than
differences in the planning process itself. However, the verbal
data collected during route navigation in the situated planning
task demonstrate that humans do not consistently rely on a
complete prior action plan. This result is consistent with prior
findings in the wayfinding literature indicating that planning
is incremental and hierarchical (Golledge, 1999; Wiener et
al., 2004).

In the questionnaire entries, three criteria for route selection
were mentioned significantly more often in the prospective
other condition than in either the situated or in the prospective
self condition: 1) the route should be simple, 2) it should
contain as few changes of direction as possible, and 3) there
should be helpful landmarks and other orientation aids (main
streets, street car tracks) along the way (all χ2 > 5.0, p < .026;
except for simple, situated vs. prospective self: χ2 = 3.0, p =
.084). Like in the behavioral measures, the prospective self
condition ranges between the situated and prospective other
conditions but the difference between the two prospective
conditions is numerically more than twice as big.
Furthermore, about 25% of the participants mentioned
choosing routes that were attractive or not too busy for their
own routes (situated and prospective planning self
conditions), while these criteria were not mentioned at all
with respect to the prospective planning other condition. In

Furthermore, the aspect of communicability is relevant for
both prospective planning conditions; if this factor alone was
at work, no differences in route choices could be expected
between these two conditions. However, this was not the
case. As such, the behavioral results were not conclusive, as
none of the route measures revealed significant differences.
However, for all behavioral measures, results of the
prospective planning self condition were between the other
two conditions as if bridging between the extremes. Also, the
participants' reported deliberate route selection criteria
support the assumption that addressees are taken into account
in the verbalization of route descriptions, consistent with the
"differentiated-addressee" hypothesis based on Denis' (1997)
suggestion. Crucially, with respect to route selection criteria,

855

the difference between planning for self vs. other is greater
than that between route planning for self and situated
planning. This stands in contrast to the behavioral data, which
reflect a more prominent difference between situated and
prospective planning.

References
Allen, G. L. (2000). Principles and practices for
communicating route knowledge. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 333-359.
Clark, H.H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Denis, M. (1997). The description of routes: A cognitive
approach to the production of spatial discourse. Cahiers de
Psychologie Cognitive, 16(4):409-458.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Garrod, S.C. & Sanford, A.J. (1988). Discourse models as
interfaces between language and the spatial world. Journal
of Semantics 6: 147-160.
Gärling, T., Säisä, J., Böök, A.& Lindberg, E. (1986). The
spatiotemporal sequencing of everyday activities in the
large-scale environment. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 6, 261-280.
Gillner, S. & Mallot, H. A. (1998). Navigation and
acquisition of spatial knowledge in a virtual maze. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10(4), 445.463.
Golledge, R.G. (1997) Defining the Criteria Used in Path
Selection. In: Ettema, D.F., Timmermans, H.J.P. (eds),
Activity-Based Approaches to Travel Analysis (pp. 151169). Elsevier, New York.
Golledge, R.G. (Ed.) (1999). Wayfinding Behavior: Cognitive
Mapping and Other Spatial Processes. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Klein, W. (1979). Wegauskünfte [Route descriptions]. In:
Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik (LiLi)
33, 9–57.
Klippel, A., Tappe, H., Kulik, L., & Lee, P.U. (2005).
Wayfinding choremes – a language for modeling
conceptual route knowledge. Journal of Visual Languages
and Computing 16 (4), pp. 311-329.
Kuipers, B., Tecuci, D. G., & Stankiewicz, B. J. (2003). The
skeleton in the cognitive map: A computational and
empirical exploration. Environment & Behavior, 35(1), 81106.
Leiser, D. & Zilbershatz, A. (1989). The Traveller: A
computational model of spatial network learning.
Environment & Behavior, 21(4), 435-463.
Newell, A., & Simon, H.A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Reason, J. (1990). Human Error. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Schober, M.F. (1993). Spatial Perspective-Taking in
Conversation, Cognition 47: 1-24.
Tversky, B. (1981). Distortions in memory for maps.
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 407-433.
Wiener, J.M., Schnee, A., & Mallot, H.A. (2004). Use and
Interaction of Navigation Strategies in Regionalized
Environments. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
24(4), 475 – 493.

Taken together, these results are consistent with the
assumption that, when planning in advance for themselves,
participants aimed to plan the route in a similar way as when
they actually travelled it, but did not entirely succeed. Their
descriptions may have been affected to a certain degree by the
aspect of communicability, but it is unlikely that this effect
alone is sufficient for explaining the results. Even if the
participants' spatial memory of the test environment was
perfect, the mental effort of retrieving precise and detailed
spatial information is rather high and time consuming,
inducing the participants to rely on a simplified route
network, dominated by large salient streets (Kuipers et al.,
2003). In addition to these aspects that may be to a certain
degree deliberate and conscious, the differences in route
choice should at least in part be due to limits of memory and
distortions of the mental map. During actual navigation, the
immediate feedback navigators receive allows for resolving
uncertainties, inaccuracies, and incompleteness of spatial
memory and therefore to a constant refinement of the route
plan. This effect is supported by the fact that actual
navigation by foot takes time, which can be (and actually is,
as the verbalization data show) used for optimization,
constantly accounting for the current situation, updating, and
refining the mental plan. Altogether, therefore, our results are
consistent with the "efficient-travel" hypothesis which states
that situated planning leads to more complex and efficient
routes because the mental map can be constantly updated by
perceptual information.
Further research may identify more precisely how perceptual
information interacts with requirements of in-advanceplanning and verbalization for different addressees. The
present study has provided an important basis for such
research by showing for the first time that different planning
and navigation conditions do in fact result in different route
choices, even though other situational factors influencing
actual decisions in everyday life, such as attractiveness of
routes, shopping facilities, etc., remained stable.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the Volkswagenstiftung (Tandem
project: Wayfinding strategies in behavior and language,
granted to Jan Wiener and Thora Tenbrink) and the DFG
(SFB/TR 8 "Spatial Cognition", Bremen / Freiburg).

856

