UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Description, Function and Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98k8f4zb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Andonova, Elena
Tenbrink, Thora
Coventry, Kenny R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Description, Function and Context
Elena Andonova (andonova@uni-bremen.de)
SFB-TR8 Transregional Spatial Cognition Research Centre
Bremen University
Bremen, Germany

Thora Tenbrink (tenbrink@uni-bremen.de)
SFB-TR8 Transregional Spatial Cognition Research Centre
Bremen University
Bremen, Germany

Kenny R. Coventry (kenny.coventry@unn.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre
Northumbria University
Newcastle, UK

Abstract

Functionality and context effects are related to our ability to
take advantage of visual and situational regularities.
Typical arrangements in our environment are represented in
context frames (Bar, 2004), alternatively described as
schemata, scripts, and frames, that provide us with a set of
expectations both about the kinds of objects we may come
across, for example, in a living room or a furniture store,
and about their spatial relations.
The close relationship between an object’s function and
its verbal description was first shown in Labov’s (1973)
study on naming and category boundaries for containers in
different contexts of use. Participants’ preference for a
verbal label for a given container was a function of the
object’s perceived function. On the other hand, how an
object is labeled can itself trigger expectations about its
function in a scene (Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod
(1994). Furthermore, Carlson-Radvansky & Radvansky
(1996) found that preference for a given reference frame
over another in the description of the spatial relation
between two objects depended on whether the objects were
in a functionally related pair (e.g., a mailcarrier and a
mailbox) or not (mailcarrier and a birdbox). In their study,
the intrinsic frame of reference was used significantly more
for related than for unrelated pairs.
However, work examining the influence of functional
relations has focused on individual lexical items in fixed
sentential contexts. If function really matters, one should
find that functional relations affect spatial description at a
range of levels of description and analysis.
Context can affect spatial description as well. Coventry
(1999) found that different contexts provided in the form of
a text can affect judgments of the appropriateness of spatial
prepositions such as in as descriptions of one and the same
scene. In a study by Grabowski, Hermann, & Weiss
(1993), participants’ interpretations of where in front of is
in relation to parking a car differed as a function of the

Lexical choices in descriptions of the spatial world around us
are affected not only by geometry, but also by variables such
as situational context and the extent to which the spatial
relations between the objects referred to are seen as
consistent with their typical function. In a study of how
people describe complex scenes with multiple objects we
examined whether descriptive choices (both locally at the
lexical level but also at a more global descriptive scheme
level) are guided by knowledge about the spatial
arrangement (functional versus non-functional doll’s
furniture arrangements) and by the contextual schemas
evoked in the task instruction (a living room context versus a
furniture showroom). Participants’ choices varied both in
terms of the order in which objects in the array were
described (trajectory strategies) and in spatial language
depending on the functionality of the array. The context of
instruction had a more limited role affecting only one aspect
of the spatial language used.
Keywords: spatial language; functional relations; context;
descriptive schemas.

Introduction
Talking about the spatial world involves making choices
regarding the spatial description that would be most fitting
to the particular situation at hand (Coventry & Garrod,
2004). One and the same spatial array can be perceived,
thought of, and talked about in many different ways. For
example, Garrod & Anderson (1987) presented participants
with a computer maze game and elicited goal-based
dialogues in which the maze and its elements were referred
to. In the analysis of participants’ references to the maze,
different description schemes emerged, e.g., path, coordinate, line, and figural, descriptions which the authors
interpret as being associated with different mental models
of the maze configuration.
Two important variables that affect lexical choice in
spatial description are functional relations and context.
199

functionality of spatial relations between objects in the
furniture set and the linguistic context of instruction. We
expected that both of these variables would affect spatial
description choices. Exactly how they do so for a range of
levels in terms of the trajectory of descriptions (the order in
which objects in the array were described) and the choice
of spatial language as well as assessing their relative
importance was of main interest in the present studies.

explicit scenario provided (the driving test scenario vs. the
lift home scenario). The context of the scenarios used has
also been shown to affect spatial perspective taking
(Tvesrky, Lee, & Mainwaring, 1999).
This work, too, has focused at the lexical and/or
sentential level. Does context affect spatial description
more globally? Our study extends previous research in a
direction that offers greater ecological validity by asking
participants to describe arrangements of multiple (3D)
objects with complex spatial relations where a wide range
of spatial language is applicable, and where several levels
of description are involved in a connected discourse
beyond individual lexically-based references. By asking
speakers to provide descriptions that would be useful to a
future participant reproducing the arrangement, we
approach a situation that resembles a natural interaction
scenario which involves both the nature of the scene and a
combination of cognitive and interactive aspects.
Given that language production for an audience is guided
by considerations about facilitating comprehension and
achieving common ground (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986;
Clark & Brennan, 1991), a speaker’s choices should be
influenced by the degree to which the spatial scene that he
or she describes is congruent with the relevant conceptual
schema of the scene which contains information about the
objects and their spatial relations. Generally, speakers
assume a great deal of common ground between them and
their interlocutors with respect to the communicative
situation as well as background knowledge on objects, their
typical functions, orientations, and spatial arrangements.
For example, in retelling stories, speakers are more likely to
mention atypical instruments than those that are easily
inferable (Lockridge & Brennan, 2002). Based on the
assumption of shared knowledge with their interlocutors
such as contextual schemata on typical items and their
arrangements in a certain situational context (e.g., a living
room), a speaker may refrain from explicating such aspects
of the situational context that are already implicitly
contained in the context frame and could be expected to be
shared across interlocutors. Therefore, preferential mention
would be given to such objects and spatial relations that
deviate from the standard schema and could not therefore
be easily reproduced by the hearer without additional
information.
Here we report an experiment that examined the effects
both of functional relations and linguistic context (the
context of task instruction) on choice of spatial description.
Participants were given an arrangement of doll’s furniture
presented on a floor extracted from a doll’s house, and
were asked to provide a description of where objects were
in relation to one another so that someone listening to the
description in the future would be able to reproduce the
arrangement of the objects from the spatial description as
accurately as possible. In this experiment we crossed the

Method
Participants 97 participants (57 women) took part in the
experiment. They were German native speakers, mostly
university and high school students with an average age of
21.11 years (age range 17-57, SD=6.03). Participants
received course credit or were paid for their participation.
Stimuli The stimuli consisted of two arrangements of
furniture items from a doll’s playhouse. The items were
placed on a 3 x 5 grid (3 rows of 5 objects each) and were
at approximately equal distances from each other. These 15
objects included chairs, tables, sofas, shelves, etc., all of
which could plausibly be found in a living room and in a
furniture store. The doll’s house items were placed on a
flat wooden surface representing one floor plan without
doors, windows, or internal partitioning. Pictures of the two
arrangements are displayed in the Appendix where (F)
shows functional array and (NF) shows the non-functional
array.
Each participant viewed one of the two arrangements
(arrays) in the same orientation of the grid. Objects
remained in the same position in the two arrangements
except for four pairs (a sofa and a cupboard, a table and a
chair, a shelf and an armchair, a kitchen trolley and a
chair) in which objects’ positions were exchanged across
the two arrays in such a way as to make one of the
arrangements appear more functional (e.g., a table flanked
by two chairs facing it) and the other less so (e.g., the
same table flanked by a smaller corner table and a kitchen
trolley). Participants were not allowed to touch,
manipulate, or move the objects around.
Procedure The procedure was identical for all participants
except for one aspect of the instruction. Participants were
asked to describe the arrangement of the furniture items
they see so that another participant could arrange the items
in the correct way later on. There were three versions of the
instruction corresponding to the three levels of context
manipulation. In one, the arrangement was said to belong to
Mr. Meyer’s living-room, in another it was Mr. Meyer’s
second-hand furniture store, and the third one was neutrally
phrased without any indication of the nature of the location.
Descriptions were recorded as audio material and later
transcribed. Participants in the living-room and furniture

200

utterance containing a sequential term from a participant in
the furniture store context condition, functional array:
(c) “daneben ein Regal ein kleines ähm ein Eckregal das
ganz links in der Ecke steht” (E., next to it there is a shelf a
small uhm a corner-shelf unit which is in the far left
corner).
The order in which objects were described in the array
(hereafter ‘trajectories’) was coded on the basis of the
transcripts and contained information matching the
sequence of utterances with the objects in the arrangements
that they referred to. The following were calculated as
percentages out of the total number of task-relevant
utterances for each trajectory: direct horizontal links
(describing an object immediately to the left or right of an
object just described), direct vertical links, indirect links
(including diagonal links and jumps over adjacent nodes on
the grid), and clusters of objects. Overall trajectory shape
was also analyzed and coded as either regular (mostly
linear, following either the horizontal or vertical lines of the
3 x 5 grid) or irregular (for example, chaotic, or clusterbased).

store conditions were asked to start their descriptions with a
pre-set phrase (I will now describe the arrangement of
furniture in Mr. Meyer’s living-room, and in Mr. Meyer’s
second-hand furniture store, respectively). The task’s
duration was approximately 10 minutes.
Design The independent variables included the three
context-of-instruction conditions (living room, furniture
store, neutral) crossed with the two levels of the array
(functional vs. non-functional). The dependent measures
were based on a set of spatial language categories and six
trajectory categories.
Coding of responses Participants’ descriptions were
transcribed, segmented into utterances and coded for the
following spatial language categories: (i) locational
utterances, (ii) sequential locative utterances, (iii)
utterances containing projective terms, (iv) locational
projective utterances, (v) utterances containing speaker
perspective, (vi) locational speaker perspective utterances,
(vii) locational utterances containing an orientational
description.
These were chosen because they represent main
distinctions identified in earlier research on spatial
language. Specifically, we distinguished between
utterances that described an object's orientation
(orientational utterances), and those that described an
object's location (locational utterances), or both. This
measure reflects the speakers' attention towards potential
problems in arranging the objects relative to each other.
Terms were coded as "sequential" if they expressed
sequential organization without specifying a spatial
direction, such as next to, beside, after, and the like. We
expected those terms to be used in descriptions that
followed the mental itinerary of an "imaginary wanderer"
(e.g., Ehrich, 1985).
The following are examples of utterances referring to the
same object in the same position on the grid given by two
participants in the furniture store context condition, one
describing the non-functional array (a), and the other one
the functional array (b):
(a) “links neben dem Sessel steht ein Eckregal mit der
spitzen Ecke ähm Richtung Wand” (E., left next to the
armchair there is a corner-shelf unit with its sharp corner
uhm towards the wall)
(b) „im linken Rand am unteren an der unteren Seite
steht eine kleine ein kleines Regal ein Eckregal“ (E., on the
left part at the lower at the lower side there is a small a
small shelf unit a corner shelf unit).
These examples illustrate the usage of an orientational
term in the first participant’s utterance referring to the
object and the absence of such a term in the description of
the second participant. In addition, (c) is an example of an

Results and Discussion
The Appendix illustrates two examples of trajectories, one
for the functional array (F) and the other one is for the nonfunctional array (NF). In the analysis of the trajectories of
scene description, a 3 x 2 analysis of variance revealed a
main effect of spatial array on the percentage of indirect
links (F(1,91)=6.94, p<.01), a main effect of array on the
percentage of clusters referred to (F(1,91)=24.34, p<.001),
and no interaction between spatial array and context for any
of the dependent variables (see Table 1). Indirect links
(diagonal and jumps) were present in a higher proportion in
the descriptive trajectories for the functional array
(20.82%) than the non-functional array (13.74%). Clusters
of furniture items were mentioned considerably more
frequently in the functional arrangement (13.70%) than in
the non-functional arrangement (2.72%) condition.
Table 1: Trajectory analysis categories (% each category
out of all utterances)
Functional array
Mean (SD) Range
Horizontal
Vertical
Indirect
Clusters

37 (16)
22 (13)
21 (15)
14 (15)

12 - 73
0 - 57
0 - 80
0 - 71

Non-functional array
Mean (SD) Range
39 (21)
21 (16)
14 (11)
3 (5)

0 - 73
0 - 62
0 - 48
0 - 29

Note. Horizontal – direct horizontal links, Vertical – direct
vertical links, Indirect – diagonal links or jumps across the
grid, Clusters – objects described in a cluster.

201

between spatial array and context for any of the dependent
measures (all p’s>.05). Orientational terms were used to a
higher degree in descriptions of non-functional than
functional spatial arrangements (27.44% vs. 15.26%). The
contextual cue in the instruction led participants to produce
a higher ratio of use of sequential terms in descriptions of
the furniture store (47.42%) than in any of the other two
(36.49% for the living room and 35.15% for the neutral
condition) as confirmed by a Duncan posthoc test.
Thus, the results of this analysis confirm that the type of
spatial arrangement that is being described influenced not
only participants’ preferences for certain trajectories over
others but it also affected the kind of spatial descriptions that
were offered for these arrangements. Not only did speakers
follow a regular-shaped linear-like trajectory but they also
made objects’ orientations in this sequence explicit in their
descriptions when they communicated information about the
non-functional array. This follows from the need to refer to
atypical visual and spatial features more than to typical
default characteristics that are part of the schema already
(Lockridge & Brennan, 2002). Whereas in the functional
array participants may rely on general background
knowledge to fill the gaps in the description, they choose to
describe orientation explicitly in the non-functional array in
order to facilitate their listeners who would not be able to
infer this kind of information merely on the basis of their
context schemas. In this way, speakers can be said to adhere
to Grice's cooperative principle (Grice, 1989): they provide
information that is needed by the listener.
We also found an effect of context on the percentage of
sequential terms used (see example C above) – descriptions
of the furniture store had a higher proportion of these than
descriptions of either the living room or the neutral context
condition. This result is in line with a furniture store
schema where one would describe the arrangement
sequentially following the path of an imaginary “wanderer”
or visitor to the store. As this is not part of the living room
schema or an unspecified generic environment (as in the
neutral condition), sequential term usage in those
conditions was lower than in the furniture store scenario.
However, the context manipulation had a weaker
influence overall; it only emerged as a contributor to
variance in one aspect of the spatial language used
(sequential terms). There was also no interaction between
the functionality of the array and context for any of the
dependent measures analysed in this study. The visual
spatial information derived from the arrangements
appeared to dominate choices in descriptions.

An analysis of the frequency data for overall shape of the
trajectories of scene description using a 6 x 2 Chi Square
analysis showed a significant effect of experimental
condition x2(5)=13.19, p<.05. Participants’ descriptive
trajectories were more likely to have a regular shape in
the non-functional array condition (70.59%) than for the
functional arrangements (41.30%).
The results from the analysis of trajectories reveal that
participants’ descriptive strategies differed on the basis of
the spatial array’s functionality. When speakers
communicated about the functional array, they naturally
opted for a non-linear trajectory where clusters of
functionally related objects became a suitable basis for
organizing information. Visual objects are functionally
(contextually) related when they tend to co-occur in
typical environments, and a scene is contextually coherent
if it contains items that tend to appear together in similar
environments (Bar, 2004). When functionally motivated
spatial relations between objects were hard to find in a
given scene, as in the non-functional array condition,
participants relied on an abstract alternative organizing
schema such as following a linear horizontal or vertical
sequence of items on the 3x5 grid. In this case, more
orderly linear descriptive trajectories dominated their
choices as seen both in the analysis of overall shape, the
lower percentage of indirect links and of clusters
mentioned in this condition.
We turn next to the analysis of spatial language
employed in participants’ descriptions and examine the
evidence available there in support of the results from the
trajectories’ analysis. Given that we found considerable
differences in trajectories across spatial arrays, we
reasoned that these should be reflected in characteristic
spatial features of the language used. In addition, spatial
language categories may be a particularly sensitive
measure for the second variable in this study, i.e., the
contextual manipulation. Note that no effect of context
was obtained in the trajectories’ analysis. One possible
explanation is that the choices of descriptive sequences
were guided to a large extent by the visual spatial
characteristics of the scene, the objects in it, and their
relations, and less so by background knowledge and
contextual schemas that are meant to differentiate
between a neutral anonymous environment, a living room,
and a furniture store. However, spatial language may
differ across contexts with respect not to the arrangements
of these objects, i.e., the trajectories, but in terms of the
overall schema of the situation of use and dynamic
routines associated with it.
In the analysis of spatial language categories, a 3 x 2
ANOVA revealed a main effect of spatial array on the
percentage of orientational terms used (F(1,91)=9.35; p=.01),
a main effect of context on the percentage of sequential
terms (F(2,91)=3.48; p<.05), and no significant interaction

Conclusion
The primary purpose of this study was to examine the
combined effects of functional relations among objects and
of the context of the task they are presented in on

202

Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. Resnick, J., M. Levine, & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.) Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition. Washington, DC: APA.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Coventry, K. (1999). Function, geometry and spatial
prepositions: Three experiments. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 1: 145-154.
Coventry, K. R., Carmichael, R., & Garrod, S. C. (1994).
Spatial prepositions, object-specific function, and task
requirements. Journal of Semantics, 11, 289–309.
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Saying, seeing
and acting. The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. Hove and New York: Psychology Press.
Ehrich, V. (1985). Zur Linguistik und Psycholinguistik
der sekundären Raumdeixis. [On the linguistics and
psycholinguistics of secondary spatial deixis.] In
Schweizer, H. (Ed.). Sprache und Raum: Ein
Arbeitsbuch für das Lehren von Forschung. Stuttgart:
Metzler.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialog: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Grabowski, J., Herrmann, T., & Weiss, P. (1993). Wenn
“vor’’ gleich “hinter’’ ist—Zur multiplen
Determination des Verstehens von
Richtungspraepositionen. Kognitionswissenschaft, 3,
171–183.
Grice, H. Paul. 1989. Studies in the Way of Words.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
Labov, W. (1973). The boundaries of words and their
meanings. In C.-J.N. Bailey & R.W. Shuy (Eds.), New
ways of analysing variation in English, vol.1.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Linde, C. & Labov, W. (1975). Spatial networks as a site
for the study of language and thought. Language, 51,
924-939.
Lockridge, C. B., & Brennan, S. E. (2002). Addressees’
needs influence speakers’ early syntactic choices.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 550–557.
Tversky, B., Lee, P., & Mainwaring, S. (1999). Why do
speakers mix perspectives? Spatial Cognition &
Computation, 1, 312–399.

participants’ choices at the level of spatial language and in
terms of the overall descriptive trajectories employed.
Previous research has highlighted the importance of each of
these factors for lexical and sentential-level choices. The
results of this study support previous findings and
theoretical accounts of spatial description that attribute a
major role to functional non-geometric information
(Coventry & Garrod, 2004). The effects found here indicate
that the influence of the array’s functionality is not
confined to basic lexical choices in descriptions of simple
2- or 3-object arrays but extends to communicating about a
complex environment with multiple objects presented
simultaneously.
Furthermore, such an influence is
observed not only in item-based language choices but in the
overall organization of information that is considered
useful and salient enough to convey to an imaginary
addressee. The difference in the usage of orientational
terms across the two spatial arrays, for example, contributes
to a wider understanding of salience beyond what is
perceptually relevant to what is cognitively helpful–in
communicating to an absent partner it is important to
address explicitly aspects of the scene that are not
consistent with the commonly shared schema of typical
arrangements of a set of related objects. The context effect
on the usage of sequential terms that we found reveals that
specific scenarios of interaction with the environment were
evoked by the different context instructions and that
consistency with the abstract scenario type was an
important part of speakers’ discursive choices.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our student assistants for help with
data collection, transcription, and coding spatial language
categories and trajectories. This study was partially
supported by a HWK fellowship (Hanse Institute for
Advanced Studies, Germany) awarded to Kenny Coventry,
DFG funding for SFB/TR8 Spatial Cognition (I5[DiaSpace]), and the Volkswagen Foundation (Tandem
project "Wayfinding strategies in behavior and language"
granted to Jan Wiener and Thora Tenbrink).

References
Bar, M. (2004). Visual objects in context. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 5, 617–629.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1996).
The influence of functional relations on spatial term
selection. Psychological Science, 7, 56-60.

203

Appendix

(F) The functional array and an example of a clusterbased, irregularly-shaped trajectory
(oval shapes represent reference to a group of objects).

(NF) The non-functional array and an example of a linear,
regular-shaped trajectory.

204

