UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Statistical Discourse Analysis of Group Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wx297rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Chiu, Ming Ming

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Statistical Discourse Analysis of Group Problem Solving:
Evaluations, Wrong Ideas, Rudeness, Justifications, and Micro-creativity
Ming Ming Chiu (mingmingchiu@gmail.com)
Department of Educational Psychology, 314 Ho Tim Building, CUHK, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
Abstract

time periods. Lastly, I tested these hypotheses with a new
statistical discourse analysis tool, dynamic multilevel
analysis (Chiu & Khoo, 2005).

This study examines how group processes affected microcreativity. I videotaped eighty high school students as they
solved an algebra problem in groups of four. Statistical
discourse analysis of 2,951 turns of talk showed that correct
contributions (CC, a measure of micro-creativity) occurred
more often after a group member justified an idea, correctly
evaluated an idea, politely disagreed or expressed a wrong,
new idea (+36%, +25%, +24%, +4%). CCs occurred less
often after a group member disagreed rudely or agreed (–4%,
–5%). Correct evaluations had the longest lasting effects,
across three speaker turns of talk. Statistically-identified,
watershed breakpoints separated time periods of high and low
micro-creativity. The effects of agreements and correct
evaluations differed across these time periods, and the effects
of justifications and questions differed across groups.

Group Processes and Micro-Creativity
New ideas and argumentation might aid CC creation
(Paulus & Brown, 2003). However, concerns over face or
status can hinder their creation (Brown & Levinson, 1987).

Four Hypotheses
H1. New ideas (correct or incorrect) help create CCs.
H2. Argumentation (evaluations, disagreements,
questions, justifications) facilitates CC creation.
H3. Rude disagreements and false agreements hinder
creation of CCs, while polite disagreements aid the
creation of CCs.
H4. Greater status differences reduce CCs.

Keywords: Creativity; education; group processes; problem
solving; hierarchical linear modeling; time-series

Past research on the development of original ideas that are
useful or influential (creativity) largely focused on
individuals (Sternberg & Lubart, 1999). However, the
explosion of information and specializations will
increasingly require teams with diverse skills and
knowledge to create innovations (group creativity; Sawyer,
2004). Still, researchers have not systematically examined
how group processes affect creative moments (group microcreativity). This study takes a step forward by analyzing the
micro-creativity of twenty groups of students as they solve
an algebra problem. By understanding how group processes
affect micro-creativity, we can help groups work together
more creatively.
In this paper, creativity refers to the “small c” creativity
of ordinary people in daily life, not the “big C” creativity
that substantially affects society (Sternberg & Lubart,
1999). Micro-creativity at a moment in time is measured
via a correct, new idea (correct contribution, CC; see
Sternberg & Lubart, 1999 for other creativity measures). A
CC’s “new” component is relative to the group members’
experiences, and its “correct” component is within the
intersection of the problem situation and the relevant
mathematics (e.g., algebra).
This study contributes to the research literature in four
ways. First, I showed when CCs occur, whether they occur
uniformly through a problem-solving session or more
frequently in some time periods than in others. Second, this
study showed how the micro-time context created by prior
speakers' actions (CCs, justifications, etc.) and interactions
affected the likelihood of creating a CC. Third, I tested
whether the above effects differed across groups or across

Group Processes that Aid Micro-Creativity
New Ideas Groups that create many ideas, representations, or
solution proposals are more likely to find a correct or optimal
solution (Paulus & Brown, 2003). Group members can also
build on idiosyncratic ideas to create CCs through processes
such as sparked ideas, jigsaw pieces, and creative
misinterpretations (Paulus & Brown, 2003; Chiu, 1997). One
person's comments (e.g., a key word) might spark another
person to activate related concepts and propose a CC. Like
fitting jigsaw pieces together, group members also can put
together different pieces to create a CC. Lastly, a person
might also misinterpret another person's incorrect idea to
create a CC. Thus, even wrong, new ideas can lead to CCs.
Group members' different views can help identify flaws
and refine wrong ideas. (Orlitzky & Hirokawa, 2001). By
creating more ideas (including wrong ideas) and evaluating
them correctly, groups can create CCs. Hence, group
members need not only build on correct ideas (See
hypothesis H1.)
Argumentation Successful group problem solving often
involves argumentation, a social process by which people
explain and justify their own views to convince both
themselves and others (Kuhn, Shaw & Felton, 1997).
During argumentation, group members evaluate one
another's ideas, recognize problems, and justify their views.
According to the functional theory of group decisionmaking, group members at least implicitly evaluate the

769

previous speaker’s action and problem solving approach
(Orlitzky & Hirokawa, 2001). For example, Jay says “five
times six is eleven.” Kay can agree (“right”), use a neutral
action (“louder, can’t hear you”), disagree (“no, you’re
wrong”), or change the topic (“I’m hungry”). While
agreements support the current problem-solving trajectory,
disagreements and changes of topic (ignoring the previous
action) try to change it (Chiu, 2000).
Evaluations can be right or wrong in mathematics. As
correct evaluations support correct ideas (“yes, five times
six is thirty,”) or identify flaws (“No! Five times six is not
eleven,”), they can help create a shared knowledge base
among group members for building new CCs. In contrast,
incorrect evaluations reject CCs (“wrong, five times six is
NOT thirty,”) or accept wrong ideas (“right, five times six
is seven,”), embedding flaws in their shared knowledge that
can propagate into wrong, new ideas (Chiu, 2000).
When group members recognize problems or difficulties
(perturbations), they can disagree or ask questions (Piaget,
1985). Disagreements indicate obstacles to be overcome
("no, five times six isn’t eleven"). Thus, disagreements can
show the need for CCs and identify flaws to avoid, thereby
motivating and aiding micro-creativity.
Meanwhile, a question ("what’s five times eight?") can
indicate an individual or group gap in understanding. For an
individual gap question, other group members who know
the answer can help her (e.g., Kay says “forty”). Thus,
individual gap questions encourage review of old ideas
rather than the creation of CCs. In contrast, no one knows
the answer to a group gap question, which motivates the
need for a CC and points to a way to create it. Thus,
perturbations can motivate and inform micro-creativity.
After perturbations provoke new ideas, group members
often justify them. Chiu and Khoo (2003) showed that
group members often anticipated criticisms of new ideas
and preemptively justified them by linking them to data,
using a warrant, or backing a warrant. Likewise, after a
person disagrees with a proposal, the original proposer
might justify it. Then, others can offer and justify their
views (Piaget, 1985). When Jay asks an individual gap
question, other members can respond with explanations and
justifications (Piaget, 1985). As justifications support the
validity of an idea, they can help create CCs.

Evaluations range from polite to rude: agreement, neutral,
change of topic, and disagreement (Chiu, 2000). Consider
Jay’s utterance, “five times six is eleven.” If Kay agrees
with Jay (“right”), she supports him, promotes his face, and
enhances their social relationship (Brown & Levinson,
1987). Thus, members might agree and repeat shared
information to create common ground and solidarity.
In contrast, other actions do not support face. Neutral
actions include discourse management or meta-discourse
actions (e.g., “louder, can’t hear you”). Although changes
of topic (“I’m hungry”) can be neutral, they can be rude if
the previous speaker (Jay) expects a response. For example,
if Jay asks, “three times four is seven?” and Kay says “I’m
hungry,” she either ignores him or does not listen to him,
both of which are rude. Lastly, disagreements (e.g., “no,
you’re wrong”) can threaten face by lowering public
perception of the previous speaker's (Jay’s) competence
(Brown & Levinson, 1987).
When a person disagrees (e.g., Kay), the target person
(Jay) ideally tries to understand the criticism and use it
productively to create a CC. However, the threat to Jay's
face may ignite his impulse to retaliate emotionally (face
attack, “no, you're wrong!” Chiu & Khoo, 2003). Thus,
rude disagreements threaten face, escalate interpersonal
conflict, and often hinder creation and evaluation of CCs. In
this hostile environment, group members might withhold
CCs or correct evaluations rather than risk losing face
(Chiu, 2000). In the worst case, a spiral of rude
disagreements can end the collaboration.
To avoid threatening Jay’s face, Kay might go to the
opposite extreme and publicly agree. By doing so, Kay
enhances her social relationship with Jay at the expense of
their problem solving. Such false agreements allow errors
to persist and potential CCs to remain unspoken. Also,
group members might avoid disagreements due to pressure
to achieve premature consensus (Janis, 1989).
Avoiding the extremes of rude disagreement and false
agreement, Kay can disagree politely to reduce the threat to
Jay's face and maintain problem solving integrity (Chiu &
Khoo, 2003). Instead of "no, you're wrong," Kay can
disagree politely, "If five is multiplied by six, we don't get
seven." The polite disagreement both reduces blame and
creates common ground. First, Kay uses the hypothetical
"if" to distance the idea from reality. Second, she does not
assign blame (no “you”). Third, Kay uses the passive voice,
"is multiplied," to hide causal agency and responsibility.
Lastly, she uses the passive circumstantial verb "get" to
implicate agency in external conditions.
Kay’s polite disagreement creates common ground by
repetition and shared positioning. By repeating Jay’s
computation, "five is multiplied by six . . . eleven," Kay
suggests that she shares his understanding. Also, Kay uses
shared positioning, specifically the first person plural
pronoun "we," to claim common cause with Jay.
Kay’s polite disagreement supports her relationship with
Jay, so he is less likely to retaliate. Instead, Jay is more

Group Processes that Hinder Micro-Creativity
Research on politeness suggests that disagreeing politely
might aid creation of CCs but disagreeing rudely might
hinder creation of CCs. When arguments spill over from
the cognitive arena into the social arena, groups members
might protect their public self-images (face) rather than
further the problem solving (Brown & Levinson, 1987).
Status differences can exacerbate these face concerns.
Face and Rudeness Each evaluation affects both the
problem solving and the previous speaker's face.
770

likely to try to understand Kay's criticism, recognize the
flaw, and correct it with a CC (Chiu & Khoo, 2003). Indeed
during a disagreement, polite redress is the accepted norm
among peers, as its absence is noticeably and unacceptable
(Holtgraves, 1997). In short, polite disagreements support
both the social relationship and micro-creativity.

percentiles in mathematics. These students had not received
any group training and had not worked together.
All 80 students answered two social status questions,
"Who are 3 classmates you would most like to hang out
with? Name 3 classmates who are the easiest for you to talk
with outside of school work." Then, these students worked
in groups of four, with no same gender or same race groups.
There were 40 girls and 40 boys; their races were 12 Asian,
27 Black, 28 Hispanic, and 13 White.
The teacher introduced her students to algebraic
equations with multiple variables with this problem:
"You won a cruise from New York to London, but you
arrive 5 hours late. So, the ship left without you. To catch
the ship, you rent a helicopter. The ship travels at 22
miles an hour. The helicopter moves at 90 miles an hour.
How long will it take you to catch the ship?"
The students had not yet learned any procedures for
solving this problem in class. Of the many solutions for this
problem, one is equating the distance for each vehicle,
cruise ship and helicopter (22 mph x [Time + 5 hours] =
90 mph x Time), to yield 1.618 hours or 1 hour 37 minutes.
The students had pens, paper, and calculators and were
videotaped as they worked for 30 minutes. Two research
assistants (RAs) transcribed and coded the videotape.
This study included individual, group, and speaker turn
variables. Students identified themselves as girls or boys
and as Asian, Black, Latino or White. Mathematics grade
refers to students' mid-year algebra grades. Peer friendship
was the mean number of times a student's name appeared
on classmates' answers to the two social status questions.
Group variables included the group means and variances of
these variables. The RAs coded each group's final answer as
right or wrong (1 or 0; solution score).
The RAs divided the videotape transcripts into sequences
of words or actions (e.g., writing "3 x 40") by the same
person, (speaker turns). Unlike flat classifications with only
one or two codes for each speaker turn (e.g., Bales, 2001),
two research assistants coded each turn and its relations to
other turns along five dimensions: evaluation of the
previous action (agree, ignore, rudely disagree, politely
disagree), knowledge content (new idea [contribution], old
idea [repetition], null problem content), validity (correct,
wrong, null problem content), justification, and invitational
form (command, question, statement), (Chiu, 2000). A CC
is a new idea that is consistent with both the problem
situation and algebra. With limited knowledge about the
group members’ experiences, the RAs coded a turn as a
contribution if it was not in the problem statement or
textbook, and was not discussed earlier during the lesson.
Krippendorff's (2004) α tested inter-coder reliability.
Statistical analysis of group processes at the speaker turn
level is problematic, as time-series data from multiple
groups often violates the independence assumption. Also,
the effects of the explanatory variables on the outcome
variable can differ across groups (group heterogeneity) or
change over time (non-stationarity).

Status Status differences can reduce CCs and distort
evaluations of CCs through status struggles (Bales, 2001) or
through the greater influence of high status members
(Cohen, 1994). Cohen (1994) defined status as “an agreedon rank order where it is generally felt to be better to be
high than low rank” (p. 23). As a higher status person often
receives more group resources and attention, people often
compete for higher status (status struggles), especially if no
status hierarchy has been established (Bales, 2001). During
status struggles, intentional rude disagreements (face
attacks; e.g., "everyone knows that five times six is thirty,
not eleven") can enhance one's own face at the expense of a
competitor's face (Chiu & Khoo, 2003). As noted earlier,
rude disagreements can hinder creation of CCs.
After a status hierarchy has been established, status
affects the expectations of each group member (Cohen,
1994). In expectation states theory, status is linked to the
expectation of competencies for the current activity (Cohen,
1994). High status is conferred on group members who are
expected to contribute positively to a desired outcome.
These expectations create different opportunities to perform
and receive rewards. Members can selectively invite and
defer to high status members' opinions while discouraging,
undervaluing, or outright ignoring lower status members'
ideas, thereby distorting evaluations to agree excessively
with high status people’s ideas and disagree excessively
with low status people’s ideas. By doing so, members enact
their expectations of high status members dominating the
interaction and increase the ratio of flaws to correct ideas in
the group’s shared knowledge base. High status people's
influence can also increase over time. High status people
speak early and often (Hackman & Johnson, 2000). As
group members value and prefer supporting previously
discussed, shared information rather than introducing new
information, high status people's domination increases in
severity over time (Stasser & Birchmeier, 2003).
Greater status differences can exacerbate status effects or
raise the incentives for status struggles, both of which might
reduce CCs. For group problem solving, the primary status
characteristic is often past task achievement, but group
members might also use diffuse status characteristics (such
as social status) to make assumptions about one another’s
competence.

Method
Eighty students from four 9th grade algebra classes in an
urban, US high school participated in this study. On a statewide exam, the school scored between the 40th to 50th
771

1), and command (–1) (V). These variables tested the new ideas,
argumentation, and rudeness hypotheses (H1, H2, H3). Then, I
added the lags –2, –3, and –4 of the V variables were added.
Ljung-Box (1979) Q-statistics tested for serial correlation (up to
order 4) in the residuals.
The path analysis estimated the direct and indirect effects
(Kennedy, 2004). To aid interpretation, I converted each
predictors' total effects to odds ratios, reported as the
percentage increase or decrease (+ X% or – X%) in the
likelihood of a CC (Kennedy, 2004).
I used an alpha level of .05 for all statistical tests.
Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli's (2006) two-stage linear
step-up procedure controlled the false discovery rate (FDR).
Lastly, I estimated the predictive accuracy of the final
model (Kennedy, 2004).

This study uses a new method, dynamic multi-level
analysis (DMA, Chiu & Khoo, 2005) to solve all of these
difficulties by: (a) identifying distinct time periods, (b)
testing for differences across groups and time periods, (c)
using multilevel analyses of the binary outcome variable,
(d) testing for residual serial correlation, and (e) identifying
direct and indirect effects.
To identify the breakpoints for each group, I used a
modified version of the Maddala and Kim (1998) model
selection method based on information criteria. Assuming a
given number of breakpoints (first 0 breaks, then 1 break,
then 2 breaks, etc.), all possible locations of those
breakpoints in each group's time series data were tested.
After the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) was
computed for each model of breakpoints, the optimal model
with the lowest BIC was identified, and the breakpoints in
that model identified the different time periods.
A multi-level Logit variance components model (Goldstein,
1995) tests if the outcome variable, CC, significantly varied
across groups or across time periods. If both varied
significantly, a 3-level model was needed: speaker turns
(level 1) within time periods (level 2) within groups (level 3).
Then, I ran the following multilevel analysis with predictive
quasi-likelihood estimation (Goldstein, 1995).
πijk = F(β000 + f0jk + g00k + β00sS00k + β00tT00k + βujkUijk
+ βvjkV(i-1)jk+ βvjkV(i-2)jk + βvjkV(i-3)jk + βvjkV(i-4)jk)
The probability (πijk) that a CC occurs at turn i of time
period j in group k is a Logit link function (F) of the
variation parameters (f0jk, g00k) and the vectors of predictors.
Meanwhile, f0jk and g00k indicate the deviations of time
period j and group k from the overall mean β000.
First, I added a vector (S) of s classroom identification
control variables. Wald tests identified significant
explanatory variables (more reliably than likelihood ratio
tests; Goldstein, 1995). I tested the regression coefficients
for significant differences across groups and across time
periods. I removed non-significant variables.
Then, I added t group-level variables: correct group
solution, mean of group members' mathematics grades,
mean of group members' social statuses, variance of
mathematics grades, variance of social statuses, racial
variance, gender variance (T). This tests the status effects
(H4) hypothesis. Then, I added interactions among pairs of
significant variables in T. Next, I added u current speaker
variables: gender, race, mathematics grade, social status,
correct evaluation, agree, politely disagree, rudely disagree,
justify, question and command (U).
I entered lag variables for the previous speakers, first at lag 1
(indicating the previous turn, denoted -1), then at lag 2 (denoted
-2), then at lag 3, and so on until none of the variables in the last
lag were significant (lag 4 in this case; a vector autoregression or
VAR, Kennedy, 2004). I added v previous speaker variables (–1)
at the speaker turn level: gender (–1), race (–1), mathematics
grade (–1), social status (–1), correct evaluation (–1), agree (–1),
politely disagree (–1), rudely disagree (–1), CC (–1), wrong
contribution (–1), correct old idea (–1), justify (–1), question (–

Results
Earlier analyses of this data showed that groups with
proportionately more CCs were more likely to correctly
solve the problem (successful groups; Chiu & Khoo, in
press). Meanwhile, exploration of the breakpoints identified
by DMA suggests three types (on-task ↔ off-task
transitions, insights, and critical errors). Krippendorf's
alpha for evaluations of previous actions, knowledge
content, correctness, and invitational form were 0.93, 0.98,
0.99, and 0.91 respectively.
The explanatory model showed that group properties did
not affect the likelihood of a CC. CC creation was not
linked to greater racial diversity, gender diversity, or status
differences (showing no support for H4). See Figure 1.
In contrast, recent speaker actions affected the likelihood
of a CC. Wrong, new ideas yielded more CCs (+9%; see
Figure 1), showing partial support for H1. After a wrong
idea, group members were less likely to agree (–18%) and
more likely to disagree rudely (+6%). Thus, they often
detected and corrected errors to create a CC (e.g., “should
be two hours, not five hours”). However, a CC did not raise
the likelihood of a subsequent CC. Thus, these groups had
few chain reactions of CCs.
When group members evaluated correctly or justified
ideas, the likelihood of CCs increased, partially supporting
H2. If any of the three previous speakers evaluated
correctly (–1, –2, –3), the current speaker was more likely
to create a CC (+2%, +5%, and +3%, respectively).
Furthermore, a group member who evaluated correctly
often helped subsequent speakers evaluate correctly, both in
the next turn (+12%) and in the following turn (+14%).
Also, group members who evaluated correctly helped other
group members justify their ideas (+3%), create fewer
wrong ideas (–3%) and agree more often (+2%).
When group members justified ideas, the likelihood of a
CC rose substantially in unsuccessful groups (+29%) and
rose even higher in successful groups (+70%), possibly
because they used different types of justifications.
Successful group members often justified their ideas with

772

+.36 *
Correct
Evaluation
(-3)

-.60**

.31 *

Justification *
Unsolved

Justification
(-1)

+.56***

+.45 **
+.33 **

Correct
Evaluation
(-2)

-1.11 ***
-.35 *

+.58 ***
+.57 ***

Correct
Evaluation
(-1)

Wrong
Contribution
(-1)

+.74 ***

-1.69 ***
+3.82***

Justification

Rude
Disagreement

-1.17***

Correct
Contribution

+.98 ***
-.69 ***

Agreement

-.61 ***

+.41***
+.39*
+.40 **

Figure 1: Path analysis of a correct contribution (correct, new idea; CC) with significant, standardized parameters. Crosses
(­) and rectangles (ß) show positive and negative total effects, respectively. Solid arrows and dashed arrows show positive
negative, direct effects, respectively. Wider lines indicate larger effects.
“RTD” (rate × time = distance) and other formulas. In
contrast, unsuccessful group members often referred to the
teacher “because Ms. T said so,” which might be less valid
or less helpful to other group members. When a group
member justified an idea, other group members were less
likely to disagree rudely (–5%) and more likely to follow
with justifications (+4%).
Polite disagreements increased CC creation (+14%),
while rude disagreements reduced it (–4%). Controlling for
correct evaluations, excessive agreement also reduced CC
creation (–5%). These effects all supported H4. (Other
predictors such as questions were not significant.)
The effects of two predictors differed across time periods
(agree and correct evaluation [–2]). The effect sizes of
agreements varied across time periods from –3% to –21%.
Those of correct evaluation (–2) varied across time period
from –0.3% to +9%. These significant differences in effect
sizes of across time periods suggested that their effects were
moderated by unexamined variables that differed across
these time contexts. Aside from justifications, agreements,
and correct evaluations (–2), all other predictors showed
similar effect sizes across groups and time periods, showing
no evidence of contextual effects.
This model had an 83% accuracy rate for predicting
whether a CC occurred in any given turn. Furthermore, the
Q-statistics showed no significant serial correlation.

& Brown, 2003). This study tested the group microcreativity versions of these hypotheses using a statistical
discourse analysis. Specifically, the likelihood of a correct,
new idea (correct contribution or CC) was higher after a (a)
wrong, new idea, (b) correct evaluation, (c) justification or
(d) a polite disagreement. However, rude disagreement and
excessive agreement yielded fewer CCs. The effects of
justifications differed across groups, while those of correct
evaluations and agreements differed across time periods.
Greater CC creation after wrong ideas, correct
evaluations, justifications, and polite disagreements suggest
that argumentation often aids micro-creativity. After a
wrong idea, group members agreed less often, rudely
disagreed more often, and created CCs more often,
suggesting that they detected and corrected the flaw in the
wrong idea. Thus, wrong, new ideas might have served as
kindling for micro-creativity via sparked ideas, jigsaw
pieces, or creative misinterpretations (Chiu, 1997).
Correct evaluations had the longest-lasting effects on CC
creation. Correct evaluations increased subsequent correct
evaluations, justifications, and CC creation over three turns.
These results support the view that verifying correct ideas
or identifying flaws helps create a shared, valid knowledge
base for later group micro-creativity.
Justifications reduced rude disagreements and yielded
more justifications and CCs, suggesting that justifications
aid rational discourse and micro-creativity. By aiding polite
discussions, justifications can highlight the validity of ideas,
thereby encouraging further justifications and CC creation.
Argumentation did not always raise micro-creativity, as group
members were concerned about face. Although polite

Discussion
Past studies suggested that diverse views and argumentation
can aid creativity, but face or status might hinder it (Paulus
773

Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2003). Rudeness and status
effects during group problem solving. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 95, 506-523.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2005). A new method for
analyzing sequential processes: Dynamic multi-level
analysis. Small Group Research, 36, 600-631.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (in press). Conflict between
cooperative and competitive goals during group problem
solving. Human Communication Research.
Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom. Review
of Educational Research, 64, 1-35.
Goldstein, H. (1995). Multilevel statistical models. Sydney:
Edward Arnold.
Hackman, M. Z., & Johnson, C. E. (2000). Leadership.
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland.
Holtgraves, T. (1997). YES, BUT … Positive politeness in
conversation arguments. Journal of Language and Social
Psychology, 16, 222-239.
Janis, I. L. (1989). Crucial decisions. New York: Free
Press.
Kennedy, P. (2004). Guide to econometrics. Cambridge:
Blackwell.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Kuhn, D., Shaw, V., & Felton, M. (1997). Effects of dyadic
interaction on argumentative reasoning. Cognition and
Instruction, 15, 287-315.
Ljung, G., & Box, G. (1979). On a measure of lack of fit in
time series models. Biometrika, 66, 265-270.
Maddala, G. S., & Kim, I. M. (1998). Unit roots,
cointegration and structural change. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
McLeod, P. L., Lobel, S. A., & Cox, T. H., Jr. (1996).
Ethnic diversity and creativity in small groups. Small
Group Research, 27, 2, 248-264
Orlitzky, M., & Hirokawa, R. Y. (2001). To err is human,
to correct for it divine. Small Group Research, 32, 313341.
Paulus, P. B., & Brown, V. (2003). Ideational creativity in
groups. In P. B. Paulus, & B. A. Nijstad (Eds.), Group
creativity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibrium of cognitive structures.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sawyer, K. (2003). Group creativity. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (in press). Knowledge
Building. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of
the learning sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Stasser, G, & Birchmeier, Z. (2003). Group creativity and
collective choice. In P. B. Paulus & B. A. Nijstad's (Eds.)
Group Creativity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sternberg, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. (1999). The concept of
creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of
Creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press.

disagreements yielded more CCs, rude disagreements and
excessive agreements reduced it. These results suggest that
students attended to their social relationships and face concerns
at the cost of less micro-creativity (Janis, 1989).
Effects differed across groups and time periods. Justifications
yielded more CCs in successful groups than in unsuccessful
ones. Furthermore, the statistical discourse analysis identified
critical breakpoints that separated each group's problem solving
session into periods of high and low micro-creativity. Also, the
effect sizes of agreement and correct evaluations varied across
these time periods.
This study's limitations include its small sample sizes of
higher level units (groups, classroom cultures, schools,
countries), limited problem content (cf. geometry, biology,
history), setting, and limited group histories.
Still, if validated by future studies, these results have the
following implications. Theoretically, this study suggests that
understanding group micro-creativity requires explicating both
time period and local time context influences. Watershed
breakpoints (on-task ↔ off-task transitions, insights, critical
errors) separated time periods of high and low micro-creativity.
The micro-time context of recent actions (wrong ideas, correct
evaluations, justifications, agreements, and rude disagreements)
also affected micro-creativity.
Methodologically, a statistical discourse analysis (Chiu &
Khoo, 2005) identified the watershed breakpoints and aided
testing of the micro-creativity hypotheses. With this new
statistical tool, scholars can test many hypotheses about
sequences of local, causal effects in individuals' and groups'
learning and problem solving.
Practically, these results suggest that group members might
improve their micro-creativity by encouraging one another to
express their ideas, justify them, and evaluate them carefully and
politely. To aid free expression of ideas (including wrong ones),
group leaders can create a safe and supportive group culture.
Within this supportive culture, group members can elicit
justifications and slow contemplation to aid correct evaluations
and reduce impulsive, rude disagreements. Through these
theoretical, methodological, and practical contributions, this
study might help group members improve their micro-creativity.

References
Bales, R. F. (2001). Social Interaction Systems. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Benjamini, Y., Krieger, A. M., & Yekutieli, D. (2006).
Adaptive linear step-up procedures that control the false
discovery rate. Biometrika, 93, 491-507.
Brown, P, & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Chiu, M. M. (1997). Building on diversity. Los Angeles:
UCLA. (ERIC No. ED 410 325).
Chiu, M. M. (2000). Group problem solving processes:
Social interactions and individual turns. Journal for the
Theory of Social Behavior, 30, 27-50.

774

