UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Stopping Rules and Memory Search Termination Decisions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qw2c45q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Harbison, J. Isaiah
Davelaar, Eddy J.
Dougherty, Micheal R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Stopping Rules and Memory Search Termination Decisions
J. Isaiah Harbison (isaiah.harbison@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
Biology/Psychology Building, College Park, MD 20742 USA

Eddy J. Davelaar (e.davelaar@bbk.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of London, Malet Street
WC1E7HX, London, United Kingdom

Michael R. Dougherty (mdougherty@psyc.umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
Biology/Psychology Building, College Park, MD 20742 USA
only change relative to the traditional free-recall paradigm is
that participants determine the length of the retrieval
interval instead of the experimenter. That is, instead of
giving participants a fixed amount of time during which to
retrieve, participants in the open-ended paradigm are free to
stop search whenever they judge themselves finished. This
decision is signaled (e.g., by pressing the SPACE bar) and
the participant continues on to the next part of the
experiment.

Abstract
An important component of many, if not all, real-word
retrieval tasks is the decision to terminate memory search.
However, despite its importance, no systematic evaluation of
the potential rules for terminating search (i.e., potential
stopping rules) has been undertaken. Using computational
methods and recent results from a new memory retrieval
paradigm, we evaluated four potential stopping rules in a
reduced SAM framework. We focused on two measures of
memory search termination: the total time spent in search
before termination and the exit latency (the time between the
last retrieved item and the point of search termination). The
results of our analysis favor a rule that is sensitive to the
number of retrieval failures during memory search.
Keywords: free recall; memory retrieval; stopping rules; exit
latency.

Introduction
Every memory search is eventually terminated. Sometimes
this termination is due entirely to an external cause (e.g., an
interruption), but often it is determined by the individual
searching memory. Therefore, it is not surprising that
computational models of the memory retrieval process often
include stopping rules to terminate memory search.
Despite the ubiquity of termination decisions and the
presence of stopping rules in models of memory retrieval,
little empirical data has been collected on search termination
decisions. Indeed, the traditional memory retrieval paradigm
gives participants a fixed retrieval-interval (e.g., 30 seconds)
during which to retrieve. After the interval, the participant is
moved on to the next list by the experimenter. This
methodology allows for no measurement of memory search
termination decisions. Recently, research has begun to
examine termination decisions by altering the traditional
retrieval paradigm through the use of an open-ended, rather
than a fixed, retrieval interval (Dougherty & Harbison,
2007). In the present paper, we use results from this new
paradigm to evaluate previously proposed stopping rules.

Figure 1: Open-ended Retrieval Paradigm.
Since participants signal their memory search termination,
this paradigm allows for the measurement of the termination
decision (Dougherty & Harbison, 2007). The most obvious
measurement of this decision is the total time (TT) that the
participant spends in search. In the fixed retrieval interval
paradigm, TT is determined by the experimenter.
Participants may continue to search throughout the entire
fixed retrieval interval or they may stop earlier; there is no
way to tell if or when participants terminate search. With
the open-ended paradigm, TT is determined by the
participant searching memory and therefore, becomes a
dependent measure of how long participants are willing to
continue searching memory. However, TT is in some ways
necessarily confounded with other variables. Particularly, as
the number of items a participant retrieves increases, an
increase in TT is expected.
As shown in Figure 1, TT can be divided into two
components, the time up to the last retrieval (time-to-last or
TL) and the time between the final retrieval and search
termination. This latter variable is referred to as the exit

Open-Ended Retrieval Paradigm
The open-ended retrieval paradigm, introduced by
Dougherty and Harbison (2007), is shown in Figure 1. The
565

that data obtained from the open-ended retrieval paradigm
provides the necessary, finer-grained analysis of free recall
data that allows us to whittle down the set of potential
stopping rules. We now turn to the comparative analysis of
four stopping rules.

latency (EL; Dougherty & Harbison, 2007). TL is the
component of TT that naturally relates to the number of
items retrieved. EL, on the other hand, does not relate to the
number retrieved in any necessary way. Indeed, reasonable
arguments could be made for EL to increase, decrease, or be
independent of the number of items retrieved (Harbison,
Dougherty, & Fayyad, submitted).
Research using the open-ended paradigm has found that
as the number of items retrieved increases TT also increases,
as might be expected. However, while TT is increasing, EL
decreases (Dougherty & Harbison, 2007; Harbison,
Dougherty, & Fayyad, submitted). That is, the more items
that are retrieved, the less time passes between the final
retrieval and search termination.
The increase in TT (due to TL) and the decrease in EL as
more items are retrieved has been found now in four
independent experiments (Dougherty & Harbison, 2007;
Harbison, Dougherty, & Fayyad, submitted). This data
pattern provides strong constraints against which to test
potential stopping rules.

Comparative Modeling Study
We compared the results from one of the open-ended
retrieval paradigm experiments against the predictions of
four different stopping rules. Each of these stopping rules
has been proposed previously in the literature.
S1. Total time—the decision to terminate search is a
function of the total time spent retrieving (Davelaar et al.,
2005; 2006).
S2. Time since last retrieved item—the decision to
terminate search is a function of the time since the last
retrieval (Metcalfe & Murdock, 1981; Rundus, 1973;
Thomas, Dougherty, Sprenger, & Harbison, 2008).
S3. Last Inter-Retrieval Time (IRT)—the stopping time
decreases as the duration of the last IRT increases. The final
IRT tends to be of constant length, independent of the
number of items retrieved (Rohrer, 1996). Furthermore, the
final IRT tends to be substantially larger than earlier IRTs.
Therefore, it is possible that once the most recent retrieval
takes a sufficient amount of time, search would be
terminated. Young (2004) suggested that it is the relative
increase in the IRT between the initial and final retrievals
may lead to search termination.
S4. Number of retrieval failures—the decision to
terminate search is a function of the number of failed
retrieval attempts (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980; 1981).
For the purpose of the present simulations, each rule was
implemented to make stopping decisions through a
probabilistic function

Stopping Rules
Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968, page 121) suggested a number
of stopping rules, which have been implemented in models
by several authors. These different stopping rules are: an
internal time limit (Davelaar et al., 2005; Davelaar, 2007;
Diller, Nobel & Shiffrin, 2001; Farrell & Lewandowsky,
2002; Metcalfe & Murdock, 1981), a strength threshold
(Anderson et al. 1998; Diller, Nobel & Shiffrin, 2001), and
an event-counter that would terminate search after a
prespecified number of events (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin,
1980; Rundus, 1973; Shiffrin, 1970).
Despite the tacit assumptions regarding stopping rules
embodied in models of memory, surprisingly little is known
about the mechanisms underlying the termination of
memory retrieval. Consequently, computational models
developed to account for retrieval dynamics have employed
a variety of rules, with little empirical justification for the
choice of the selection (Davelaar et al., 2005; Metcalfe &
Murdock, 1981; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980, 1981).
Satisfying solutions may involve more pragmatic
considerations rather than theoretical, such as minimizing
simulation time. Moreover, modelers traditionally have been
relatively more concerned with accounting for recall
probabilities at various levels of granularity, from
cumulative recall functions (e.g., Gronlund & Shiffrin,
1986) to conditional recall probabilities (Howard & Kahana,
1999). Since the empirical results the models were
evaluated against were from experiments using the fixed
interval retrieval paradigm, the potential contribution of the
stopping rule or rules that a participant would normally use
would likely have little impact on recall probabilities.
Given the varied assortment of stopping rules employed
across the literature, it is clear that little heed has been paid
to how a chosen stopping rule might affect the model’s
retrieval dynamics. To date, there has been no justifiable
way to narrow the set of plausible stopping rules. We argue

P (G ) =

1
1 +e

− g ( X −θ )

,

in which P(G) is the probability of giving-up, g and theta are
the gain and threshold parameters respectively and X is
either the total time (for S1), the time since the last retrieved
item (for S2), the last IRT (for S3), or the number of failures
(for S4).

Method
To evaluate the stopping rules, all rules were implemented
in a reduced search of associative memory (SAM)
framework (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980).

Search of Associative Memory (SAM)
The two central aspects of SAM are the acquisitions of
associations during learning and the random-sampling with
replacement process during retrieval. During list
presentation SAM learns associations between context and
images and between images that are co-active in the shortterm buffer. Images are combinations of features from item
and context representations. Specifically, the association
between the current context and an image in the short-term
566

buffer is incremented by the value a, that is a free parameter
within the framework, for each second the image is present
in the buffer. Similarly, the inter-image associations are
incremented for each second they are both present in the
short-term buffer. However, as discussed below, we
removed the inter-image associations for the purposes of the
present simulations.
During retrieval, the context is used to search for images
in the long-term store. Search for not-yet retrieved images
proceeds through a random-sampling with replacement
process, where the probability of sampling an image is
dependent on the association strength between that image
and the current context. Specifically, the probability of
sampling an image, Ii, given the context, C, is

Ps ( I i | C ) =

Data
The data to be fitted in the model comparison was taken
from Experiment 2 of Harbison, Dougherty, and Fayyad
(submitted). This experiment made use of the open-ended
retrieval paradigm. Each participant was shown six lists of
ten, fifteen, and twenty items one at a time. List-length was
randomized so that each block of three lists contained a list
of each length. The lists were created randomly for each
participant and consisted of high frequency (KF 30 to 300),
single syllable words from the MRC psycholinguistic
database (Wilson, 1988). Between presentation of the list
and recall, participants performed timed math problems for
at least 30 seconds, making it a delayed free recall task.
The list length effect was found in this experiment; the
percent of items retrieved from the lists decreased as list
length increased. No differences in TT or EL were found due
to list length; therefore, the data was collapsed over this
variable. Figure 2 shows mean total time (as solid circles)
and exit latency (as open circles) across participants for
retrieval totals of zero through nine in each of the four
panels. It is important to note that the same qualitative
pattern of results (increasing TT and decreasing EL as more
items were retrieved) was found in the within-participant
data as well.

S (C , I i )
,
∑ S (C , I j )
j

which is the relative strength of image Ii in the search set
delineated by context C. Since images retrieved are not
excluded from subsequent sampling, the probability of
sampling a previously retrieved image increases with the
total number of images retrieved. Note that for the purposes
of S4, sampling a previously retrieved image counts as a
retrieval failure.
If the sampled image has not previously been retrieved,
the second stage of retrieval, item recovery, is performed.
Recovery of the sampled item depends on the absolute
strength of the image and succeeds with probability

Procedure
We conducted 1000 simulation runs of delayed free recall
for each of the four rules. Delayed free recall was modeled
by presenting 10 list items followed by 10 distracter items to
the model and at retrieval having the search set be
comprised of only the first 10 items. No items were
retrieved from the short term store or buffer. This procedure
was used in previous models (Davelaar et al., 2005; 2006)
and is consistent with the theoretical position that distracter
items displace list items from the buffer (Murdock, 1967).
The number of items retrieved (Nstop), the TT (in iterations)
and the EL (in iterations) were recorded for all simulations.
The strength for each image increased by 0.18 for every
timestep that the item resided in the buffer (i.e., a = 0.18 in
terms of the SAM model). A baseline value (or the d
parameter) of 0.18/5 = 0.036 was used as the residual
memory strength. These values were chosen after extensive
exploration of the parameter space. However, the space is
quite flat and many possible combinations of parameter
values produced similar levels of fit. To avoid any
parameter tradeoffs, all encoding parameters were kept
fixed across the four simulations. The fitting routine
minimized the sum of squared deviations of all 20 data
points using the simplex method repeatedly until the
parameter values stabilized. First, θ was allowed to vary
alone (with g = 100) and then g was allowed to vary alone
(with θ fixed to the best value). After this both parameters
were allowed to vary, but this cycle did not change the
values much. For rules S2 and S3, the initial values for
comparison were set to zero, thereby those points are based
on the probability of terminating search only.

Pr ( I i ) = 1 − e − S ( C ,Ii ) .
If the recovery process is successful (i.e., a randomly chosen
number between 0 and 1 is less than Pr(Ii)), then the item
has successfully been retrieved and that item is outputted.
Otherwise, the recovery is deemed unsuccessful and the
retrieval attempt is counted as a failure.
Note that for comparison with the temporal data we
assume that each retrieval attempt takes a fixed amount of
time whether or not that retrieval attempt was successful.
This assumption is consistent with previous applications of
the SAM model to temporal data (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin,
1980).
For our comparative analysis, we are interested in the
termination of the search and not in the associative path
traversed during memory retrieval. We therefore exclude
encoding of inter-image association strengths, the use of
retrieved images for further retrieval and post-retrieval
incrementing. In terms of the SAM model, this eliminated
the contribution of the inter- and intra-image associations.
Doing so allowed us to isolate the contribution of the
stopping rules themselves, as any differences in patterns of
latencies across stopping rules could not be attributed to
interactions between the rules and these mechanisms.
However, introducing the various SAM components did not
alter the major qualitative patterns. We do note that these
components are critical in capturing finer-grained retrieval
dynamics.

567

variability in EL. Therefore, we believe the empirical results
successful rule out S1 and S2. While S3 does not have these
restrictions, the qualitative predictions of this rule remain in
error.

During the retrieval phase, an image can be resampled,
but will not be re-recovered, leading to an extra time-step
during the retrieval. In following Raaijmakers and Shiffrin
(1980), we assume that the number of sampling attempts is
linearly related to the retrieval time (here one time-step
equals one second). Only the time-stamps for the first
correct retrievals were used in the analyses.

Control Simulation
The comparative simulation study shows that the stopping
rule introduced by Raaijmakers and Shiffrin (1980; 1981) is
superior to the other three rules. A criticism to these results
is that the maximum number of failures rule is inherent to
the SAM framework and thus the rule already had an
advantage over the other rules. Although we reduced SAM
to its essentials, we conducted a control simulation with the
smallest retrieval model we could employ: a simple
sampling-with-replacement model.
We ran 20000 trials of a sampling-with-replacement
model using only the S4 rule (stop when number of failures
equals 5). Our only assumption with this model is that
memory retrieval involves sampling items in memory and
allowing memories to be resampled (see also, Indow &
Togano, 1970; Wixted & Rohrer, 1994). More specifically,
this model assumes equal association strengths between
every item in memory and the context. Therefore, every
item has the same probability of being sampled. This
removed any additional assumptions concerning the nature
of the learning process. Furthermore, there is no recovery
process or, put another way, the probability of recovering an
item given that it is sampled is set to one. This allowed us to
test whether a two-step process is critical in obtaining the
qualitative patterns.
Note that only the S4 rule was tested. As discussed
above, the particular assumptions of the model will have
no impact on the qualitative predictions of rules S1 and S2.
Each of these rules, by definition predicts a lack of
systematic variance in a variable where systematic
variance is clearly and repeatedly found (TT and EL,
respectively). The S3 rule was excluded because it has
already been demonstrated to make predictions
inconsistent with the results. What is of interest is whether
the predictions of the S4 rule is robust to variations in
retrieval assumptions, not whether a model can be devised
that allows S3 to make accurate predictions. In addition,
we wanted to check whether the mere assumption of
sampling-with-replacement is sufficient to capture the
qualitative patterns seen in the data. Previously, one of us
noted that a sampling-without-replacement model, in
which the search set becomes smaller after every correct
retrieval, produces incorrect predictions for inter-response
time distributions in free recall (Davelaar, 2007).
As can be seen in Figure 3, the model captures the
qualitative pattern of TT being an increasing function of
Nstop and EL being a negatively decelerating function of
Nstop. This simulation also shows that the two temporal
measures are sensitive to accumulated costs (in case of rule
S4, these are failures), and could therefore be informative
measures for investigating memorial processes in more
high-level decision processes (e.g., Thomas et al., 2008).

Results
The results of the simulations are presented in Figure 2 and
are based on 10000 simulation runs of the respective
simulation (100k for model S3). We calculated the adjusted
R2 for each model. Although we aimed at fitting the four
models quantitatively, the models differ in their qualitative
fits to the data. In the data, TT is an increasing function of
Nstop, which is captured by models S2, S3, and S4. In the
data, EL is a negatively decelerating function of Nstop, which
is captured by models S1 and S4. Therefore of these four
models, model S4 has the best qualitative and quantitative
fit.

Figure 2: Data (dots) and simulation (lines) results.
The qualitative fit to the data is especially important given
the robustness of the within-participant analyses (Dougherty
& Harbison, 2007; Harbison, Dougherty, & Fayyad,
submitted). The consistent finding that TT increases
systematically with the number of items retrieved cannot be
predicted by S1. Indeed, S1 cannot predict any systematical
variability in TT. Similarly, S2 cannot predict systematic
568

models use an internal time limit (Davelaar, 2007;
Davelaar et al., 2005; Diller, Nobel & Shiffrin, 2001;
Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2002; Metcalfe & Murdock,
1981), the simulations show that such a stopping rule does
not capture the empirical findings. This issue was raised
by Metcalfe and Murdock (1981) who commented that
participants do not use a total time stopping rule (rule S1).
However, this is not to say that such a stopping rule will
never be used. For example, Diller et al. (2001) were able
to quantitatively fit retrieval time data using an internal
time limit that was conditioned on the strength of the lastsampled image and the experimenter-imposed response
deadline. Granted that Diller et al. (2001) were only
concerned with cued recall, the possibility remains that 1)
different recall paradigms require different stopping rules,
2) experimenter-imposed deadlines affect participant’s
choice of stopping rule, or 3) type of material and list
composition affects the choice of stopping rule. In this
paper, we only focused on stopping rules in a free recall
paradigm in the absence of an experimenter-imposed
deadline. Further research, both at the empirical and
computational levels, is needed to identify which stopping
rules are employed across different paradigms and under
different conditions.
In our simulations, we did not include inter-image
transitions through which items can be retrieved. We
acknowledge the importance of associative path in
accounting for detailed memory performance, but the results
presented here suggest that associative paths may have
relative smaller impact on the decision for terminating
search, at least for the retrieval from a random word list. For
example, we only focused on the stopping rule for retrieval
of a whole set of items. SAM incorporates a stopping rule
that governs the use of a previously retrieved item in further
retrieval. This rule affects the timing of conditional
responses. Here, we took a list-wise view and we are
currently working on comparing stopping rules that affect
the more finer-grained temporal dynamics.
Anderson and colleagues provided a rational analysis of
the free recall task (Anderson & Milson, 1989; Anderson &
Schooler, 1991), in which each item has a need probability
associated with it. Only those items are retrieved whose
need probability is larger than a certain criterion, which
increases with the time spent inspecting an item before
accepting or rejecting it. Anderson and Milson (1989) were
able to capture a number of basic memory phenomena using
their adaptive perspective. However, their analysis only
provided the time of the last retrieved item, TL, and not of
the exact time of terminating memory search. One
possibility would be to use the criterion to estimate the
termination time, but this would require knowing the
functional form of how the criterion changes during item
inspection. Nevertheless, the success of Anderson’s rational
analysis and our current results warrants investigating how
these can be combined and would allow analyzing the
consequences of different retrieval processes on stopping
rules. We leave such an endeavor for the future.

Figure 3: Simulation results using the sampling-withreplacement model and the S4 rule. Note the similarity in
the qualitative profiles with the data shown in figure 2.

Conclusion
The purpose of this paper was to examine stopping rules
that might characterize the psychological basis of how
people terminate memory search. We argue that the
decision to terminate search is ubiquitous in real-world
memory retrieval. Therefore, memory search termination
decisions are important for understanding the underlying
processes involved in memory search as well as how long
a physician might spend when generating possible
diagnostic hypotheses (Thomas et al., 2008), or how long a
survey respondent will spend retrieving episodes of
alcohol consumption so that he or she can estimate
frequency of use (Brown, 1995; 1997; Brown & Sinclair,
1999; Conrad, Brown, & Cashman, 1998). Nevertheless,
the question of how people terminate memory search has
gone largely unstudied.
Our goal was to provide an initial starting point for
understanding how people terminate memory search. The
systematicity of the empirical data (Dougherty &
Harbison, 2007; Harbison, Dougherty, & Fayyad,
submitted) suggests that participants employ a decision
rule to terminate memory search. In this paper, we sought
to address the nature of this stopping rule by evaluating
four rules that have been featured in the analytical
literature on free recall memory. Only one of the four rules
leads to the model capturing the qualitative pattern in the
data. The fits are quite remarkable despite the relative
simplicity of our assumptions and suggest that decisions
for terminating memory search are made on events
occurring during the retrieval phase itself. This is made
even clearer in the control simulation in which despite the
lack of any memorial process, the model captures the
important qualitative patterns.
The four stopping rules we compared by no means
represent an exhaustive list, but we feel that these rules
represent a range of rules that seem plausible and were
explored during development of process models of free
recall memory. Interestingly, although some successful
569

Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2002). An endogenous
distributed model of ordering in serial recall.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 59-79.
Gronlund, S. D., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1986). Retrieval
strategies in recall of natural categories and categorized
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 12, 550-561.
Harbison, J. I., Dougherty, M. R., & Fayyad, B. (submitted).
On the lawfulness of the decision to terminate memory
search.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (1999). Contextual
variability and serial position effects in free recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 25, 923-941.
Indow, T., & Togano, K. (1970). On retrieving sequence
from long-term memory. Psychological Review, 77, 317331.
Metcalfe, J., & Murdock, B. B. (1981). An encoding and
retrieval model of single-trial free recall. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 161-189.
Murdock, B. B. (1967). Recent developments in short-term
memory. British Journal of Psychology, 58, 421-433.
Raaijmakers J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1980). SAM: A
theory of probabilistic search of associative memory. In
G. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, Vol 14. New York: Academic Press.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93-134.
Rohrer, D. (1996). On the relative and absolute strength of a
memory trace. Memory & Cognition, 24, 188-201.
Rundus, D. (1973). Negative effects of using list items are
recall cues. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 12, 43-50.
Shiffrin, R. M. (1970). Memory search. In D. A. Norman
(Ed.), Models of human memory. New York: Academic
Press.
Thomas, R. P., Dougherty, M. R., Sprenger, A. M., &
Harbison, J. I. (2008). Diagnostic hypothesis generation
and human judgment. Psychological Review, 115, 155185.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine readable dictionary, Version 2. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 20, 6-11.
Wixted, J. T., & Rohrer, D. (1994). Analyzing the dynamics
of free recall: an integrative review of the empirical
literature. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 89-106.
Young, C. J. (2004). Contributions of metaknowledge to
retrieval of natural categories in semantic memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 909-916.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant SES-0620062 awarded to
MRD.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Milson, R. (1989). Human memory: An
adaptive perspective. Psychological Review, 96, 703-719.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396408.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., & Matessa, M.
(1998). An integrated theory of list memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38, 341-380.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory:
a proposed system and its control processes. In K. W.
Spence, & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of
learning and motivation Vol. 2. Advances in research and
theory (pp. 89-195). New York: Academic Press.
Brown, N. R. (1995). Estimation strategies and the
judgment of event frequency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 15391553.
Brown, N. R. (1997). Context memory and the selection of
frequency estimation strategies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 898914.
Conrad, F., Brown, N. R., & Cashman, E. (1998). Strategies
for estimating behavioral frequency in survey interviews.
Memory, 6, 339-366.
Davelaar, E. J. (2007). Sequential retrieval and inhibition of
parallel (re)activated representations: A
neurocomputational comparison of competitive queuing
and resampling. Adaptive Behavior, 15, 51-71.
Davelaar, E. J., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., Ashkenazi, A.,
Haarmann, H. J., & Usher, M. (2005). The demise of
short-term memory revisited: Empirical and
computational investigations of recency effects.
Psychological Review, 112, 3-42.
Davelaar, E. J., Haarmann, H. J., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., &
Usher, M. (2006). Semantic similarity dissociates shortfrom long-term recency effects: Testing a
neurocompuational model of list memory. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 323-334.
Diller, D. E., Nobel, P. A., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). An
ARC-REM model for accuracy and response time in
recognition and recall. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 414435.
Dougherty, M. R., & Harbison, J. I. (2007). Motivated to
retrieved: How often are you willing to go back to the
well when the well is dry? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 11081117.

570

