UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Syllogistic Reasoning with Generic Premises: The Generic Overgeneralization Effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6bg1c6m2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Khemlani, Sangeet
Leslie, Sarah-Jane
Glucksberg, Sam

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Syllogistic Reasoning with Generic Premises:
The Generic Overgeneralization Effect
Sangeet Khemlani1, Sarah-Jane Leslie2, Sam Glucksberg1
1

Department of Psychology
Department of Philosophy
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

2

ii.

Those that refer to a property that the majority of the
members of a kind possess, e.g., ‘cars have radios’.
iii. Those that refer to a striking, often dire property, e.g.,
‘mosquitoes carry malaria’.
As these examples illustrate, generics are claims about kinds
rather than about individuals. They occur frequently in
everyday speech, even in parents’ speech to two-year old
children who have yet to master quantifiers such as ‘some’ or
‘all’ (Hollander, Gelman, & Star, 2002; Gelman, Goetz,
Sarnecka & Flukes, in press). Furthermore, they do not
express universal generalizations. While it is false that all
tigers are striped, the generic claim ‘tigers are striped’
remains true in the face of exceptions (e.g., albinos).
One might suppose that generics are interpreted as
existential statements, such that the generic ‘Ks are Fs’ is said
to be true whenever some Ks are Fs, as in ‘some mosquitoes
carry malaria’. However, this interpretation fails to account
for statements such as ‘birds are female’ or ‘dogs are brown’,
which are intuitively false even though, of course, some birds
are female and many dogs are brown. As these examples
suggest, generics cannot be accounted for in terms of
quantifiers such as ‘all’ or ‘some’.
These observations suggest that generics are not
quantificational (see Pappas & Gelman, 1998).
Quantificational statements are about how much or how
many in a way that generics are not. Notice that, upon being
asked ‘how many tigers are striped’, one might reply ‘most
tigers are striped’, or ‘some tigers are striped’, but one cannot
reply ‘tigers are striped’. The generic is not an appropriate
answer to this question (Carlson, 1977). Leslie (2007a,b)
argues that the truth and falsity of generics does not depend
on how many of the relevant individuals possess the
predicated property. There is no sense, she claims, in which
generics are dependent on such quantitative considerations.
People do, however, exhibit a bias in interpreting
characteristic generic assertions such as ‘ducks lay eggs’.
Such assertions are patently true in existential form, but false
in universal form. Therefore the assertion ‘all ducks lay eggs’
is false, and should be judged as such whenever any
counterexamples come to mind, e.g., when it is recognized
that male ducks and immature female ducks do not lay eggs.
Apparently, although such counterexamples are available to
people, they do not seem to be spontaneously accessible. If
they were spontaneously accessible, people should not agree
to universally quantified characteristic statements such as ‘all
ducks lay eggs’. Yet casual observation suggests that people
do agree with such statements.

Abstract
Generics are statements that are not explicitly quantified and
that express generalizations, such as ‘ducks lay eggs’.
Intuitively, the generic (non-quantified) form of such
statements seems to be true. Furthermore, people seem to be
prone to an interesting error: treating the universal form of
characteristic generic assertions (e.g., ‘all ducks lay eggs’) as
true, even though they are, upon a moment’s reflection,
patently false. How would people interpret generic assertions
when they are used as premises in a syllogistic reasoning task?
Although the normative strategy to optimize production of
valid conclusions would be to treat generics as existential
assertions, people displayed a strong tendency to assimilate
generics to universal assertions. As in prior comprehension
studies, generics behave as the prototypical default form for
expressing generalizations about the world.
Keywords: generics; syllogisms; reasoning; deduction

Introduction
Suppose you are given the following syllogism:
All A are B
All B are C
What follows? There are at least two valid conclusions: ‘all A
are C’ and ‘some A are C’. This holds irrespective of content.
Any deduction of this form (two universally quantified
assertions as above) would be valid, even if not true in the
real world. For instance,
All lions have manes
All maned animals are male
Therefore all lions are male
Given this form and content, people can readily see that the
syllogism is valid, and can also see that it is empirically false,
in this case because the first premise is false.
Consider, now, a case where people might not recognize
that a premise is false, as in the assertion ‘all ducks lay eggs’.
Upon reflection, the assertion is clearly false: the majority of
ducks – males, juveniles, and unfertilized females – are
among the eggless. The illusion that such statements are true
in universal form arises from our mode of understanding an
important kind of non-quantified assertions, generics (Leslie,
2008; Prasada & Dillingham, 2006; Khemlani, Leslie,
Glucksberg, & Fernandez, 2007).
Generics are generalizations that lack explicit quantifiers
such as ‘some’ or ‘all’. Leslie (2007a,b) argues that there are
three kinds of generics:
i. Those that express a characteristic of a kind, e.g. ‘ducks
lay eggs’.

619

Maned animals are male
Therefore lions are male
In this case, people would agree not only with the first
premise, but also with the first premise in universal form
about 50% of the time. People would agree with the second
premise in both generic and universal form as well. But,
despite having two premises that people judge as true, the
conclusion should be perceived as false and thus the
deduction should be judged invalid.
How do people treat generics as premises in the context of
syllogistic reasoning problems? If the overgeneralization
effect operates in such contexts, then by analogy, people
should tend to view generics as universal assertions, and
perhaps vice versa. In other words, conclusions drawn for
generic premises should resemble conclusions drawn for
universal premises. An alternative hypothesis is that people
recognize that generic assertions are always true in existential
form, and that by acting upon this property of generics they
avoid drawing erroneous conclusions. In the context of
syllogistic reasoning, unlike the context of ordinary discourse,
treating a generic as an existential assertion would be
normative. To determine how people use generics in the
context of syllogistic reasoning, we asked people to solve
syllogism problems using first and second premises in
existential, universal, and generic forms. On the basis of prior
work on how people comprehend generics, we expected to
find generic syllogistic reasoning to resemble reasoning with
universal premises rather than reasoning with existential
premises, i.e., non-normatively because of the bias to commit
the generic overgeneralization error.

To see if people do in fact judge universally quantified
generic assertions to be true, Khemlani et al. (2007) asked
people to judge the truth value of three types of generic
assertions (characteristic, majority and striking), each in one
of three forms: existential (e.g.,’ some ducks lay eggs”),
generic (‘ducks lay eggs’) and universal (‘all ducks lay
eggs’). There was virtually unanimous agreement that
existentially quantified generic assertions were true for all
three predicate types. For the generic assertions, all three
types were generally viewed as true, with characteristic
generics being judged true more frequently than majority or
striking ones. Most interestingly, universally quantified (i.e.,
‘all’) characteristic generics were judged to be true almost
half the time (46% agreement rate), while majority and
striking generics were rejected most of the time (only 7%
agreement rate for either type).
People seem to view characteristic generic assertions as
universal ones, not only judging universally quantified
generics as true, but also paraphrasing universally quantified
assertions as generics, e.g., paraphrasing ‘all ducks lay eggs’
as ‘ducks lay eggs’ (Khemlani et al., forthcoming). People
thus seem prone to committing a generic over-generalization
error: they conflate universally quantified characteristic
assertions as generic ones.

Generics and Syllogistic Reasoning
How would people interpret generics in the context of
syllogisms? Because generics are non-quantificational, there
is no obvious and unambiguous way to interpret generic
assertions when they appear as premises in a syllogism.
Consider:
Some Xs are Ys
Some Ys are Zs
What follows?
According to standard analyses of syllogistic reasoning,
nothing follows. If, on the other hand, the quantifier ‘some’
were to be replaced by the quantifier ‘all’, then at least two
valid conclusions follow: ‘all Xs are Zs’ and ‘some Xs are
Zs’.
How would syllogisms with generics as premises be
interpreted, e.g.,
Xs are Ys
Ys are Zs
What follows?
Because generics are non-quantificational, there is no
unambiguous answer. Normatively, true generics are always
true in existential form as well, and so should be viewed as
existentially quantified in the context of syllogistic reasoning.
Hence, in this example, nothing follows. However, if people
commit an analogy of the overgeneralization effect – view the
generic premises as if they were universally quantified – then
they should erroneously conclude that Xs are Zs. This
conclusion would not be erroneous if one could
unambiguously render the conclusion ‘Xs are Zs’ as ‘All Xs
are Zs’, but this would not work. Consider the generic
premises
Lions have manes

Method
Participants. Nineteen undergraduate students at Princeton
University served as participants, and none had any
background in logic or computer science. They completed the
experiment over the Internet online using an interface written
in Ajax.
Materials. Traditionally syllogistic premises and conclusions
come in four different Aristotelian “moods”:
All A are B
affirmative universal
Some A are B
affirmative existential
No A are B
negative universal
Some A are not B
negative existential
The generic form permits two additional moods:
A are B
affirmative generic
A are not B
negative generic
The present study manipulated only affirmative moods, which
are italicized above. Moreover, syllogisms must be cast in a
particular “figure”:
A-B
lions – manes
B-C
maned animals – males
There are four possible figures in which a syllogism can be
cast, but the study considered only the first:
A-B
B-A
A-B
B-A
B-C
C-B
C-B
B-C

620

reluctant to explicitly draw no conclusions, even when both
premises were existential and a null conclusion was
appropriate (see Table 1).

Future studies on generic syllogisms should consider different
figures because of well-known “figural effects” (JohnsonLaird & Bara, 1984).
The content of a particular argument can also influence the
participants’ response (Oakhill & Johnson-Laird, 1985;
Evans, Barston, & Pollard, 1983), and so to ensure that
participants did not answer based on their prior knowledge
and beliefs, the premises used were semantically empty, e.g.,
All comets are orthovolatile.
Some orthovolatile materials are pollutants.
The term “orthovolatile” is nonsensical and the association
between a comet and a pollutant is weak, so a participant who
uses these premises to make an inference cannot do so with
respect to background knowledge, beliefs, or internal
associations between the terms used. The stimuli are provided
in Appendix A.

Table 1. Proportion of responses to an existential first premise
Existential 1st premise (Some A-B)
nd
All A-C
A-C
Null
2 premise Some A-C
Some B-C
76
0
6
18
All B-C
94
3
3
0
B-C
94
0
6
0

When the first premise was existential (Table 1), participants
performed quite poorly, drawing incorrect existential
conclusions 76% of the time when the second premise was
existential; they answered correctly 94% of the time when the
second premise was universal (Mann-Whitney, z = 1.99, p <
.05). These are common patterns as reported in the reasoning
literature (Chapman & Chapman, 1959; Johnson-Laird &
Bara, 1984) and suggest that the participants were performing
the reasoning task as they normally would despite the
presence of generic premises.
Performance was equivalent – 94% existential conclusions
– when the second premise was a generic. In this case, it is
ambiguous how participants interpreted generic premises
because the error would be made whether the generic was
interpreted as an existential or as a universal assertion.
However, because the data for universal and generic second
premises are virtually identical, it is likely that generics were
interpreted as if they were universals. Additional evidence for
this hypothesis is provided by the data for the other two
conditions, where the first premise was either universal or
generic.
When the first premise was universal (see Table 2) and the
second premise was existential, participants incorrectly drew
existential conclusions 59% of the time, again replicating
previous results (Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984).
Appropriately, 71% of conclusions were universal when the
second premise was universal, with generics at 29% (MannWhitney, z = 2.19, p < .05). When generics appeared as the
second premise, the difference between universal and generic
conclusions disappeared, 46% and 41% respectively (MannWhitney, z = 1.05, p = .29). The pattern again suggests that
generics are assimilated to universals rather than to
existentials.

Design and Procedure. Participants were presented with 18
syllogisms, one at a time, and were asked to provide a
conclusion for each by entering their answers on their
computer keyboard. Each syllogism problem consisted of two
premises, followed by the prompt, what follows?
Each of the two syllogistic premises appeared in universal,
existential, or generic form. This generated a 3 (first premise)
× 3 (second premise) repeated-measures design. Participants
received each argument form twice, each time with different
content. Stimuli were counterbalanced using Latin squares.
Coding. Participants’ responses fell into five categories; most
of the time participants produced either a universal,
existential, or generic response. They would also at times
provide a ‘null response’, e.g., “Nothing necessarily follows.”
A small percentage of the responses were complex
interpretations of the premises. For instance, some responses
made use of modal operators, e.g., “It is possible that
pyramidal cells are compact, but certainly not guarenteed
(sic)”. Other responses were statements about capability, e.g.,
“Septapods might live in warm climates,” and yet others used
probabilistic reasoning, e.g., “Kangaroos probably have gene
Gamma-64.” Some participants used conditionals, e.g., “If
elephants are semiparametric, they heal quickly”, and others
used domain restriction, e.g., “Septapods with ovipositors live
in warm climates”. Such complex formulations comprised
only 9% of the responses, and were omitted from the present
analyses.

Table 2. Proportion of responses to a universal first premise
Universal 1st premise (All A-B)
nd
All A-C
A-C
Null
2 premise Some A-C
Some B-C
59
3
22
16
All B-C
0
71
29
0
B-C
5
46
41
8

Results and Discussion
The data most relevant to the hypothesis – that people would
commit an overgeneralization error – are the similarities
between syllogisms with universal and generic premises. The
greater the tendency to commit this error, the more similar the
pattern of conclusions for generic and universal premises
should be. The proportions of each type of conclusion –
existential, universal, generic and null (no conclusions drawn)
– are presented in Tables 1–3. There were relatively few null
conclusions, almost exclusively for syllogisms in which the
second premise was in existential form. Participants seemed

The similarity between the patterns of conclusions between
universals and generics is most apparent when generics
appear as the first premise (Table 3). As when universals
appeared as first premise, over half (58%) of the conclusions
were existentially quantified. Even more striking, generic
conclusions are produced 83% and 94% of the time for

621

overgeneralization effect is not limited to comprehension, but
extends to production as well. For our syllogistic reasoning
task, people not only tended to interpret generic premises as if
they were universal ones, they also tended to produce generic
conclusions as if they were also universal.
What accounts for the generic overgeneralization effect in
both comprehension and production? Several hypotheses
merit consideration. The first is based on Leslie’s (2007b)
supposition that characteristic generic assertions require less
cognitive effort to understand than their universally quantified
counterparts. In order to judge that a universally quantified
assertion is false, one must retrieve a counterexample from
memory, e.g., to reject the assertion ‘all ducks lay eggs’ one
must recall that male ducks do not lay eggs. On this
hypothesis people should take more time to correctly reject
universally quantified generics than to incorrectly accept
them, because the former requires retrieval of a
counterexample. This hypothesis was not supported; in three
separate experiments, people took no more time to correctly
reject universally quantified generics than to incorrectly
accept them (Khemlani et al., forthcoming). This hypothesis
also seems unlikely in the context of syllogistic reasoning
tasks. If generics were computationally simpler, we would
have expected more generic conclusions than universals in
the case where either one is erroneous. We found no evidence
for this: people were about equally likely to produce
erroneous universal conclusions as erroneous generic
conclusions when the first premise was a generic (Table 2).
The small difference between these two conditions is most
likely attributable to a primacy effect.
An alternative hypothesis is that people tend towards
default options. In the case of comprehension people would
treat universally quantified assertions as generic ones, and so
treat them as true. And so they do (Khemlani et al., 2007). In
the case of production in the context of processing
syllogisms, one strategy would be to instantiate generics as
quantified assertions in order to evaluate and produce
conclusions. Assimilating generics to universals is the analog
of treating universals as generics in comprehension tasks, and
this is what our participants seemed to do. The patterns of the
types of conclusions drawn are more similar between generic
and universal premises than between generic and existential
premises.

universals and generics as second premises, respectively.
These data reflect a clear primacy effect: generics presented
as the first premise dramatically increased the proportion of
generic conclusions compared to those that were produced
when the first premise was universal (Mann-Whitney, z =
3.66, p < .001). Further, the proportions of universal
conclusions differ as a function of primacy as well, with 46%
and 11% for universal-first and generic-first, respectively
(Mann-Whitney, z = 3.20, p < .005; see Tables 2 and 3).
Table 3. Proportion of responses to a generic first premise
Generic 1st premise (A-B)
All A-C
A-C
Null
2nd premise Some A-C
Some B-C
58
0
23
19
All B-C
3
11
83
3
B-C
3
3
94
0

These data strongly suggest the operation of a generic
overgeneralization effect, where generic premises are
apparently assimilated to universal assertions. Note that this is
non-normative. The generic and universal conclusions in the
generics-first condition are erroneous; they do not follow
from the premises because the conservative normative
interpretation in the context of syllogisms should be
existential. If generics had been assimilated to existentials,
then the generic and universal conclusions would not have
been drawn.
The overall pattern of data is consistent with the hypothesis
that people tend to treat generics as universals when they
appear as premises in syllogistic reasoning problems. This is
analogous to the generic overgeneralization effect that was
found in an evaluation task (Khemlani et al., 2007), in which
people erroneously agree to the universal form of a true
generic such as ‘duck lay eggs’, even though the universal
form, e.g., ‘all ducks lay eggs’ is false.
An alternative explanation of the present data is that
syllogistic reasoning is prone to the “atmosphere effect”,
where the overall atmosphere constructed by the premises in
syllogisms influences participants’ responses (Woodworth &
Sells, 1935; Wetherick & Gilhooly, 1990; Polk & Newell,
1988). That is, participants produce a generic response when
given generic premises, a universal response when given
universal premises, and an existential response with
existential premises. The data do not support this alternative.
Participants produce more generic responses when given a
universal first premise and a generic second premise than
when given a generic first premise and a universal second
premise, while the atmosphere effect would predict roughly
equivalent proportions of such responses. Moreover,
participants produce reliably fewer existential premises when
given an existential first and second premise than when given
any other type of second premise. The atmosphere effect has
been unable to account for other phenomena in syllogistic
reasoning (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991), and is similarly
unable to explain the results here.
The findings for generic premises that we obtained here
generalize the findings from comprehension/evaluation to a
new task, syllogistic reasoning. That is, the generic

Conclusions
We extended the experimental study of generics from
comprehension processes to production using a syllogistic
reasoning task. In comprehension tasks, people display a
tendency to treat universally quantified assertions (e.g. ‘all
ducks lay eggs’) as generics, a phenomenon that we term the
generic overgeneralization effect. Do people display an
analogous tendency when producing conclusions to
syllogisms that employ generics as premises? We found that
they do: generics behaved in ways similar to those of
universals, providing a production analog to the
overgeneralization effect found for comprehension. The
generic overgeneralization effect, then, describes the general

622

Evans, J., St. B. T., Barston, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On
the conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic
reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 11, 295 – 306.
Gelman, S.A., Goetz, P.J., Sarnecka, B.W., & Flukes, J. (in
press). Generic language in parent-child conversations.
Language Learning and Development.
Hollander, M. A., Gelman, S. A., & Star, J. (2002).
Children’s interpretation of generic noun phrases.
Developmental Psychology, 36 (6).
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Bara B. (1984). Syllogistic inference.
Cognition, 16, 1– 61.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Psychology Press.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.-J., Glucksberg, S., & Fernandez, P.
(2007). Do ducks lay eggs? How people interpret generic
assertions. In D. S. Macnamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 395 - 401). Nashville, TN: Cognitive Science
Society.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.-J., & Glucksberg, S. (forthcoming).
Do all ducks lay eggs? The generic overgeneralization
effect.
Leslie, S.-J. (2007a). Generics, cognition, and
comprehension. Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University.
Leslie, S.-J. (2007b). Generics and the Structure of the Mind.
Philosophical Perspectives, 21 (1), 375 – 403.
Leslie, S.-J. (2008). Generics: Cognition and Acquisition.
Philosophical Review, 117 (1), 1 – 47.
Leslie, S.J. (forthcoming). The original sin of cognition.
Oakhill, J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1985). The effect ofbelief
on the spontaneous production of syllogistic con-clusions.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 37A, 553 –
570.
Pappas, A., & Gelman, S. A. (1998). Generic noun phrases in
mother-child conversations. Journal of Child Language,
25, 19 – 33.
Polk, T. A., & Newell, A. (1988). Modeling human
syllogistic reasoning in Soar. In Proceedings of the 10th
Annual Cognitive Science Society, 181 – 187. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and
statistical connections in common sense conception.
Cognition, 99 (1), 73 – 11.
Wetherick, N., & Gilhooly, K. (1990). The figural effect in
syllogistic reasoning. In K. Gilhooly, M. T. G. Keane, R.
Logie, & G. Erdos (Eds.), Lines of thought: Reflections on
the psychology of thinking, 1. London: Wiley.
Woodworth, R. S., & Sells, S. B. (1935). An atmosphere
effect in formal syllogistic reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 18 (4), 451 – 460.

phenomenon of conflating a universal assertion with a generic
one in either direction.
We interpret these findings as consistent with the view that
generics are default interpretations, with the universal form
often misinterpreted as a generic assertion, and the mirror
image of this, misinterpreting the generic as a universal
assertion. These errors may well reflect the role of generics
as the prototypical default form for expressing important
generalizations about the world.
As such, generics provide us with an extremely useful
mechanism for making such generalizations. However, there
is a potential disadvantage to such a powerful mechanism. As
Leslie notes, generics may give voice to pernicious
generalizations about race, gender, age and ethnicity, among
others (Leslie, forthcoming). Upon examination, social
stereotypes act very much as ordinary generic assertions
about kinds. They do not employ quantifiers, e.g., ‘old people
tend to forget things’. They may tend to be accepted in
universal form, e.g., ‘all old people tend to forget things’.
And perhaps most important, they resist counterexamples.
Just as the existence of a three-legged dog does not affect our
agreement to the assertion that ‘dogs are four-legged’
(Prasada & Dillingham, 2006), so does the existence of an old
person with excellent memory (such as the comic George
Burns who functioned at a very high level into his nineties)
fail to affect our belief that old folk do forget a lot. The irony
is clear: one of our most primitive and ubiquitous forms of
generalization enables us to efficiently make important
inferences about the world, beginning in early childhood
when, for example, children are told ‘flies are dirty’. At the
same time, this mechanism – and its linguistic instantiation,
generic assertions – makes us vulnerable to erroneous and
often damaging generalizations.

Acknowledgments
These studies are based on work supported in part by a
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
awarded to the first author. We thank Rina Ayob, Jeremy
Boyd, Nuria Carriedo, Paula Rubio Fernandez, Adele
Goldberg, Geoffrey Goodwin, Phil Johnson-Laird, and Olivia
Kang for their many helpful suggestions and critiques.

References
Carlson, G. (1977). Reference to kinds in English. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1959). Atmosphere effect
reexamined. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 72, 193
– 204.

623

Appendix A
First premise
Alligators have enzyme I-381
Dolphins are protocetaceans
Comets are orthovolatile
Hydrochlorides are paramagnetic
Muskrats have gene BDA-23
Semi-automatic weapons have recoil mounts
Septapods have ovipositors
Iridium tablets emit beta radiation
Kangaroos are polymorphic
Sensillas are trichoidal
Elephants are semiparametric
Wasps are type 6 parasites
Pyramidal cells are mesovoltaic
Bamboo shoots are pseudospores
Seasalt crystals are hypersalinic
Snakes are ontodextrous
Delta transmitters are quasidelphic

Second premise
Creatures with enzyme I-381 are semi-nocturnal
Protocetaceans are viviparous
Orthovolatile materials are pollutants
Paramagnetic substances cause tooth decay
Individuals with gene BDA-23 mark their territory with urine
Weapons with recoil mounts cause repetitive stress injury
Individuals with ovipositors live in warm climates
Substances that emit beta radiation are found in Croatia
Polymorphic individuals have gene Gamma-64
Trichoidal subtances cause skin irritation
Semiparametric individuals heal quickly
Type 6 parasites are arthropods
Mesovoltaic subtances are compact
Pseudospores have reticulated proteins
Hypersalinic particles are gray
Ontodextrous individuals have protein G-168
Quasidelphic cells can withstand superheating

624

