UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Real Deal: What Judgments of Really Reveal about How People Think about Artifacts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sv3q924

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Malt, Barbara C.
Paquet, Micheal R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Real Deal:
What Judgments of Really Reveal about How People Think about Artifacts
Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)

Michael R. Paquet (mrp2@lehigh.edu)

Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA
But raccoons, as well as whales, water, and rocks, belong
to the realm of natural kinds. It is less clear how to think
about the nature of folk beliefs and knowledge for the case
of artifacts -- objects created to serve aesthetic or functional
purposes in human lives. Putnam (1975) proposed extending
metaphysical essentialism to artifacts, but his perspective
remains controversial among philosophers (e.g., Schwartz,
1980; Thomasson, 2007). Psychologists have also debated
what people treat as the basis for artifact groupings and
whether there is a basis that qualifies as a psychological, if
not metaphysical, essence. Rosch and Mervis (1975)
suggested that artifact groupings are sets of objects having
only a family resemblance to one another. Each object
overlaps with others in the group, but no one property or
type is the absolute determiner of membership (see also
Lakoff’s, 1987, radial view). Since then, other psychologists
have argued for accounts entailing greater restrictions on
membership and more closely resembling essentialist
approaches. Suggestions for what constrains membership
have focused on original (intended) function and the
creator’s intended category membership (see Malt &
Sloman, 2007a, for a review). Bloom (1996) and Kelemen
and Carey (2007), among others, argue explicitly for
characterizing artifact representations and judgments about
kind membership as hinging on beliefs about essences.
Consistent with the essentialist approach, some intuitions
about a divergence between appearance and reality for
artifacts are similar to those for natural kinds and can be
interpreted in terms of beliefs about essences. For instance,
consider an object that looks like a Coke can but has the
workings of a radio inside and some controls to make the
radio operate. A person might say that it’s really a radio, not
a Coke can (Bloom, 1996). And if someone takes a shoe and
uses it to hammer a nail, both the user and observers would
likely say the object is really a shoe and not a hammer. In
such cases, the most obvious interpretation is that the
judgment about really rests on either the function the object
was made to serve or the category to which its creator
intended it to belong. A number of studies have found that
people draw heavily on one or another of these attributes in
judging what an artifact is (see Malt & Sloman, 2007a).
But other intuitions about artifacts are not so clear-cut.
Many artifacts begin life under one intention and are
adapted to new uses. What about a piano stool used as an
end table, a decorative cup that serves as a pencil holder, or
an old plastic shower curtain used as a drop cloth for
painting? Might these objects be thought of as really an end
table, pencil holder, or drop cloth, respectively, especially

Abstract
In two experiments we investigate what drives judgments of
what an artifact really is and what these judgments reveal
about how people think about artifacts. We contrast an
essentialist perspective with a pragmatics perspective. Results
from both experiments favor the pragmatics perspective that
judgments of really reflect how well properties of the object
match properties evoked by the name in question.
Keywords: artifacts; essentialism; pragmatics; naming

Introduction
A whale may look like a fish even though it is a mammal,
and an irregular piece of material may look like a rock even
though it is cleverly painted foam. In such cases, one could
say that the state of affairs is not really what it seems.
The notion that there can be a distinction between
appearance and some deeper or truer reality is reflected in
objectivist philosophical positions such as metaphysical
essentialism (e.g., Putnam, 1975). According to
metaphysical essentialism, entities in the world (at least, in
the natural world) fall into kinds according to their
underlying traits, regardless of whether people are aware of
them. Thus a person may think a sample of liquid is water
on the basis of its color, smell, and taste, but it is not really
water unless its chemical composition is the same as that of
other instances of water.
Psychologists have by and large avoided commitments
about the nature of the world per se, but they have studied
closely the nature of “folk” beliefs about the world and how
such beliefs influence interactions with it. Much attention
has been paid to children’s development of an appearancereality distinction and ability to talk about it using phrases
such as really and truly (Flavell, Green, & Flavell, 1986).
Further, children’s responses to questions about what
something looks like versus what it really is have been used
as evidence for psychological essentialism (Medin &
Ortony, 1989), the view that people act as if metaphysical
essentialism is right (regardless of whether it actually is).
For instance, Keil (1986) told children stories about animals
such as a raccoon that had been altered so it looked like a
skunk, and then he asked the children what it looked like
and what it really was. By about age 9, children tended to
respond that the animal was really a raccoon, and they gave
justifications invoking hidden properties. Although adult
judgments are not always consistent with beliefs in essences
(e.g., Kalish, 1995; Malt, 1994), such beliefs do seem to be
central to some aspects of how people interact with the
world (e.g., Rothbart & Taylor, 1992).

247

quality. To help address this issue, Malt and Sloman
(2007b) presented scenarios similar to their original ones
but asked people what the objects really were. These
judgments showed a stronger influence of creator’s
intention than the judgments of name use had, consistent
with Bloom’s suggestion. At the same time, however, the
judgments were influenced by the pragmatic variables, such
that an object was judged more strongly really a certain
thing when the discourse context made it more likely it
would be named as such. Furthermore, in scenarios
contrasting accidental creation of an object with intentional
(modeled on Gelman & Bloom, 2000; e.g., a piece of
newspaper was described as either accidentally or
intentionally folded into a hat shape), participants
considered the object to be really the material (newspaper)
much more than they considered it to be really the object
created (hat), even when the creation was intentional.
Thus past results give a somewhat murky picture of what
drives people’s judgments about what artifacts really are. It
seems that people give more weight to creator’s intended
category (or intended use), overall, than they do in
judgments of name acceptability, but the impact is variable,
and the same kinds of pragmatic variables that influence
what name is preferred in the communicative situations also
influence really judgments.
The goal of the two
experiments we present is to better understand what drives
judgments of what an artifact really is and what these
judgments reveal about how people think about artifacts.
We contrast two perspectives. The pragmatics perspective
suggests that intuitions about what an artifact really is
derives from a sense of what name(s) would be appropriate
for it in some context. A judgment that an object is really
an X means that the current conceptualization of the object
is consistent with the properties that the specified name
evokes. This perspective, similar to a family
resemblance/radial view of categories, suggests that many
dimensions may be relevant, including but not limited to the
creator’s intended category and original, intended use.
Weights on dimensions may vary depending on what the
context makes salient, and a person may even be able to
maintain two different conceptualizations of an artifact,
making two names acceptable. The essentialist view, in
contrast, suggests that intuitions about what an artifact
really is derives from an understanding of the creator’s
intended category or original, intended use. (We do not
attempt to disentangle these two.)

after extended use as such? Could they be thought of as
really both, if not just the second?
Three converging perspectives suggest they may be
viewed as having shifted what they really are (or be viewed
as really both). Dennett (1987) argues that people tend to
treat artifacts as if they come endowed with some intrinsic
meaning but they are wrong. He suggests that artifacts
derive meaning only from how people use them, and that
the original intention, over time, becomes of only historical
interest. Thus, what an artifact counts as is based on its
current utility to those who interact with it, and what it
should be called is just a pragmatic matter about how to talk
about it in light of its current use. Dennett’s argument
seems to be primarily a metaphysical one, since he suggests
that people are often mistaken in their understanding of this
point. At the same time, though, he indicates that lay
intuitions in some cases are consistent with this perspective.
Compatible with Dennett’s remarks about the pragmatic
basis for naming artifacts, Malt and Sloman (2007b) pointed
out that names for artifacts are usually given in the interest
of communication. They argued that what names are judged
suitable should reflect what ones will meet the
communication goals of a particular discourse context. In a
similar vein, Siegal and Callanan (2007) suggest that the
embeddedness of artifacts in social contexts will result in
their meanings evolving and changing with a culture and
community, and that judgments of what an artifact is for can
likewise be expected to evolve.
In support of such non-essentialist views, Malt and
Sloman (2007b) described artifacts in scenarios that
manipulated communication goals, and they asked people to
judge how sensible it would be to call the object by each of
two names in that context: one reflecting its original,
intended category, and one reflecting the use it was
currently being put to. Relative liking for the names varied
depending on the specific manipulation, but the name
reflecting the current use was generally considered sensible,
and sometimes more so than the one reflecting the creator’s
intention. Siegal and Callanan (2007), using simpler
scenarios, asked children and adults about what an artifact
was really for: its original purpose or the one described as
current. Both groups tended to favor the current one.
Interpreting such results as evidence against an
essentialist psychology for artifacts depends, however, on
assuming that answers to such questions reflect people’s
conceptualization of the objects themselves. Bloom (2007)
suggested that Malt and Sloman’s (2007b) findings about
name acceptability in discourse contexts are about only that
-- pragmatic choices for communicative purposes -- not
about how people think about the objects non-linguistically.
In other words, he suggested there is something an artifact
really is that may be different from what someone chooses
to call it for communication purposes. One could also
interpret Siegal and Callanan’s question as eliciting
pragmatic choices; participants might interpret “what is it
really for?” as meaning something like “what is it being
used for by the people in the scenario”? rather than as
meaning something about judging a deeper, underlying

Experiment 1
If the pragmatics perspective is right, intuitions about what
an artifact really is may be driven in part by how well its
physical qualities fit the usual or typical description
associated with an object name. Malt and Sloman’s finding
of low ratings for a crude newspaper hat as really a hat (and
other such stimuli) may be explained in these terms.
Likewise, a desk used to iron a shirt on may be judged still
really a desk because its physical features resemble only to a
small degree those normally associated with ironing board.

248

called them. Participants receiving booklets without
intention were told that the names were given by someone
who finds items at garage sales and re-sells them on eBay,
using the best name he can come up with. All participants
were asked to look over the picture and text for each object
and choose a rating from 1 (“not at all sensible”) to 7 (“very
sensible”) for the statement It’s really an X, where X was
the name from the catalog (ladder, pail, etc., without
modifiers). They were told that their judgments could fall
mostly at one end or in the middle, or could be a mix. To
provide an objective assessment of typicality, a separate
group of participants rated each object on a 1 to 7 scale for
how typical it was of things called by the listed noun.

On the other hand, a decorative, narrow-necked bottle used
as a vase may be judged really a vase because it closely
resembles things typically called vase. If the essentialist
perspective is right, the original intention for the object
should matter but not the typicality of its instantiation
(provided the features are not incompatible with the
intention, creating doubt about it). In the first experiment,
we manipulated how typical objects’ physical features were
of artifact names. We also manipulated whether the name to
be judged was given to the object by its creator or by
someone who had no direct knowledge of creator’s intent. If
the pragmatics perspective is correct, high typicality items
should be judged really an X more than low typicality ones,
regardless of who has given the name (although knowledge
of creator’s intent may also contribute to the judgments). If
the essentialist perspective is correct, typicality should
matter only when the creator’s intention is unknown. (In
that case, object features are the best indicator of what the
creator’s intention was.)

Results and Discussion
The typicality ratings were used to divide the objects into
the 14 most and least typical. Low typicality items had a
mean rating of 3.30; high typicality items had a mean of
6.23. Means were then calculated for the really ratings for
the two typicality levels, for both the creator’s intention
version and the eBay version (see Table 1).

Method
Booklets presented 28 household objects found in on-line
catalogs under one of the following names: can, jar, box,
stool, bench, ladder, pail, bucket, tape, or chest (of
drawers). At least two examples of each name were used
such that exemplars were likely to vary in perceived
typicality. We avoided objects named by conventional
compounds such as juice box or hair brush that might be
viewed as belonging to categories distinct from those named
by the head noun. See Figure 1 for examples.

A.

Table 1: Mean really ratings as a function of typicality and
name source.
Typicality
Low
High

Name Source
Creator
eBay
3.77
3.64
6.49
6.14

The main effect of typicality was highly significant, F(1,
39) = 239.37, p < .001, indicating that people considered the
objects to be more really an example of a name when they
were typical of the name than when atypical. The effect of
name source was not significant, F(1, 39) = 1.45, p > .2,
and name source did not interact with typicality, F < 1,
showing that people placed little weight on the name source
in their judgments and did not rely on typicality more when
creator’s intention was unknown. These results demonstrate
that physical properties of objects have a major influence on
whether they seem to be really an instance of a name,
suggesting that people are evaluating whether properties of
the objects are consistent with those brought to mind by the
name. They favor the pragmatics perspective over the
essentialist perspective.

B.

Figure 1: (A) Typical stool; (B) Atypical stool.
The booklets either provided information about the
manufacturer/vendor’s intended name or did not. For
booklets with intention present, enough of each object’s
Web page was printed to present the full object label (e.g.,
“Heavy-duty steel rolling ladder”) and purchasing
information (e.g., company name, item price, item details).
For booklets without intention, objects were presented with
the same full label beneath it but no other information.
Participants were given examples of unrelated cases where
one might debate whether to say something is really a
certain thing (Is a toy gun really a gun? Is water running
really a case of running?). They were told that some people
might decide yes, some no, and some might feel some cases
are and others aren’t. The participants receiving booklets
with intention present were told that they would be seeing
objects with information about what their manufacturer

Experiment 2
The pragmatics perspective suggests an object may be
judged really something different from the original intention
if its current conceptualization is consistent with a different
name. It may even be considered really more than one thing
if it can be thought of as consistent with more than one
name. Thus a piano stool used next to a sofa to hold a candy
dish might be considered really an end table, or possibly
really both a stool and an end table. The essentialist
perspective, in contrast, suggests that it should be regarded
as really the first, even though used as if the second. Malt

249

and Sloman (2007b) found that participants generally
accepted names associated with a new use for referring to
objects in conversation. When asked what the object really
was, though, ratings in some cases leaned more toward the
old name, suggestive of greater reliance on the creator’s
intention. Complicating interpretation, however, is that in
those experiments no pictures were used, only object names.
No attempt was made to control what properties participants
imagined the objects to have, and hence how similar they
might seem to things normally associated with the original
or new name. Thus, a Frisbee used as a picnic plate might
have been thought of as resembling a typical Frisbee more
than a typical picnic plate. The current Experiment 1
supports the idea that what participants imagined the object
to look like based on its original use may have influenced
their willingness to judge it really a different thing.
Experiment 2 therefore provided explicit descriptions of
objects and pre-tested each description to ensure that its
properties were equally typical of both the original and
alternative names.
Another factor influencing the extent to which
conceptualization of an object is consistent with a name
may be the extent to which the role associated with that
name has become entrenched (see also Dennett, 1987;
Siegel & Callanan, 2007). A piano stool temporarily holding
a candy dish for a party may be judged still really a piano
stool, whereas a piano stool permanently set next to the
sofa, in a room with no piano, may more likely be
considered really an end table. Adapting Siegel and
Callanan’s (2007) manipulation, we attempted to influence
perceived entrenchment by varying who was shifting the
object to a new use and how many people were making the
shift. The person was either the object’s creator, or its
owner, or someone merely looking at the item and thinking
about a new use while shopping. Either one such person was
making the shift or many were (that is, many artisans
producing similar objects, many owners, or many shoppers).
The pragmatics perspective predicts that both these
variables may influence the extent to which
conceptualization of the object is consistent with the new
name. The essentialist perspective suggests that neither will
because judgments of what the object is really will be tied to
the original intention.
Although the primary measure of interest was really
judgments, to further evaluate the possibility that people
treat name choices for purposes of communication as
distinct from what something really is, half the participants
judged whether it was acceptable to call the object by each
name (e.g., It’s OK to call it an end table and It’s OK to call
it a stool) instead of what it really was. We also asked
participants for verbal justifications of decisions in order to
provide insights into the basis for their judgments.

compatible with the original and new use. First, nine pairs
of object names were selected, representing objects that
could feasibly be made for one use but given a new one
(e.g., Frisbee/picnic plate; tablecloth/picnic blanket). The
nouns were presented (unpaired) in random order to
participants who were asked to list, for each noun, features
generally true of objects with that name. Features produced
by a third or more of participants for either noun in a pair
were considered in creating its object description. Second,
object descriptions were given to a separate set of
participants who rated each on a 1 to 7 scale for typicality
with respect to the two potential names. Six descriptions
with ratings above 5.0 for both names and no more than a 1point difference between them were retained for use. These
descriptions were for the pairs: stool/end table; candy
dish/ashtray; tablecloth/ picnic blanket; watering can/teapot;
letter opener/butter knife; and umbrella/lampshade.
Each stimulus for the main experiment consisted of an
object description followed by a brief story in which the
object was created under one intention but might now be
used in a different way. The stories manipulated Person
Type (who was making the change: the artisan creator,
owner, or shopper) and Number (how many were making
the change: one person or many). For example, for the
stool/end table stimulus, the item description was:
Picture an object made of dark varnished wood, about 2.5 feet
high, with four cylindrical legs and a flat, 1.5-ft.-by-1.5-ft.
top.

The version in which one person, the creator, changed its
use read as follows:
John is a carpenter. He created objects like this one to be sold
as end tables. They’ve been for sale in his shop for several
years. Then, one day a few years ago, he decided to start
selling them as stools. He has made and sold them as stools
ever since. He never plans to make or sell them as end tables
again.

In the version in which one person, an owner, changed its
use, the first three sentences remained the same but the
remainder read:
Then, one day a few years ago, he sold one at his shop to
Marla, but Marla didn’t buy it to use as an end table.
Although she knew it was intended to be used as an end table,
Marla bought it to use as a stool and has been using it as a
stool ever since.

In the version in which one person, a shopper, changed its
use, the first three sentences also remained the same but
the remainder read:
Then, one day a few years ago, Marla was browsing in the
shop and noticed one. She thought, “If I could afford that, I’d
use it as a stool, not an end table.” Marla has often come to
the shop over the years and admired the object, but she hasn’t
been able to afford it

In the remaining versions, many carpenters, owners, or
shoppers made (or thought about, for the shopper) the
change.
Each participant read about only one object in one story
version and then judged the acceptability of either two
really statements for the object (e.g., It is really an end table
and It is really a stool) or else two OK to call statements
(It’s OK to call it an end table and It’s OK to call it a stool),

Method
Stimuli were short stories consisting of an object description
followed by a paragraph describing the object’s original and
new use. Object descriptions were developed through a twopart pre-test aimed at creating descriptions equally
250

As Table 2 shows, the two entrenchment variables –
Person Type and Number – had little effect on judgments of
really. There was no main effect of Person Type or Number
and no interaction of either with Name (old vs. new), all Fs
close to 1. The pattern for judgments of whether it is “OK to
call” the object by a name was very similar (see Table 3),
except for a small but significant main effect of Name, with
Old names slightly preferred, F(1, 84) = 7.33, p < .01
(which may reflect slightly higher typicality with respect to
old names). Thus, it seems that, at least in this
implementation, participants paid little attention to who and
how many people are considering the object in a new light.
This outcome is inconsistent with that of Siegal and
Callanan (2007), and may reflect the greater complexity of
our stories, which did not as directly focus attention on the
key variables.

from the stories about the properties of the objects and/or
the people interacting with the objects, indicating that they
did read the stories and use the information in their
decisions.
Furthermore,
individual
justifications
corresponded to ratings (i.e., if a justification indicated that
only one name was acceptable, the ratings reflected that, and
likewise if it indicated that both were acceptable).
Justifications were coded into five categories depending
on what information the participant appealed to: multiple
types of properties, physical properties; functional
properties (other than original intended use); intended
category/use, and other. The distribution of justifications
was similar for really and OK to call judgments (see Table
4), with the only notable difference being a somewhat
greater appeal to physical features for really judgments.
Most importantly, justifications frequently appealed to
multiple types of information, and few appealed solely to
the original intention. The justifications are consistent with
the rating data in suggesting that participants did not rely
primarily on creator’s intention but rather considered
multiple properties in deciding whether the object was
compatible with a name.

Table 2: Mean ratings for really judgments.

Table 4: Justification type percentages.

with name order counterbalanced across participants. The
rating scale was marked with 1 as barely acceptable and 7 as
very acceptable. After giving ratings, participants wrote a
brief explanation of their ratings.

Results and Discussion

Number
One
Many

Name
Old
New
Old
New

Person Type
Creator Owner Shopper
5.33
5.20
5.33
5.73
5.60
5.33
5.40
5.40
5.73
5.80
6.07
4.60

Judgment
Really
OK to call

Many

Name
Old
New
Old
New

Creator
5.40
4.93
5.07
5.53

Justification Type
Phys. Func
Intent.
28
13
4
19
19
3

Other
9
10

In sum, the results are most compatible with the
pragmatics perspective. The entrenchment manipulations
did not influence the judgments of what the objects really
are, contrary to this view. However, the high mean ratings
for objects as both really the original type of thing and
really the new type of thing indicate that people are willing
to think of an artifact as having two identities at the same
time, perhaps depending on from whose perspective, or
from what point in time, they are considering it. Verbal
justifications support this conclusion. Furthermore, with
these stimuli balanced for typicality with respect to both
names, there was no difference between ratings of OK to
call and ratings of really, arguing against the possibility that
naming judgments are inherently different from judgments
of what an artifact really is.

Table 3: Mean ratings for OK to call judgments.
Number
One

Mult.
46
49

Person Type
Owner Shopper
6.20
5.93
5.33
5.27
6.20
6.33
5.00
5.27

The most striking result is that for both judgments of
what an object really is and what it is OK to call it,
participants considered the names associated with the old
use and with the new one both quite acceptable, with mean
ratings at about 5 and above on the 7-point scale for both, in
all conditions. This outcome is consistent with a pragmatics
perspective but not an essentialist perspective. (The slight
preference for old names in OK to call judgments is
inconsistent with the essentialist prediction for the
difference to emerge in really judgments.) It might be
suggested that the willingness to agree with both options,
and the lack of influence of the other variables, is because
participants are not reading the stories or are not thinking
about their choices and responding randomly. However, the
justifications that participants gave argue against this
interpretation. Participants reliably referred to information

General Discussion
We have asked what people mean when they say that an
artifact is really some particular kind of thing. The
essentialist perspective is that they are basing their judgment
on beliefs about the presence of an underlying essence. The
pragmatics perspective is that they are basing it on
compatibility of their conceptualization of the artifact with
properties brought to mind by the category name. The data
from our two experiments support the second possibility.
One might propose variants of an essentialist hypothesis that
are more compatible with our data, such as allowing an

251

Flavell, J. H., Green, F. L., & Flavell, E. R. (1986).
Development of knowledge about the appearance-reality
distinction. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 51, 1-87.
Gelman, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2000). Young children are
sensitive to how an object was created when deciding what
to name it. Cognition, 76, 91-103.
Kalish, C. W. (1995). Essentialism and graded membership in
animal and artifact categories. Memory & Cognition, 23,
335-353.
Keil, F. C. (1986). Conceptual domains and the acquisition of
metaphor. Cognitive Development, 1, 73-96.
Kelemen, D. and Carey, S. (2007). The essence of artifacts:
Developing the design stance. In E. Margolis & S.
Laurence (Ed.), Creations of the mind: Theories of
artifacts and their representation. Oxford University Press.
Kemler Nelson, D. G., Herron, L., & Morris, C. (2002). How
children and adults name broken objects: Inferences and
reasoning about design intentions in the categorization of
artifacts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 3, 301332.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Malt, B. C. (1994). Water is not H2O. Cognitive Psychology,
27, 41-70.
Malt, B. C. & Sloman, S. A. (2007a). Artifact categorization:
The good, the bad, and the ugly. In E. Margolis & S.
Laurence (Ed.), Creations of the mind: Theories of
artifacts and their representation. Oxford University Press.
Malt, B. C., & Sloman, S. A. (2007b). Category essence or
essentially pragmatic? Creator’s intention in naming and
what’s really what. Cognition, 105, 615-648.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). Mind, language, and reality. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rothbart, M., & Taylor, M. (1992). Category labels and
social reality: Do we view social categories as natural
kinds? In Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K. (Eds.), Language,
interaction, and social cognition. London: Sage.
Schwartz, S.P. (1980). Natural kinds and nominal kinds.
Mind, 89, 182-195.
Siegel, D. R., & Callanan, M. A. (2007). Artifacts as
conventional objects. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 8, 183-203.
Thomasson, A. (2007). Artifacts and human concepts. In E.
Margolis & S. Laurence (Ed.), Creations of the mind:
Theories of artifacts and their representation. Oxford
University Press.

artifact’s essence to evolve or shift if a user endows it with a
new use. However, the influence of physical as well as
functional properties demonstrated in Experiment 1, and the
willingness to accept more than one name as what an
artifact really is, demonstrated in Experiment 2, suggest that
any successful account must have a flavor not usually
associated with essentialism.
We began this paper by noting that for natural kinds such
as whales, water, and raccoons, it seems sensible to talk
about an appearance-reality distinction, and that such talk
can be interpreted as reflecting appeals to superficial
features vs. underlying essence. Does our argument for a
pragmatics perspective on artifacts create a dilemma for
explaining why a person might, likewise, sometimes say
that a particular artifact is really one type of thing although
it appears to be another (as in the case of a radio that looks
like a Coke can)? We think not. An artifact can have
properties different from those it initially appears to have,
and those discovered properties can be compatible enough
with those evoked by a particular name to say it is really the
second type of thing, without the discovered properties
being of any particular sort qualifying them as essences.
Indeed, the pragmatics perspective explains why one can
defend several different assignments of reality in such
artifact contrasts, as responses in Experiment 2 imply. For
instance, consider jelly jars adopted for use as drinking
glasses by a family. A visitor might ask “Why do you drink
from jelly jars?” and the family might respond, “They are
not jelly jars to us; they’re our glasses.” A neutral observer
might make the case for any of several options: “They’re
really jelly jars” or “They’re really drinking glasses (now,
though they may once have been jelly jars)” or “They’re
really both jelly jars and drinking glasses.” Whether one
name or the other, or both, are most compatible with the
objects depends on whose perspective(s) the observer takes
and what properties (including physical, functional, and
original intent) are thereby most heavily weighted.
In light of this emphasis on the perspective taken on an
artifact, it is especially puzzling why manipulations of the
entrenchment of a use have had relatively little effect here
and in Malt and Sloman (2007b). It seems likely that
entrenchment is a powerful influence on what an artifact
really is to someone in real life (as in the case of the jelly
glasses). Our manipulations may not have been salient
enough, or entrenchment may be a variable that needs to be
experienced, not just heard about.

References
Bloom, P. (1996). Intention, history, and artifact concepts.
Cognition, 60, 1-29.
Bloom, P. (2007). More than words: A reply to Malt and
Sloman. Cognition, 105, 649-655.
Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

252

