UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The CLARION Cognitive Architecture: A Tutorial

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/149589jb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Helie, Sebastian
Wilson, Nick
Sun, Ron

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The CLARION Cognitive Architecture: A Tutorial
Sébastien Hélie (helies@rpi.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY 12180, USA

Nick Wilson (wilson3@rpi.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY 12180, USA

Ron Sun (rsun@rpi.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY 12180, USA
level, implicit associations are learned through gradual trialand-error learning. In contrast, learning of explicit
knowledge is often one-shot and represents the abrupt
availability of explicit knowledge (following “explicitation”
or through newly acquired linguistic information in the top
level). The emphasis on bottom-up learning (i.e., the
transformation of implicit knowledge into explicit
knowledge) is, in part, what distinguishes CLARION from
other cognitive architectures. Nevertheless, top-down
learning is also included in CLARION.

Abstract
This full-day tutorial introduces participants to CLARION, a
dual-process/dual-representation cognitive architecture that
focuses on the distinction between explicit and implicit
cognitive processes. CLARION is also integrative, involving
cognition, motivation, metacognition, and so on. This tutorial
presents a detailed description, along with many simulations,
advanced topics, and formal results. Although some prior
exposure to cognitive architectures and artificial neural
networks can be helpful, prior understanding of these areas is
not required, as the full-day format allows a detailed
presentation of basic, as well as advanced, topics related to
cognitive modeling using CLARION. This tutorial will enable
participants to apply the basic concepts, theories, and
computational models of CLARION to their own work.

The Action-Centered Subsystem
In the Action-Centered Subsystem, the top level contains
simple “State Æ Action” rules, while the bottom level uses
multi-layer perceptrons to associate states and actions.
Learning in the bottom level is captured by a reinforcement
learning algorithm (with backpropagation), while rule
learning in the top level is mostly “one-shot” and can be
performed bottom-up or independently.
The ACS has been used to model navigation in mine
fields (Sun et al., 2001). In addition, because CLARION
focuses on the dichotomy between explicit and implicit
knowledge, benchmark psychological tasks used to show
implicit learning were also successfully captured and
explained (Sun et al., 2005).

Overview
CLARION is a cognitive architecture composed of four
main subsystems: the Action-Centered Subsystem (ACS),
the Non-Action-Centered Subsystem (NACS), the MetaCognitive Subsystem (MCS), and the Motivational
Subsystem (MS). The ACS is used mainly for action
decision-making. The NACS is usually a slave system to the
ACS and is used to store declarative and episodic
knowledge. This subsystem is also responsible for reasoning
in CLARION. The MS is responsible for determining
motivational drive levels (which in turn lead to the setting of
goals). The MCS is responsible for cognitive monitoring
and parameter setting in both the ACS and NACS, and
makes the goal setting determinations based on drive levels
reported from the MS.
In addition to the aforementioned subsystem structure,
CLARION is based on two other basic assumptions:
representational differences and learning differences of two
different types of knowledge: implicit versus explicit (Sun,
Merrill, & Peterson, 2001; Sun, Slusarz, & Terry, 2005).
The main difference between these two types of knowledge
is accessibility. In each subsystem, the top level contains
explicit knowledge (easily accessible) whereas the bottom
level contains implicit knowledge (harder to access).
The second assumption in CLARION concerns the
different learning processes in the top and the bottom level
of each subsystem (Sun et al., 2001, 2005). In the bottom

The Non-Action-Centered Subsystem
In the Non-Action-Centered Subsystem, the top level
contains simple logical rules while the bottom level uses a
nonlinear neural network. Learning in the bottom level is
captured by associative (e.g., contrastive Hebbian) learning.
Rule learning in the top level is mostly “one-shot” (similar
to the ACS).
The NACS in CLARION has been used mainly to
simulate reasoning. In particular, CLARION was able to
capture data showing the mixed effect of rule-based
reasoning and similarity-based reasoning when judging the
likelihood/strength of simple deductive forms. Other
reasoning phenomena can also be naturally explained using
CLARION (e.g., inheritance-based reasoning, reasoning
from incomplete information, etc).

9

Simulation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Sun, R., Coward, L.A., & Zenzen, M.J. (2005). On levels of
cognitive modeling. Philosophical Psychology, 18,
613-637.
Sun, R., Merrill, E., & Peterson, T. (2001). From implicit
skills to explicit knowledge: A bottom-up model of
skill learning. Cognitive Science, 25, 203-244.
Sun, R. & Naveh, I. (2007). Social institution, cognition,
and survival: A cognitive-social simulation. Mind
and Society, 6, 115-142.
Sun, R. & Peterson, T. (1998). Autonomous learning of
sequential tasks: Experiments and analyses. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 9, 1217-1234.
Sun, R. & Peterson, T. (1998). Some experiments with a
hybrid model for learning sequential decision
making. Information Sciences, 111, 83-107.
Sun, R., Slusarz, P., & Terry, C. (2005). The interaction of
the explicit and the implicit in skill learning: A dualprocess approach. Psychological Review, 112, 159192.
Sun, R. & Zhang, X. (2004). Top-down versus bottom-up
learning in cognitive skill acquisition. Cognitive
Systems Research, 5, 63-89.
Sun, R. & Zhang, X. (2006). Accounting for a variety of
reasoning data within a cognitive architecture.
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial
Intelligence, 18, 169-191.
Sun, R., Zhang, X., & Mathews, R. (2006). Modeling metacognition in a cognitive architecture. Cognitive
Systems Research, 7, 327-338.

The Meta-Cognitive Subsystem and the
Motivational Subsystem
The Motivational Subsystem contains both low- and highlevel primary drives that take into account environmental
and internal factors in determining drive strengths. The
drive states determined by the MS are reported to the MetaCognitive Subsystem, which regulates not only goal
structures but also cognitive processes to facilitate the
achievement of the goals.
Previous simulations using these subsystems have shown
how anxiety-inducing drives within the MS can affect the
parameters within the ACS in terms of explicit versus
implicit response weighting (and therefore performance).
Other simulations have detailed the combination of various
drives in the MS toward the setting of goals by the MCS.

References
Naveh, I. & Sun, R. (2006). A cognitively based simulation
of academic science. Computational and
Mathematical Organization Theory, 12, 313-337.
Sun, R. (2000). Symbol grounding: A new look at old ideas.
Philosophical Psychology, 13, 149-172.
Sun, R. (2002). Duality of the Mind: A Bottom-up Approach
Toward Cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Sun, R. (2003). A Tutorial on CLARION 5.0. Technical
Report, Cognitive Science Department, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute.
Sun, R. (2004). Desiderata for cognitive architectures.
Philosophical Psychology, 17, 341-373.
Sun, R. (Ed.). (2006). Cognition and Multi-Agent
Interaction: From Cognitive Modeling to Social

10

