UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Structural Alignment and Comparison of Events in Verb Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jz052xr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Childers, Jane B.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Structural Alignment and Comparison of Events in Verb Acquisition
Jane B. Childers (jane.childers@trinity.edu)
Department of Psychology, One Trinity Place
San Antonio, TX 78130 USA
describe a cognitive process children engage in when
learning a new verb.
However, most studies of early verb learning in the
laboratory expose the child to a single example of a new
event. This may lead children to form a good understanding
of that event, but also means that the cross-situational
information children may be using during verb learning is
not available during the experimental session. A few
previous studies have provided children with multiple
events linked to a single new verb. Two of these studies
show that children who are as young as 3 can infer that a
single element that varies across events must not be central
to a new verb’s meaning (Forbes & Farrar, 1995; Behrend,
1995). A third study (Gropen, Pinker, Hollander &
Goldberg, 1991) adds that 4-year-olds are able to use
contrastive information during verb learning (e.g., “Now let
me show you something that is not keating”) to shape their
later verb productions. However, to argue that children are
comparing contexts to each other and deriving a common
relational structure (as predicted by Gentner’s structural
alignment view, e.g., Gentner, 1983; 1989) it is important to
show that young children can attend to consistency across
contexts.
Study 1 demonstrates that 2 1/2 year old children can
attend to consistencies across related events, a prerequisite
for the application of Gentner’s view to verb learning.
Studies 2 and 3 extend Study 1 by testing specific
predictions that can be made by applying Gentner’s theory
to verb learning. Specifically, Study 2 tests 2 1/2-year-olds’
attention to relations apart from objects to begin to better
understand whether children can attend to relations or have
undergone a ‘relational shift’. Study 3 examines children
attention to changing elements across events, as well as their
use of syntactic information, during verb learning. As a
whole, these studies begin to test a new mechanism for verb
learning, a domain-general process of structural alignment
and comparison.

Abstract
Three studies are the first to explore how Gentner’s structural
alignment theory (1983;1989) can be applied to the problem
of verb acquisition. Study 1 shows that children younger than
3 can compare events based on consistencies across events,
and that this comparison influences their extension of new
verbs at test. Study 2 provides preliminary evidence that
children can align events based on the relations present in
related events. Study 3 shows that particular object changes
(i.e. tool changes) across related events influences children’s
verb extensions.
These results suggest that structural
alignment and comparison may be a key mechanism in early
verb learning.
Keywords: verb acquisition; domain-general mechanism;
comparison; language acquisition.

Introduction
Learning a new verb is difficult. To learn a verb, children
need to deduce which elements of a dynamic, transient
event are important in a particular new verb’s meaning or
solve a “packaging problem” (e.g., Gleitman & Gleitman,
1992). Furthermore, languages vary in which elements of
events are incorporated in their verb system (e.g., path
information in verbs in Spanish but not as often in English;
Talmy, 1975), thus children need to attend to different
elements in events across languages.

Structural Alignment and Comparison
Given the difficulty of this task, it seems likely that children
exploit any information available to them during verb
learning, including information available in the situational
context in which a new verb is heard. At the same time,
considering every situational cue in every context would
quickly overwhelm a young child. Thus, a principled
account of how children use situational information across
contexts is needed. Gentner and others have shown that
adults and children can use a domain-general cognitive
process to compare instances to each other (e.g., Markman
& Gentner, 1993; Gentner & Markman, 1997; Gentner &
Namy, 2000; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001; Paik & Mix,
2006; Waxman & Klibanoff, 2000). In this view, an
observer analyzes objects and their relations in one instance
(e.g., propositions, spatial layouts, scenes) and then seeks
out objects in the second instance that can be aligned to the
first instance based on their common relational structure.
This comparison process highlights the common relational
structure across instances (Gentner & Markman, 1997),
which is just the sort of information children need to attend
to when learning a new verb. Thus, this theory of structural
alignment and comparison seems especially well suited to

Study 1
Method
Participants Thirty-six 2 1/2 year old children participated
in this study (range: 2;4-2;10; mean age = 2;7) with 18 girls
and 18 boys.
Children lived in a south central region of the United
States, and were mostly from middle-class or upper-middleclass families. A 50% English criterion was used to exclude
children with insufficient English exposure, and parents
completed selected portions of the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventory: Words and
Sentences (Fenson, Dale, Reznick, Bates, Thal, & Pethick,

681

experimenter (E) enacted the target action while producing a
novel verb (e.g., “Look! I’m going to <verb> it. I’m
<verbing> it. I <verbed> it.”). The set of sentences with
the enactment was repeated. Children then were given a
chance to enact the event and say the new verb (e.g., “Now
it’s your turn to play. Can you say ____?”).
Following the child’s enactment, the experimenter either
repeated the target action 6 more times (Control group) or
enacted 3 new events that were related to the target action.
These new events either maintained the action component of
the target event (Action group) or the result (Result group).
For each new event, E produced the same set of 3 sentences
twice and enacted the event twice (=24 repetitions of each
novel verb before test).
In the test phase, the experimenter put new objects in
front of the child and asked the child to enact the event (e.g.,
“Can you <verb> it?”). Each test set of objects included the
apparatus used in the target event, a new object that could
be used to enact the action, and a new object that could be
used to produce the result (see Fig. 1). Once the child acted,
the experimenter asked the child to produce the verb (e.g.,
“What are you doing?”) and then the experimenter imitated
the child’s actions and asked the child to produce the verb
again (e.g., “Now look. What am I doing?”). Children then
were given one more chance to perform a new action (e.g.,
“Can you <verb> again? How else can you <verb> it?”).
The teaching and test phase formed a single block of
trials. The process was repeated until children had
completed a block of trials for each of the four novel events.
Coding Responses in which children used the target
apparatus and performed the target action were coded as
Target responses. Action responses were responses in
which the child used new objects and performed the same
movement as seen in the Target event (and comparison
events). Result responses included any response in which
children used a new object to accomplish the same result
that was produced in the initial complex event (and
comparison events). Any irrelevant responses were coded
as Other.
To better examine the range of different responses
children produced, only the first production of a particular
type of response was scored (e.g., Meltzoff, 1995). Even so,
in this study and in the subsequent studies children had the
opportunity to make multiple responses, thus these response
categories are independent.
Interrater agreement between 2 independent coders was
91%, Cohen’s Kappa =.81.

1994) to provide an estimate of the child’s language
development.
Design and Materials Each child was randomly assigned
to either a Control group, an Action group or a Result group
(n= 12 per group). Verbs were presented in a random order
across participants.
Four novel complex events were constructed and a novel
verb (tam, pilk, meek, gorp) was randomly assigned to each
event. Each novel complex event was created to include
both an action component and a result component. A
separate set of objects was used to show a series of related
events depicting either consistent actions (with variations in
results) or consistent results (with varying movements). A
third set of stimuli including objects that could be used to
preserve the action component, preserve the result
component, or imitate the adult, was given to the child for
his/her own enactment of the event at test. All of the events
were designed as prototypical events (e.g., Slobin, 1981) in
that they all had an animate agent (the experimenter or
child) who acted on an inanimate patient (e.g., an egg).
For example, in one event, an object is rolled down an
incline and disappears into a box. The action component of
this complex action included rolling the object with one’s
fingers; the result was that the object was hidden (see Fig.
1). In the 3 action events the object was rolled in different
ways and the result of disappearance was not present (e.g.,
rolling down an open tube). The 3 result events consisted of
hiding the object in ways that did not include the motion of
rolling (e.g., hiding in a bag). At test children were the box
with the flap which could be used for imitation, a ramp
which could be used to enact rolling and a cloth which
could be used to enact hiding.

Results
Preliminary analyses revealed that our 2 1/2-year-old
children had difficulty learning 4 new verbs in a single
session. Thus, we examined their responses to the first 3
verbs they heard in the experiment, with different children
learning different combinations of the four new verbs.
A repeated measures ANOVA was computed with
Response Type (3: Target, Action, Result) as a withinsubjects factor, and Condition (3: Control, Action, Result)
as a between-subjects factor; the dependent measure was the

Fig. 1: Target event (top), Action comparison (left),
Result comparison (right), Test objects (bottom).
Procedure Each child heard 4 new verbs . Each new verb
was presented in a block of trials that included a teaching
phase and a test phase. In the teaching phase, the
682

One prediction that follows from the structural alignment
view is that events with the same number of elements, and
events with elements that accomplish a result in a similar
way, are easier to align than are events in which variations
in number and roles of elements are seen. In Study 2 we
examined whether we could influence verb learning by
giving children sets of either perfectly alignable or less
alignable events.

number of responses produced at test (see Figure 2). The
ANOVA revealed a main effect of Response Type, F(2, 33)
= 9.45, p<.001, a main effect of Condition, F(2, 33) = 5.50,
p<.01, and a significant Response by Condition interaction,
F(4, 33) = 6.86, p< .001.
Simple comparisons with Sidak corrected p values for
the use of multiple post-hoc tests (Sidak, 1967) were used to
investigate the Response by Condition interaction (see Fig.
2). In the Control condition, there were significantly more
Target responses than Action responses (p< .001). In the
Result condition, there were significantly more Target and
Result responses than Action responses (ps< .001). There
were no differences between the three response types in the
Action condition.
These same analyses across the 3 conditions revealed
no differences in the mean number of Target responses
across conditions. The number of Action responses was
greater in the Action condition than in the Control (p= .001)
or Result conditions (p= .001). Result responses were
greater in the Result condition than in both the Control
condition (p< .01) and the Action condition (p< .05).
We also examined children’s responses as individuals
by counting how many children produced a Target, Action
or Result response at test; the parametric results are
mirrored in the responses made by individual children.

Study 2
Method
Participants Thirty-six 2 1/2-year-old children (mean age
=2;8; range: 2;5-2;10) participated in the study.
Design and Materials Twelve participants were randomly
assigned to either a Perfectly Alignable, a Less Alignable or
a Control Condition.
As in the previous study, 4 novel complex events were
constructed as Target events (see Fig. 3) and a novel verb
was randomly assigned to each event. In each target event,
E used a specific movement/set of movements to create a
noticeable change in a third object. In the Perfectly
Alignable condition, 3 comparison events were constructed
which had the same number of elements as in the Target
event (and the other comparison events) and had objects in
particular roles in each event (e.g., tools) that had similar
perceptual properties. In the Less Alignable condition, the

Mean number of responses

Target
Action Response

3

Result Response

2.5

*

2

*

1.5
1

Target Event
Fig. 3

0.5
0

Control

Action

Perfectly Alignable

Less Alignable

Result

Condition

Fig 2: Study 1 Results.

Discussion

Test objects:
Extension (L), Affordance Object (R)

In this study, children who saw consistent actions or
results preserved the consistent action or result in their
enactments, extending the verb appropriately using new
objects.
These results are important because they
demonstrate that children younger than 3 can compare
events in terms of the consistent elements across events.
They also suggest that comparing events may help children
overcome a conservative tendency in verb learning (e.g.,
Tomasello, 1992) and generalize a newly learned verb. At
the same time, studies are needed to directly test predictions
that derive from the structural alignment view. Specific
predictions are tested in studies 2 and 3.

comparison events had different numbers of objects, the
objects in particular roles did not share many properties, and
some role reversals were shown (in terms of objects of a
particular type in a role that was similar to a role in the
target event, e.g., squisher, squishee). In a Control
condition, the Target event was repeated twice. A third set
of stimuli was available at test. These included an object
that could be used to reproduce the result (Extension) and an
object that could be used to perform a familiar unrelated

683

structural alignment view. This finding that we can disrupt
alignments, as shown by children’s increased reliance on a
fall-back strategy (using object affordances) is exciting
because no previous study of verb learning has shown
attention to relations across events.
A second prediction that follows from the structural
alignment view is that the comparison events will help
children attend to the changing element in an event. In a
third study children were shown either events in which a
tool changed or a patient (affected object) changed across
the comparison events. The prediction was that children
who were comparing events to each other would attend to
the changing element and use it to guide their verb
extensions at test. In addition, in this study children
received syntactic cues which should highlight objects that
are named. Thus, the study includes comparison cues and
syntactic information to explore the contribution of each
type of information to verb learning.

action (Affordance). The procedure was the same as had
been used in Study 1.
Coding Children’s responses were coded into three
categories: as Extension responses (if they reproduced the
event E had shown using new objects), as Affordance
responses (if they used a familiar object to enact a familiar
event, e.g. throwing a ball into a bucket above) or Other (if
they enacted an irrelevant event). Children could respond
multiple times thus they could produce all of the types of
responses. In this study, we computed proportions of
Extension and Affordance responses by counting the total
number of each specific response type and dividing it by the
total number of all responses.

Results
A repeated measures ANOVA was computed with
Condition (Perfectly Alignable, Less Alignable, Control) as
a between-subjects factor, and Response type (Extension,
Affordance) as a within-subjects factor; the dependent
measure was the proportion of responses at test. The
analysis revealed a main effect of Response type, F(1, 33) =
52.85, p<.001, and a significant Condition by Response type
interaction, F(2, 33) = 5.04, p< .02 (see Fig. 4).
Post-hoc tests showed that there were significantly
more Extension responses in the Perfectly Alignable than in
the Less Alignable condition (p< .05), but that Extensions in
the Perfectly Alignable condition did not differ from the
proportion of Extensions in the Control condition. In
addition, there were significantly more Affordance
responses in the Less Alignable condition than in the other 2
conditions (ps< .04).

Study 31
Method
Participants Forty-two 2 1/2-year-old children (mean age
=2;7; range: 2;4-3;3) participated in the study.
Design and Materials Each child was randomly assigned
to either a Noun First, a Noun Last or an All Pronoun
condition (n = 14 per condition). Within each condition,
there were two within-subjects variables: Event type (tool
change or patient change) and Response type (extension,
distractor). Each child saw 2 sets of events in which the
tool was changed in the events before test, and 2 sets of
events in which the patient (affected objects) varied. While
they were seeing these events, stimulus sentences either
labeled the tool (Noun first), labeled the patient (Noun last)
or neither (all pronoun).
These different syntactic
conditions were included to compare the effect of hearing a
noun to the effect of seeing a changing element.
As in the previous studies, 4 novel events were
constructed as Target events and a novel verb was randomly
assigned to each event. In each target event, E used a
specific movement/set of movements to create a noticeable
change in a third object. Two event sets were created in
which the patient was varied. For example, in one event, E
stirred a set of smaller objects using a pencil (see Fig. 5).
Two other event sets were created in which the affected
object stayed the same but the tool changed (see Fig. 6).
Children saw the related events while hearing sentences
from one of the 3 sentence conditions.
Procedure The only difference in procedure in this study
as compared to the previous 2 studies was that children were
given an initial play session with the test objects to have the
chance to explore them before each event set was shown.
As in the previous studies, children then heard 4 new
verbs, one at a time. Each new verb was presented in a
block of trials that included a teaching phase and a test
phase. The sentences used in the teaching phase were those

Extension
Mean proportion of responses

1

Affordance

0.9

*

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

*

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Control

Fig. 4

Less Alignable Perfectly Alignable
Conditions

Discussion
These results show that children performed less well
when they saw events with differing numbers of elements,
events in which the result was accomplished in a different
way and/or events in which elements that shared properties
with elements in a target event (e.g., the larger object in an
event) was used in a different role in the comparison event.
An account of why these types of successive events would
be less useful to children is Gentner’s (1983; 1988)

1

Lashelle Syndenham and Cynthia Luethcke are co-authors on
this study.

684

response did not mean they could not also make a distractor
response.

that corresponded to each child’s sentence condition. Each
child saw 3 related events before the test phase and each
event was demonstrated twice by E.

Results
A repeated measures ANOVA was computed with
Condition (3: Noun first, Noun last, All pronoun) as a
between-subjects factor and Event Type (Patient change,
Tool change) and Response Type (Extension, Distractor) as
within-subjects factors, and; the dependent measure was the
number of responses produced at test. The analysis revealed
a main effect of Response Type, F(1, 39) = 86.85, p< .001, a
main effect of Event Type, F(1, 39) = 5.68, p< .03, and a
significant Event Type by Response Type interaction, F(1,
39) = 20.63, p< .001; there was no main effect or interaction
with Condition.
Post-hoc tests with Sidak corrections revealed that there
was a significant difference in children’s extension
responses across the two event types (p= .001) and there
was a trend towards significance for distractor responses (p<
.06). Within each event type, there was a significant
difference between the two types of responses children
made (see Fig. 8).

Noun First
“The pencil meeks it.”
Noun Last
“It meeks the rocks
(flowers, buttons).”
All Pronoun
“It meeks it.”
Fig. 5: Patient change set with sentence conditions.
Noun First
“The fork (brush,
banana) koobs it.”
Noun Last
“It koobs the cord.”

Extension

All Pronoun
“It koobs it.”
Fig. 6: Tool change set with sentence conditions.
objects using a pencil (see Fig. 5). Two other event sets
In the test phase, the experimenter put new objects in
front of the child and asked the child to enact the event (e.g.,
“Can you <verb> it?”). Each test set of objects included a
new tool, a new patient and two distractor objects (see Fig.
7). Once the child acted, the experimenter asked the child to
produce the verb (e.g., “What are you doing?”). Children
then were given one more chance to perform a new action
(e.g., “Can you <verb> again? How else can you <verb>
it?”).

Mean number of responses

Distractor

^

2
1.5

*

*

1

*

0.5
0

Tool Change

Patient Change

Condition
Fig. 8: Study 3 Results.

Discussion
This study provides clear evidence showing that particular
object changes—i.e., tool changes—influenced children’s
enactments. Events in which the patient changed did not
appear to lead to appropriate verb extensions in the same
way. Naming the objects that were changing appeared to
have no influence as there was no main effect or interaction
with our different sentence conditions. Thus, children did
not appear to use the nouns in sentences to direct their
attention to tools or to patients. One reason for this result
may be that comparing events requires so many cognitive
resources that there are few left over to use to process the
linguistic information. Given that this study was the first to
try to examine both structural alignment and linguistic
information in verb learning, further studies examining the
interaction of these cues are needed. Children in real world
settings would have access to both of these cues and likely

Fig. 7: Test objects for one of the tool change sets:
New object to stretch, distractor, distractor, new tool.
The teaching and test phase formed a single block of
trials. The process was repeated until children had
completed a block of trials for each of the four novel events.
Coding Children’s enactments were coded into two main
categories: Extension response (i.e., use of a new object to
accomplish the same result as in E’s events) or Distractor
(any other irrelevant response). As in Study 1, to better
examine the range of different responses children produced,
only the first production of a particular response was scored
(e.g., Meltzoff, 1995). Even so, children could make
multiple responses so the production of an extension

685

do use both types of information, though our study suggests
they may not use both types of cues simultaneously.

General Discussion
Three studies provide preliminary evidence of children’s use
of structural alignment in learning new verbs. Further
studies are needed to explore specific aspects of each of
these studies. However, there is no other theory of verb
learning which would predict these patterns of results across
these studies. Most studies of new verb learning in young
children present the child with only a single new example of
an event that corresponds to the new verb. Yet, children
have access to multiple events in their everyday life. If
children can make use of the information available across
these events, perhaps by aligning them based on their
relational structure, they could use the information about
similarities and differences across events to refine their
understanding of the appropriate situational contexts to
which a new verb refers. Our lab is the first to try to adapt
Gentner’s theory to early verb learning, and the results are
promising (see also Childers & Paik, 2008, for a crosscultural study). This view leads to important predictions to
address, and may describe a core mechanism children may
use to learn new verbs.

Acknowledgments
Funding was provided by a grant from the National
Institutes of Health (1R15 HD044447-01) and by Trinity
University.

References
Behrend, D. (1995). Processes involved in the initial
mapping of verb meanings. In M. Tomasello & W. E.
Merriman (Ed.s), Beyond names for things: Young
children's acquisition of verbs. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Childers, J. B. & Paik, J. H. (in press). Korean- and
English-speaking Children Use Cross-situational
Information to Learn Novel Predicate Terms. Journal of
Child Language.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D., &
Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59, v-173.
Forbes, J. N. & Farrar, M. J. (1995). Learning to represent
word meaning: What initial training events reveal about
children’s developing action verb concepts. Cognitive
Development, 10, 1-20.

686

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical
learning. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D. & Markman, A. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52,1,
45-56.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (2000). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gleitman, L., & Gleitman, H. (1992). A picture is worth a
thousand words, but that's the problem: The role of
syntax in vocabulary acquisition. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 1, 31-35.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., & Goldberg, R.
(1991). Affectedness and direct objects: The role of
lexical semantics in the acquisition of verb argument
structure. Cognition, 41, 153-95.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers: Close comparisons facilitate far
mappings. Journal of Cognition and Development, 2,
189-219.
Markman, A. & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology,
25, 431-467.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-50.
Paik, J. H. & Mix, K. S. (2006). Preschooler’s use of
surface similarity in object comparisons: Taking
context into account. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 95, 194-214.
Sidak, Z. (1967). Rectangular confidence regions for the
means of multivariate normal distributions. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 62, 626-33.
Slobin, D. I. (1981). The origins of grammatical encoding
of events. In W. Deutsch (Ed.) The child's construction
of language. New York: Academic Press.
Talmy, L. (1975). Semantics and syntax of motion. In J. P.
Kimball (ed), Syntax and Semantics: Volume 4. New
York: Academic Press.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: A case study of early
grammatical development. New York, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2000). The role of
comparison in the extension of novel adjectives.
Developmental Psychology, 36, 571-581.

