UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Color of Similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0j67d015

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Breaux, Brooke O.
Feist, Michele I.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Color of Similarity
Brooke O. Breaux (bfo1493@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette,
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Michele I. Feist (feist@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette,
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA
drawings were presented either close together or far apart in
order to test the hypothesis that, if similarity is understood
via proximity, similarity ratings should be higher when the
drawings are presented close together than when they are
presented far apart. The results suggest that the effects of
proximity on similarity judgments differ depending on
whether the judgment being made is considered conceptual
or perceptual. When participants judged similarity based on
function (i.e., conceptual similarity), objects presented
closer together in space were rated as more similar than
objects presented further apart, in line with the conceptual
metaphor SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY.
However,
perceptual judgments produced the opposite result: objects
presented closer together in space were rated as more
distinct than objects presented further apart.
Casasanto interpreted these results as supporting the
conceptual metaphor SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY when
participants are called upon to make conceptual judgments
but not perceptual judgments, suggesting that the interplay
between proximity and similarity may be more complex
than the metaphor would lead us to believe.
While these results are compelling, it should be noted that
the participants were instructed to base their similarity
judgments on either conceptual or perceptual properties of
the pictures. The account would be greatly strengthened if
the distinction between conceptual and perceptual
judgments could be made implicitly and without overt
instruction, yet using a single set of stimuli. Happily,
precisely this situation exists in the domain of color.
In their study of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, Kay and
Kempton (1984) argue that “it is well known that triad
distances for color stimuli reproduce discrimination
distances faithfully, so long as the stimuli selected are
chosen from a single lexical category” (p. 70). What this
suggests is that distinctions made between colors within the
same lexical category—like those labeled blue—are
perceptual. In support of this, Kay and Kempton presented
participants with color triads from which they were asked to
select the color most different from the others. They found
that participants who considered the three colors to be from
the same lexical category selected in line with perceptual
discrimination distance. However, when a conceptual
distinction existed between the color swatches, as evidenced
by description via separate color terms (blue and green),
participants’ choices differed from that which would be
predicted based on discrimination distances, choosing as

Abstract
Conceptual Metaphor Theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980)
posits that the metaphorical ways in which we talk about
abstract concepts are indicative of the ways in which we think
about those concepts. In a recent test of this hypothesis,
Casasanto (2007) considered the metaphor SIMILARITY IS
PROXIMITY. He found evidence to suggest that the effect of
physical proximity on similarity ratings differs depending on
whether the task requires a perceptual or conceptual judgment
regarding the similarity of common objects: only for
conceptual judgments did Casasanto find that physical
proximity increased similarity ratings.
We extend this
finding, asking whether physical proximity will similarly
affect conceptual, but not perceptual, judgments regarding the
similarity between two color swatches.
Keywords: Color; Space; Metaphor

Introduction
The question of how concepts are represented and used is a
fundamental one in Cognitive Science, touching on all areas
of inquiry. The question becomes particularly problematic
when the concepts considered are abstract, like similarity,
rather than firmly grounded in observables in the world, like
proximity. One influential proposal regarding how we use
and reason about abstract concepts, Conceptual Metaphor
Theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980a, 1980b), holds that
abstract concepts are understood via connections to the
more concrete concepts used metaphorically to talk about
them. This would, in turn, imply that the way in which we
reason about abstract concepts should show important
parallels with the way in which we reason about the
corresponding concrete concepts which form the bases for
the metaphors. In this regard, Lakoff & Johnson (1980)
argue “[a]s metaphorical concepts are defined in terms of
nonmetaphorical concepts, they show entailment relations
parallel to those for the corresponding nonmetaphorical
concepts.” (p. 197).
Recently, this claim from Conceptual Metaphor Theory
has been put to the test (Casasanto, 2007). In this study,
judgments of similarity were elicited for line-drawings of
everyday objects (e.g., tools, clothing, furniture).
Participants were instructed either to judge similarity by
visual appearance or to judge similarity by function or use—
the first type of judgment argued to be perceptual and the
second type of judgment, conceptual. In addition, the line-

253

are likely to have low similarity ratings and colors presented
far apart are likely to have high similarity ratings. The
opposite result is predicted for the conceptual judgment
match, in which it is predicted that judgments of color
similarity will follow the conceptual metaphor
SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY. In this case, colors
presented close together are likely to have high similarity
ratings and colors presented far apart are likely to have low
similarity ratings.
There are two remaining conditions, each of which could
be considered a mismatch: a within-category color pair
(perceptual) presented to the right visual field (conceptual),
and a between-category color pair (conceptual) presented to
the left visual field (perceptual). There are at least two
logical outcomes for these mismatched conditions. One
possibility is that visual field will have a stronger influence
over judgments of similarity than category status and the
other is just the opposite, that categorical status will have a
stronger influence over judgments of similarity than visual
field. If visual field has a stronger influence on judgments
in this task, then color pairs presented to the left visual field
would be subject to more perceptual effects and color pairs
presented to the right visual field would be subject to more
conceptual effects regardless of the type of color pair in
question. However, if categorical status has a stronger
influence on judgments in this task, then within-category
color pairs would be subject to more perceptual effects and
between-category color pairs would be subject to more
conceptual effects regardless of visual field presentation.

most different the color swatch that would be described with
a different term than the other two. Further, when they were
presented with colors from two lexical categories but
blocked from using their color vocabulary (having agreed
that the central chip was both green and blue), English
speakers chose as would be predicted by perceptual
discrimination distances. Taken together, these results
suggest that the category boundary effect is indicative of a
conceptual decision. As such, the domain of color admits of
both conceptual and perceptual judgments without explicit
instruction to that effect (note that the participants in Kay &
Kempton’s (1984) study were in all cases asked to choose
the color swatch that was most different from the other two;
no additional instructions were given to them).
There is additional evidence in the domain of color for a
possible distinction in processing between conceptual
judgments (subject to lexical category effects) and
perceptual judgments. Gilbert, Regier, Kay, and Ivry (2006)
found that discrimination performance varied depending on
whether the odd color swatch in a discrimination task was
presented to the right visual field or to the left. In the right
visual field, reaction time was faster if the odd swatch and
the distracters were from different lexical categories than if
they were from the same category; no such difference was
found if the odd swatch was presented to the left visual
field. This suggests that the left visual field (and therefore
the right hemisphere) may engage in perceptual processes,
while the right visual field (and left hemisphere) may
engage in either conceptual processes or both conceptual
and perceptual processes.
In sum, it appears that judgments regarding features of a
color swatch are most likely to be guided by perceptual
processes when (a) the color swatches are drawn from the
same lexical category (Kay & Kempton, 1984), or (b) the
color swatches are presented to the left visual field (Gilbert
et al., 2006). Conversely, conceptual judgments regarding
color swatches are most likely when (a) the colors are drawn
from different lexical categories (Kay & Kempton, 1984), or
(b) the color swatches are presented to the right visual field
(Gilbert et al., 2006). Given this evidence that both
conceptual and perceptual judgments are available in the
domain of color under separate sets of circumstances, we
are in a position to ask whether Casasanto’s (2007) result
will extend to judgments of similarity between color
swatches, in which case we would expect to see evidence of
the conceptual metaphor SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY
when participants are making conceptual judgments of
similarity, but not when they are making perceptual
judgments.
Specifically, a within-category color pair presented to the
left visual field would be considered a perceptual judgment
match, and a between-category color pair presented to the
right visual field would be considered a conceptual
judgment match. If Casasanto’s (2007) results extend to
judgments of similarity between colors, we expect that
similarity ratings for the perceptual judgment match will not
follow the conceptual metaphor SIMILARITY IS
PROXIMITY. In this case, colors presented close together

Experiment
This experiment tested whether the distinction Casasanto
(2007) found between conceptual and perceptual judgments
of similarity would appear in judgments regarding similarity
between colors. If so, participants should rate color
swatches as more similar when presented close together
than when presented further apart when the comparison is
conceptual. Conversely, participants should rate color
swatches as more distinct when presented close together
than when presented further apart when the comparison is
perceptual.

Methods
Participants A total of 88 native English speaking
undergraduates from the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette community took part in this study in exchange for
class credit.
Materials
The stimuli consisted of four computergenerated colors from the blue-green continuum (Munsell
7.5G, 2.5BG, 7.5BG, and 2.5B), presented as 76 pixel x 76
pixel squares. The colors used in this study were identical to
those used by Gilbert et al. (2006, p.493) and, following
their nomenclature, will henceforth be referred to as colors
A, B, C, and D. The use of these four colors permitted the
formation of two within category pairs - within-green (A
and B) and within-blue (C and D) - and one between

254

each case, the first stimulus was presented closer to the
fixation cross, and the second was presented more towards
the periphery of the screen. Thus, the first stimulus in the
near condition was presented at a distance of 100 pixels
from the center of the fixation cross to its edge, with the
second stimulus at a distance of 226 pixels from the center
of the fixation cross to its edge. The first stimulus in the far
condition was presented at a distance of 75 pixels from the
center of the fixation cross to its edge, and the second
stimulus, at a distance of 251 pixels from the center of the
fixation cross to its edge. Order of presentation of the two
colors in the pair (e.g., A-B or B-A) was randomly
determined on each trial.
Because we were interested in the possible effect of the
visual field on perceptual vs. conceptual judgments, it was
very important to ensure that the pairs of color samples were
actually perceived in the target visual field. Thus, to reduce
participants’ ability to predict the location of the second
stimulus and, thence, the likelihood that they would make
saccades away from the fixation cross, filler trials were
designed such that the second color stimulus would appear
in the visual field opposite that of the first color stimulus.
During the filler trials, the second stimulus was presented
the same distance from the fixation cross as the first
stimulus but on the opposite side of the fixation cross. By
design, half of the trials that each participant completed
were experimental trials as described above, and half were
cross-fixation filler trials, ensuring that participants would
not be able to predict whether the second color sample
would appear on the same side of the screen as the first
stimulus (test condition) or on the opposite side of the
screen (filler trial condition). Participants completed a total
of 12 experimental trials and 12 filler trials.
After completing the similarity judgment task,
participants engaged in a lexical boundary task to determine
whether their lexical boundary coincided with the predicted
one, which falls between colors B and C; data from
participants whose lexical boundary differed was excluded
from further analysis. In the lexical boundary task, a neutral
grey screen was presented for 1 second. A black fixation
cross (50 x 50 pixels) then appeared in the middle of the
screen for 1.5 seconds. While the fixation cross remained
on the screen, the color samples from the similarity
judgment task were displayed one at a time. Each of the four
color stimuli (A, B, C and D) was presented individually, in
random order, in each of the eight positions on the computer
screen that had served as possible color stimulus locations
during the color comparison task (75 pixels to the left of the
fixation cross, 100 pixels to the left of the fixation cross,
150 pixels to the left of the fixation cross, 175 pixels to the
left of the fixation cross, 75 pixels to the right of the fixation
cross, 100 pixels to the right of the fixation cross, 150 pixels
to the right of the fixation cross, and 175 pixels to the right
of the fixation cross). After a second-long exposure to the
color, participants were asked to use their computer
keyboard to indicate whether they thought the color they
just saw was blue, indicated by pressing the B key, or green,
indicated by pressing the G key. Participants were instructed

category pair (B and C) - such that each pair accounted for
approximately the same amount of difference in
psychological color space.1 The colors were presented to
participants on a neutral grey background with RGB values
of 178, 178, and 178.
Procedure Participants were seated at a comfortable
viewing distance (approximately 70 centimeters) from a
computer screen, upon which each of the possible one-step
pairs – A-B, B-C, and C-D – was presented eight times in
randomized order. Upon each presentation, participants
were asked to rate the similarity of the presented colors on a
scale of 1 (not at all similar) to 9 (very similar).2
The order of the trials was as follows: participants first
viewed a neutral grey computer screen (set at a resolution of
1024 x 768 pixels) for one second. A black fixation cross
(50 x 50 pixels) then appeared in the middle of the screen
for 1.5 seconds; participants were instructed to focus their
visual attention on the fixation cross whenever it was
present on the screen. With the fixation cross still on the
screen, the first square of color was presented in one of four
randomly selected positions: either on the left or the right
side of the fixation cross, and at a distance of either 75
pixels or 100 pixels from the center of the fixation cross to
the edge of the color stimulus. After a one second
presentation, the first color stimulus was removed from the
screen. The second color stimulus was presented
immediately following the removal of the first color
stimulus, either on the same side of the fixation cross as the
first stimulus (experimental trials) or on the opposite side of
the fixation cross (filler trials); it too remained on the screen
for one second. All possible color positions were aligned
along the same horizontal axis as the fixation cross. After
the second color stimulus was removed from the screen, a
rating scale appeared, and the participant was asked to rate
the similarity between the two color swatches they had just
viewed. Similarity ratings and reaction times were recorded
for each trial.
In order to determine whether the visual field within
which the colors were presented might lead to either
perceptual (left visual field) or conceptual (right visual
field) processing (an extension of Gilbert et al., 2006), test
trials were designed such that the second color stimulus was
restricted to appear in the same visual field as the first color
stimulus. Within each visual field, stimuli were presented
either close together (50 pixels distance between nearest
edges) or far apart (100 pixels distance between nearest
edges), for a total of four possible presentation situations for
each pair and eight possible locations for each color. In
1

Gilbert et al. (2006) did determine that in both CIEL*a*b and
CIEL*u*v color spaces the interstimulus distances for the withingreen colors was slightly less than the distances for the betweencategory colors, but the distances for the within-blue colors was
slightly greater than the distances for the between-category colors.
However, when averaged together, the within-distance exceeded
the between-distance for both color spaces.
2
The nine-point scale used in this study followed that used by
Casasanto (2007).

255

participant. Z-scored similarity ratings were compared
using a three-way ANOVA with Distance (close, far),
Categorical Status (within, between), and Visual Field
(right, left) as all within-subjects factors. Ratings showed a
marginally significant two-way Distance by Categorical
Status interaction (F (1, 64) = 3.68, p = 0.0594) with a main
effect of Categorical Status (F (1, 64) = 30.69, p < .0001).
No other significant effects or interactions were found.
As predicted, the main effect of Categorical Status
revealed that judged similarity for within-category color
pairs was significantly higher than for between-category
color pairs (Figure 1). That colors from the same lexical
category were rated as significantly more similar than colors
from different lexical categories is simply a replication of
the results reported by Kay and Kempton (1984); lexical
color boundaries affect the perception of color similarity.

to make responses during this task using their dominant
hand. Color categorization responses and reaction time were
recorded.
Design We used a 2 (Distance: close or far) x 2
(Categorical Status: within or between) x 2 (Visual Field:
right or left) design. All factors were varied within subjects.

Analysis and Results

Standardized Similarity Rating

Lexical Boundary Determination
Of the 88 total
participants, 96.6% consistently labeled (eight out of eight
trials) color A as green, 72.7% consistently labeled color B
as green, 73.9% consistently labeled color C as blue, and
97.7% consistently labeled color D as blue. 21 participants
produced more than two inconsistent labels and were thus
eliminated from further analysis. Of these 21 participants,
18 produced at least two of their inconsistent labels in
response to the same color stimulus, indicating that this
color was likely to be correctly identified by the participant
only seventy-five percent of the time. Although participants
were not formally screened for color vision, all but one had
normal color vision by self-report. That participant was
accordingly removed from further analysis. The data from
one additional participant was analyzed separately.3 41 of
the remaining 66 participants produced no inconsistent
labels, and 25 of the remaining 66 participants produced
only one inconsistent label, the production of which was
attributed to random error.
To determine whether the category status of a stimulus might
vary as a function of its location on the screen, the consistency
of color labeling for all 88 participants was analyzed. There
were found to be no significant differences in inconsistent
labeling between visual fields (right, left), distance from
fixation point (75 pixels, 100 pixels, 150 pixels, 175 pixels),
and color label (green, blue); however, there were significant
differences between the mean number of inconsistent labels for
colors closest to the predicted lexical color boundary (B and C)
and the mean number of inconsistent labels for colors further
away from the predicted lexical color boundary (A and D). The
mean number of inconsistent labels for the colors closest to the
predicted lexical color boundary (M = 5.25; SD = 1.91) was
significantly greater than the mean number of inconsistent
labels for the colors further away from the predicted lexical
color boundary (M = 0.38, SD = 0.5); F (1, 30) = 97.09, p <
.0001. Along with the naming patterns cited above, this
suggests that the lexical boundary does indeed fall between
colors B and C for our participants overall, as predicted based
on previous results (Gilbert et al., 2006).

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

Within
Between

-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5

Figure 1: Standardized similarity ratings for pairs of colors
as a function of their categorical status. Within-category
colors (i.e., within-green and within-blue) were rated as
more similar and between-category colors were rated as
more dissimilar (i.e., green-blue). Bars indicate standard
errors.
Our primary question was whether the influence of the
metaphor SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY was restricted to
conceptual judgments of similarity for color samples, as it
was for objects (Casasanto, 2007), with the opposite effect
for perceptual judgments. We thus varied the expected type
of judgment in two ways: via categorical status, and via
visual field. To recap, we predicted that within-category
judgments would be perceptual, while between-category
judgments would be conceptual (Kay & Kempton, 1984),
and we predicted that judgments of pairs presented to the
left visual field would be perceptual, while judgments of
pairs presented to the right visual field would contain a
conceptual component (either alone or in combination with
a perceptual one) (Gilbert et al., 2006).
We first ask whether categorical status will interact with
proximity. As predicted, we observed that judged similarity
for within-category pairs is lower when the colors appeared
close together than when they appeared far apart.
Conversely, we observed that judged similarity for betweencategory pairs is higher when the colors appeared close
together than when they appeared far apart (Figure 2).

Similarity Ratings To analyze the test condition results,
raw similarity ratings were z-scored individually for each
3
It was determined that this participant had a lexical boundary
between A and B rather than between B and C. In the lexical
boundary task, this participant labeled color B as an example of
blue seven out of eight times and color A as an example of green
eight out of eight times. No other inconsistent labels were
produced by this participant.

256

Standardized Similarity Rating

while conceptually the same), increasing the distance
between the color samples resulted in an increase in
similarity ratings. However, when participants perceived
colors as coming from two different lexical categories (and,
thereby, both perceptually and conceptually different),
increasing the distance between the color samples resulted
in a decrease in similarity ratings. This seems to substantiate
the claims made by Casasanto (2007) that proximity and
conceptual similarity have a strong positive relationship,
while proximity and perceptual similarity do not.
While our results do lend support to the hypothesis
originally posited by Casasanto (2007), there is at least one
alternative explanation for the current findings which does
not invoke Conceptual Metaphor Theory. When colors
were presented close together, participants may have had a
tendency to compare them on a more perceptual basis,
lessening any effects which might be linked to categorical
status. However, when colors were presented far apart,
perceptual comparison may have been more difficult. As a
result, participants may have relied more on their conceptual
knowledge of the colors to help them solve this relatively
harder problem (cf., Kay & Kempton, 1984). It may thus be
that increasing the distance between colors in turn increases
the likelihood that participants will use categorical
information to make judgments of similarity. This would
mean that presenting colors far apart should produce effects
more consistent with the categorical status of the color pair.
If the effects of categorical status are such that withincategory colors are rated as more similar overall and
between-category colors are rated as more dissimilar
overall, then the prediction here is that within-category
colors should be rated as more similar when presented
further apart than when presented close together.
Conversely, between-category colors should be rated as
more dissimilar when presented further apart. This pattern
of results is presented in Figure 2. Increasing the distance
between colors could simply be strengthening the effects of
categorical status.
One issue with both explanations is that the interaction we
observed between physical proximity and categorical status
was only marginally significant. One possible explanation
for this lies in the difference between interstimulus distance
in the close condition (a separation of 50 pixels) and the far
condition (a separation of 100 pixels), a difference of only
fifty pixels. It may be that this difference in distances
between the two conditions was sufficient but not optimal
for observing the differential effects of proximity on judged
similarity, an issue that we leave to future research.
We also note that category status may not be the only
indicator of type of judgment, as it has also been observed
that discrimination of color may differ depending on
whether the target colors are presented to the left visual field
or to the right (Gilbert et al., 2006). We thus asked whether
the same interplay of conceptual metaphor and type of
judgment would be evident when the type of judgment was
manipulated via visual field presentation, thus extending
from Gilbert et al’s (2006) findings. Our results suggest
that it may not. This may seem surprising, given the

0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1

Close
Far

-0.1
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7

Within

Between

Figure 2: Standardized similarity ratings for pairs of colors
as a function of categorical status and physical distance. For
within-category pairs, similarity ratings were lower when
the colors were presented close together than when they
were presented far apart (left panel); for between-category
pairs, similarity ratings were higher when the colors were
presented close together than when they were presented far
apart (right panel). Bars indicate standard errors.
We next ask whether visual field will interact with
proximity, thus extending the findings of Gilbert et al
(2006). Contrary to the predictions, we did not observe any
difference in the effect of proximity on judgments of color
similarity across the two visual fields. Presenting color
stimuli at different distances had the same effect in the right
visual field (conceptual) as the left visual field (perceptual),
(F (1, 64) = 1.05, p = .3100).

General Discussion
It has long been established that judged similarity between
pairs of color samples will be higher for within-category
pairs than for between-category pairs, despite similar
discrimination distances (Kay & Kempton, 1984).
However, Kay & Kempton argue that the two kinds of
comparisons – within- and between-category – are in fact
indicative of two kinds of processes – perceptual and
conceptual. In this study, we take up this hypothesis,
probing for further effects resulting from this distinction.
Recently, Casasanto (2007) found compelling evidence
that the metaphorical means with which we speak about
abstract concepts may affect perceptual judgments regarding
those concepts in a very different way from how it affects
conceptual judgments.
In his study examining the
conceptual metaphor SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY,
Casasanto found that for conceptual comparisons, seeing the
objects to be compared close together led to higher
similarity ratings than when the objects were presented far
apart; the converse was true in the case of perceptual
comparisons.
Given that both perceptual and conceptual processes are
implicitly available for judgments about color, the current
study tested whether Casasanto’s (2007) finding would
extend to judgments of the similarity between physically
different color samples. The results suggest that it may.
When participants perceived colors as coming from the
same lexical category (and, thereby, perceptually different

257

participants evidenced an influence of the metaphor
SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY, judging objects presented
close together as more similar than those presented far apart.
Although perceptual information about colors is
constantly available, we observed a similar distinction
between perceptual similarity judgments and conceptual
ones with lexical category status as the indicator for the type
of judgment being made. Our results thus corroborate and
extend Casasanto’s finding, and suggest a new way of
considering how we think about similarity in a variety of
domains. The influence of conceptual metaphor on the
abstract concept of similarity may be limited to situations
involving conceptual reasoning.

marked visual field difference in reaction time patterns for a
color discrimination task observed by Gilbert and his
colleagues (2006). We note in this regard that, while they
examined reaction time differences, we were looking at
differences in consciously-made similarity ratings. It is
possible that, given the conscious attention that enters into a
similarity rating, the conceptual-perceptual distinction that
arises from presentation to a single visual field may wash
out, as the judgments at issue likely occur after visual field
differences are resolved. It is possible – indeed likely – that
the consciously-available categorical status which was
varied in our materials plays the larger role in the conscious
act of judging similarity, an effect which was made evident
in situations where the information from categorical status
and that from visual field presentation represented a
mismatch. Given these possibilities, we plan to eliminate
the visual field manipulation from our future studies of the
interplay between physical proximity and judged similarity.
This may provide us both with a stronger manipulation of
physical proximity (due to the increased screen space
available for a single trial) and also with a cleaner measure
of any effects that proximity may have on consciously made
judgments of similarity.
Finally, the differences noted between the effect of
proximity for within- vs. between-category color pairs
suggests a possible solution to the long-standing
controversy regarding the possibility of Whorfian effects on
color perception and memory (e.g., Davidoff, Davies, &
Roberson, 1999; Heider, 1972; Lucy & Shweder, 1979, inter
alia). Given that there are two kinds of processing readily
available for colors – conceptual and perceptual – with
different patterns of effects, it may be that that these two
kinds of processing surface in different sets of tasks, or
when different portions of the color space are considered.
As a result, we may see Whorfian effects in just those
situations which invite conceptual processing, but not in
situations which invite perceptual processing. We leave
further consideration of this issue to future research.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank John V. Anderson for his help with
data collection, and the members of the Language and
Cognition Lab at UL Lafayette, in addition to Zachary Estes
and three anonymous reviewers, for comments and helpful
discussion.

References
Casasanto, D. (2007). Similarity and proximity: When does
close in space mean close in mind? Proceedings of 29th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Nashville, TN.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Roberson, D. (1999). Colour
categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 398, 203-204.
Gilbert, A.L., Regier, T., Kay, P., & Ivry, R.B. (2006).
Whorf hypothesis is supported in the right visual field but
not the left. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 103, 489-494.
Heider, E. R. (1972). Universals in color naming and
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93(1), 1020.
Kay, P. & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 86, 65-79.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980a). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980b). The metaphorical
structure of the human conceptual system. Cognitive
Science, 4, 195-208.
Lucy, J. A., & Shweder, R. A. (1979). Whorf and his critics:
Linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on color memory.
American Anthropologist, 81, 579-615.

Conclusions
Casasanto (2007) observed that when perceptual
information was available in the stimuli and was relevant to
the task, participants used it. In this situation proximity
may facilitate noticing small differences with the result
that objects presented close together are judged to be less
similar than those presented far apart. When perceptual
information was not available or was not relevant to the task,

258

