UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Disease Category on Diagnostic Problem Solving in Mammography

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61s3t6vp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Azevedo, Roger
Lewis, Gwenyth
Klatzky, Roberta
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Disease Category on Diagnostic Problem
Solving in Mammography
Roger Azevedo 1, Gwyneth Lewis 1, Roberta Klatzky 2 and Emily Siler 1
{razevedo, glewis1, easiler@memphis.edu}
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems
400 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN, 38152, USA

{klatzky@cmu.edu}
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Baker Hall, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA

category on radiologists’ mammogram interpretation during a
diagnostic problem solving task. Disease category refers to
ultimate diagnostic outcome, (i.e., benign or malignant).

Abstract
Research on diagnostic problem solving is devoted to
understanding the cognitive factors underlying the superior
performance exhibited by medical professionals in their
domain. In this study we analyzed think-aloud protocols and
video recordings of staff and resident radiologists as they
diagnosed mammograms during an interactive problem solving
task. Analyses revealed statistically significant differences in
radiologists’ usage of problem solving operators (PSOs) and
several performance measures between benign and malignant
breast disease cases. Results suggest that additional factors
outside of expertise should be considered in order to better
understand diagnostic problem solving in a medical domain.
The effects of disease type on performance and diagnostic
problem solving should guide future development of medical
tutoring systems.

Breast Disease
Mammography is considered the best means of detecting
breast cancer in its early stages because cancer can develop
long before any symptoms are felt. Abnormal mammograms
constitute about 5%-10% of routine screenings. Of this
percentage, most are diagnosed as benign, meaning the breast
tissue is not cancerous. Unfortunately, the error rate in
mammography is high. An estimated 10%-20% of breast
cancers are missed in routine screenings (American Cancer
Society [ACS], 2007). According to the Physician Insurers
Association of America (2002), radiology is the target of
more malpractice suits (33%) than any other specialty with
the top three reasons involving misreading mammograms,
underestimating seriousness of findings, and failing to detect
findings.
Serious training issues in the area of mammography require
attention. The importance of understanding problem solving
in this context is profound because radiologists are faced with
detecting potentially life threatening diseases on a daily basis.
As cognitive scientists we have taken a critical initial step
towards improving training in this area by conducting
research that examines the cognitive components that
constitute proficiency in mammogram interpretation. This
paper presents the results of a study designed to build a
comprehensive
characterization
of
differences
in
mammogram interpretation and the impact of disease
category on the diagnostic problem solving processes of
mammographers. However, space limitations preclude us
from providing detailed analyses about how to design medical
training systems, based on the results of this study.

Keywords: problem solving, expertise, medicine, think-aloud
protocols, diagnosis, intelligent tutoring systems

Introduction
Research on medical expertise has broadened our
understanding of the cognitive processes involved in medical
problem solving. Much of our understanding of medical
expertise is based on findings from medical text
comprehension studies and existing expertise studies in nonvisual medical domains (e.g., Norman et al., 2006). Relatively
little is known about the functioning of expertise during
visual medical tasks (Azevedo, 1997, Azevedo et al., 2007;
Faremo, 1997; Lesgold et al., 1981, 1988; Rogers, 1992),
such as interpreting and diagnosing x-rays in mammography.
Little emphasis is placed on the role of case type on
performance and the diagnostic process. Previous research
has documented the effect of case difficulty on clinical
reasoning (Brooks, Norman, & Allen, 1991). Although
experts are distinguished from novices by their forward
reasoning approach, this is only true for more difficult cases.
Experts tend to rely on pattern recognition when solving
easier cases. Other factors impacting diagnostic problem
solving have included the order of data presentation (Bergus,
Chapman, Gjerde, & Elstein, 1995), the amount of detail
presented in a case description (Redelmeir, Koehler,
Liberman, & Tversky, 1995), and familiarity of the material
(Bordage, 1999). The present study contributes to an
important area of research by examining the impact of disease

Method
Participants
A total of 13 participants drawn from the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center teaching hospitals took part in the
study including nine staff radiologists and four radiology
residents. The radiologists had MD degrees and Board
Certification in radiology. The radiology residents also had

577

MD degrees but were on rotation at one of the teaching
hospitals. In this study, we decided to combine the two
groups of medical professional into one group given the
following constraints: (1) small sample size in each group, (2)
limited ability to conduct statistical analyses given (1), and
(3) our main interest in examining the role of disease category
on diagnostic problem solving and other performance
measures.

participants was about 76 pages of single spaced text (about 6
pages per participant) and total word length was over 33,000
words (average of 2,538.5 words per participant). The next
section presents a detailed description of the coding scheme
and the results of its application to all 130 transcribed and
segmented protocols (13 participants solving 10 cases).
Segmented protocols and inter-rater reliability measures are
provided.

Benign and Malignant Breast Disease Cases

Coding Scheme Azevedo and colleagues’ (1997, 2007)
coding scheme was used for the current analysis with a few
additions. The coding scheme is based on three sources: (1)
the content analysis of mammography, (2) theoretical and
methodological articles (Chi, 1997, 2006a, 2006b; Ericsson,
2006; Ericsson & Simon, 1993), and (3) the results of
previous studies in medical cognition (Hassebrock & Prietula,
1992; Patel & Ramoni, 1997), and chest radiography
(Faremo, 1997; Lesgold et al., 1981, 1988; Rogers, 1992).
Azevedo’s (1997) coding scheme consists of three major
categories: knowledge states, problem solving operators, and
control processes (Anderson & Labiere, 1998; Newell &
Simon, 1972). All are described below.

Ten breast disease cases were used with an additional case
used for practice. A staff radiologist worked with the team
and selected cases from her teaching files, none of which
were previously viewed by the participants. She served as the
consulting expert and did not participate in the experiment.
Each case comprised a brief clinical history and four
mammograms including the craniocaudal (CC) and
mediolateral (MLO) views of the left and right breasts and
any additional data necessary to provide a complete diagnosis
(e.g., spot compression, ultrasound scan, previous
mammograms, etc.). For this study, a set of 10 cases was
selected that included five benign and five malignant diseases
(as confirmed by pathology reports). The cases also included
common abnormalities as well as atypical ones that are
infrequently encountered in mammography. Abnormalities
ranged from ones that were fairly obvious to detect (e.g.,
large mass) to those that required the use of a magnifying
glass to detect (e.g., cluster of microcalcifications).

Knowledge states. Knowledge states include radiological
observations, radiological findings, and diagnoses
representing the hierarchical nature of medical knowledge in
breast diseases and mammography (Evans & Gadd, 1989).
Radiological observations are units of information that are
recognized as potentially relevant in the problem-solving
context (i.e., information from clinical histories and
mammograms), but do not constitute clinically useful facts
(e.g., presence of dense fibroglandular tissue on the
mammograms). Radiological findings are units of
information that are recognized as potentially relevant in the
problem-solving context (i.e., information from clinical
histories and mammograms) and which also constitute
clinically useful facts (e.g., a cluster of pleomorphic
calcifications on the mammograms). Diagnoses include
disease types at different levels of abstraction, from prediagnostic labels to definitive diagnoses (e.g., malignant with
in situ ductal carcinoma).

Experimental Procedure
Participants were tested individually; the experimenter
provided each participant with a one-page handout of
instructions for the think-aloud diagnostic task (i.e., You will
be presented with ten breast disease cases to diagnose. Each
case will be comprised of a brief clinical history and a
corresponding set of mammograms. For each case, please
read the clinical history out loud, examine and describe the
findings as you would normally. Suggest further examinations
if appropriate. Please think out loud throughout the entire
diagnostic process, that is, verbalize all comments and
impressions you have as you diagnose each case. Please let
me know if you would like to review additional data during
the diagnostic process”). The experimenter then presented
each participant with the same cases selected from the
consulting expert’s teaching files (i.e., first with the practice
case and subsequently with the 10 cases with order varied
across participants). Participants could request additional data
from the experimenter (e.g. an ultrasound image) during the
diagnostic task. Video and audio data were collected during
the entire experimental session. No time constraints were
imposed.

Problem-solving operators (PSOs). Problem-solving
operators are used to generate or instantiate states of
radiological knowledge. Eleven basic types of operators were
identified that characterize distinct segments of problemsolving behavior. They are inferred cognitive processes that
modify, add, and/or eliminate existing or currently active
knowledge states and produce new, active knowledge states.
The operators reflect the knowledge and problem-solving
behaviors required to successfully complete the diagnostic
task. The conceptual operations involve actions that are or are
not concurrently accompanied by verbalizations. For this
study, a new operator termed Data Requisition was created to
supplement the original coding scheme as this study included
an additional interactive component involving soliciting the
experimenter for more data.

Analyzing the Think-Aloud Protocols
Audio and video data were transcribed by a trained research
assistant according to the transcription conventions of
Bracewell & Breuleux (1993) to ensure accuracy of lexical
and syntactic structures. Overall protocol length for all

578

Reading time. Reading time was the total time in seconds a
participant spent reading the clinical case history. A
component of scanning time, these data were obtained from
the time stamp on the video and the session.

Control processes. Control processes included Goals (the use
of the future tense to indicate an intended action), diagnostic
Planning (the planning of subsequent examinations and their
possible interpretations), and Meta-reasoning (a participant
conducts a self-evaluation of the quality of the evolving
diagnostic strategy). For the current study, Goal was
categorized as a type of problem-solving operator for the
current analysis (see previous paragraph).

Scanning time. Scanning time was coded as the time in
seconds a participant took to remove the mammograms from
the envelope, arrange the mammograms on the viewbox, and
inspect the mammograms with the naked eye and/or
magnifying glass up until the participant made their first
utterance. This data was obtained from the time stamp on the
video and the session.

Application of the Coding Scheme The consulting
radiologist was video recorded while solving each of 11 cases
(one practice case and 10 additional cases). A research
assistant with training in Azevedo’s (1997) coding scheme
independently coded the 130 protocols (13 participants x 10
cases) for problem solving operators. The experimenter recoded 70% of the protocols to establish inter-rater reliability.
Agreement surpassed 97% (1,117 out 1,146 PSOs) and
disagreement was resolved through regular discussion. The
observations, findings, and diagnoses gleaned from the video
data served as the gold standard by which participant
observations were compared for accuracy. Problem-solving
operators were coded using an augmented version of Azevedo
and colleagues’ (1997, 2007) coding scheme. All of the
measures, including incidental reading and scan time, are
described below.

Results
The data were analyzed to determine the effects of disease
category (benign, malignant) on participants’ diagnostic
performance. Inferential statistics were conducted on the
proportions (based on frequency data) of problem-solving
operators and performance measures.

Performance Measures
Several ANOVAs were performed on participants’
performance data, including scanning time, reading time,
findings and observations accuracy, and diagnostic accuracy
to determine the effects of disease category. The performance
data of each participant were expressed as proportions under
case type. Results revealed statistically significant results,
based on disease category, for findings and observations
accuracy and diagnostic accuracy (see Table 1). Participants
accurately detected significantly more observations and
findings on malignant cases. They also provided significantly
more correct diagnoses for benign diseases (i.e., misses
exceeded false alarms). Overall, participants did not
significantly differ in the amount of time to construct an
initial representation of a case or the overall amount of time
necessary to diagnose each case.

Diagnoses. Diagnoses were coded as either correct or
incorrect based on their consistency with the consulting
expert’s diagnoses. Correct diagnoses matched the consulting
expert’s diagnosis, even if at different levels of abstraction
(e.g., carcinoma and suspicious for malignancy) and was
given a score of 1 for a match with the consultant’s diagnosis.
For example, a participant’s diagnosis of infiltrating ductal
carcinoma matches the consultant’s diagnosis for that
particular case. Incorrect diagnoses did not match the
consultant’s diagnosis and was given a score of 0. For
example, a participant gave a diagnosis of microcalcifications
while the correct diagnosis provided by the consultant for the
same case was benign mass. It should be noted that the exact
diagnoses provided by the consultant are based on
postmortem pathology reports.

Table 1: Accuracy measures by disease category.
Performance Measure

Observations. Observations were identified in the protocols
for each participant. An observation was given a score of 1 if
it closely matched the gold standard (e.g., the observation
heterogeneously dense tissue closely matches rather dense
tissue in both breasts) and 0 if it did not.

Mean scanning time (sec.)
Mean reading time (sec.)
Findings & observations
accuracy*
Diagnostic accuracy*

Findings. Similar to observations, findings were identified in
the protocols and compared with the findings of the
consulting radiologist. Correct findings were given a score of
1 if they closely matched the gold standard set by the
consulting radiologist and 0 if they did not.

Disease Category
Benign
Malignant
(n=5)
(n=5)
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
46.12(23.14)
206.28(99.2)

51.65(34.25)
234.53(105.80)

0.61(0.46)
0.62(0.21)

0.73(0.29)
0.53(0.30)

Note: * p < .05

Problem Solving Operators (PSOs)

No codes. Protocols containing utterances that did not fit with
any of the operational problem-solving definitions were
coded as no code or rare instances when participant speech
was inaudible. No codes comprised 11% of the data and were
excluded from the analysis.

The coded problem solving operators were tallied for all cases
under the categories of PSO type, participant number, and
case number, and subsequently converted into proportions by
case and participant. Individual ANOVAs were performed on

579

views. Additionally, this operator may be used to test
hypotheses about the potential cause or diagnosis either to
confirm the location or existence of a suspected finding.
Higher prevalence of this operator for benign cases may again
be due to the iterative nature in solving benign cases.

each PSO, by disease category (benign, malignant). Results
revealed significant differences (p<.05) for five PSOs,
including Data Classification, Data Explanation, Data
Requisition, Hypothesis Evaluation, and Hypothesis
Generation. Details are discussed below in terms of
malignancy type (see Table 2 for a full list of the proportional
problem solving operator usage in benign and malignant
cases). Additionally, the results yielded a model of the
diagnostic process involving the order of PSO application.

Malignant Cases. Significantly greater proportions of
Hypothesis Evaluation and Hypothesis Generation were
observed in malignant cases. Hypothesis Evaluation occurs
after a hypothesis has been generated. This is a sort of
“follow-up” procedure used to assess how well
mammographic features measure support a generated
hypothesis. This may entail confirmation or rejection of a
hypothesis (which may lead to the generation of alternative
hypotheses). There may be a higher proportion of this
operator for malignant cases simply because there is a greater
proportion of hypothesis generation. Hypothesis Generation
is typically observed in the later stages of mammography
diagnosis as it frequently occurs only after mammographic
features have been identified, characterized, and classified.
Typically, a hypothesis consists of a preliminary statement
regarding a mammogram’s diagnosis. The operator may be
more common in solving malignant cases because malignant
cases require less iteration between the earlier problem
solving states. Diagnostic training is assumed to focus on
malignant pattern recognition, whereas the recognition of
benign features may be less emphasized.

Table 2: Mean proportional problem solving operator usage
based on disease category.
Operator

Data Acquisition
Data Assessment
Data Classification*
Data Comparison
Data Examination
Data Explanation*
Data Exploration
Data Identification
Data Requisition*
Goal
Hypothesis Evaluation*
Hypothesis Generation*
Recommendation
Summarization

Disease Category
Benign
Malignant
(n=5)
(n=5)
Mean(SD)
Mean(SD)
0.10 (0.05)
0.10 (0.06)
0.04 (0.07)
0.02 (0.04)
0.07 (0.07)
0.04 (0.06)
0.03 (0.04)
0.04 (0.05)
0.19 (0.10)
0.19 (0.10)
0.06 (0.07)
0.02 (0.04)
0.18 (0.11)
0.14 (0.09)
0.01 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
0.17 (0.10)
0.13 (0.07)
0.03 (0.06)
0.02 (0.04)
0.01 (0.04)
0.03 (0.05)
0.01 (0.02)
0.12 (0.09)
0.07 (0.07)
0.07 (0.05)
0.04 (0.06)
0.04 (0.07)

Problem Solving Model Based on Disease Type
The study yielded an interpretive model of the problem
solving stages and a representation of the associated problem
solving operators by disease type. The number of instances
associated with this model will not be discussed for the
purposes of this paper. The process for benign-case solving
(BCS) and the process for malignant-case solving (MCS)
initially follow the same linear sequence during the early
stages of the problem solving process. These stages are as
follows:
First, the clinical patient history is read to acquire patient
information (Data Acquisition) that provides the basis for the
next step of requesting additional data or mammograms (Data
Requisition) followed by positioning the data on the viewbox
and assessing the technical quality (Data Assessment). A goal
may then be verbalized (Goal) that is pursued through a
visual scan of the data to identify relevant mammographic
features (Data Examination). The features are then
characterized on the basis of their visual properties (Data
Exploration) that determine the next step of classifying the
data (Data Classification).
At this point, the BCS process follows a different path than
the MCS process. The BCS process follows Data
Classification by stating the pathophysiological cause (Data
Explanation) and then iterates back to Data Requisition
followed by the linear steps of placing, identifying, scanning,
examining, exploring, and classifying the new data. During
these subsequent steps, goals may be verbalized (Goal) and
pursued by comparing the new data with previous data (Data

Note: * p < .05
Benign Cases. Significantly greater proportions of the
operators Data Classification, Data Explanation, and Data
Requisition were observed in benign cases. The operator Data
Classification typically occurs after mammographic features
(findings and observations) have been identified,
characterized, and/or compared with other mammographic
views. This result may be interpreted as due to the importance
of detecting all potentially relevant features. Mammograms
with benign diagnoses may thus entail a more exhaustive
search, possibly involving iterative assessments in order to
satisfactorily rule out disease. Data Explanation is associated
with interpreting the significance of mammographic data
(e.g., clinical history, findings) in terms of the likely
underlying physiological cause. Greater usage of this operator
when solving benign cases may, as previously hypothesized,
be due to the ambiguity in solving benign cases. Diagnosing
benign mammograms may involve greater iteration between
states than when diagnosing malignant mammograms, which
may be due to the crucial nature of identifying potentially
significant or clinically relevant mammographic features. The
assumption is that diagnostic uncertainty in benign cases
leads to a wider range of potential pathophysiological causes.
Data Requisition involves soliciting the experimenter for
additional data (e.g., spot compression views, ultrasound
image) to compare or confirm the existence, location, or
appearance of mammographic features between or across

580

Comparison) that will lead to further classification and
explanation of the data.

Conclusion
The results contribute to an emerging body of research aimed
at understanding the cognitive factors underlying diagnostic
problem solving of breast disease cases and the differences in
diagnostic accuracy based on disease category. Future
research may aim towards better understanding of the role of
medical data in diagnostic problem solving. Our study
suggests that findings and observations are far less often
detected in malignant cases than in benign cases. This could
be attributed to mammographers’ awareness of the high
stakes
involved
in
diagnosing
mammograms.
Mammographers may spend more time on benign cases to
ensure that all potentially malignant features are detected.
Understanding of detection differences when solving benign
and malignant cases may benefit from eye tracking studies to
determine whether case type is responsible for detection
differences or simply reporting differences. Our study also
suggests that diagnostic accuracy is higher for malignant
cases. Are malignant cases simply easier to solve? This is a
difficult question considering that detection of
mammographic features was higher for benign cases. These
questions demonstrate a need for future research in this area.
Future research should strive to have researchers from
various fields of cognitive science with divergent theoretical
and methodological backgrounds contribute to our
understanding of disease type in medical problem solving by
conducting: (1) eye tracking studies to assess detection of
benign and malignant features and therefore examine search
processes and visual chunking and their relation to problem
solving processes and diagnostic accuracy, (2) longitudinal
studies to assess the development of expertise in medical
problem solving skills and expertise, (3) conversational and
gestural analyses of teaching rounds focusing on how staff
radiologists train medical students and residents to problem
solve, and how they provide different types of scaffolding to
correct different types of performance issues (e.g., strategies
for reducing differential diagnoses), and (4) utilize these
performance data and the problem solving model to re-design
medical training systems. In sum, future research should
continue the effort to further our understanding of
mammogram interpretation of benign and malignant cases.

Figure 1. Problem solving model for benign (BCS) and
malignant (MCS) breast disease cases.

Acknowledgments

Additionally, the process may again iterate to Data
Requisition and repeat. The MCS process, however, proceeds
to generating a hypothesis to explain the classified feature
(Hypothesis Generation). The hypothesis is then tested and
evaluated (Hypothesis Evaluation), which if rejected may
lead to further instances of Hypothesis Generation. The BCS
process eventually progresses to Hypothesis Generation and
Hypothesis Evaluation after some iteration. Final steps in the
process involve summarizing the relevant information
(Summarization) and specifying treatment or follow-up
procedures (Data Recommendation) if necessary.

This research has been funded by a postdoctoral fellowship
by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada (SSHRC) awarded to the first author. The authors
would like to thank the Dr. Jules Sumkin from the UPMC and
Magee-Womens Hospital, and the radiologists and residents
for their participation.

References
American Cancer Society (ACS). Breast Cancer Facts &
Figures 2007-2008. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, Inc.
Anderson, J. & Lebiere, C. (1998). Atomic components of
thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Azevedo, R., Faremo, S., & Lajoie, S.P. (August, 2007). Expertnovice differences in mammogram interpretation. In D. S.

581

Ericsson, K. (2006). Protocol analysis and expert thought:
Concurrent
verbalizations
of
thinking
during
experts’performance on representative tasks. In K. Ericsson,
N. Charness, P. Feltovich, & R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance
(pp. 223-241). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Press.
Ericsson, K., & Simon, H. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal
reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Evans, D., & Gadd, C. (1989). Managing coherence and context
in medical problem-solving discourse. In D. Evans & V.
Patel (Eds.), Cognitive science in medicine: Biomedical
modeling (pp. 211-255). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Faremo, S. (1997). Novice diagnostic reasoning in a visual
medical domain: Implications for the design of a computerbased instructional system for undergraduate medical
education. Unpublished master’s thesis, Concordia
University, Montréal, Canada.
Hassebrock, F., & Prietula, M. (1992). A protocol-based coding
scheme for the analysis of medical reasoning. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 37, 613-52.
Lajoie, S., & Azevedo, R. (2000). Cognitive tools for medical
informatics. In S.P. Lajoie (Ed.), Computers as cognitive
tools II: No more walls: Theory change, paradigm shifts
and their influence on the use of computers for instructional
purposes (pp. 247-271). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lesgold, A., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R., & Wang, Y. (1981). The
acquisition of perceptual diagnostic skill in radiology
(Tech.Rep.No.PDS-1). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh,
Learning Research and Development Center.
Lesgold, A., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R., Klopfer, D.,
& Wang, Y. (1988). Expertise in a complex skill:
Diagnosing x-ray pictures. In M. Chi, R. Glaser & M. Farr
(Eds.), The nature of expertise (pp. 311-342). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Norman, G., Eva, K., Brooks, L., & Hamstra, S. (2006).
Expertise in medicine and surgery. In K. Ericsson,
N.Charness, P. Feltovich, & R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance
(pp. 339-353). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Press.
Patel, V., & Ramoni, M. (1997). Cognitive models of directional
inference in expert medical reasoning. In P. Feltovich, K.
Ford & R. Hoffman (Eds.), Expertise in context: Human
and machine (pp.67-99). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Redelmeier, D. A., Koehler, D.J., Liberman, T. V., &
Tversky A. (1995). Probability judgment in medicine:
Discounting unspecified probabilities. Medical Decision
Making, 15, 227–230.
Rogers, E. (1992). Visual interaction: A link between perception
and problem solving. Unpublished dissertation, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
Taylor, P. (2006). From patient data to medical knowledge:
Principles and practice of health informatics. London,UK:
Blackwell.
The World Health Report: Working Together for Health. 2006.
The World Health Organization (WHO).

McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 65-70). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Azevedo, R. (1997). Expert problem solving in mammogram
interpretation: A visual cognitive task. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
Azevedo, R. (1998). Expert problem solving in a visual medical
domain. In M. A. Gernsbacher, & S. J. Derry (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 72-77). Mahwah,NJ:
Erlbaum.
Azevedo, R., & Lajoie, S. (1998). The cognitive basis for the
design of a mammography interpretation tutor. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 9, 32-44.
Azevedo, R., Faremo, S., & Lajoie, S. P. (August, 2007). Expertnovice differences in mammogram interpretation. In D. S.
McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 65-70). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Bergus, G. R., Chapman, G. B., Gjerde, C., & Elstein, A. S.
(1995). Clinical reasoning about new symptoms despite
preexisting disease: Sources of error and order effects.
Family Medicine, 27, 314-320.
Bordage, G. (1999). Why did I miss the diagnosis? Some
cognitive explanations and educational implications.
Academic Medicine, 74, 8138-8143.
Bracewell, R., & Breuleux, A. (1993). Substance and romance in
analyzing think-aloud protocols. In P. Smagorinsky(Ed.),
Speaking about writing: Reflections on research
methodology (pp. 55-88). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Brooks, L. R., Norman, G. R., & Allen, S. W. (1991). The Role
of Specific Similarity in a Medical Diagnostic Task. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 278-287.
Carney, P., Yi, J., Abraham, L., & Miglioretti, D. (2007).
Reactions to uncertainty and the accuracy of diagnostic
mammography. Society of General Internal Medicine, 22,
234-241.
Chi, M. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data:
A practical guide. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6,271315.
Chi, M. T. H. (2006a). Two approaches to the study of experts’
characteristics. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J.
Feltovich & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge
handbook of expertise and expert performance (pp. 21–30).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chi, M. T. H. (2006b). Laboratory methods for assessing
experts’ and novices’ knowledge. In K. A. Ericsson, N.
Charness, P. J. Feltovich & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance
(pp. 167–184). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crowley R S, Tseytlin E, Jukic D. ReportTutor - An intelligent
tutoring system that uses a natural language interface. AMIA
Annual Symposium Proceedings (2005), 171-5.
Crowley, R. S., Legowski, E., Medvedeva, O., Tseytlin, E., Roh,
E., & Jukic, D. (2007). Evaluation of an intelligent tutoring
system in pathology: Effects of external representation on
performance gains, metacognition, and acceptance. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association, 14, 182190.

582

