UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Strategy Behind Belief Revision: A Matter of Judging Probability or the Use of Mental
Models?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5b28d689

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Wolf, Ann G.
Knauff, Markus

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Strategy Behind Belief Revision: A Matter of Judging Probability
or the Use of Mental Models?
Ann G. Wolf (ann.g.wolf@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Department of Experimental Psychology, Otto-Behaghel-Straße 10F
D-35394 Gießen, Germany

Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Department of Experimental Psychology, Otto-Behaghel-Straße 10F
D-35394 Gießen, Germany
Ponens (MP) is the logic inference rule of the sort ‘if p then
q’ where conclusion q is inferred from categorical statement
p. Similarly, Modus Tollens (MT) is the logic inference rule
of the sort ‘if p then q’ where conclusion not-p is inferred
from the categorical statement not-q. They found that for
both MP and MT inferences, the preferred change was
disbelieving the conditional statement. They ascribed this
finding to syntactical factors. Politzer and Carles (2001)
investigated whether the conditional form of the first
premise in MP and MT problems influences the relative
entrenchment of the conditional and categorical premises by
also using disjunctive and conjunctive syllogisms. In line
with Elio and Pelletier’s (1997) findings, the conditional
premise was revised more often than the categorical
premise. Because the disjunctive and conjunctive major
premises were also more questioned than their minor
counterpart, the authors argue that is not the conditional
nature of the major premise leading to these revision
choices but its status quo of being the major premise, by
which they mean that due to its compound nature its more
likely to be the source of error. Elio (1997; second
experiment) also found that the conditional statement was
believed less than the categorical. The accounts put forward
by Elio and Pelletier (1997) and Politzer and Carles (2001)
for explaining the deeper entrenchment of the conditional
are context independent (Hasson & Johnson-Laird, 2003). A
point to remark here is that although they used non-basic
inference problems and the accounts offered seem plausible
within the context of their studies, the thematic content of
their premises were science fictional. In real life, however,
people reason about more mundane issues. Byrne and
Walsh (2005) argued that relative entrenchment is a
function of familiarity. They found that with problems in an
unfamiliar domain, people tended to believe the categorical
premise more. In contrast, with familiar problems people
tended to believe the conditional more. The reason for this,
they say, is that familiar conditionals may express rules and
laws that are deeply entrenched and therefore people rather
choose to revise the categorical fact. However, the familiar
conditionals they used had a high intrinsic probability close
to being factual of nature, therefore stripped from any
subjective probability. Not all familiar statements express
rules and laws and a familiar conditional need not
necessarily be high in probability. With respect to the

Abstract
Research in the field of human reasoning has shown repeatedly
that people find it reasonably easy to detect inconsistencies. The
question that still remains is how people revise their beliefs to
undo these inconsistencies. We report two experiments in which
subjects had to make belief revision choices on modus ponens
(MP) and modus tollens (MT) sets of problems that contained
conditionals with different levels of probability. After the final
statement of each set, which was stated to be true, they had to
decide which of the first two statements they believed more. The
results showed that with high and low probability problems,
subjects revised their beliefs as a function of the probability of the
conditional. However, when the conditional had a near 50%
chance of occurring, the pattern of belief revision more resembled
the mismatch principle as suggested by the mental model theory.
Thus, people use different strategies when revising their beliefs
depending on whether they are guided by semantics or mental
models.
Keywords: Belief revision, conditional probability, mental
model theory, mismatch principle.

Introduction
Belief revision is the process by which one alters his or
her belief state in the face of contradicting evidence. In the
past, the topic of belief revision was reserved for logicians
and philosophers to be concerned about (e.g. Gärdenfors,
1988). Several opposing theories have been offered in the
past to explain the underlying process of belief revision. The
most long-standing theory of belief revision is that of
epistemic entrenchment, developed within the field of
artificial intelligence (e.g. Gärdenfors, 1992). This notion
holds that some pieces of information are more entrenched
and are accordingly more easily believed than others. There
have been some findings suggesting that epistemic
entrenchment plays a role in belief revision. However, it is
not clear exactly what defines epistemic entrenchment.
What the current study aims to investigate is whether
probability of conditionals serves as a kind of epistemic
entrenchment in belief revision and to contrast this with the
mental model theory of belief revision (Johnson-Laird,
2006; Johnson-Laird, Girotto, and Legrenzi, 2004). Elio and
Pelletier (1997) were one of the first to incorporate the
theory of belief revision into human deductive reasoning.
They explored conditional reasoning wherein Modus
831

unfamiliar domain, people might find it difficult to assign
any level of probability to the conditionals because they
cannot imagine the situation sketched before them.
Despite these findings and explanations, what is
still missing is a firm theoretical basis for human belief
revision performance in conditional reasoning. The first to
offer such a theory were Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002)
which will be outlined in the next section.

The Probability of Conditionals
A number of authors have claimed that people represent
ordinary conditionals psychologically (e.g. George, 1995;
Liu, Lo, & Wu, 1996; Oaksford & Chater, 2001; Stevenson
& Over, 1995). People interpret a conditional “if p then q”
as ‘what is the probability of q given p’ and this seems to
affect their reasoning strategy. For example, in a study by
Liu, et al. (1996), subjects had to decide whether the
conclusion followed logically from the premises on valid
and invalid inference problems. They found that the higher
the perceived sufficiency of the problems, the higher the
correct responses. In a follow-up test, they also found a
positive relationship between the probability judgment of
the conditional and the endorsement of the set of premises.
Evans, Handley, & Over (2003) have shown in a similar
fashion that people are less likely to endorse a conditional
when the antecedent has a low probability.
The influence of probability of conditionals on
reasoning came to be known as the conditional probability
hypothesis, first implied by Marcus and Rips (1977) and
later further developed by other researchers (e.g. Over,
Hadjichristidis, Evans, Handley, & Sloman, 2007). The
conditional probability hypothesis is grounded on the
conditional subjective probability, P (q|p), which is known
as the Ramsey test (Edgington, 1995, as cited in Oberauer &
Wilhelm, 2003). This test implies that people judge the
conditional the same as the conditional probability. Several
authors have contrasted the predictions of the mental model
theory with those of the conditional probability hypothesis
on reasoning tasks. The findings in these studies supported
the conditional probability hypothesis and not the material
conditional hypothesis. This was the case in studies using
basic conditionals (see Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002) with
specified frequency distributions (Evans, et al., 2003;
Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003) as well as in studies using nonbasic conditionals (Over & Evans, 2003; Over et al., 2007).

The Mental Model Theory of Belief Revision
According to the mental model theory of reasoning,
people construct a set of mental models of the possibilities
that the situation embedded in the premises might
represent. The key assumption of the mental model theory
is that mental models represent only what is true according
to the premises, and not what is false, which is called ‘The
principle of truth’ (Johnson-Laird, et al., 2004). Initially,
people construct only one possible mental model, the
conjunctive p & q, which is called the explicit model.
They do however make ‘mental footnotes` of further
implicit models that if fully fleshed out represent the
remaining false possibilities, which are “not-p and q” and
“not-p and not-q”. Johnson-Laird and his colleagues posit
that the first step in reasoning is detecting an inconsistency
among a set of premises (Johnson-Laird et al., 2004). They
put forward the principle of models of consistency which
holds that people search for a mental model that holds a
possibility in which all premises are true (Legrenzi,
Girotto, & Johnson-Laird, 2003). If they find such a model
then the set of premises is judged as consistent, otherwise
it is regarded inconsistent.
How does the mental model explain how people
resolve inconsistencies? The model theory uses a so-called
mismatch principle to explain and predict which of the two
statements will be revised. According to this principle, the
statement that will be revised or believed less is that
statement, whether it be conditional or categorical, that has
a mental model that not only mismatches but also conflicts
with the mental model of the contradicting fact (Hasson &
Johnson-Laird, 2003; Johnson-Laird, 2006; Johnson-Laird,
et al., 2004). With MP problems, the contradicting fact
would be not-q, this mismatches and conflicts with the
mental model of the conditional (p q) and is therefore
discarded. With MT problems, the contradicting fact is p,
which matches the model of the conditional and therefore
people would revise the categorical instead. Johnson-Laird
and his colleagues (Johnson-Laird, 2006; Johnson-Laird et
al., 2004) demonstrate the strength of their theory by
harmonizing the results of former studies with the
mismatch principle. For example, Elio and Pelletier (1997)
found that the belief revision was a function of which
counter fact followed the belief set. When it was a
negation of the consequent, then subjects tended to reject
the conditional and believe the categorical statement more.
However, when the counter fact was of the form p then
they believed the conditional statement more.

The Current Study
What we intend to do here is to extend the conditional
probability hypothesis into the research on belief revision
and test it against the mental model theory of belief
revision. We propose here that if people judge conditionals
in a probabilistic manner, they also should take the
probability of the conditional into account in their process
of belief revision and base their reasoning thereon. We will
use sets of conditional problems statements that relate to
real-life situations with differing levels of probability.
We hypothesize that when the “if p then q” relationship in
the conditional has a clear high or low chance of occurring
then people will use this information as a sort of heuristic to
guide their belief revision. When the premises give off no
sign of which one would be more probable and thus more
believable, people will turn to the use of mental models to
resolve the inconsistency as they would with basic
conditionals. Two experiments were carried out to test the
mismatch principle and the conditional probability
hypothesis in belief revision. The first experiment
832

the MT set of premises, the third sentence was always an
affirmation. For example:

investigated whether people use subjective probability as a
means to guide their revision choice. To test this, we used
inference problems with either high or low probability
conditionals. We expect that people will believe the
conditional more when it expresses a high probability and
the categorical more when it expresses a low probability.
Further, when the probability of the conditional is close to
50%, then people will convert to the use of mental models
to guide their revision choice.

Example of a low probability MP:
Example of a high probability MT:
If Knut goes to work, then he will
If Christian is fishing, then he is
take a hot air balloon. (p q)
quiet. (p q)
Knut goes to work. (p)
Christian is not quiet. (⌐q)
He does not take a hot air balloon. (⌐q) Christian is fishing. (p)

The presentation of the 32 problem sets was randomized
across the subjects.
Procedure. Subjects received instructions on the computer
screen. They were explained that they would be presented
with three statements one at a time and that the truth status
of the first two statements was uncertain but that the third
statement, which was inconsistent with the first two, was
certainly true. Their task was then to decide which of the
first two statements they believed more. Four practice trials
preceded the actual experiment. They had the possibility to
take a short break after each set of premises. Both the
conditional and the categorical statement appeared in white
font colour in the middle of a black screen. After reading
each statement, the subjects had to push a spacebar-like
button to continue. Next, the inconsistent statement that was
known to be true appeared on the screen; the fact was
printed in red font to signify its counterfactual nature and to
aware the subjects they had to make a belief revision choice.
For that, they had to press one of two buttons, depending
which of the two previous statements they believed more,
the conditional or the categorical. The designation of the left
and right button to conditional and categorical statements
was counterbalanced across subjects.

Experiment 1
Methods
Subjects. Thirty students (17 females, 13 males) aged 19 to
31 from the University of Giessen participated in this study
in exchange for monetary compensation.
Materials and Design. The conditionals used in the
experiment were taken from a pool of 36 conditional
statements. These conditional statements were rated for
probability by another group of students that were taken
from the same population. These students were recruited in
seminars and tutorials of a first year course and were tested
in the class rooms. They were given a booklet that consisted
of 36 individual conditional “If-then” statements, each
presented on a separate page. On the first page of the
booklet, they read the following instruction (translated from
German):
“On each of the following pages you will be presented with a
statement, which is uttered by a person. A rating scale is presented
under each statement. On this scale, please rate the possibility that
this person is speaking the truth. 0% means “very unlikely” and
100% means “very likely”. Please rate the statements in the order
they are being presented to you. Please do not go back to previous
statements.”

Results and Discussion
Mean percentages of belief revision choices in the four
conditions are depicted in Figure 1.

Following Girotto and Johnson-Laird’s (2004)
suggestion, we asked the participants how possible it is
that the statement is true. The statements were randomly
presented to the subjects and they were allowed to work at
their own speed.
Descriptive statistics were run over all the statements to
find the eight statements with the lowest mean and the
eight statements with the highest mean. The overall mean
of the low-probability statements was 7.19 and the overall
mean of the high-probability statements was 88.44. A
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test showed that the difference
between the two means was highly significant, z = 11.030, p < .000. From each of these 16 statements, a set
of MP problems and a set of MT problems were generated
resulting in 32 problem sets in total. Thus, we used a 2 x 2
design with Inference problem (MP vs. MT) and
Probability of the conditional (low vs. high) as the
independent within subject factors. The dependent factors
were revision choice and decision time. The presentation
software package Super lab 4.0 was used for presenting
the items on the computer screen. For the MP set of
premises, the third sentence was always a negation and for

Mean Responses (%)

100
80

Conditional

60

Categorical

40
20
0
MPH

MPL

MTH

MTL

Figure 1: Belief revision choices in percentages. Notes:
MPH = Modus Ponens high-probability; MPL = Modus
Ponens low-probability; MTH = Modus Tollens highprobability; MTL= Modus Tollens low-probability.
We used paired-samples t-tests to analyse the impact of
probability on belief revision. The conditional statement
was believed significantly more often when the MP
833

conditional probability hypothesis work in tandem. This
might explain the fast reaction times with the highprobability MT problems; it was most likely the easiest to
perform for the subjects. With the low-probability MT
problems, subjects chose to believe the categorical
statement more than the conditional, which is in accordance
with the conditional probability hypothesis. However, the
mental model of the given fact (p) does not fit the mental
model of the categorical statement (not-q). This conflict
could account for the high reaction time with the low
probability MT problems.
To test whether probability-based reasoning and
the mismatch principle represent two different strategies, we
conducted a second experiment with inference problems
taken from the first experiment, intermixed with MP and
MT inference problems that had a mean probability score
close to 50% in the rating study. If indeed the two strategies
are both in play and the high versus low probability of the
conditionals overruled the strategy according to the
mismatch principle, then subject should resolve the
inconsistencies on these so-called ‘neutral’ probability
problems by revising their belief with the help of mental
models. This means that with MP neutral-probability
problems, the subjects should choose to believe the
categorical statement more because the mental model of the
fact (not-q) conflicts with the mental model of the
conditional statement (p q). Contrary, with MT neutralprobability problems, subjects are predicted to believe the
conditional statement more because its mental model
matches the one of the presented fact (p). The belief revision
choices with the low- and high-probability problems should
show the same trend as in experiment 1.

Reaction Time (s)

statement had a high probability (M =61.67%, SD = 30.07)
than when it had a low probability (M = 22.08%, SD
=21.45), t(29), p < .000. Similar results were found for the
MT problems. With the high-probability MT problems, the
conditional statement was believed significantly more often
(M = 82.50%, SD = 20.13) than with the low-probability
MT problems (M = 26.25%, SD = 24.86), t (29), p<.000.
These findings show that people take the probability of the
conditional into account when they have to make a belief
revision choice. This is supportive of the subjective
probability hypothesis. The results also extend Politzer and
Carles’ (2001) findings by showing that it also holds for MT
inference problems. Figure 2 depicts the mean RTs for the 4
conditions.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Mean RTs

MPH

MPL

MTH

MTL

Figure 2: Mean reaction times for the 4 conditions
A repeated measures ANOVA was performed to examine
the impact of Inference problem and Probability on RT. No
main effect was found for Inference problem, F (1, 29) =
.266, p=.610. A main effect did show up for the Probability,
Wilks’ Lambda=.38, F = 46.760, p<.000. The decision time
was higher for MT problems (6.16 s) than for MP problems
(4.73 s). However, a significant Inference problem x
Probability interaction, F (86.489), p<.000, accounted for
the main effect for Probability. Post-hoc tests revealed that
the difference in reaction times between high-and lowprobability problems was only significant for the MT
inference problems. With low-probability MT problems, it
took subjects significantly longer (M = 7.07 s) to decide
which statement to believe more than with the highprobability problems (M = 3.95 s). A possible explanation
for this could be that the strategy of finding inconsistencies
between mental models might have interacted with the
strategy of making probability judgments. Recall that the
mismatch principle takes the stand that people will choose
to disbelieve the statement that has a mental model that is
inconsistent with that of the incontrovertible fact. With both
the high- and low-probability MT set of statements, the
mental model of the incontrovertible fact (p) matches the
mental model of the conditional statement (p and q). But
only with the high-probability problems, the subjects
believed the conditional more. Here, the strategies predicted
by the mental model theory of belief revision and the

Experiment 2
Subjects. A total of 40 subjects will be tested. For the
completion of this article 16 people aged 18 to 26 were
tested (7 men, 9 women) from the University of Giessen in
exchange for monetary compensation.
Materials and design. The high- and low-probability
problem sets were taken from the set used in the first study.
Conditionals that were rated around 50% probability in the
rating study were used to create the sets of ‘neutral’
problems. A total of 24 sets of problems were used which
were divided into the following six conditions: four highand four low-probability MP problems, four high- and four
low-probability MT problems, four ‘neutral’ MP problems,
and four ‘neutral’ MT problems. Again, the software
program Super Lab 4.0 was used for presenting the items.
Procedure. The instructions on the computer were the same
as in experiment 1. The items were presented in a
randomized fashion and preceded by four practice items.

Results and Discussion
The results for the low- and high-probability problems
showed a pattern similar to that of the first experiment (see
Figure 3). With the MP high-probability problems, subjects
chose to believe the conditional 75% of the time, whereas
834

p<.000). This might suggest that belief revision is more
difficult to perform when the conditional statement has a
near 50% chance of occurring. There was also a significant
interaction effect between Inference problem and
Probability, F (2, 30) = 3.99, p=. 029. Type of Inference did
not affect mean RT times for high- and low- probability
conditions, but in the neutral-probability condition subjects
had faster decision times for MT problems (M=11.08 s) than
for the MP problems (M=12.52 s).

this percentage was only 37.5% for the low-probability
problems. This difference was significant, z =-2.44, p =.015.
Similarly, with the MT high-probability problems, subjects
chose to believe the conditional 81.3% of the time, whereas
for the low-probability problems this occurred only 40.6%
of the time, z = -2.997, p = .003. We also used neutralprobability problems close to 50% chance of occurrence to
test whether people would in this case guide their belief
revision as a function of consistencies between mental
models. As predicted by the mismatch principle, the
conditional was believed significantly more often on the MT
problems (71.9%) than on the MP problems (54.7%), z =1.99, p =.047. However, although in the MT condition the
pattern of revision choice was as expected, the conditional
being more believed than the categorical, in the MP
condition the categorical was not chosen more often
(45.3%) than the conditional statement. Figure 4 depicts the
mean reaction times for all the conditions.

General Discussion
In both experiments we were able to demonstrate that
when the inconsistent set of statements included a high
probability conditional, the conditional was believed more
than the categorical. Conversely, when the problem set
included a low probability conditional, the subjects
preferred to believe the categorical statement instead. This
was the case for both MP and MT inferences. This shows
that people incorporate probability into their belief revision
strategy. This highly supports the claims made by advocates
of the conditional probability hypothesis in conditional
reasoning (e.g. Over, et al., 2007) and shows that this can be
extended into the revision process of reasoning problems
when inconsistencies arise between statements. These
results are related to Politzer and Carles’ (2001) finding that
the level of probability of conditionals of MP problems
affected revision choices (see also Dieussaert, Schaeken,
Neys, & d’Ydewalle, 2000).
Also, partial support was found for the mismatch
principle (Hasson & Johnson-Laird, 2003; Johnson-Laird,
2006; Johnson-Laird et al., 2004). The conditional was more
often believed on the MT neutral-probability problems than
on the MP neutral-probability problems. Furthermore, with
MT neutral probability problems, subjects believed the
conditional more often than the categorical statement to a
significant degree. This is as the mismatch principle would
predict, the mental model of the counter fact (p) matches the
first part of the mental model of the conditional (p q). With
MP problems, however, the categorical statement was not
believed more than the conditional statement, opposing the
predicting of the mismatch principle. Keeping in line with
this principle, a possible explanation for this could be that
people rather prefer to find a mental model within their
belief set that matches the mental model of the
incontrovertible fact instead of focusing on a mental model
that conflicts with that of the given fact. In addition to that,
the conditional had a probability close to 50%, the subjects
could have also reasoned it was likely possible to occur.
The reaction times in this study also offered some
valuable information. In the first experiment, it was shown
that the reaction times were faster for high-probability MT
problems than for their low probability counterparts. We
reasoned that an interaction between the two strategies
might have been the underlying cause of this. However, this
trend did not emerge in the second experiment. A possible
explanation could be that the interaction of the two
strategies in the low- and high-probability conditionals

Mean Responses (%)

100
80
Conditional

60

Categorical

40
20
0
MPH MPL

MTH

MTL

MPN MTN

Figure 3: Mean belief revision choices in percentages.
Notes: MPN = Modus Ponens neutral-probability; MTN =
Modus Tollens high-probability.

Reaction Time (s)

14
12
10
8

Mean RTs

6
4
2
0
MPH MPL

MTH MTL

MPN MTN

Figure 4: Mean reaction times for the 6 conditions.
There was a significant main effect of probability on the
reaction times, F (2, 30) =128.09, p<.000. Post-hoc tests
indicate that the RT for the neutral-probability problems,
collapsed over inference problem, was significantly higher
than for the high- and low-probability problems (both
835

Evans, J.St.B.T, Handley, S.J., & Over, D.E. (2003).
Conditionals and Conditional Probability. Journal of
Experimental psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 321-335.
Gärdenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in flux. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gärdenfors, P. (1992). Belief Revision: An introduction.
In P. Gärdenfors (Ed.), Belief revision (pp. 1-28).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
George, C. (1995). The endorsement of the premises:
Assumption-based or belief-based reasoning. British
Journal of Psychology, 86, 93-111.
Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2004). The
probability of conditionals. Psychologia, 47, 207-225.
Hasson, U., and Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2003). Why
believability cannot explain belief revision. In Alterman, R.,
and Kirsh, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006). Beliefs, heresies, and
changes in mind. In P.N. Johnson-Laird (Ed.), How we
reason. New York: Oxford University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Byrne, R.M.J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 211-228.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P. (2004).
Reasoning from inconsistency to consistency. Psychological
Review, 111, 640-661.
Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2003).
Models of inconsistency. Psychological Science, 14, 131137.
Liu, I.-M., Lo, K.-C, & Wu, J.-T. (1996). A probabilistic
interpretation of “If-Then”. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 828-844.
Marcus, S.L., & Rips, L.J. (1979). Conditional reasoning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 18, 199223.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Science,
5, 349-357.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of
conditionals: Conditional probabilities, mental models, and
personal utilities. Journal of Experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 680-693.
Over, D.E., Evans J. St. B.T. (2003). The probability of
conditionals: The psychological evidence. Mind &
Language, 18, 340-358.
Over, D.E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans J. St. B.T.,
Handley, S.J., & Sloman, S.A. (2007). The probability of
causal conditionals, 54, 62-97.
Politzer, G., & Carles, L. (2001). Belief revision and
uncertain reasoning. Thinking and reasoning, 7, 217-234.
Stevenson, R.J., & Over, D.E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain premises. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology A: Human Experimental Psychology, 48A, 613643.

dampened due to the inclusion of the neutral-probability
problems. These might have brought the strategy of finding
inconsistencies between mental models more to the surface
in this condition. In the second experiment, another
interesting finding emerged regarding decision times. Here,
the subjects were much faster making their revision choice
with high- and low-probability problems than with neutralprobability problems, which portrays the impression that the
former two were easier to perform than the latter. Liu et al.
(1996) showed that when the conditional had a high
perceived sufficiency, subjects correctly concluded that the
conclusion, q and not-p on MP and MT problems
respectively, follows logically from the premises. With the
low perceived sufficiency conditional problem sets, the
subjects did not make these correct conclusions. The current
reaction time results (in addition to the belief revision
responses) further support these and other earlier findings
that people reason psychologically. They have a preference
for the conditional when it expresses a high probability and
a preference for the categorical when the conditional
expresses a low probability. This reasoning strategy seems
to hamper their performance on reasoning tasks but eases
their performance on belief revision tasks.
In conclusion, the two experiments conducted here
together showed that people use different reasoning
strategies depending on how probable they think the “if p
then q” conditional statement is. This shows that people
assign probability estimates to the conditionals and
illustrates that the probability of the conditional can be
regarded as a sort of epistemic entrenchment whereon the
belief revision process is based. Moreover, the results of the
decision times suggest that it is also easier for people to
engage in belief revision when the conditional expresses a
clear probability (either high or low) then when it does not
and people instead have to rely on mental models to resolve
the inconsistency.

Acknowledgments
We thank Susann Ruis and Stefanie Müller for their
assistance with the data collection.

References
Byrne, R.M.J., & Walsh, C.R. (2005). Resolving
contradictions. In V. Girotto &, P.N. Johnson-Laird (Eds.),
The shape of reason: essays in honour of Paolo Legrenzi.
Hove: Psychology Press.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., Neys, W. De, &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Initial belief state as a predictor of
belief revision. Current Psychology of Cognition, 19, 277286.
Elio, R. (1997). What to believe when inferences are
contradicted: The impact of knowledge type and inference
rule. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 211-216). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F.J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21, 419-460.
836

