UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Picture-Word Interference Effect is a Stroop Effect After All

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56h0c99m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Van Maanen, Leendart
Van Rijn, Hedderik

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Picture-Word Interference Effect is a Stroop Effect After All
Leendert van Maanen (leendert@ai.rug.nl)
Hedderik van Rijn (D.H.van.Rijn@rug.nl)
Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 407
9700 AK Groningen, The Netherlands
color if it spells a different color word than if it does not
spell a color word (e.g., M. O. Glaser & Glaser, 1982). That
is, participants are slower in naming the color of a written
word if that word is another color (e.g., saying “red” to a
stimulus that is the word “green” written in red), as
compared to naming a colored spot alone (that is, without
the distractor “green”). This effect is usually referred to as
Stroop interference. In picture-word interference tasks, a
similar interference pattern can be observed (e.g., W. R.
Glaser & Düngelhoff, 1984). Picture-naming latencies are
increased for pictures that are accompanied by incongruent
words relative to latencies of these pictures in isolation. For
example, naming a picture of a cat together with the word
“dog” takes longer than naming that same picture without
the word.
However, when target and distractor relate to the same
concept, participants typically respond faster than to the
target alone, an effect called facilitation. For example in the
Stroop task, the word “red” written in red ink elicits a faster
color naming response than a red spot. The PWI analog is
that a picture of a cat accompanied by the word “cat” is
responded to faster than a picture of a cat alone.
Besides the interference and facilitation effects and their
prototypical design, PWI and Stroop share many other
characteristics. For instance, both interference and
facilitation typically disappear if the task is changed to
naming the written word. This effect is sometimes referred
to as Stroop asynchrony (W. R. Glaser & Düngelhoff,
1984). Given all these similarities1, it has regularly been
assumed that both tasks tap a similar set of underlying
processes.

Abstract
The idea that picture-word interference (PWI) and the Stroop
effect are two manifestations of the same process has been
widely accepted. However, recently Dell’Acqua and
colleagues (2007) have questioned the identical nature of the
Stroop effect and picture-word interference, based on the
observation that the loci of both effects in the mental
processing stream differ. In this paper, we will present a
dynamic computational model of semantic interference for
both the Stroop effect and PWI. The model is based on
competition between possible responses in both Stroop and
PWI tasks. The differences between both tasks are solely
explained by differences in processing speed of the stimuli.
This way, our model does justice to the different loci of
effects observed by Dell’Acqua et al, while at the same time
supporting the long-held view that both Stroop and PWI are
indeed similar in the underlying processes.
Keywords: Stroop effect; picture-word
cognitive model; ACT-R; RACE.

interference;

Introduction
Through the years, the idea that the picture-word
interference (PWI) effect and the Stroop effect are two
manifestations of the same process has been widely
accepted. For instance, MacLeod’s influential review on the
Stroop effect (MacLeod, 1991) also discusses picture-word
interference, and even lists the picture-word task in his list
of “eighteen major empirical results that must be explained
by any successful account of the Stroop effect” (MacLeod,
1991, Appendix B). In previous work, we have also taken
for granted that picture-word interference is just an instance
of the Stroop effect. Van Maanen and Van Rijn (2007b)
described a computational model of picture-word
interference, and when discussing related models, we
actually focused on models of the Stroop task.
The wide acceptance that PWI and the Stroop effect are
one and the same effect probably stems from the
(behavioral) similarities between the two. First, the
prototypical paradigm for both tasks is that participants are
requested to respond to one stimulus, while being presented
with a second stimulus. In the case of the Stroop task, the
to-respond-to stimulus (henceforth referred to as the target)
is the color a word is printed in, and the to-be-ignored
stimulus (the distractor) is a written word. Similarly, in
picture-word interference tasks, the target is a picture, and
the distractor is a word. Over the years, a wide range of
variations of this paradigm have been presented (for an
overview, see MacLeod, 1991).
Second, both tasks display similar latency distributions.
The typical Stroop effect is that it is harder to name the ink

Difference between Stroop and PWI
Recently it has been suggested that the Stroop effect and
picture-word interference may not be caused by the same
process (Dell'Acqua et al., 2007). In particular, it seems that
the loci of the two effects in the mental processing stream
differ. Many researchers now agree that the locus of the
Stroop effect is on the level of response selection (e.g.,
Fagot & Pashler, 1992; Kuipers, La Heij, & Costa;
MacLeod, 1991; Roelofs, 2003). That is, the Stroop
interference comes about because an incorrect response
possibility that is triggered by the distractor, interferes with
the correct response that is triggered by the target stimulus.
Fagot and Pashler (1992, Experiment 7) studied whether
the Stroop effect would persist in a psychological refractory
1
For a more extensive comparison between PWI and Stroop, see
(Dell'Acqua, Job, Peressotti, & Pascali, 2007; MacLeod, 1991).

645

period (PRP) design. They hypothesized that if the locus of
the Stroop effect would be early in the processing stream,
the Stroop-critical processing would be parallel to the
secondary task, and the Stroop effect would disappear. In
their experiment, participants were instructed to respond to
an auditory stimulus first, and then, after a SOA (Stimulus
Onset Asynchrony) interval the Stroop stimulus was
presented. Fagot and Pashler did not find an interaction
between congruency condition and SOA, which can be
interpreted as evidence that the locus of the Stroop effect
(operationalized as the latency difference between the
congruent and the incongruent Stroop stimulus) could not
be early in the processing stream. This finding, they argued,
is in line with a response selection account (that is, late in
the stream of mental processing) of the locus of the Stroop
effect.
In a similar experiment, Dell’Acqua and colleagues
(2007) tried to answer the same question for the PWI effect.
They performed the same experiment as Fagot and Pashler
(1992 Experiment 7), with the only difference that the
primary task was not Stroop naming, but instead picturenaming. Interestingly and surprisingly, they did find an
interaction between congruency condition and SOA,
indicating that the locus of picture-word interference is
early, possibly during perceptual encoding of the stimulus.
Based on this, Dell’Acqua and colleagues state that their
findings “are obviously incompatible with the often
reiterated principle that the PWI effect comes about for
limitations of the cognitive system that are analogous to
those causing the Stroop effect” (Dell'Acqua et al., 2007, p.
720). They conclude that their analysis “favor[s] an
interpretation of the present findings that points to the
functional dissociation of the sources of Stroop and PWI
effects” (Dell'Acqua et al., 2007, p. 722).
In the remainder of this paper, we will argue that this
conclusion might be premature. Using computational
cognitive models, we will demonstrate that an apparent
difference in locus can be achieved using the same
underlying process. To achieve this, we will present a
cognitive model that simulates both the Stroop task and
PWI. The only difference between the two simulations of
the Stroop task and the PWI task is a single parameter value,
and we will argue that this parameter is sufficient to account
for the perceived shift in locus. Since the model relies on the
ACT-R cognitive architecture (Anderson, 2007) as well as a
recent extension that models the memory retrieval process
(RACE, Van Maanen & Van Rijn, 2007b), we will first
discuss the critical components of both, before explaining
the implementation of the combined Stroop/PWI model.

system is a set of condition-action pairs (called production
rules) that specify which actions to perform, given the
content of the buffers. Actions are instructions to the
modules and are performed by manipulating buffer contents.
Whereas different modules can run in parallel, the central
production system constitutes a serial bottleneck.
An example of a module is declarative memory.
Declarative memory is represented by a module that can be
queried via a retrieval buffer. Declarative facts, that are
stored in declarative memory, are called chunks. Given that
there is just one retrieval buffer that can contain only a
single chunk, only one chunk can be retrieved from memory
at a time. Each chunk is associated with a quantity called
activation that indicates the likelihood that a particular
chunk is needed at this moment in the current task. In ACTR, the level of activation of the chunks is determined by a
set of equations that take the history of usage of a chunk
into account (Anderson & Schooler, 1991). However, as this
account is not detailed enough for current purposes, we will
use a more elaborate model of memory retrievals (Van
Maanen & Van Rijn, 2007b) to compute the activation
values. This model, termed Retrieval by ACcumulating
Evidence (RACE) will be explained in the next section.

RACE
RACE stems from an effort to better understand the process
of memory retrievals within a cognitive architecture (Van
Maanen & Van Rijn, 2005, 2006, 2007a, 2007b). By
studying cognitive phenomena that were difficult to explain
with the default ACT-R retrieval mechanism, we developed
a model that predicts what happens during the actual
retrieval process.
RACE is driven by two key assumptions:
1. The activation of one chunk is determined (in part) by
the activation of other chunks.
2. The activation of one chunk relative to the activation
of other chunks determines the likelihood that it will
be needed.
The first assumption represents the fact that the relevance
of information is context-dependent. This is for instance
reflected in priming studies, in which a related prime
decreases the response latency on a target stimulus (e.g.,
Neely, 1976, 1977). We operationalized this by adopting a
spreading activation strategy (Collins & Loftus, 1975), in
which increased activation of one chunk increased the
activation of related chunks. This way, context, as
represented by increased activation of associated chunks,
has an effect on the likelihood that a chunk will be needed.
Ci (t) = αCi (t −1) + β ∑ C j (t −1)S ji

ACT-R

Equation 1

j ∈k

ACT-R (Anderson, 2007) can be perceived as a theory of
cognitive information processing. That is, the theory
predicts how humans handle pieces of information in
various (cognitive) tasks. The theory is characterized by a
central production system that communicates with different
modules through a set of buffers. The central production

Equation 1 incorporates the first assumption. The
equation reflects how the activation of a chunk (Ci(t))
accumulates during a retrieval process. The activation
dynamics depend on the previous activation of a chunk (at
t–1), as well as on spreading activation from other chunks
646

(Sji). α and β are scaling parameters that determine the
relative contributions of both components to the new
activation value. Because α is set to a value in the range
(0,1), it can be regarded as temporal decay of activation.
The accumulated activation thus decays away after a
retrieval has been attempted.
The second assumption reflects the insight that if multiple
memory representations are relevant, responding becomes
more difficult (Luce, 1986). Following ACT-R, the
activation of a chunk determines the likelihood that it will
be needed in the near future. However, given that these
likelihoods are not independent, the actual need likelihood
of a chunk is relative to the activation of other chunks. In
RACE, this is accounted for by taking the ratio of activation
of one chunk (chunk i in Equation 2) with other relevant
chunks (chunks j in Equation 2). In the current model, these
chunks (j) are the other chunks that match the retrieval
criteria specified in a retrieval request.

e Ai
≥θ
∑ eAj

A cognitive model of both Stroop and PWI
The model presented here, in line with the proposal of
Dell’Acqua et al (2007), assumes that both the Stroop task
and PWI consist of three main stages, the perceptual
encoding stage, the response selection stage, and the
response execution stage. The interference effects observed
in the Stroop task and PWI are accounted for by competition
effects in the RACE declarative memory retrieval
mechanism: If multiple chunks are eligible for retrieval
from declarative memory, they compete for retrieval as
outlined above in the section describing RACE. This causes
interference if multiple chunks contribute to the likelihoods
of different chunks. Besides retrieval competition,
interference may also be caused by another factor. In the
incongruent conditions, the model sometimes selects an
incorrect response (that is, retrieves a chunk reflecting the
picture, when the word has to be named), and has to retry to
select the correct response (as is illustrated by Figure 1).
This also leads to increased latencies.
Facilitation occurs if multiple chunks contribute to the
likelihood that one chunk is the requested one, and speed up
the retrieval time of that chunk. In this case, the activation
increase of that chunk due to spreading activation from
other chunks exceeds the competitive effect from the
activation of the other chunks themselves.
For ease of explanation, we will focus in this section on
the Stroop task only. However, given our hypothesis that the
Stroop and PWI tasks are the same process, one can
substitute all references to the color dimension of the
stimulus with references to the picture to get a description of
how the model performs a typical picture-word interference
trial.
The Stroop task examined here has six different
conditions. Two task conditions: color naming and word
reading, and three different congruency conditions. The first
congruency condition is one in which both the word and the
ink color refer to the same color concept (e.g., the word
“red” written in red ink, congruent condition). In the second
condition, the word and the ink color refer to different color

Equation 2

j

If the ratio specified in Equation 2 crosses a threshold (θ,
the retrieval ratio), the relative activation of the chunk in the
denominator (chunk i) is high enough to produce a memory
retrieval of that chunk. The duration of the retrieval process
constitutes the interval between the onset of the retrieval
process and the moment at which the activation of one of
the chunks crosses the retrieval ratio.
Using Equations 1 and 2, we have already provided
quantitative fits for variants of both picture-word
interference and the Stroop task (Van Maanen & Van Rijn,
2007a, 2007b). The previous model of PWI had a focus on
the effect of SOA differences (Van Maanen & Van Rijn,
2007b); the Stroop model fitted a data set in which the
distractors were presented subliminally (Van Maanen &
Van Rijn, 2007a).

Figure 1: Typical temporal activity traces for the picture-word interference simulation (upper panel) and the Stroop
simulation (lower panel). Both traces represent the incongruent naming condition. The dotted lines indicate the stage
transitions in the cognitive process.
647

concepts (“red” in green ink, incongruent condition). The
third congruency condition is a neutral condition (actually,
two neutral conditions, which can be considered identical
for current purposes: one for color naming in which a series
of x-s is written in colored ink, and one for word reading in
which a color word is written in black). This follows a
prototypical experimental setup for the Stroop task (M. O.
Glaser & Glaser, 1982), as well as for picture-word
interference (W. R. Glaser & Düngelhoff, 1984).
The model performs a typical word reading trial as
follows: In the perceptual encoding stage, the stimulus
features are transferred to the perceptual buffer and at the
same time, the relevant chunks are being retrieved from
memory. This reflects the observation that perceptual cues
can be processed before they enter awareness (Marcel,
1983; Merikle, Smilek, & Eastwood, 2001). Because the
model’s task is to read the word (and ignore the color), the
model retrieves a chunk that encodes the syntactic
properties of the stimulus (that is, the lemma chunk, Levelt,
Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999). For word reading it is not
necessary to retrieve a concept chunk, since words can be
pronounced without active access to the word’s meaning.
Although perceptual cues can influence processing before
they enter awareness (e.g., Marcel, 1983), it seems that
processing of the complete visual stimulus cannot
commence until one is aware of those cues (Treisman &
Gelade, 1980). Therefore, the second stage is only initiated
if the model is aware of the stimulus and if it has retrieved a
chunk that is associated with the desired stimulus
dimension. In the case of word reading, this means that the
model should have retrieved a lemma chunk. However,
since a lemma is also the desired chunk type in the response
selection stage, the model directly continues with the
response execution stage. At this time the model retrieves an
associated motor program (that is, a lexeme, Kempen &
Huijbers, 1983) storing information on how the lemma is
articulated and the response is uttered.
If the task is not word reading but instead color naming,
the process is a bit more complex (Figure 1). Again, during
the perceptual encoding stage, the stimulus features are
transferred to the perceptual buffer. Then, a chunk is
requested from declarative memory that represents
conceptual information on the color of the stimulus. During
the response selection stage, the model tries to retrieve a
lemma that is associated with the just retrieved concept.
Because multiple chunks may be retrieved and accumulate
activation, lemma retrieval could result in a retrieval of an
incorrect lemma. That is, the model did not retrieve the
lemma that represents the syntactic properties of the
stimulus color, but instead retrieved the lemma describing
the word. To be able to deal with this, a perceptual check is
performed (c.f., Van Rijn & Anderson, 2004). If the correct
lemma was retrieved, the model continues with the response
execution. If not, than the model tries to retrieve another
lemma.

Figure 2: Model predictions and data for the
Stroop effect (a) and picture-word interference (b).
The data comes from (M. O. Glaser & Glaser, 1982,
Experiment 1) for the Stroop effect, and (W. R.
Glaser & Düngelhoff, 1984, Experiment 1) for
picture-word interference, both for SOA=0. Error
bars denote standard errors.
The response encoding stage is again the same as for the
word reading task. The model retrieves a lexeme and utters
the response.
Latency differences between various conditions come
from two sources. The first source is the perceptual check
that ensures that a lemma describing the relevant stimulus
feature is retrieved. The second one is the competition
caused by the RACE mechanism. All retrieval times (for
concept chunks, lemma chunks, and lexeme chunks) depend
on the activation of other chunks. If multiple chunks spread
activation to different chunks, as in the incongruent
condition, retrieval times are increased because of the
competition between those chunks. If multiple chunks
spread activation to the same chunk, as in the congruent
condition, retrieval times are decreased because of
facilitation. The model thus assumes that interference in
declarative memory is not localized, but is distributed over
the various processing stages (McClelland, 1979;
Wheeldon, 1999).

Model fits of experimental data
We ran the model for 36 simulation runs per condition,
similar to the number of trials in typical Stroop or PWI
experiments (e.g., M. O. Glaser & Glaser, 1982 and W. R.
Glaser & Düngelhoff, 1984 used 36 trials per condition for
648

16 and 18 participants, respectively).2 Figure 2a presents the
fit of the Stroop model for both the color naming task and
the word reading task. The model captures both Stroop
interference in the incongruent color naming condition, and
facilitation in the congruent color naming condition
(RMSE=32.6, R2=.93) . In addition, the Stroop asynchrony
between color naming and word reading can be observed.
Given our hypothesis that the Stroop effect and pictureword interference are manifestations of the same process,
the challenge is to demonstrate that both effects can be fitted
with the same model.
The only difference in the two simulations that yield the
data presented in Figure 2 is a single parameter that controls
the speed of processing of the stimulus and that is adjusted
to reflect the differences in the two tasks: The processing
speed of the combined picture-word stimulus was set slower
than the processing speed of the combined color-word
stimulus. This reflects the idea that line drawings are more
complex visual stimuli than colors, which can be considered
as stimuli consisting of only one feature (e.g., Fleetwood &
Byrne, 2006; Rossion & Pourtois, 2004).
Figure 2b presents the model fit on picture-word
interference reaction time data. Similar to the fit of the
Stroop task, all the behavioral patterns (interference,
facilitation, and asynchrony) are captured by the model
(RMSE=56.8, R2=.84).
It could be argued that this model has a significant
number of degrees of freedom, since a number of other
strategies could also have been implemented. However, we
believe that this model is a convincing theory of the process
of both tasks. The model is constrained by integrating it in a
cognitive architecture that has proven its merits (ACT-R,
Anderson, 2007), and implemented the tasks in a relatively
straightforward way (c.f., Newell and Simon’s “listen to the
architecture” argument, Newell & Simon, 1972). However,
we deviated from the central ACT-R assumptions with
respect to memory retrieval processes, and extended the
standard system with RACE. As we have argued earlier
(Van Maanen & Van Rijn, 2007b), default ACT-R cannot
account for interference patterns found in PWI and Stroop
tasks. In addition, the model parameters were chosen to fit
the Stroop data, and afterwards only the perceptual encoding
speed was adapted to fit the PWI data.

perceptual encoding, but it encounters relatively more
interference during the response selection and execution
phases. This pattern in the sub-processes of both tasks
seems similar to the one theorized by Dell’Acqua et al
(2007), in which the locus of PWI is in the perceptual
encoding phase, and the locus of the Stroop-effect is in the
response selection phase. However, contrary to Dell’Acqua
et al’s argument that this is an indication for different
underlying mechanisms, we show here that a single
mechanism accounts for both phenomena.
We further analyzed the contributions of the various
retrieval steps to the final reaction times. Since the
suggestion that the Stroop task and PWI are different
processes is primarily based on the incongruent conditions,
and only on the naming tasks (Dell'Acqua et al., 2007), we
focused on the retrieval times in these conditions only. As
the temporal activity traces in Figure 1 and the barplot in
Figure 3 suggest, the retrieval time for the concept chunk
differed between simulations of the Stroop task and PWI (ttest, t = 11.13, df = 36.43, p < 0.001). Also, an ANOVA
with as factors Task and Chunk Type showed a significant
interaction effect between task and chunk type (F(1,
140)=41.78, p<0.001). Post-hoc paired t-tests demonstrate
that the retrieval times for concepts and lexemes differ
within each task (t = 5.71, df = 35, p < 0.001 for PWI, and t
= 7.58, df = 35, p < 0.001 for Stroop).3 That is, in the
picture-word interference task, the retrieval times of the
concept retrieval are significantly higher than those of the

Discussion
Figure 3: Relative contributions to the latency in
the incongruent condition, for Stroop and PWI in
our models. The bars show the percentage of the
latency dedicated to the retrieval of the concept
chunk, the lemma chunk, and the lexeme chunk
respectively. Error bars denote standard errors. A
clear interaction between the task (Stroop or PWI)
and the relative contribution of concept retrievals
and lexeme retrievals can be observed.

When observing the typical temporal activity traces in
Figure 1 of the model for both tasks, it becomes clear that
the time the model has spent on retrievals from declarative
memory is temporally shifted in the incongruent conditions.
The picture-word interference trace is characterized by a
long retrieval during the perceptual encoding stage,
followed by three relatively quick retrievals during the
response selection and execution stages. In contrast, the
Stroop trace does not show a long retrieval during
3

Note that these analyses were conducted on the same model
runs as reported earlier. The number of runs was kept equal to the
reported empirical data.

2

The model lisp code as well as the RACE ACT-R module can
be downloaded from http://www.ai.rug.nl/cogmod.

649

The role of response congruency. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 21(7-8), 892-919.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22(1), 1-38.
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times. New York: Oxford UP.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the
Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109(2), 163-203.
Marcel, A. J. (1983). Conscious and unconscious
perception: Experiments on visual masking and word
recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 15(2), 197-237.
McClelland, J. L. (1979). On the time relations of mental
processes: Examination of systems of processes in
cascade. Psychological Review, 86(4), 287-330.
Merikle, P. M., Smilek, D., & Eastwood, J. D. (2001).
Perception without awareness: Perspectives from
cognitive psychology. Cognition, 79(1-2), 115-134.
Neely, J. H. (1976). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: evidence for facilitatory and inhibitory
processes. Memory & Cognition, 4(5), 648-654.
Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: roles of inhibition-less spreading
activation and limited-capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology-General, 106(3), 226-254.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Roelofs, A. (2003). Goal-referenced selection of verbal
action: Modelling attentional control in the Stroop task.
Psychological Review, 110(1), 88-125.
Rossion, B., & Pourtois, G. (2004). Revisiting Snodgrass
and Vanderwart's object pictorial set: The role of surface
detail in basic-level object recognition. Perception, 33(2),
217-236.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12(1), 97-136.
Van Maanen, L., & Van Rijn, H. (2005). RACE for
retrieval: Competitive effects in memory retrieval. 12th
Annual ACT-R Workshop, Trieste.
Van Maanen, L., & Van Rijn, H. (2006). An accumulator
model account of semantic interference in memory
retrieval. 7th International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling. Trieste, ITA.
Van Maanen, L., & Van Rijn, H. (2007a). Accounting for
subliminal priming in ACT-R. 8th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling. Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.
Van Maanen, L., & Van Rijn, H. (2007b). An accumulator
model of semantic interference. Cognitive Systems
Research, 8(3), 174-181.
Van Rijn, H., & Anderson, J. R. (2004). The
pseudohomophone baseword frequency effect explained.
Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing
conference (AMLaP). Aix-en-Provence, FRA.
Wheeldon, L. R. (1999). Competitive processes during
word-form encoding. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
22(1), 59-60.

lexeme retrieval, whereas in the Stroop task retrieval times
for the concepts are significantly lower than those of the
lexemes.

Conclusion
These results suggest that for picture-word interference, the
contribution of the perceptual stage to the total interference
effect exceeds the contributions of the response selection
and execution stages. On the other hand, the Stroop
interference effect is primarily caused in the later stages of
response selection and execution. This is exactly the
conclusion that Dell’Acqua et al (2007) draw based on
theirs and Fagot and Pashler’s (1992) dual-task studies.
However, in contrast to the conclusion Dell’Acqua et al
present, we demonstrate here that this difference between
PWI and Stroop can be explained with a single cognitive
process underlying both tasks.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (ToKeN/I2RP project grant no.
634.000.002).

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? New York: Oxford UP.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2(6),
396-408.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading
activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82(6), 407-428.
Dell'Acqua, R., Job, R., Peressotti, F., & Pascali, A. (2007).
The picture-word interference effect is not a Stroop effect.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(4), 717-722.
Fagot, C., & Pashler, H. (1992). Making two responses to a
single object: Implications for the central attentional
bottleneck. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 18(4), 1058-1079.
Fleetwood, M. D., & Byrne, M. D. (2006). Modeling the
visual search of displays: A revised ACT-R model of icon
search based on eye-tracking data. Human-Computer
Interaction, 21(2), 153-197.
Glaser, M. O., & Glaser, W. R. (1982). Time course
analysis of the Stroop phenomenon. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 8(6), 875-894.
Glaser, W. R., & Düngelhoff, F. J. (1984). The time course
of picture-word interference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10(5),
640-654.
Kempen, G., & Huijbers, P. (1983). The lexicalization
process in sentence production and naming: Indirect
election of words. Cognition, 14(2), 185-209.
Kuipers, J. R., La Heij, W., & Costa, A. (2006). A further
look at semantic context effects in language production:
650

