UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Theories of Expertise and Measures of Competence: Cognitive and Interactional
Perspectives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3x10t98k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Frederikson, Carl H.
Koschman, Timothy
MacWhinney, Brian
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Theories of Expertise and Measures of Competence:
Cognitive and Interactional Perspectives
Participants
Carl H. Frederiksen

Timothy Koschmann

Dept. of Educ. & Counseling Psychology
McGill University
Carl.Frederiksen@mcgill.ca

Dept. of Medical Education
Southern Illinois University
tkoschmann@siumed.edu

Brian MacWhinney

Colleen Seifert

Dept. of Psychology
Carnegie-Mellon University
macw@cmu.edu

Dept. of Psychology
University of Michigan
seifert@umich.edu

Discussant
Edward H. Shortliffe

Dept. of biomedical Informatics
Arizona State University
edward.shortliffe@asu.edu
solving. In these tests, applicants work up a series of
clinical cases portrayed, for the purposes of the exam, by
“standardized patients” (SPs). Applicants interview these
patients, perform physical examinations, and document their
findings in simulated chart notes. They are evaluated using
a combination of behavioral checklists and categorical
grades assigned by trained observers (NBME, 2005).
Competence, then, is defined instrumentally as that which
the assessments measure—little light is shed on its
underlying cognitive and interactional processes. Further,
behavioral checklists have been found to imperfectly reflect
changing levels of expertise (Hodges et al., 1999). Such
checklists would appear, therefore, to lack validity as a
metric for professional competence.
Though expert
evaluators may be able to recognize expert performance
when they see it, there are also problems with categorical
ratings. Such ratings seek to break down the components of
competent performance (e.g., “Questioning skills,”
“Information-sharing,” “Professional manner and rapport”),
but in the process, may lose the phenomenon of interest. In
the clinical exam, the cognitive skills and the interactional
work of gathering pertinent information, forming an
appropriate clinical picture and communicating findings
(both to the patient and fellow healthcare workers) are
irremediably interdependent.
The papers to be presented here are all based on a corpus
of graded performance samples.
These samples are
modeled after the practical testing protocols used in highstakes licensure exams. Each sample includes a video
recording of the subject interviewing the SP and conducting
a physical exam, the subject’s associated chart note, and a
recording of a detailed debriefing interview. These
structured samples allow comparisons of performance
across different levels of clinical training. Drawing on
diverse disciplinary backgrounds, the four presentations

Abstract
This symposium explores the relationship between
expertise and competence, two terms used to describe
skilled performance.
Expertise has long been a
foundational topic of inquiry in Cognitive Science (Chi,
Glaser, & Farr, 1988; Ericsson, Charness, Feltovich &
Hoffman, 2006). Research in this area has produced a much
better understanding of how expertise develops at the
highest levels of performance (Ericsson et al., 2006). It
might seem reasonable that theories of expertise might
inform the methods used to assess competence, but it is not
clear that this has necessarily been the case.
In
contradistinction to expertise as studied in Cognitive
Science, professional competency is a regulatory matter.
Minimal standards of performance are established by
certifying bodies and, in professions such as law and
medicine, enforced by statute. The relationship between
theories of expertise and what measures of competence
actually measure has received relatively little attention in
the past.
Given its inherent complexity and vital importance to
society, much of the research on expertise has been carried
out within the domain of medicine (e.g., Patel, Kaufman, &
Magder, 1996; Ericsson et al., 2006). Medicine is a highly
regulated field and one in which there is a vital need to
establish and maintain high standards of practice. State
medical boards were established in the U.S. over a century
ago to provide “the public a way to enforce basic standards
of competence and ethical behavior in their physicians, and
physicians a way to protect the integrity of their profession”
(FSMB, n.d.). All medical boards require passing scores on
the components of a nationally-administered licensing
exam. Though most of this exam is based on conventional
written tests, one component involves practical problem259

seek to analyze the forms of expertise that underlie
competent performance.
The first, to be presented by Colleen Seifert, is entitled,
“When is “too little” actually “enough?”” Her research has
focused on the role of memory in problem solving and
reasoning (Seifert, 2002; Seifert & Patalano, 2001). Her talk
will focus on observations regarding the physicians’
reactions to an impasse in their problem solving. Because
the case under study required information not available in
the SP encounter, subjects faced an impasse. They had to
decide when to stop pursuing more information in the
encounter, and recognize that they had elicited as much
helpful information as possible. Given the nature of medical
evidence—conflicting findings, multiple diagnoses for the
same findings, self-report of symptoms—this is critical
ability when performing exams.
The second talk, “Clinical Competency as Expertise in
Application of Biomedical and Clinical Knowledge in the
Clinic,” will be presented by Carl Frederiksen. Studies of
clinical expertise require research approaches that can
confront the full range and complexity of processes that
enable effective functioning in authentic situations of
medical practice (Patel, Kaufman, & Magder, 1996).
Applying knowledge in clinical situations requires a wide
spectrum of cognitive and communicative skills
(Frederiksen et al., 2004). Analyzing samples from the
shared corpus, Frederiksen has developed a model of expert
clinical knowledge and its application that has subsequently
been validated using data from subjects at different levels of
training.
The third talk, by Brian MacWhinney, will analyze the
problem-solving protocols using a conceptual framework
borrowed from developmental linguistics. Perspective
Theory holds that understanding a sentence corresponds to
cognizing a mental model with interlocking entities,
properties, and relations (MacWhinney, 2005). It assumes
that the successful functioning of a mental model is
achieved by operating this device from the viewpoint of an
embodied agent.
Using this model, Greeno &
MacWhinney (2007) showed how classroom learning
events involve perspective shifts between competing
mechanistic models.
The emergent clinical pictures
developed within each assessment protocol evidence similar
shifts in perspective.
Operating within a more sociological tradition, Goodwin
(1994) analyzed “professional vision” by examining the
discursive methods through which members of a profession
highlight objects of interest. In the final talk, Timothy
Koschmann will apply a similar analysis to the transcripts of
expert evaluators assigning grades to subjects’
performances. He will document how a performance is
rendered visible as competent through the evaluators’
discursive practices.
Ted Shortliffe serves as the panel discussant. In addition
to being a practicing physician, Shortliffe was the developer
of one of the first medical expert systems. In this way, he
broadens the set of perspectives examining the relationship
between expertise and competency.

References
Chi, M., Glaser, R., & Farr, M. J. (Eds.). (1988). The nature
of expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Associates
Frederiksen, C., Donin, J., Koschmann, T., & Kelson, A..
(2004, August). Investigating diagnostic problem solving
in medicine through cognitive analysis of discourse in
clinical situations. Fourteenth Annual Meeting of the
Society for Text & Discourse, Chicago, IL.
FSMB. (n.d.). Overview of the Federation of State Medical
Boards. Retrieved January 28, 2008 as:
http://www.fsmb.org/smb_overview.html
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American
Anthropologist, 96, 606-633.
Greeno, J., & MacWhinney, B. (2006, April). Perspective
shifting in classroom interactions. Paper presented at
AERA 2006.
Hodges, B., Regehr, G., McNaughton, N., Tiberius, R. &
Hanson, M. (1999). OSCE checklists do not capture
increasing levels of expertise. Academic Medicine, 74,
1129-1134.
Ericsson, K. A., Charness, N., Feltovich, P. J., & Hoffman,
R. R. (Eds.). (2006). The Cambridge Handbook of
Expertise and Expert Performance. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2005). The emergence of grammar from
perspective taking. In D. Pecher & R. Zwaan (Eds.), The
grounding of cognition: The role of perception and
action in memory (pp. 198-223). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
NBME (2005). 2006 Step 2 Clinical Skills (CS) Content
Description and General Information. Philadelphia, PA:
National Board of Medical Examiners. Retrieved
February 2, 2006 as:
http://www.usmle.org/step2/Step2CS/Step2CS2006GI/20
06Step2CS.pdf
Patel, V. L., Kaufman, D. R., & Magder, S. A. (1996). The
acquisition of medical expertise in complex dynamic
environments. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to
excellence: The acquisition of expert performance in the
arts and sciences, sports and games (pp. 127-165).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Seifert, C. M. (2002). The continued influence of
misinformation in memory: What makes a correction
effective? In B. Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning
and Motivation, Vol. 41 (pp. 265-292). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Seifert, C. M., & Patalano, A. L. (2001). Opportunism in
memory: Preparing for chance encounters. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 10, 198-201.

Acknowledgements
The research reported here was made possible by NIH
Grant #5R03MH7479-2. Earlier pilot funding was provided
by the Office of the Associate Dean for Research at
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine.
All
correspondence should be sent to Timothy Koschmann,
(tkoschmann@siumed.edu).

260

