UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking in Pictures: A Fresh Look at Cognition in Autism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5sr761sk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Kunda, Maithilee
Goel, Ashok K.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thinking in Pictures: A Fresh Look at Cognition in Autism
Maithilee Kunda (mkunda@cc.gatech.edu)
Ashok K. Goel (goel@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth Street NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30308, USA

While the specific causes of autism are not known, an
etiological framework, shown in Figure 1, has been traced
out that leads from genetic and possibly environmental
factors, through neurobiological development and cognitive
functioning, and finally to behavioral manifestations
(adapted from Minshew & Goldstein, 1998).
Many theories have attempted to give a cogent account of
the changes in cognitive functioning that lead to the
behavioral characteristics of autism. Some prominent
theories include: Mindblindness, which hypothesizes that
individuals with autism lack a “theory of mind,” i.e. they
cannot ascribe mental beliefs to other people (Baron-Cohen,
1995); Weak Central Coherence, which posits a bias
towards local instead of global information processing
(Happé & Frith, 2006); and Executive Dysfunction, which
suggests that individuals with autism have deficits in
executive functions such as planning, mental flexibility, and
inhibition (Russell, 1998).
However, many individuals on the autism spectrum have
given quite different introspective descriptions of their
cognitive processes. One of the most famous is the account
by Temple Grandin in her book Thinking in Pictures (2006).
Grandin, a high-functioning adult with autism, states that
her mental representations are predominantly visual, i.e. that
she thinks in pictures, and that this representational bias
affects how she performs a range of cognitive operations,
from conceptual categorization to the interpretation of
complex social cues. Numerous other individuals with
autism have also informally reported becoming aware of
similar biases in mental representation, suggesting that
Grandin is not an isolated case.
While Grandin’s account of visual thinking has been
primarily an introspective study, we aim to show that the
Thinking in Pictures hypothesis does, in fact, represent a
very powerful way to look at cognition in autism.
We begin by considering what it might mean to think in
pictures and how this would differ from typical cognition.
Second, we explore how Thinking in Pictures could account
for many characteristic behaviors of autism. Third, we
present relevant empirical data from a range of literature,
including cognitive and neurobiological studies of
individuals with autism. Fourth, we examine how Thinking
in Pictures relates to other cognitive theories of autism.

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a cognitive account of autism
centered around a reliance on pictorial representations. This
Thinking in Pictures hypothesis, inspired by the book of the
same name by Temple Grandin, shows significant potential
for explaining many autistic behaviors. We support this
hypothesis with empirical evidence from several independent
cognitive and neuroimaging studies of individuals with
autism, each of which shows strong bias towards visual
representations and activity. We also examine three other
cognitive theories of autism—Mindblindness, Weak Central
Coherence, and Executive Dysfunction—and show how
Thinking in Pictures provides a deeper explanation for several
results typically cited in support of these theories.
Keywords: Autism; cognitive theory; mental imagery;
pictorial representation; visual reasoning.

Introduction
Ever since the discoveries of autism and Asperger’s
syndrome in the 1940s by physicians Leo Kanner and Hans
Asperger, autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have been
defined by the atypical behaviors that they produce. In
particular, ASDs (referred to as “autism” for simplicity) are
developmental conditions characterized by atypical social
interactions, communication skills, and patterns of behavior
and interests, as described in the American Psychiatric
Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-IV-TR, 2000).

What Does It Mean to Think in Pictures?
Developing a Thinking in Pictures account of autism raises
many hard issues. Do individuals with autism actually think
in pictures, or do they just think they do? If they actually
do, does it mean they are incapable of representing verbal

Figure 1: Outline of etiology of autism (adapted from
Minshew & Goldstein, 1998).

321

information or just biased against it? To what degree do
they abstract information from their visual representations,
and what kinds of visual representations do they use?
We do not intend to answer all of these questions here.
Instead, we propose one simple, minimal characterization of
Thinking in Pictures, leaving open many details, and
examine what conclusions can be drawn. This formulation
does not make for a complete cognitive model, nor is it the
only way to define a valid Thinking in Pictures account.
We begin with two basic assumptions. First, we assume
that typical cognition utilizes both pictorial and amodal
representations and reasoning. Second, we assume that the
Thinking in Pictures cognitive account is characterized as
using mainly pictorial and other modal representations.
Modal representations are close to perceptual modalities,
such as vision, while amodal representations are removed from
perception. At one end of this representational spectrum,
illustrated in Figure 2, are analogical, imagistic or pictorial
representations that preserve topology and have a one-to-one
structural correspondence with the world, but no abstractions of
the world (Glasgow & Papadias, 1992). At the other end are
amodal representations that contain only abstractions of the
world, e.g. in the form of propositions. Along this modalamodal spectrum are various descriptive representations in the
forms of symbols. Descriptive representations close to the
modal end of the spectrum are perceptually grounded, as in
perceptual symbol systems (Barsalou, 1999).

A bias toward pictorial representations also affects
knowledge organization, in particular the formation of
conceptual categories. Consider some basic types of
categories: prototype, exemplar, and qualia (Thagard, 2005).
Qualia-based categories can be supported using pictorial
representations, since they are based on perceptual
similarity. Exemplar categories, which consist of examples
of a particular concept, are also supported since no further
abstraction is required. However, prototype categories
require abstractions from examples to form the
uninstantiated prototype that defines the basic category.
Finally, some basic inferences in typical cognition
inherently use pictorial representations, such as the mental
rotation of images (Shepard & Cooper, 1982). While other
types of inference rely on amodal representations, such as
propositional logic, alternate methods for some of these
inferences, or variations of them, could exist using pictorial
representations. For example, many theories of analogical
reasoning focus on amodal matching, where syntactic
relationships among the various components of a concept
(often representing causal relations) are used to establish the
similarity between two cases (Gentner, 1983). However, it
has been shown that visual knowledge alone is sufficient for
analogical transfer (Davies & Goel, 2008).

Thinking in Pictures and Autism
The definition of autism is centered on three areas: social
interaction, communication, and stereotyped patterns of
behavior and interests. Each of the following paragraphs
addresses a subset of the behaviors in each area, which are
listed in the DSM-IV-TR (2000).
Atypical social behaviors of autism include a lack of
seeking to share enjoyment with others and a lack of social
or emotional reciprocity. Both of these types of behavior
rely on an ability to infer the mental states of others, which
is a highly abstract concept that cannot easily be represented
pictorially. Without this concept, individuals with autism
would have difficulty in desiring to induce certain mental
states in others, like enjoyment, and in reciprocating or even
perceiving emotional or social intentions.
Communication issues in autism include the delayed
development or inappropriate use of language along with
deficits in imaginary play. Thinking in Pictures explicitly
allows for problems in verbal language development from a
bias against amodal representations. Regarding the latter, it
has been shown that symbolic play in typically developing
children evolves from using objects that share perceptual
similarity with the target representation to objects that are
perceptually dissimilar (Ungerer et al., 1981), suggesting a
progression from play that is perceptually grounded to play
that is free from perceptual constraints. Accordingly,
imaginary play deficits in autism could be explained by a
bias towards perceptually grounded representations.
Finally, autism is also characterized by stereotyped
patterns of behavior and interests, such as a preoccupation
with parts of objects or an adherence to nonfunctional
routines. Function, as discussed previously, is a qualitative

Figure 2: Representational spectrum of a cat, illustrating
progression from modal to amodal representations.
Pictorial representations, which lie towards the modal end
of the spectrum, capture quantitative, or metric, information;
amodal representations are especially good at expressing
non-metric relations (Chandrasekaran, 2006). For example,
a pictorial representation of a cat consists of considerable
metric information about the cat, such as the relative sizing
of her body parts, their spatial layout, etc. (Kosslyn, 1994).
In contrast, amodal representations such as the word “cat”
or “behind (tail, body)” contain no metric information about
the cat (even though spatial relationships like “behind” can
be represented).
As a result, in pictorial representations, abstract, nonmetric concepts such as the function of an object, the causal
relations between events, or the intentionality of an agent
are, at best, implicit.

322

concept not well-suited to pictorial representations. Without
functional interpretations, object use by children with
autism could remain centered on visual or other perceptual
features, within the sensorimotor-based frameworks of early
developmental play (Fenson et al., 1976). Several studies
have indeed shown less (Stone et al., 1990) or less complex
(Williams, Reddy, & Costall, 2001) functional play in
children with autism compared to their typically developing
peers. Also, as noted previously, pictorial representations
do not provide for the explicit representation of causality,
which could lead to nonfunctional routines, for instance if
routines were structured temporally instead of causally.

of numbers to add or subtract alternately, and they either
had to remain silent or to repeat “Monday” as a form of
articulatory suppression (AS). The control group performed
far better when they were silent than under AS. However,
the autism group showed no difference between the silent
and AS conditions, suggesting that they did not use verbal
representations to guide their task-switching.
The fourth experiment looked at a word-completion task
in which semantic priming was provided using either picture
or word cues (Kamio & Toichi, 2000). The control group
performed similarly under both conditions, but the autism
group performed much better with picture cues than word
cues. This suggests that the individuals with autism were
better able to retrieve verbal information through pictorial
representations than through other verbal representations.
Together, results from these four experiments suggest that
individuals with autism are biased towards using pictorial
representations over verbal ones in several tasks. They
seem to encode pictures pictorially until required to produce
a verbal representation and also to rely more on pictorial
representations than verbal ones for recall, task-switching,
and semantic retrieval.

Evidence for Thinking in Pictures
Knowledge Representation
We discuss the results of four experiments that examined
the uses of pictorial versus verbal (amodal) representations
in individuals with autism as compared to typically
developing individuals. First, in studies of picture and word
recall tasks in the typical population, it has been consistently
found that more pictures are recalled than words. One
prominent explanation of this effect is dual-coding theory,
which posits that pictures are encoded both pictorially and
verbally whereas words are encoded only verbally, and that
the “dual encoding” of pictures aids in their recall (Paivio,
1991). One study of this task in children found that the
control group exhibited a significant picture-superiority
effect of this kind, as expected, but the same effect was not
statistically significant in the autism group (Whitehouse,
Maybery, & Durkin, 2006), which the authors of that study
suggest results from the children with autism not benefiting
from a second, verbal encoding of the pictures.
Second, in the typical population, the recall of short
words is generally better than the recall of longer words, but
this effect can be eliminated by articulatory suppression,
suggesting that verbal encoding is used to some extent
(Cowan et al., 2003). Furthermore, this effect is still seen if
pictures are used instead of words, but only in subjects of a
certain age, starting around 7 to 8 years old (Hitch et al.,
1989). In one study of this type of picture recall task in
children (Whitehouse, Maybery, & Durkin, 2006), the
pictures had either long or short labels, and subjects were
asked to either remain silent or verbalize each label. As
expected, the control group performed significantly better
with the short labels than with the long labels, and whether
they verbalized the labels had no effect. In contrast, the
autism group exhibited a much smaller word-length effect
overall, and the effect was smaller in the silent condition
than in the verbalizing condition. These results suggest that
the children with autism verbally encoded the pictures to a
lesser extent than did the control group, and also that their
use of verbal encodings increased when prompted to
verbalize the labels.
The third experiment looked at the effects of articulatory
suppression on a task-switching test (Whitehouse, Maybery,
& Durkin, 2006). Children were given a sequence of pairs

Knowledge Organization
As discussed earlier, prototype-based categories cannot be
instantiated easily using pictorial representations. Several
studies show evidence for limitations in the use of prototype
categories in autism. In one study, children with autism
who successfully applied rule-based categorization on one
task were unable to apply prototype-based categorization on
another (Klinger & Dawson, 2001). Individuals with autism
were also shown under a variety of tasks to exhibit fairly
typical abilities in concept identification but significantly
lower abilities in concept formation, which relies on the use
of prototypes (Minshew, Meyer, & Goldstein, 2002).
Another study showed a preference in individuals with
autism for categorizing objects based on physical attributes
instead of on more abstract qualities, namely for sorting
books by color instead of by genre as typically developing
individuals did (Ropar et al., 2007).

Visual Attention and Reasoning
Much empirical evidence has shown that individuals with
autism are adept at certain tasks relying on pictorial modes
of processing. One such task is the Embedded Figures Task
(EFT), in which a small, simple shape must be found within
a larger figure. Numerous studies have shown that
individuals with autism are often more accurate (Shah &
Frith, 1983) or more efficient (Joliffe & Baron-Cohen,
1997) on the EFT than typically developing individuals.
Recent studies have looked at another visual search task
in which a target must be found amid a group of distracters
that share either shape alone (feature search) or shape or
color (conjunctive search) (Plaisted, O’Riordan, & BaronCohen, 1998; O’Riordan et al., 2001). Results showed that
individuals with autism had significantly faster search times
than typically developing individuals and, unlike the control

323

group, had the same search times under both feature and
conjunctive search conditions. Even more unusual were
findings that, while typically developing individuals showed
a characteristic linear increase in search time as the number
of distracters increased in conjunctive search, the increase in
search times for the autism group remained fairly flat.
These results suggest that individuals with autism might
be using fundamentally different search strategies than the
typical population. While the view of Thinking in Pictures
presented in this paper does not explicitly deal with visual
attention, these results could be explained by attentional
strategies that are not mediated by verbal representations,
which might prove more efficient for visual tasks.
Finally, while many of these types of studies cast their
findings as evidence for isolated skills or “islets of ability”
in individuals with autism, recent research has suggested
that, given the opportunity to reason pictorially, individuals
with autism can exhibit significantly higher measures of
general intelligence than shown on standard tests.
In particular, a study conducted using groups of both
children and adults with autism demonstrated that their
performance on Raven’s Progressive Matrices fell into
dramatically higher percentile ranges than their performance
on Wechsler scales, a discrepancy not seen in the typically
developing control groups (Dawson et al., 2007). In fact,
whereas a third of the children with autism fell into the
mentally retarded range on the Wechsler scales, only 5
percent did so on the Raven’s test, with a third of them
scoring at the 90th percentile or higher (as compared to
none in this range on the Wechsler scales). Raven’s
Progressive Matrices, while a pictorial test, is cited in this
study as requiring “the ability to infer rules, to manage a
hierarchy of goals, and to form high-level abstractions.”
This result is strongly in accord with the Thinking in
Pictures theory of autism, which provides for the pictorial
execution of all of these high-level reasoning processes.

and parietal visual regions in the low imagery condition.
These results suggest that individuals with autism rely on
visuospatial brain regions to process both high and low
imagery sentences, unlike typically developing individuals
who use these areas more for high imagery sentences and
use verbal areas for low imagery sentences.
The second fMRI study looked at the differences in brain
activation between individuals with autism and typically
developing individuals while they performed the Embedded
Figures Task (EFT) which, as described earlier, is a visual
search task (Ring et al., 1999). While many brain regions
showed similar activation between the two groups, the
control group showed greater activation than the autism
group in prefrontal cortical regions that are associated with
working memory and in particular serial search. In contrast,
the autism group showed greater activation in occipitotemporal regions that represent low level visual processing
and have been linked to mental imagery (and possibly
motion). These results suggest a difference in high-level
attentional strategy between individuals with autism and
typically developing individuals while performing the EFT,
with typically developing individuals recruiting a workingmemory-based serial search strategy and individuals with
autism using an imagery-based strategy.

Other Cognitive Theories of Autism
Mindblindness
Mindblindness hypothesizes that individuals with autism
lack a “theory of mind,” or ability to ascribe beliefs to other
beings (Baron-Cohen, 1995). This limitation could lead to
atypical social and communicative behaviors. The classic
study used in support of this theory is the false-belief task,
in which two characters (typically dolls named Sally and
Ann) are shown alongside two baskets. Sally places a
marble in her basket and exits the room, after which time
Ann switches the marble from one basket to another. When
Sally returns, the subject is asked in which basket Sally will
search for her marble. Responding that Sally will look in
the first basket, where she still supposes the marble to be,
requires ascribing a false belief to Sally, i.e. a belief that
does not match the state of the real world.
The original study (Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985)
looked at three groups for this task: children with autism
(mean age 12 years), children with Down’s syndrome (mean
age 11 years), and a control group (mean age 4 years). Both
the Down’s syndrome group (who had a lower mean verbal
mental age than the autism group) and the control group
(who had a lower mean physical age than the autism group)
averaged percent-correct scores in the mid-80s, while the
autism subjects scored only in the mid-20s.
While Mindblindness holds that theory of mind is a
distinct mental mechanism (Baron-Cohen, 1995), one can
also approach theory of mind from the standpoint of
representations in general. As discussed in the previous
section, the formation of concepts like intentionality or
mental states is difficult using pictorial representations. If

Neurobiological Evidence
Here, we discuss two neuroimaging studies using functional
MRI that relate to representations and attentional strategies,
respectively. The first study looked at differences in brain
activation between individuals with autism and typically
developing individuals when they had to answer true/false
questions about high or low imagery sentences (Kana et al.,
2006). High imagery sentences included statements like,
“The number eight when rotated 90 degrees looks like a pair
of eyeglasses,” while low imagery sentences included
statements like, “Addition, subtraction, and multiplication
are all math skills.” The control group showed a significant
difference between the high and low imagery conditions,
with the high imagery condition eliciting more activity from
temporal and parietal regions associated with mental
imagery as well as from inferior frontal regions associated
with verbal rehearsal. In contrast, the autism group showed
similar activation in both conditions, with less activity in
inferior frontal language regions than the control group in
the high imagery condition, and greater activity in occipital

324

these concepts were made accessible through pictorial
representations, for instance through diagrams or metaphors,
then we might expect to see improvements in theory of
mind capabilities. A recent study (Wellman et al., 2002)
used cartoon-drawn thought-bubbles to teach children with
autism about mental states. After this training, most of the
children passed standard false-belief tasks that they had
previously failed as well as other theory of mind tasks.
Also, a dissociation has been found between children with
autism and typically developing children in their abilities to
represent different kinds of “false” states. In one study
(Leslie & Thaiss, 1992), two groups of children were tested
on standard false belief tasks, in which subjects had to
reason about beliefs that did not match the state of the real
world, as well as on false photograph and false map tasks, in
which subjects had to reason about external visual
representations that did not match the state of the real world.
The control group performed well on the false belief tasks
but poorly on the false photograph and false map tasks. As
expected, the autism group performed poorly on the false
belief tasks, but they actually outperformed controls on the
visual tasks. This suggests that, while impaired in their
understanding of abstract false beliefs, the children with
autism had access to richer pictorial representations or
stronger pictorial reasoning skills than the control group.

flexibility. However, in the Thinking in Pictures account,
we would expect to see atypical performance in these verbal
and category-dependent areas.
Furthermore, as cited earlier, a recent study (Dawson et
al., 2007) showed that both children and adults with autism
performed considerably better on Raven’s Progressive
Matrices than on Wechsler scales of intelligence. Raven’s
Progressive Matrices are deemed to test fluid intelligence,
which includes “coordinated executive function, attentional
control, and working memory” (as described by that study).
Therefore, these results do not seem to indicate a general
executive dysfunction in individuals with autism.
One possible explanation, using the Thinking in Pictures
hypothesis, is that individuals with autism have deficits in
executive functions that are verbally mediated but not in
executive functions that are (or can be) pictorially mediated.
This view is consistent with current models of working
memory that propose two distinct storage components—the
phonological loop and the visuospatial sketchpad—that
operate under a central executive (Baddeley, 2007).

Conclusions
Our aim in this paper has been to show that Thinking in
Pictures has significant strengths as a cognitive account of
autism that are not to be found in existing theories, both in
terms of its explanatory breadth regarding the behaviors of
autism as well as the depth to which it can account for many
different pieces of supporting empirical evidence.
Of course, the range of autistic behaviors that any of these
theories, including Thinking in Pictures, can explain of and by
itself remains an open issue, as does the question of whether
any of these theories might apply more to one particular subset
of the autistic population than another. It is possible that a full
cognitive account of autism requires a combination of theories,
or that developing a coherent theory requires the identification
of specific subgroups of individuals on the autism spectrum
beyond what has already been established.

Weak Central Coherence
Weak Central Coherence hypothesizes that individuals with
autism have a limited ability to integrate detail-level
information into higher-level meanings, or are at least
biased towards local instead of global processing (Happé &
Frith, 2006). This trait is presumed to account for some of
the stereotyped patterns of behaviors and interests in
individuals with autism. Also, superior performance on
certain tasks like the EFT is explained with the rationale that
in individuals with autism, visual search is unhindered by
potentially distracting gestalt perceptions.
However, as described above, these results can also be
explained under the Thinking in Pictures hypothesis by
enhanced visual attentional strategies that could arise from a
bias towards pictorial representations. Other evidence for
Weak Central Coherence often includes verbal tests, such as
deficits in homograph pronunciation in sentence contexts (as
cited in Happé & Frith, 2006). These tests, while putatively
measuring local, word-level versus higher-order, sentencelevel processing, can also be interpreted as tests of verbal
reasoning skills, which would be impaired under the
Thinking in Pictures account.

Acknowledgments
Kunda was supported by the Office of Naval Research
through the NDSEG fellowship program, and Goel’s work
was partially supported by an NSF IIS Grant (#0534622) on
Multimodal Case-Based Reasoning in Modeling and
Design. The authors would like to thank Gregory Abowd,
Rosa Arriaga, Nancy Nersessian, Eric Schumacher, Melody
Moore, and Irfan Essa for their helpful comments, as well as
members of the Design Intelligence Lab and the Autism
Research Group. Also thanks to Andrea Ray Chandler for
the use of her cat sketch.

Executive Dysfunction
The final cognitive theory of autism that we discuss is
Executive Dysfunction, which hypothesizes that individuals
with autism have limitations in their executive functions
such as planning, mental flexibility, and inhibition, among
others (Russell, 1998). Many studies cited in support of the
Executive Dysfunction theory include verbal tests of
memory and inhibition and sorting-based tests of mental

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Revised 4th Ed.).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working Memory, Thought and
Action. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

325

Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An Essay on
Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the
autistic child have a theory of mind? Cognition,21, 37-46.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Chandrasekaran, B. (2006). Multimodal cognitive
architecture: making perception more central to intelligent
behavior. Proc. AAAI National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (pp. 1508-1512).
Cowan, N., Baddeley, A.D., Elliot, E.M., & Norris, J.
(2003). List composition and the word length effect in
immediate recall: A comparison of localist and globalist
assumptions. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 74–79.
Davies, J., & Goel, A. (2008). Transfer of problem-solving
strategy using the cognitive visual language. J. Visual
Languages and Computing, in press.
Dawson, M., Soulières, I., Gernsbacher, M. A., & Mottron,
L. (2007). The level and nature of autistic intelligence.
Psychological Science, 18, 657-662.
Fenson, L., Kagan, J., Kearsley, R., & Zelazo, P.R. (1976).
The developmental progression of manipulative play in
the first two years. Child Development, 47, 232-236.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: a theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Glasgow, J. I., & Papadias, D. (1992). Computational
Imagery. Cognitive Science, 16, 355-394.
Grandin, T. (2006). Thinking in Pictures, Expanded Edition:
My Life with Autism. New York, NY: Vintage Press.
Happé, F., & Frith, U. (2006). The weak coherence account:
detail-focused cognitive style in autism spectrum
disorders. J. Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36, 525.
Hitch, G. J., Halliday, M. S., Dodd, A., & Littler, J. E.
(1989). Development of rehearsal in short-term memory:
Differences between pictorial and spoken stimuli. British
J. Developmental Psychology, 7, 347–362.
Jolliffe, T., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1997). Are people with
autism and Asperger syndrome faster than normal on the
Embedded Figures Test? J. Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 38, 527–534.
Kamio, Y., & Toichi, M. (2000). Dual access to semantics
in autism: is pictorial access superior to verbal access? J.
Child Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 41,
859-867.
Kana, R. K., Keller, T. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Minshew, N.
J., & Just, M. A. (2006). Sentence comprehension in
autism: thinking in pictures with decreased functional
connectivity. Brain, 129, 2484–2493.
Klinger, L. G., & Dawson, G. (2001). Prototype formation
in autism. Development & Psychopathology, 13, 111–124.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and Brain: The Resolution of
the Imagery Debate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leslie, A. M., & Thaiss, A. (1992). Domain specificity in
conceptual development: neuropsychological evidence
from autism. Cognition, 43, 225–251.

Minshew, N. J., & Goldstein, G. (1998). Autism as a
disorder of complex information processing. Mental
Retardation & Developmental Disabilities Research
Reviews, 4, 129-136.
Minshew, N. J., Meyer, J., & Goldstein, G. (2002). Abstract
reasoning in autism: a dissociation between concept
formation and concept identification. Neuropsychology,
16, 327-224.
O’Riordan, M. A., Plaisted, K. C., Driver, J., & BaronCohen, S. (2001). Superior visual search in autism. J.
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 27, 719–730.
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and
current status. Canadian J. Psychology, 45, 255–287.
Plaisted, K., O’Riordan, M., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1998a).
Enhanced visual search for a conjunctive target in autism:
a research note. J. Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 39,
777–783.
Ring, H. A., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Williams,
S. C. R., Brammer, M., Andrew, C., & Bullmore, E. T.
(1999). Cerebral correlates of preserved cognitive skills in
autism: a functional MRI study of embedded figures task
performance. Brain, 122, 1305–1315.
Ropar, D. & Peebles, D. (2007). Sorting preference in
children with autism: the dominance of concrete features.
J. Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37, 270-280.
Russell, J. (Ed.). (1998). Autism as an Executive Disorder.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press, USA.
Shah, A., & Frith, U. (1983). An islet of ability in autistic
children. J. Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 24, 613–620.
Shepard, R. N., & Cooper, L. (1982). Mental Images and
Their Transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stone, W. L., Lemanek, K. L., Fishel, P. T., Fernandez, M.
C., and Altemeier, W. A. (1990). Play and imitation skills
in the diagnosis of autism in young children. Pediatrics,
86, 267-272.
Thagard, P. (2005). Mind: Introduction to Cognitive
Science, 2nd Ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ungerer, J. A., Zelazo, P. R., Kearsley, R. B., and O’Leary,
K. (1981). Developmental changes in the representation
of objects in symbolic play from 18 to 34 months of age.
Child Development, 52, 186-195.
Wellman, H. M., Baron-Cohen, S., Caswell, R., Gomez, J.
C., Swettenham, J., Toye, E., & Lagattuta, K. (2002).
Thought-bubbles help children with autism acquire an
alternative to a theory of mind. Autism, 6, 343-363.
Whitehouse, A. J. O., Maybery, M. T., & Durkin, K. (2006).
Inner speech impairments in autism. J. Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 47, 857-865.
Williams, E., Reddy, V., and Costall, A. (2001). Taking a
closer look at functional play in children with autism. J.
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31, 67-77.

326

