UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tracks in the Mind: Differential Entrenchment of Common and Rare Liturgical and Everyday
Multiword Phrases in Religious and Secular Hebrew Speakers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5j38t63g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Berant, Jonathan
Caldwell-Harris, Catherine
Edelman, Shimon

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tracks in the Mind: Differential Entrenchment of Common and Rare Liturgical
and Everyday Multiword Phrases in Religious and Secular Hebrew Speakers
Jonathan Berant (jonatha6@post.tau.ac.il)
School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel

Catherine Caldwell-Harris (charris@bu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Boston University
64 Cummington St., Boston, MA 02215, USA

Shimon Edelman (se37@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
becomes progressively entrenched, to the point of becoming a
unit; moreover, units are variably entrenched depending on
the frequency of their occurrence.”
In the two decades since the publication of
Langacker’s volume, the concept of entrenchment became a
central part of the item-based theories of language acquisition
(Tomasello, 2003; Goldberg, 2005). Although empirical
evidence for entrenchment in L1 and L2 acquisition has been
accumulating steadily (e.g., Theakston, 2004; Eskildsen &
Cadierno, 2007), many of the originally posited
characteristics of this phenomenon are still waiting to be
thoroughly explored. In the present paper, we focus on one
such characteristic: the graded dependence of entrenchment
on exposure.
Harris (1998) demonstrated that the last words of
four-word English idioms (such as “great minds think alike”)
are processed more quickly when they are followed by either
the first two words or the middle two words of the idiom,
suggesting that entrenched idiom-level representations exist.
She was also able to show that common word pairs (such as
“tax bill”), but not random ones (such as “tag bill”), activate
unitized representations for the pair, as well as schematic
representations that are consistent with its syntactic structure.
More recently, Caldwell-Harris and Morris
(submitted) reported a correlation between the purported
degree of entrenchment of word pairs (as estimated by their
Google frequencies) and the probability of the subjects
perceiving them in the “canonical” order when presented with
the reversed order (e.g., seeing “zip code” when presented
with “code zip”).
Although it is now possible to use corpus tools and
Google searches to estimate the frequency of a given multiword expression in various contexts, neither expressions
specifically described as idioms nor merely common multiword expressions offer the possibility of controlling the
subjects’ exposure to the stimuli. Without such control, the
frequencies observed in a corpus may be only loosely related
to each subject’s experience, making it difficult to
demonstrate the psychological reality of graded
entrenchment.

Abstract
We tested the hypothesis that more frequent exposure to multi-word
phrases results in deeper entrenchment of their representations, by
examining the performance of subjects of different religiosity in the
recognition of briefly presented liturgical and secular phrases drawn
from several frequency classes. Three of the sources were prayer
texts that religious Jews are required to recite on a daily, weekly, and
annual basis, respectively; two others were common and rare
expressions encountered in the general secular Israeli culture. As
expected, linear dependence of recognition score on frequency was
found for the religious subjects (being most pronounced for men,
who are usually more observant than women); both religious and
secular subjects performed better on common than on rare general
culture items. Our results support the notion of graded entrenchment
introduced by Langacker and shared by several cognitive linguistic
theories of language comprehension and production.
Keywords: entrenchment; prefabs; frequency effects; sentence
processing; multiword expressions; collocations.

Introduction
In processing an incoming utterance or in generating a new
one, a user of language has the choice of two computational
strategies. Using the terminology of Sinclair (1991), these
strategies involve, respectively, (i) the open-choice principle,
according to which units are looked up in the lexicon and then
composed together according to the rules of grammar, and (ii)
the idiom principle, according to which a pre-fabricated
version of the utterance, if one exists, is drawn from an
extended phrasal lexicon (Becker, 1975), rather than being
constructed all over again “on the fly.” Balancing these two
options in language corresponds in more general terms to the
familiar computational trade-off between processing time and
memory capacity (Yang, 2005).
One of the foundational insights of cognitive
linguistics is that these options need not be entirely distinct.
As noted by Langacker (1987, p.59), “Linguistic structures
are more realistically conceived as falling along a continuous
scale of entrenchment in cognitive organization. Every use
of a structure has a positive impact on its degree of
entrenchment, whereas extended periods of disuse have a
negative impact. With repeated use, a novel structure

869

In the study reported here, we circumvented this
difficulty by resorting to stimuli for which the frequency of
exposure could be estimated
for a particular subject
population. Thus, we predicted that observant Israeli Jews
would exhibit differential entrenchment for Hebrew multiword expressions taken from liturgical texts that are recited
on different occasions during the daily, weekly, and annual
prayer cycles. A control group of subjects comprised secular
Israelis. The two groups were tested both with these religious
expressions and with rare and common phrases that are part
of the everyday Israeli cultural experience.

Methods
Participants
Fifty-one native Hebrew speakers, ranging in age from 18 to
36, were categorized according to whether they self-reported
as being religious or secular; 19 participants attested that they
were secular (11 females and 8 males), and the other 32
attested that they were religious (19 females and 13 males).
Each participant completed a questionnaire detailing praying
habits (frequency of praying and whether in private or at
synagogue).

Praying Customs in Orthodox Judaism
Observant Orthodox Jews are required by their religion to
recite three prayers every day. On Saturdays, which is the
Jewish holy day of the week, the prayers are longer and the
service is substantially different. The prayers recited over the
annual High Holy Days are further prolonged and modified.
Prayers can be recited in privacy, without a quorum, or
preferably in a synagogue, where the service is longer. The
High Holy Days service carries a higher emotional charge
than the more frequent mundane prayers.
The majority of the Jewish population in Israel is secular.
Generally, secular people do not pray at all, although a
substantial proportion does attend some of the services in the
High Holy Days. In the religious sector, the variability in
praying customs is high: some people attend all services
mentioned above in a synagogue, others pray daily in private,
and some only pray on a weekly basis or even less often.
Furthermore, within the religious sector, there are pronounced
cultural differences between the sexes: traditionally, men are
expected to be more meticulous about praying than women.
Thus, there are two factors that affect the frequency with
which an individual is exposed to phrases from the Jewish
liturgical texts. The first is the objective frequency of the
phrase in Jewish prayers. Phrases that appear in daily prayers
are presumably recited more often than phrases that appear in
weekly prayers, which in turn are recited more often than
phrases that appear only in annual prayers. The second factor
is the specific praying habits of the individual. The more
observant a person is, the more we expect him or her to have
been exposed to religious phrases. We can use these two
factors to predict the level of entrenchment of a phrase from a
prayer in a religious individual. This entrenchment is the
product of being naturally exposed to liturgical Jewish
phrases throughout many years of experience.

Figure 1: Mean experiment Score (ExpScore) and standard
error across levels of frequency for all of the subjects.

Materials
Six groups of stimuli were constructed (see examples in
Table 1). Three of these were religious phrases, categorized
according to frequency of recitation (daily, weekly, and
annual). Two groups were nonreligious phrases, categorized
as common and rare. The sixth group was constructed out of
words that appear separately from each other in Jewish
prayers and do not form cohesive phrases (mixed). Each
phrase group comprised eleven 2-word phrases and four 3word phrases. The length in characters of phrases was similar
across all categories (mean=12.1, std=0.55). Religious
phrases were extracted from Jewish prayers that are typically1
recited daily, weekly, or yearly. Phrases were selected to have
comparable semantic and syntactic complexity. The common
phrases were drawn from Israeli culture and included political
slogans, names of famous TV shows, and popular songs. The
rare phrases were selected from modern Hebrew literature
and poetry. Google counts confirmed that the phrases in the
rare group were significantly less common than phrases in the

Table 1: Examples of phrases.
Phrase Type
Daily
Weekly
Annual
Mixed
Common
Rare

Example
morid hatal
nafshi yeshovev
bnei maron
zore’a ha’amim
shalom xaver
divrey rahav

1
A person may also conceivably encounter these phrases
outside of the prayer routine, e.g., in the course of studying or of
some other activity.

870

common group (mean log frequency of rare phrases = 1.6,
common phrases = 4.6, p<0.0001).

Figure 3: Mean ExpScore per subject per frequency boxplot
on secular phrases across the Religion and Sex factors.
Figure 2: Mean ExpScore per subject per frequency boxplot
on religious phrases across the Religion and Sex factors.

Results
The analysis examined the relationships between the
dependent variable, ExpScore (the perceptual identification
score, measured on a 0,1,2 scale) and five predictors:
Religion (a 2-level factor, secular vs. religious); Sex (a 2level factor, male vs. female); Frequency (a 6-level factor,
daily, weekly, annual, mixed, common and rare); PencilScore
(average score the subject got in the paper-and-pencil test, 0-1
scale); and PrayersPerDay (number of prayers recited by the
subject every day, with possible values being 0,0.5,1,2,3). In
addition to those fixed effects, two random factors were
included in the analysis: Subject and Item.
Because items from the ‘mixed’ condition were not true
phrases, they were dropped from the analysis after
ascertaining that their score was significantly lower than that
in any other condition (see Figure 1). Data were then split into
two subsets, each with an ordered Frequency factor: religious
phrases (daily, weekly, and annual) and secular phrases (rare
vs. common).
Analysis was carried out in two stages, using the R
processing environment (www.r-project.org). First, repeatedmeasures ANOVA tests were performed after averaging the
scores separately by subjects and by items (Clark, 1973).
Because effects that turn out significant in separate by-subject
and by-item analyses may still be unreliable when all the
random factors are considered jointly (Raaijmakers et al.,
1999), we also fit a series of mixed linear models to the data
using the lme4 package (Baayen, in press), which can handle
multiple crossed random effects. Because high correlations
were found between the Religion, PencilScore and
PrayersPerDay
variables
(PencilScore-PrayersPerDay:
r=0.78, p<0.0001, Religion-PencilScore: r=0.92, p<0.0001,
Religion-PrayersPerDay: r=0.68, p<0.0001), separate models

Procedures
In the perceptual identification task, phrases were briefly
displayed in the center of the screen followed by the masking
stimulus (‘&&&&&&’). Participants immediately verbally
reported the words to the experimenter who recorded their
response, and then participants initiated the subsequent trial
with a key press. Exposure durations were set individually for
each participant, based on performance in practice trials. For
two-word phrases, exposure duration ranged from 50-80 ms
across the participants (mean exposure 71.71 ms); for 3-word
phrases, durations were set to be 20 ms longer.
Stimuli were displayed using the DirectRT software
(www.empirisoft.com), under Windows XP installed on a
2.16 GHz Intel 2 Core Duo MacBook. The perceptual
identification task was explained to the participants both
orally and in a written form prior to the practice trials. The 90
experimental trials were randomly ordered. Responses were
scored for accuracy using a three-point scale: 0 for
recognition of less than one word, 1 for correct recognition of
at least one word in the phrase, 2 for exact and complete
recognition of the phrase.
After completion of the perceptual identification task
participants were tested on their knowledge of Jewish prayer
texts in a paper-and-pencil test. The subject was asked to
complete 17 phrases taken from various Jewish prayers. (E.g.,
barux shem kvod ____). Zero points were given for a phrase
left incomplete, one point for partial completion, and two
points for perfect completion of the phrase.

871

effects for PencilScore (F(1,42)=161.2, p<0.001) and Sex
(F(1,42)=29.9, p<0.0001), and a marginal effect for
Frequency (F(2,42)=3.0, p=0.06). An interaction between
PencilScore and Sex was also found (F(1,42)=7.4, p<0.01).
Thus, PencilScore and the interaction between PencilScore
and Sex were significant both by-subject and by-item.
Frequency was significant by-subject and marginal by-item.
A similar 2 x 3 ANCOVA with the same factors but
PrayersPerDay as a covariate showed that subjects who pray
more tended to obtain better scores (see figure 4). A bysubject ANCOVA revealed main effects for PrayersPerDay
(F(1,47)=15.0, p<0.001) and Frequency (F(2,94)=32.8,
p<0.0001), and an interaction between PrayersPerDay and
Frequency (F(2,94)=5.1, p<0.01). A by-item ANCOVA
revealed main effects for PrayersPerDay (F(1,42)=47.5,
p<0.0001) and Sex (F(1,42)=24.0, p<0.0001), the same
marginal effect for Frequency, and an interaction between
PrayersPerDay and Sex (F(1,42)=13.8, p<0.001).
PrayersPerDay was significant both by-subject and by-item,
and Frequency was significant by-subject and marginally
significant by-item.
We performed similar ANOVAs on the secular phrases.
The 2 x 2 x 3 ANOVA with factors Sex, Religion, and
Frequency revealed that common phrases received higher
scores than rare phrases (see Figure 6). A by-subject ANOVA
revealed a main effect for Frequency (rare phrases: 0.78,
common phrases: 1.48, F(1,48)=470.7, p<0.0001) and an
interaction between Religion and Sex (F(1,47)=5.6, p=0.02).
A by-item ANOVA revealed main effects for Frequency
(F(1,28)=25.8, p<0.0001) and Sex (F(1,28)=14.6, p<0.001)
and an interaction between Religion and Sex (F(1,29)=15.7,
p<0.001). Frequency and the interaction between Religion
and Sex were significant both by-subject and by-item (see
figure 3). The 2 x 3 by-subject ANCOVA with Sex and
Frequency as factors and PencilScore as a covariate found a
main effect for Frequency (F(1,47)=473.6, p<0.0001) and an
interaction between PencilScore and Sex (F(1,47)=5.7,
p=0.02). The by-item ANCOVA revealed main effects for
Frequency (F(1,28)=25.8, p<0.0001) and Sex (F(1,28)=14.4,
p<0.001) and an interaction between PencilScore and Sex
(F(1,28)=19.13, p<0.001). Frequency and the interaction
between PencilScore and Sex were significant both bysubject and by-item. The last 2 x 3 by-subject ANCOVA with
Frequency and Sex as factors and PrayersPerDay as a
covariate found a main effect for Frequency (F(1,47)=489.0,
p<0.0001) and an interaction between PrayersPerDay and Sex
(F(1,47)=5.7, p=0.02). The by-item ANOVA revealed main
effects for Frequency (F(1,28)=25.8, p<0.0001) and Sex
(F(1,28)=20.8, p<0.0001), and interactions between
PrayersPerDay and Sex (F(1,28)=15.9, p<0.001) and between
PrayersPerDay, Frequency and Sex (F(1,28)=5.1, p=0.03).
Frequency and the interaction between PrayersPerDay and
Sex were significant both by-subject and by-item.
As mentioned earlier, showing significance of a predictor
by-subject and by-item does not necessarily entail that it
would prove significant in a combined random effects
analysis. The lme4 package handles crossed random factors
such as Subject and Item in the present case; we used it to fit

were fit for each of these variables as a stand-in for
religiosity.

Figure 4: Mean ExpScore per subject as a function of
PencilScore and PrayersPerDay (each point represents one
subject). Linear models fit to this data suggest that these
predictors have a facilitatory effect on the recognition of
religious phrases but not of the secular phrases.
Looking first at the subjects’ performance on religious
phrases, we found that religious subjects obtained higher
scores than secular subjects (see Figure 2). This effect was
revealed as significant in a 2 x 2 x 3 (Sex x Religion x
Frequency) mixed design ANOVA. A by-subject ANOVA
revealed main effects for Religion (0.78 vs. 1.2 score for
secular vs. religious, F(1,47)=15.5, p<0.001), Frequency
(mean daily score: 1.17, mean weekly score: 0.91, mean
annual score: 1.04, F(2,96)=33.7, p<0.0001), and Sex (0.95
vs. 1.17 score for female vs. male, F(1,47)=4.5, p=0.04).
Interaction effects were found for Religion and Sex
(F(1,47)=4.4, p=0.04), and Religion and Frequency
(F(2,96)=5.5, p<0.01). A by-item ANOVA revealed main
effects for Religion (F(1,42)=124.3, p<0.0001) and Sex
(F(1,42)=46.2, p<0.0001) and a marginal effect for Frequency
(F(2,42)=3.0, p=0.06). An interaction was found for Religion
and Frequency (F(2,42)=3.6, p=0.04). Thus, Religion, Sex
and the interaction between Religion and Frequency were
significant both by-subject and by-item. Frequency was
highly significant by-subject and marginal by-item.
A 2 x 3 ANCOVA with Frequency and Sex as factors and
PencilScore as a covariate showed that subjects with high
scores in the paper-and-pencil test tended to get high scores in
the perceptual identification task (see Figure 4). A by-subject
ANCOVA revealed main effects for PencilScore
(F(1,47)=23.8, p<0.0001) and Frequency (F(2,94)=32.9,
p<0.0001). Interactions were found for PencilScore and Sex
(F(1,47)=4.4, p=0.04) and PencilScore and Frequency
(F(2,94)=4.9, p<0.01). A by-item ANCOVA revealed main

872

a linear model to our data. In addition to offering a more
faithful picture of the significant effects, the lmer function in
this package (but not the standard R function for ANOVA,
aov) tolerates unbalanced data (in our case, the numbers of
subjects in the Religion by Sex groups were different). The
lmer function also allows one to specify a distribution other
than the normal distribution for the data. Indeed, the
ExpScore variable in our experiment was binomial rather than
normal, under a transformation that mapped all erroneous and
partial identifications scores to 0, and all perfect scores to 1.

the set containing only religious subjects (see Figure 5)
showed a main effect for the frequency of the religious
phrases (z=-2.42, p=0.015), and a main effect for sex (z =
3.11, p<0.01). Because religious men pray more regularly
than religious women (mean score for religious males: 1.43,
mean score for religious females: 1.03) we limited the
analysis further to religious males only and found a stronger
graded effect (z = -3.26, p=0.001). A model fit to the secular
subjects data showed no graded effect for the frequency of
religious phrases, as expected (z = -1.14, p=0.25). Adding a
quadratic Frequency term to the model for the secular
subjects data resulted in marginal effects for Frequency (z=1.93, p=0.053) and Frequency squared (z=1.78, p=0.075).

Figure 5: Mean ExpScore per subject across the different
levels of frequency for the religious phrases. The graded
effect is stronger for religious compared to secular subjects,
and for religious men compared to religious women.

Figure 6: Mean ExpScore per subject across different levels
of frequency for the secular phrases. The graded effect is
clear regardless of sex or religion.

We fit a series of binomial logit-link mixed linear models
to the ExpScore data for the religious phrases among all of
the subjects. The first model used Religion and Frequency as
predictors. The Religion predictor was significant, which
shows that religious subjects indeed performed better than
secular subjects (z = 5.16, p<0.0001). The second model used
PencilScore and Frequency as predictors. The PencilScore
predictor was significant, which shows that high scores in the
paper-and-pencil test are associated with high scores in the
perceptual identification experiment (z=5.87, p<0.0001). The
third model used PrayersPerDay and Frequency as predictors.
PrayersPerDay was significant, which confirms that subjects
who pray more performed better in the experiment (z = 4.98,
p<0.0001). Sex was dropped from all the above models
because its effects did not reach significance when
incorporated into the models. Together, the three models
show that the more religious the subject is (by whichever of
the three measures), the better score received for religious
phrases in the experiment.
We next used mixed-model linear regression analysis to
test for a graded effect of the frequency of religious phrases
among the religious subjects only. Fitting a linear model to

Models fit to the secular phrases showed a strong effect for
the Frequency predictor. A model using Religion, Sex and
Frequency as predictors revealed a main effect for Frequency
(z=4.57, p<0.0001) and an interaction between Religion and
Sex (z=2.81, p<0.01). A model using PencilScore, Sex and
Frequency as predictors revealed a main effect for Frequency
(z=4.81, p<0.0001) and an interaction between PencilScore
and Sex (z=2.92, p<0.01). A model using PrayersPerDay, Sex
and Frequency as predictors revealed again a main effect for
Frequency (z=4.73, p<0.0001) and an interaction between
PrayersPerDay and Sex (z=3.16, p<0.01).

Discussion
The present study tested the hypothesis that multi-word
phrases have increased accessibility as a function of how
frequently they are encountered. To quantify prior exposure,
we recruited observant religious subjects, who are likely to
recite liturgical texts at prescribed regular intervals; secular
subjects, who do not pray regularly, served as a control
population.

873

Our results support the graded entrenchment hypothesis.
The effects of all three variables that we chose as surrogates
for prayer frequency (Religion, PencilScore and
PrayersPerDay) on the subjects’ recognition performance as
measured by ExpScore were significant. We note that while
Religion and PrayersPerDay are based on the subject’s selfassessment and may therefore not be entirely reliable,
PencilScore is an objective “offline” measure of the subject’s
familiarity with the phrases, just as ExpScore is an objective
“online” measure of the same. The observed correlation
between these two measures can be explained in terms of a
dual effect of entrenchment: on the one hand, it consolidates
the memory trace of a phrase (making its eventual retrieval
more likely and more reliable); on the other hand, it also
makes this memory trace more readily traversed during
perception and production (making its real-time recognition
more reliable). As expected from this explanation, the
correlation between ExpScore and PencilScore is only
observed for religious phrases (Figure 4).
Because religious men usually pray more often than
religious women, we expected to find an interaction between
Religion and Sex. Although the results do point in that
direction (see Figure 2), the interaction was not significant in
our analysis. We believe that collecting more data might
expose this interaction.
We had expected a graded effect within the religious
subjects for the frequency of the phrases, and no effect for the
secular subjects. However, as Figure 5 shows, the secular
subjects did show an effect: a lower score for the weekly
phrases compared to the daily and annual phrases. It is
possible that the weekly phrases we used were unintentionally
more difficult than the daily and annual phrases. The
explanation we favor is that non-religious participants are
affected by the frequency of phrases, just as are the religious
participants, but in an attenuated manner. The annual phrases
were more entrenched than weekly phrases within the secular
subjects because many secular subjects attend synagogue
during the High Holy Days, and because the prayers recited
on that occasion carry a high emotional charge.
Within the religious subjects the situation is clear-cut. The
model’s fit to all of the religious subjects, and especially the
fit to the religious men’s data, shows sensitivity to the
frequency of the phrase. Thus, we may conclude that
differential exposure to multi-word phrases is capable of
bringing about a graded entrenchment of these phrases —
laying down tracks in the subject’s mind that facilitate
subsequent traversal of familiar phrasal territory.

References
Baayen, R. H. (in press). Analyzing linguistic data. A
practical introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge:
Cambridge university press.
Becker, J. D. (1975). The phrasal lexicon. Proceedings of the
1975 workshop on theoretical issues in natural language
processing. (pp. 60-63). Morristown, NJ: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Clark, H. H. (1973). The language-as-fixed-effect-fallacy: a
critique of language statistics in psychological research.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 12,
335-359.
Eskildsen S. & Cadierno T. (2007). Are recurring multi-word
expressions really syntactic freezes? Second Language
Acquisition (SLA) from the perspective of Usage-Based
Linguistics. Collocations and Idioms 1. Papers from the
First Nordic Conference on Syntactic Freezes. Joensuu,
Finland: Joensuu University Press.
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at work: the nature of
generalizations in language. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Harris, C. L. (1998). Psycholinguistic studies of
entrenchment. Conceptual Structures, Language and
Discourse. Berkeley, CA: CSLI.
Caldwell-Harris, C. L. and Morris, A. L. (under review). Fast
Pairs: a visual word recognition paradigm for measuring
entrenchment, top-down effects, and subjective
phenomenology.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of cognitive grammar.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., Schrijnemakers, J. M. C. & Gremmen
F. (1999). How to deal with “The language-as-fixed-effect
fallacy”: common misconceptions and alternative solutions.
Journal of Memory and Language, 41, 416-426.
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance and collocations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Theakston, A. L. (2004). The role of entrenchment in
constraining children’s verb argument structure
overgeneralizations: a grammaticality judgment study.
Cognitive Development, 19, 15-34.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: a usagebased theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Yang, C. (2005). On productivity. In P. Pica, J. Rooryck and
J. Van Craenenbroeck (eds.) Linguistic Variation Yearbook
2005 (pp. 265-302). Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.

Acknowledgments
We thank Giles Hooker for supplying invaluable statistical
advice, Ben Sandbank for insightful discussion, and the
subjects who participated in this research. JB is a fellow in
The Azrieli Fellows Program.

874

