UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Training a Bayesian: Three-and-a-half-year-olds' Reasoning about Ambiguous Evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mx3g61x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Bonawitz, Elizabeth Baraff
Fischer, Adina
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Training a Bayesian:
Three-and-a-half-year-olds’ Reasoning about Ambiguous Evidence
Elizabeth Baraff Bonawitz, Adina Fischer, & Laura E. Schulz
{liz_b, adinafb, lschulz}@mit.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

important structural and dynamic similarities to scientific
theories. In particular, children seem to have abstract,
coherent causal representations of the world that support
prediction, explanation, and counterfactual reasoning and –
critically -- that are defeasible in the face of counterevidence (Gopnik, 1996; Carey & Spelke, 1996).
One approach to thinking about how prior beliefs should
interact with statistical evidence can be obtained by
regarding causal learning as a problem of Bayesian
inference. In Bayesian inference, the learner seeks to
evaluate a hypothesis about the process that produced some
observed data. The learner’s a priori beliefs about the
plausibility of the hypotheses are expressed in a “prior”
probability distribution. The learner seeks to evaluate the
“posterior” probability of the hypothesis – their beliefs
about the plausibility of the hypothesis after taking into
account the evidence provided by the data. The posterior
distribution directly combines the evidence obtained,
through the likelihood, with the learner’s initial beliefs
about the plausibility of the hypothesis, expressed in the
prior. In the case of causal learning, we can imagine prior
probabilities being supplied by a domain-specific theory,
stipulating which causal structures are plausible
(Tenenbaum, Griffiths, & Niyogi, in press; Tenenbaum &
Niyogi, 2003). Thus, Bayesian inference is a rational
framework for learning and provides a formal account of
how domain-specific theories and domain-general patterns
of evidence might interact to affect children’s beliefs.
However, the integration of strong prior beliefs with new
evidence may not be so natural for young learners -- or even
for adults (Chen & Klahr, 1999; Inhelder & Piaget, 1958;
Kuhn, 1989; Kuhn, Amsel, & O'Laughlin, 1988; Masnick &
Klahr, 2003). For instance, some research suggests that
adults interpret identical evidence differently depending on
whether the data supports or conflicts with a favored theory.
Thus, if two candidate causes are both independent of an
effect, learners will cite instances of co-occurrence as
evidence for the variable consistent with their theories and
instances of non-co-occurrence as evidence against the
variable incommensurate with their theories (Kuhn, 1989).
Of the research that does demonstrate causal learning in
children, some suggests that there are uneven contributions
from either evidence or prior beliefs. The considerable
research suggesting that four and five-year-olds are capable

Abstract
Previous work has demonstrated the importance of both naïve
theories and statistical evidence to children’s causal
reasoning. In particular, four-year-olds can use statistical
evidence to update their beliefs. However, the story is more
complex for three-year-olds. Although three-and-a-half-yearolds perform as well as four-year-olds when statistical
evidence is theory-neutral, several studies suggest that they do
not learn from statistical evidence when a statistically likely
cause is inconsistent with their prior beliefs (e.g., Schulz et
al., 2007). There are at least two possible explanations for
younger children’s failure to use statistical data to update their
beliefs: one (the Information Processing account) suggests
that younger children have a fragile ability to reason about
statistical evidence; the other (a Prior Knowledge account)
suggests that in some domains, younger children have
stronger prior beliefs and thus require more evidence before
belief revision is rational. To distinguish these accounts, we
conducted a two-week training study with three-and-a-halfyear-olds. Children participated in an Information Processing
Training condition, a Prior Belief Training condition, or a
Control condition.
Relative to the Control condition,
children in the Prior Belief Training condition, but not
children in the Information Processing Training condition
showed an overall improvement in their ability to reason
about theory-violating evidence. This suggests that at least
some developmental differences in statistical reasoning tasks
may be due to younger children’s stronger prior beliefs.
Keywords: Causal learning; Ambiguous evidence; Training
study.

Theories and Evidence in Preschoolers Causal
Reasoning?
One of the hallmarks of a good scientist is her ability to
revise her beliefs in the face of counter evidence. However,
belief revision should be at once flexible (to permit
learning) and conservative (to prevent misleading data from
overturning strongly held beliefs).
In principle, small
amounts of data (e.g., observing the cookies missing from
the cookie jar) should suffice to overturn weakly held
beliefs (that my partner is dieting) but should leave strong
beliefs (in conservation of matter) intact.
Integrating new evidence with prior knowledge may be
important in cognitive development as well. Indeed, many
researchers have suggested that children’s beliefs have some

837

of using statistical data to support belief revision has led
many researchers to argue that bottom-up, general statistical
learning (e.g., sensitivity to the covariation of events) plays
a critical role in children’s causal inferences (Gopnik et al.,
2004; Keil, 1995; Schulz & Gopnik, 2004). However, other
researchers have argued for the importance of domain
specific prior beliefs (e.g. Carey & Spelke, 1996; Keil,
1995) and indeed, many studies suggest that both adults and
children privilege domain-specific information over
domain-general evidence, (Ahn, Kalish, Medin, & Gelman,
1995; Bullock, Gelman & Baillargeon, 1982; Shultz, 1982).
It has perhaps been difficult to evaluate the interaction
between domain-specific knowledge and domain-general
learning mechanisms because much previous work has
focused on unambiguous instances of each. For example,
studies arguing for the importance of domain-specific
theories have generally involved contexts in which
participants have very strong theories and minimal
counterevidence; thus, there has been little room for the
evidence to play a role in the interpretation of the events. In
contrast, studies arguing for the importance of domaingeneral mechanisms have often provided overwhelming
evidence, giving little room for theories to play a role in the
interpretation of evidence. Thus, while some research has
explored the relative strength of theories and evidence, few
studies have demonstrated a graded interaction between the
two.

phenomena, (Notaro, Gelman & Zimmerman, 2001). While
adults accept that some events (e.g., psychosomatic
phenomena) can cross the mental/physical divide,
preschoolers typically deny that psychosomatic reactions are
possible (e.g., they deny that feeling frustrated can cause a
headache or that feeling embarrassed can make you blush).
We were interested in how preschool children would
interpret formal patterns of evidence suggesting the
presence of a psychosomatic cause in light of a strong initial
belief in domain boundaries.
Both three-and-a-half- and four-year-old children were
read both the Within and Cross Domains books. Consistent
with the predictions of a Bayesian model, four- and fiveyear-olds inferred that cause A was the relevant cause from
both the Within and the Cross Domains evidence, were
more likely to identify A as the cause in the Within Domain
book than the Cross Domains book, and were able to
transfer their new expectations about psychosomatic
causality to a novel task. However, although three-and-ahalf-year-olds readily identified cause A as the target cause
in the Within Domain book, the younger children failed to
learn from the statistical evidence when the evidence
violated their prior beliefs; that is, they did not learn at all in
the Cross Domains book.

What leads to differences in causal learning
between younger and older preschoolers?
Why did the three-and-a-half-year-olds respond differently
to the Cross Domains evidence than the four- and five-yearolds? One explanation consistent with previous research is
that three-year-old children might have difficulty making
inferences from ambiguous statistical data. If the ability of
the three-and-a-half-year-olds to interpret data of this
complexity is fragile, any increase in task difficulty
(including a conflict with prior knowledge) might
compromise children’s ability to evaluate the evidence.
Research on young children’s causal reasoning has
suggested that information processing demands can limit 3year-olds performance even on tasks that only require
reasoning within one domain of knowledge, (eg. See Leslie,
1994). A context in which three-year-olds must integrate
knowledge across multiple domains may be even more
cognitively taxing. Because this account assumes that
three-and-a-half-year-olds’ failure is due to information
processing limitations, we will call this the Information
Processing account.
Critically however, the differential treatment of evidence
by younger and older preschoolers may not be irrational
from a Bayesian perspective: rather, it is possible that the
younger children might have a stronger prior belief in
domain boundaries than the older children. Notoro et al
(2001) demonstrated that with age children begin to report
psychogenic phenomenon as both physical and
psychologically caused, supporting the claim that a belief in
this domain boundary may lessen with age and experience.
Thus, although a small amount of evidence might be needed
to convince an older child of psychosomatic causality (given

Can being scared give you a tummy ache?
To investigate this interaction, we looked at children’s
causal judgments in contexts in which we might observe the
impact of both naïve theories and patterns of evidence. We
provided children with suggestive, but still ambiguous
evidence in cases where they did, and cases where they did
not, have strong prior beliefs (Bonawitz et al, 2006; Schulz
et al, 2007). Children were read two books in which two
candidate causes co-occurred with an effect. Evidence was
presented in the form: AB  E, AC  E, AD  E, etc.
After receiving this statistical evidence, children were asked
to identify the cause of the effect on a new trial. While it is
possible that B, C, and D were each causes of the effect, it is
more probable that A was the single cause. In one book (the
Within Domain book), all the causes and the effect were
from a single domain; in the other condition (the Cross
Domains book) cause A was from a different domain
(creating a conflict between the statistical evidence and
children’s prior knowledge).
Because we wanted to investigate processes that might
underlie genuine instances of theory change, we chose a
context in which children’s theories are both robust and
distinct from adult theories. Considerable research has
shown that children’s causal reasoning respects domain
boundaries (Carey, 1985; Estes, Wellman, & Woolley,
1989; Hatano & Inagaki, 1994; Wellman & Estes, 1986;
Bloom, 2004). In particular, many researchers have
suggested that children respect an ontological distinction
between
mental
phenomena
and
bodily/physical

838

(assessing children’s willingness to generalize from one
psychosomatic event to others).

that older children have other experiences supporting such
claims), more evidence may be needed to overturn younger
children’s resistance to believing in psychosomatic illness.
Thus the three-and-a-half-year-olds might have failed to
learn from the statistical data in the previous study, not
because of information processing limitations but because
the data presented might have been insufficient to overcome
three-year-olds’ initial inductive bias that psychological
causes are unlikely to generate bodily effects. We will call
this the Prior Belief account.

Methods and Design
Participants Forty eight children (mean age: 45 months;
range: 39-48 months) were recruited from Boston area
preschools. Fifty four percent of the participants were girls
and a range of ethnicities resembling the diversity of the
population was represented. Children were randomly
assigned to an Information Processing Training condition, a
Prior Belief Training condition, or a Control condition. The
experimenter met with the children for four 20-minute
sessions over a period of two weeks.

Psychosomatic training study
In order to evaluate these accounts, we designed a two-week
training study for three-and-a-half-year-olds.
In one
condition (Information Processing Training) children were
repeatedly exposed to ambiguous evidence (ABE;
ACE, AD E, etc.); however, these books always
presented children with within-domains evidence and the
evidence never dealt with psychosomatic causality. If the
Information Processing account is correct and children fail
the belief revision task simply because of a fragile ability to
reason from ambiguous evidence, then multiple exposures
to this form of evidence could help children use the
ambiguous data to revise their beliefs in a final test book
about psychosomatic events.
In the other condition (Prior Belief Training), children
were not given additional exposure to ambiguous evidence,
but they were taught that psychosomatic events were
relatively common. If the Prior Belief account is correct
and three-and-a-half-year-olds failure to update their beliefs
with evidence is due, not to their fragile ability to interpret
evidence, but instead to strong prior beliefs in a
psychological/biological domain boundary, then presenting
children with evidence that psychogenic events are common
should improve children’s performance on both a final test
book and a transfer task.
Of course it is possible that three-and-a-half-year-olds
have both a fragile ability to interpret ambiguous evidence
and a strong prior belief in domain boundaries. In that case,
both training studies should impact the children’s
performance. An additional group of children were tested in
a Control training condition in which psychological
variables were repeatedly mentioned but were not causally
connected to biological outcomes.
In all three conditions, children were first tested on a
Cross Domains test book (identical to the book used in
Schulz et al., 2007). Children were included in the study
only if they failed the initial Cross Domains book (that is,
they rejected the statistically likely domain-violating
candidate cause in favor of the statistically unlikely withindomain cause). All children then received 5 training books
over a two-week period. At the end of the training,
children’s performance was assessed on three measures: 1) a
final Cross Domains test book (formally identical to the
initial book but involving different specific stimuli) 2) a
Free Explanation book (requiring a free explanation rather
than a forced choice response) and 3) a Transfer book

Materials Two Cross Domains test books were created, as
well as a Free Explanation test book, and a set of Transfer
cards. Additionally, five training books for each condition
(Prior Belief, Information Processing, Control) were
created for a total of 15 training books.
Test books: (1) Cross Domains Books: These stories
presented ambiguous but statistically compelling evidence
supporting a psychological cause of an illness. In both
books, the repeating psychological cause was always paired
with the character eating different types of food (the
biological candidate causes). At the end of the book,
children were asked a forced choice question: “What is the
cause of (Bunny, Beaver’s) (Belly Ache, Tummy Hurting)?
Is it because of (feeling worried, feeling scared) or because
of eating (cornbread, sandwich)?” The order of events
(psychological or food) was counter-balanced across books.
(2) Free Explanation Book: This story book presented
children with an open explanation task, reading: “This is
Puppy. Puppy is nervous because it’s his first day of
school. {Experimenter turns page.} Oh, oh! Puppy’s
stomach hurts! Why do you think puppy’s stomach hurts?”
(3) Transfer Cards: Six picture cards were created showing
a physically possible event (throwing a ball in a lake and
making a splash); a physically impossible event (brushing a
window with a feather and breaking it); a biologically
possible event (skipping rope and getting tired); a
biologically impossible event (stomping on the ground and
making a tomato grow); and two psychosomatic events
(worrying and getting a headache; being nervous and feeling
sick). Children were shown each of the six pictures in one of
two fixed semi-random orders and asked yes or no questions
about the possibility of the event. For example, for the
physically impossible event, children were asked: “Can that
happen? Can Tony break the window with a feather?” The
two psychogenic questions were: “Can that happen? Can
Leslie get a headache from worrying too much?” and “Can
that happen? Can Jordan start to feel sick from being
nervous and upset?”
Information Processing Training Books: Ambiguous
evidence was presented in each of the 5 storybooks used in
this condition in the format of AB  E; AC  E; …; AG
 E. In these books, events were always within-domain and
non-psychological so that children would not also be getting

839

Figure 1: Table to the left shows the percent psychosomatic answers given on the Cross Domains test book, the Free
Explanation test book, the transfer cards, as well as the overall average number of psychosomatic responses given on the final
test day. The figure on the right reflects the average percent correct psychosomatic responses given by children in each of the
three training conditions.

Procedure Children were read storybooks in a quiet room
at their daycare. Children were randomly assigned to each
condition. Participants were first tested with one of the two
Cross Domains test books, particular books counterbalanced
between children (the other book was then used for the test
book at the end of training). Only children who chose the
non-psychological (statistically unlikely) cause were
included in the training and were then immediately read
book 1 for whatever condition the child was assigned.
Children were then visited at their daycare three more times
over the course of two weeks, with no two consecutive
training days. On each of the second and third visits,
children were read the two books appropriate to their
training condition (Books 2 & 3 on Day 2; and Books 4 & 5
on Day 3). On the final day (Day 4) the second cross
domains test story book, the free explanation book, and the
far transfer cards were read.

evidence that might affect their beliefs about psychosomatic
illness. At the end of each story, children were given a
forced choice between two causal variables, for example,
“Why does Bambi have itchy spots? Is it because of running
in the cattails or running in the garden?” If children choose
the statistically unlikely variable, they were corrected by
being show that the statistically likely variable was always
present with the effect and was therefore a better
explanation.
Prior Belief Training Books: Five different storybooks
presented evidence that psychosomatic reactions happen
fairly often. Books showed ten characters in a classroom.
All the characters experienced a similar emotion (e.g.
boredom waiting for a hamster to do a trick). Eight of the
ten characters were then shown to have a physical reaction
(e.g. Sue gets sleepy; Charles gets sleepy; Josh does not get
sleepy). At the end of the book children were given a forced
choice question asking whether the physical reaction to the
psychological emotion happened to very many or very few
characters in the story (e.g., “Can you help remind me: did
very many students get sleepy or did very few students get
sleepy?”) If children chose incorrectly, the experimenter
went back through the book with the child pointing out how
many characters got sleepy and corrected the child.
Control Books: Control books were created to both
impose a time delay between the initial and final test
sessions, and to make sure that the repetition of mental
events in the Prior Belief Training would not explain
children’s choice of the psychological causes in the test
books. These books told a story about a character who had
a recurring psychological state (i.e., happy, angry, or
sleepy). To remain consistent with the level of engagement
children had in the other training conditions, children were
asked a question at the end of each story that was irrelevant
to psychosomatic causal reasoning but that verified that the
children were engaged with the story. No corrective
feedback was given for children’s responses to these
questions.

Results
One child was dropped from the Information Processing
Training condition for failure to give an interpretable
answer on the initial test book. There was no other attrition
during the training, leaving 16 children in the Prior Belief
and Control condition, and 15 children in the Information
Processing condition. There were no age differences
between groups and no difference in the numbers of males
and females in each condition. There were no main effects
of age.
.
There were no differences across conditions for
children’s correct answers on the training books. Children’s
responses to questions in the Information Processing, Prior
Belief, and Control training books were not significantly
different from chance on Day 1 (p = NS, by binomial test).
However, by Days 2 and 3, children were significantly more
likely to choose the correct answer in all
conditions{(Control, Day 2, p < .05; Day 3, p < .01);
(Information Processing, Day 2, p < .05; Day 3, p < .01);
(Prior Belief, Day 2, p < .05; Day 3, p < .01) by binomial

840

the number of children’s psychological explanations in the
two training conditions to the Control condition.
Training seemed to significantly help children in the
Information Processing Training condition and marginally
help children in the Prior Belief Training, with more
children appealing to psychological explanations in these
conditions than in the Control condition (Information
Processing: χ2 (1, N = 30) = 7.63, p < .01; Prior Belief: χ2
(1, N = 32) = 3.06, p = .08), (See Figure 1). There were no
significant differences between the two training conditions
(χ2 (1, N = 29) = 1.29, p < NS).
Given that in the explanation book, the information
processing demands were minimal, it may seem odd that the
Information Processing Training improved children’s
responses on this. We believe that exposure to the recurring
variables in the Information Processing Training books
might have encouraged children to attend to elements within
the story (as opposed to other relevant information), and
thus supported children’s success on this test task.

test}. These results suggest that the training books in all
conditions were difficult enough initially, and that children
were genuinely learning from the training.
Overall Results We first analyzed how often children gave
the correct, psychosomatic response across all three final
measures: the Cross Domain Test book, the Free
Explanation Book, and the Transfer Test cards. Overall,
children in the Prior Belief Training condition were
significantly more likely to correctly give psychosomatic
responses across the board (M = 44.8%) than were children
in the Control condition (M = 17.2%), (t(32) = 3.06, p <
.01), (See Figure 1).
By contrast, children in the
Information Processing condition (M = 33.3%) were not
more likely to endorse psychosomatic causality than
children in the Control condition (t(32) = 1.60, p = NS).
There were no significant differences between the Prior
Belief and Information Processing conditions (t(32) = 1.02,
p = NS). These results suggest that at least the Prior Belief
Training significantly improved children’s ability to
recognize the relevant causal variable in the final test tasks.
We next analyzed the effect of the training on each test task
separately.

Far Transfer Test Cards Children had some difficultly
with this task, with several children in each condition
showing a bias, responding all ‘yes’ or all ‘no’ to all six
questions (3 children in the Control condition; 3 children in
the Prior Belief condition; and 4 children in the Information
Processing condition). For the analyses of the Transfer
cards, these children were removed, resulting in a total of 13
children in the Control condition, 13 in the Prior Belief
condition, and 11 in the Information Processing condition.
Children in the Prior Belief Training were significantly
more likely to endorse the possibility of psychosomatic
causality than were children in the Control condition (Prior
Belief: χ2 (1, N = 32) = 4.28, p < .05); however, children in
the Information Processing condition (Information
Processing: χ2 (1, N = 30) = .08, p < NS) were no more
likely to endorse psychosomatic causality than were
children in the Control condition, (see Figure 1).

Cross Domains Test Books Responses of children were
coded as either appealing to the recurring psychosomatic
cause or to the alternative cause (i.e., the particular food) for
the test book in each condition. Compared to their responses
on the original test book, children were significantly more
likely to appeal to psychosomatic causes in all conditions
(Control: χ2 (1, N = 32) = 4.57, p < .05; Information
Processing: χ2 (1, N = 30) = 6.00, p < .05; Prior Belief: χ2
(1, N = 32) = 10.67, p < .01), (See Figure 1). There were no
significant differences between conditions; however, in
terms of raw numbers, children in the Prior Belief Training
condition were most likely to appeal to being worried or
scared on the last days book (50% of the children,
compared to only 25% of children in the Control Condition
and 27% in the Information Processing Training condition).

Discussion

Free Explanation Test Book Children’s responses were
coded as either appealing to the target psychological cause
in the story (e.g. feeling nervous; thinking about school) or
to external biological causes not mentioned in the story
(e.g., eating too much food, “bumping his belly”, or even, as
one child notably put it, “has too much poo poo in him”).
Children’s responses fell uniquely and unambiguously into
one of these two categories. Two children (one in the
Information Processing Training and one in the Prior Belief
Training) refused to provide an explanation and were
removed from analyses for just the Explanation Test books,
resulting in a total of 16 children in the Control condition,
15 children in the Prior Belief condition, and 14 children in
the Information Processing condition compared for this
task. Because children had no previous exposure to these
books, success on the training was measured by comparing

After only four twenty-minute training sessions over two
weeks, three-year-olds showed an improvement in their
ability to recognize causal variables that conflicted with
their prior knowledge. This improvement was manifest
across three quite different tasks and these findings were
strongest for the Prior Belief Training, in which children
showed improvement relative to the Control condition on all
three measures. Perhaps the most striking finding is that
three-year-olds, after receiving Prior Belief Training, were
able to extend their inferences about psychosomatic illness
to a transfer task. Children in the Prior Belief Training
were twice as likely as children in the Control condition to
endorse the possibility of psychosomatic illness, suggesting
that children had genuinely revised their beliefs from the
limited training.
Children who received the Information Processing
Training showed more improvement than children in the

841

Inference. Proceedings of the 28th Annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Vancouver, Canada.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982) The
development of causal reasoning. In W.J. Freidman (Ed.), The
developmental psychology of time (pp.209-254). New York:
Academic Press.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1996). Science and core knowledge.
Philosophy of Science, 63(4), 515-533.
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal:
Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables strategy.
Child Development, 70(5), 1098-1120.Estes, D., Wellman,
H.M., & Woolley, J.D. (1989) Children’s understanding of
mental phenomena. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child
development and behavior. New York: Academic Press.
Gopnik, A. (1996). The scientist as child. Philosophy of Science,
63, 4, 485-514.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L.E., Kushnir, T., &
Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children: causal
maps and Bayes nets. Psychological Review.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1994) Young children’s naïve theory of
biology. Cognition, 50, 171-188.
Keil, F.C. (1995). The growth of causal understandings of natural
kinds. In D. Sperber & D. Premack (Eds.), Causal cognition: A
multidisciplinary debate. (pp. 234-267). New York: Clarendon
Press/Oxford University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1995). The growth of causal understandings of natural
kinds. In D. P. D. Sperber (Ed.), Causal cognition: A
multidisciplinary debate. New York, NY: Clarendon
Press/Oxford University Press.
Kuhn, D., Amsel, E., & O'Laughlin, M. (1988). The development
of scientific thinking skills. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists.
Psychological Review, 96(4), 674-689.
Leslie, A.M. (1994). ToMM, ToBy, and Agency: Core architecture
and domain specificity. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman
(Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and
culture. (pp. 119-148). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Masnick, A. M., & Klahr, D. (2003). Error Matters: An initial
exploration of elementary school children's understanding of
experimental error. Journal of Cognition and Development, 4(1),
67-98.
Notaro, P.C., Gelman, S., & Zimmerman, M.A. (2001) Children’s
Understanding of Psychogenic Bodily Reactions. Child
Development 72(2), 444-459.
Schulz, L.E., & Gopnik, A. (2004) Causal Learning Across
Domains, Developmental Psychology, 40(2), 162-176.
Schulz, L., Bonawitz, E.B., & Giffiths, T. (2007) Can being scared
make your tummy ache? Naïve theories, ambiguous evidence,
and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Developmental Psychology.
Tenenbaum, J.B., Griffiths, T. L., and Niyogi, S. (2007). Intuitive
theories as grammars for causal inferences. To appear in
Gopnik, A., & Schulz, L. (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology,
philosophy, and computation. Oxford University Press.
Tenenbaum, J.B. and Niyogi, S. (2003). Learning Causal Laws.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Wellman & Estes, 1986; Carey, S., & Spelke, E.S. (1996) Science
and core knowledge. Philosophy of Science, 63(4), 515-533.

Control condition only on the Free Explanation task. As
noted, such improvement might be due largely to the
children’s increased attention to elements within the story as
opposed to relevant external factors. However, children in
the Information Processing condition did not show
improvement relative to children in the Control condition on
the other two measures. This suggests that improving
children’s ability to process ambiguous evidence has a
relatively limited influence on children’s ability to learn
from counterintuitive statistical evidence. Given that there
were no significant differences between the Prior Belief and
Information Processing Training conditions, this conclusion
can only be drawn with great caution. Nonetheless, this
study provides suggestive evidence that developmental
changes in children’s difficulty in learning from
counterintuitive evidence may be due primarily, not to
younger children’s greater difficulties in processing
statistical information, but to their initially stronger beliefs
in domain boundaries.
What did the Prior Belief Training do for the children?
From a Bayesian perspective, it seems likely that the
training changed children’s perception of the prior
probability of psychosomatic events, thus making the
posterior probability of the psychosomatic hypothesis
stronger. This raises the question of how children’s
estimates of the probability of events are generated in the
first place. One possibility is that children might believe
domain-violating events are rare because they have trouble
imagining a mechanism by which psychological events
could influence biological events. Further research might
explore the extent to which training children on causal
mechanisms improves their ability to reason about causal
variables previously perceived as theory-violating.
Overall, given that all the three-year-olds in this
experiment initially failed the cross-domains task, the
success of the children following such a short training is
promising. In particular, it suggests that even very young
children may be rational learners, conservatively but
flexibly integrating new evidence with prior beliefs.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Irene Headen, Michael Obilade, Noah Goodman,
Wendy Weinerman, Darlene Ferranti, and members of the
Early Childhood Cognition lab, and participating daycares.
Research supported from the McDonnell Foundation and
James H. Ferry Fund grant to L.S.

References
Ahn, W., Kalish, C.W., Medin, D.L., Gelman, S.A. (1995). The
role of covariation versus mechanism information in causal
attribution. Cognition 54, 299–352.
Bloom, P. (2004). Descartes' Baby. New York: Basic Books
Bonawitz, E.B., Griffiths, T.L., & Schulz, L. (2006) Modeling
Cross-Domain Causal Learning in Preschoolers as Bayesian

842

