UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding Why: The cognitive science of explanation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1tg3m6zb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Lombrozo, Tania
Sloman, Steven
Strevens, Micheal
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding Why: The Cognitive Science of Explanation
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo whoisat berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Steven Sloman (steven_sloman whoisat brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University
Box 1978, Providence, RI 02912 USA

Michael Strevens (strevens whoisat nyu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, New York University
5 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003 USA

J.D. Trout (jtrout whoisat luc.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Loyola University Chicago
6525 North Sheridan Road, Chicago, IL 60626 USA

Deena Skolnick Weisberg (deena.weisberg whoisat yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University
PO Box 208205, New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Keywords: Explanation, inference to the best explanation,
understanding, causation, causal reasoning, philosophy of
science

Explanation: Do the details matter?
Intuitively, more information makes for better explanations.
Yet many of the most illuminating explanations are praised
for their simplicity and elegance, for the details they leave out
(Strevens, 2004; Lombrozo, 2007). These talks will consider
how the quantity and nature of the information contained in
explanations affect their quality. Why might less detail make
for better explanations? Are some details special (Weisberg et
al., 2007)?

The study of explanation
Explanation has recently emerged as an important topic of
study in both cognitive development and cognitive
psychology (Keil, 2006; Weisberg et al., 2008). Explanation
is intimately related to the growing field of causal reasoning
(Sloman, 2005), and has been shown to influence inference,
categorization, and learning (Lombrozo, 2006). Although
explanation serves as a basis for understanding and learning
and is increasingly recognized as an important aspect of
cognition, there are few descriptive or normative accounts of
explanation in cognitive science. In this symposium we
consider the emerging experimental literature on explanation
in relation to the philosophy of scientific explanation
(Strevens, 2006; Trout, 2007), with the goal of cultivating a
cognitive science of explanation.
The symposium will focus on two themes that explore
the causes and consequences of explanatory judgments, each
addressed by a psychologist-philosopher pair. Weisberg and
Strevens will begin by considering the role of informative (or
misinformative) details in explanations, as well as the
implications for understanding cognitive development and
scientific explanation. Lombrozo and Trout will consider the
consequences of explanations, and in particular the role of
explanatory judgments in guiding (or misguiding) inferences
about causation, category membership, and truth. The
symposium will conclude with a commentary by Sloman on
the promise and perils of a cognitive science of explanation.

Weisberg: Seductive details and other errors of
explanatory reasoning
Psychological research has found that people believe
explanations to be good even when these explanations contain
significant flaws or gaps in reasoning. For example, studies
have shown that people fail to recognize circularity in
arguments and believe their own explanatory understanding is
deeper than it actually is. Weisberg will present an additional
error people make when evaluating explanations: They are
swayed in their judgments of explanatory satisfaction by
interesting but logically irrelevant information, known as
“seductive details.” Despite these multiple and serious
failures of explanatory reasoning, Weisberg will argue that
these problems are not insurmountable. This tentatively
optimistic conclusion is supported by evidence from experts’
understanding and use of explanations and from the ways in
which adults and children process explanations in a social
context.
Deena Skolnick Weisberg will receive her Ph.D. in
psychology from Yale in 2008. Her work explores
explanation and fictional cognition, and has appeared in
Cognition, Science, and other leading journals.
693

Strevens: Explanatory depth and causal void

Trout: The limits of explanatory phenomenology

Much work on explanation in the philosophy of science
suggests that the key to scientific understanding lies in the
appreciation of causal detail, in seeing how the phenomenon
to be explained was causally produced. But many striking
scientific explanations deliberately exclude causal details, and
seem the more profound for it. What can be learned from this
datum? How do causal details interfere with understanding?
Is there more to explanation than causal understanding? This
talk will argue that although causal information provides the
bedrock of explanation, both in science and in everyday life,
assembling the information only takes you halfway to
understanding. Sometimes the most important thing to see is
how certain causal details are irrelevant to understanding a
phenomenon. A psychological mechanism for determining
the relevance and irrelevance of causal information will be
sketched.
Michael Strevens is an associate professor of philosophy
at NYU. His interests include philosophy of science and the
philosophical applications of cognitive science. His work has
appeared in journals such as Cognition and Philosophy of
Science; his book on explanation is to appear with Harvard
University Press in Fall 2008.

Many explanations produce a sense of understanding in us
even when the explanations are terribly mistaken. This
experience or sense of understanding, sometimes genuine and
sometimes counterfeit, can range from a dramatic “Aha”
experience to a sanguine “stopping rule.” The
phenomenology produced by an explanation is independent
of the explanation’s goodness. This presentation will consider
two questions. First, are there reliable cues to a good
explanation? Second, why do people find the phenomenology
of an explanation so gripping? Some of the philosophical
work on explanatory robustness will be offered to answer the
first question, and psychological findings about
overconfidence and the structure of learning to answer the
second question.
J.D. Trout is a professor of philosophy at Loyola
University Chicago. His interests include philosophy of
science, epistemology, and psychology, and his work has
appeared in journals such as Philosophy of Science and
Psychological Review.

Commentary
Sloman: A cognitive science of explanation

Explanation and Inference

The symposium will conclude with a commentary by Steven
Sloman, a professor of cognitive and linguistic sciences at
Brown University. Sloman has published widely on
explanation and causation (e.g. Sloman, 1994; Sloman, 2005),
and his work is often informed by philosophy. As such,
Sloman is an ideal commentator for this interdisciplinary
symposium on explanation.

Explanations reveal and inform a host of basic cognitive
processes, including causal inference and learning
(Lombrozo, 2006). Explanations are even used as a basis for
assessing truth (Sloman, 1994; Trout, 2002; Lombrozo,
2007). These talks will consider the consequences of the
structure and phenomenology of explanations.

Lombrozo: The effects of explanations on
categorization and on causal judgments

References
Keil, F.C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual
Review of Psychology, 57, 227-254.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of
explanations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 464-470.
Lombrozo, T. (2007). Simplicity and probability in causal
explanation. Cognitive Psychology, 55, 232-257.
Sloman, S.A. (1994). When explanations compete: The role
of explanatory coherence on judgments of likelihood.
Cognition, 52, 1-21.
Sloman, S.A. (2005). Causal models: how we think about the
world and its alternatives. New York: Oxford UP.
Strevens, M. (2004). The causal and unification accounts of
explanation unified—causally. Noûs, 38, 154-179.
Strevens, M. (2006). Scientific explanation. In D.M. Borchert
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy, MacMillan.
Trout, J.D. (2002). Scientific explanation and the sense of
understanding. Philosophy of Science, 69, 212-233.
Trout, J.D. (2007). The psychology of scientific explanation.
Philosophy Compass, 2/3, 564-591.
Weisberg, D.S., Keil, F.C., Goodstein, J., Rawson, E. &
Gray, J. (2008). The seductive allure of neuroscience
explanations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 470477.

Recent findings in cognitive development and cognitive
psychology suggest that learning and inference are often
mediated by causal beliefs. Causal beliefs have been shown to
influence processes of attribution and categorization, as well
as the rate and nature of causal learning. This talk will suggest
that explanations act as a filter to determine which causal
beliefs are brought to bear on a given judgment. In particular,
judgments can differ depending on whether participants
entertain a mechanistic explanation that cites proximate
causes or a teleological explanation that appeals to functions.
Two sets of studies demonstrate that explanations influence
judgments of categorization and even judgments about causal
relationships. These effects challenge many current accounts
of causation and categorization, but can be understood in the
context of theories of explanation and causation from
philosophy.
Tania Lombrozo is an assistant professor of psychology at
UC Berkeley. Her interests include explanation and causal
reasoning, and her work has appeared in journals such as
Cognition and Psychological Science.

694

