UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Upsides and Downsides of Gesturing in Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04h6s91h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Cushen, Patrick J.
Wiley, Jennifer

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Upsides and Downsides of Gesturing in Problem Solving
Patrick J. Cushen (pcushe2@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street MC 285
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Jennifer Wiley (jwiley@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street MC 285
Chicago, IL 60607 USA
Abstract
The ToH task is considered complex because it requires
the use of multiple processes. First, it requires the creation
and maintenance of a problem representation. The
representation includes not only the physical objects of the
problem (the disks and pegs), but also the task rules, which
determine the legality of moves. Errors at the representation
level may lead to repeated violations of the rules or memory
mistakes related to the positions of disks. Second, the task
requires planning. That is, in order to solve efficiently,
subjects are required to think ahead, establishing both
distant goals (such as the moving of a particular disk to its
final location) and immediate subgoals (such as making
other moves to open up the opportunity to complete the
overarching goal; Anderson, Kushmerick, & Lebiere, 1993).
Errors in planning may lead solvers into dead-end
movement sequences. Third, efficient solvers need to be
able to represent and monitor their progress. It is necessary
to keep track of the various objects and subgoals as well as
progress through a mental representation of the solution
sequence. In addition, solvers must be able to detect errors
in planning and correct their mistakes. Errors in monitoring
can result in the solver losing track of his or her place, or
perseverating on poor moves or movement sequences.
One could imagine that, in complex problem solving
(with numerous cognitive processes operating at the same
time), capacity limitations may influence problem-solving
performance. Working memory capacity (WMC) is a
construct that can generally be defined as the ability to
retain information in memory while concurrently processing
other information (Baddeley, 2002). Differences in WMC
have more recently been conceptualized as differences in an
attentional-control ability or executive function (Engle,
2002). That is, the ability of a person to perform well on a
working memory span task such as reading span or
operation span is related to their ability to control or direct
their attention (for example, to focus on goal-related stimuli
in the face of interference; Conway et al., 2005).
WMC is an important individual difference in cognitive
psychology that correlates with numerous measures of
cognitive ability (Conway, et al., 2005; Engle, 2002).
Researchers have suggested that effective use of working
memory is integral to successful problem solving, as the
inability to adequately maintain different pieces of
information in memory is a significant impairment to
problem solving performance (i.e. Kotovsky, Hayes, &
Simon, 1985). Additionally, numerous computer models of

Research has shown that gesturing can serve to both clarify
our thinking and improve our working memory. Working
memory capacity (WMC) is widely considered to be a
contributing factor in a number of higher order cognitions,
including problem solving. The current study investigated the
influence of individual differences in WMC, the number of
moves required for solution, and the ability to gesture during
solution of the Tower of Hanoi. The results show a complex
relationship between WMC, problem size and the ability to
gesture, and that there are both upsides and downsides to
gesturing while problem solving.
Keywords: Problem Solving, Working Memory Capacity,
Gesture, Tower of Hanoi.

Introduction
Research has shown that gesturing can serve to both clarify
our thinking and improve our working memory (Wagner,
Nusbaum, & Goldin-Meadow, 2004). In the present
research, we sought to explore the role of gesture in first
time problem solving of the Tower of Hanoi (ToH). The
ToH task (Simon, 1975) has been used in the cognitive
literature as a benchmark cognitive test. It has been used to
test a number of higher cognitive abilities, including skill
acquisition and transfer (Reber & Kotovsky, 1997), as well
to observe developmental changes in cognitive ability and to
assess mental deficits in patient populations.
ToH is a complex, yet well-structured problem. Though
difficult, its solution space is well-defined. In the classic
problem, participants are given three pegs with three
differently-sized disks on the first peg. The smallest disk is
on top and the largest on the bottom. The goal is to move all
disks to the third peg, one disk at a time. In addition,
participants are given the constraints that larger disks cannot
be placed on smaller disks and that only a top disk can be
moved. Even this basic presentation requires at least seven
movements to reach the solution.

Figure 1. The 3-Disk Tower of Hanoi.

775

Several difficulties with the load approach can be
addressed with an individual differences approach using
individual performance on complex span tasks, such as
reading span and operation span, to assess WMC (Conway
et al., 2005), and relating these measures, or a domaingeneral factor derived from these measures, to an
individual’s problem solving performance (Ash & Wiley,
2006). Interestingly, the few individual differences studies
that have been done on ToH tasks do not show a clear
relation with WMC.
Some studies using individual
difference measures of WMC have shown a relationship
with visual/spatial WMC tests (for example, see Zook,
Davalos, Delosh, & Davis, 2004). Some studies have failed
to find a relationship between WMC and ToH performance,
even when using spatial measures of working memory
capacity (Welsh, Satterlee-Cartmell, & Stine, 1999). When
studies find relationships between ToH and WMC only with
spatial and not on other types of working memory measures
(i.e. verbal), these results suggest that the relationship
between these WMC measures and ToH is due to the spatial
components of the tasks rather than to a domain-general
WMC component.
There are, however, a few individual differences studies,
where some evidence of the expected relationship has been
found. Miyake, Friedman, Emerson, Witzki, Howerter, and
Wager (2000) demonstrated that performance on a 4-disk
variant of the ToH was related to a solver's performance on
a number of tasks related to inhibition (including an
antisaccade task, and a Stroop task). Zook, Davalos, Delosh,
and Davis (2004) have also found performance on Stroop
related to performance on ToH. Critically, these tasks have
been shown to be related to the domain-general WMC factor
derived from multiple WMC tasks (Kane & Engle, 2003).
Another relevant study used the Tower of London, an
isomorph of the ToH in which items (in this case, balls) are
not moved between columns but moved between holes of
different depth (Newman, Carpenter, Varma, & Just, 2003).
This study demonstrated a relationship between WMC and
brain activation in the frontal cortex during the solving of
difficult Tower of London variants. Interestingly, in this
study solvers were not allowed to manipulate an external
representation of the problem or even gesture (since their
motion was necessarily limited within an fMRI). Often, the
ToH task is administered using physical objects that can be
manipulated in order to solve the problem. By providing
manipulable external representations, previous researchers
may have been alleviating the load on working memory, and
the need to maintain an internal representation of the
problem space. This in turn may have eliminated the effects
of individual differences in WMC on problem solving in
other studies.
For a number of reasons, the ability to gesture or not may
be predicted to have an effect on ToH problem solving, as
well as on the relationship between WMC and problem
solving. Other research has shown that the inability to
gesture may worsen performance on complex tasks and
increases the amount of working memory load associated

cognitive activity, including problem solving and skill
acquisition, utilize a limited capacity storage component
that is analogous to human working memory (Anderson,
1993; Newell & Simon, 1972) in order to fit human
performance.
There are a number of reasons why individual differences
in WMC should play a critical role in the solution of the
ToH. In formulating a problem representation, higher WMC
should allow solvers to keep larger numbers of disks in
memory. This would allow them to efficiently solve more
complex versions of the ToH task (for example, 4-disk
variants). Further, there has been some suggestion that
WMC may influence a solver's ability to integrate and
maintain rules in a problem representation (Kotovsky,
Hayes, & Simon, 1985). In planning, higher WMC may
allow for the retention of larger numbers of goals and
subgoals, leading to faster solving. There has been evidence
to support this idea from functional imaging studies that
have shown increased activation of the right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, relative to the planning complexity of a
ToH task (Newman, Carpenter, Varma, & Just, 2003) This
area has been shown to be associated with working memory
capacity and executive functioning. This perspective would
lead one to suspect that persons with higher WMC would be
more capable of monitoring of their own progress in a
mental representation of the solution space.
Surprisingly, the relationship between WMC and
performance on the ToH has not yet been demonstrated
clearly. The most consistent evidence for the role of
working memory in the ToH task comes mainly from
studies using a secondary task/load approach. That is, while
a participant is attempting to solve a complex problem, he or
she is given a separate secondary task to attempt
simultaneously (such as remembering the last few digits of a
random number sequence). Studies have found that having
participants engage in a concurrent task hinders their ability
to efficiently solve complex problems (Reber & Kotovsky,
1997), such as the Tower of Hanoi and its isomorphs
(Kotovsky & Simon, 1990).
The logic behind these load studies is that the secondary
task puts a “load” on working memory, and therefore, when
deficits are seen in problem solving, it is attributed to taxing
working memory. However, by adding a secondary task,
one cannot determine how “normal” problem solving would
have proceeded without the additional task and what the role
of WMC may be in normal solution processes. A second
related problem is that secondary tasks may vary in the
extent to which they actually “load” on working memory,
and the extent to which they only load on working memory.
While many secondary tasks that have been utilized may
indeed be demanding, it is less clear that working memory is
the only thing that any particular secondary task is affecting.
A task intended to tax working memory may be making a
problem more difficult for other reasons as well. Thus,
deficits associated with secondary task manipulations may
not necessarily represent the effects of reduced working
memory on problem solving.

776

Based on Kane, et al. (2004), factor analysis was used to
create a factor from the shared variance between the three
working memory span tasks. A median split was then
performed on this factor to differentiate between high and
low-WMC subjects for subsequent analyses.

with solving (Cary & Carlson, 1999). Gesturing may be a
process by which solvers attempt to focus their attention on
aspects of the task or keep track of their progress through a
problem space. Gesturing has also been linked to improved
performance on spatial tasks (Kirsh, 1995); a benefit that
ought to influence solution efficiency in the ToH task. And,
as suggested above, gesture may help participants to
externalize their mental representation and thus free
working memory resources.
Garber and Goldin-Meadow (2002) demonstrated that
mismatches in speech and gesture patterns during
explanation of a solution to the ToH occurred primarily at
points where a solver must chose between multiple potential
movement paths. Mismatches indicated that gesture was
being used to represent solution-related information; in this
case, information that was not readily apparent via
verbalizations. These findings suggest that both mental
representation and gesture are important for resolving an
effective strategy.
However, no experiments have directly examined the role
of gesture during first-time ToH solution attempts. This is
especially important because the first solution attempt is
also likely to be the one with the highest working memory
demand. The goal of the present research was to examine
the role of gesturing and individual differences in WMC,
and how these might interact, on first time ToH problem
solving. The size of the problem space was also varied to
examine how this would interact with gesture and WMC as
well. The simple predictions were that the ability to gesture,
higher WMC and smaller problem spaces should all lead to
better performance on the ToH.

Procedure
Participants were first given the practice problem to
familiarize themselves with the movement rules and
verbalizations associated with performing the ToH task.
Instructions to the practice task, including movement rules,
were given verbally. Participants were allowed to ask any
questions, including requesting that the experimenter re-read
the movement rules. They were given as long as they
needed to complete the practice. After the practice, subjects
were presented with the primary ToH task. Before
beginning, the rules and goal of the task were reiterated.
Participants were divided into two groups: a gesture and a
no-gesture group. In the no-gesture condition, participants
received the instructions, “Please refrain from gesturing,
whether with your hands or with your head, while solving
the problem.” If, during solution, they attempted to gesture,
they were instructed to refrain from gesturing. Subjects in
the gesture condition received no gesture-related instruction
and were allowed to gesture freely.
The participants were given a total of 15 minutes to solve
the ToH task. To solve the problem, they stated each move
attempt out loud. If at any point the participant made an
illegal move, he or she was informed of the fact that they
had made an error and had to state a different, legal, move
in order to proceed. Alternately, subjects occasionally made
memory errors (such as incorrectly recalling the location of
a particular disk), which made it impossible to follow their
movements. In this case, subjects were told, “I believe that
you have made an error,” at which point, the participant was
instructed to restart their explanation. Participants who
became confused or lost their place could restart the
problem at any point during solving, but had to inform the
experimenter that he or she was restarting. The session
ended when all disks had been moved legally to the
rightmost peg, or when the 15 minutes had elapsed.

Method
Participants
One-hundred and sixteen undergraduates from the
University of Illinois at Chicago subject pool were given
class credit for participating in this research.

Materials
Practice Problem. Participants were first presented with
a practice problem, a two-disk variant of the ToH. The
problem required two moves to complete and was intended
to familiarize the participant with the movement rules and
with how to verbalize their moves while solving.
Tower of Hanoi Problem. Participants saw either a 4disk unsolved (15-move) or a 4-disk partially-solved (7move) version of the ToH in paper form. (See Figure 2.)
These particular variants allow for the size of the problem
space to be manipulated using the same number of objects.
Working Memory Span. Participants received a battery
of three working memory span tasks, including Reading
Span, Operation Span and Symmetry Span, in a separate
session either immediately prior to or immediately
following their ToH session. (For information on these span
tasks, see Kane et al., 2004.) The main purpose of this
battery was to derive a domain-general measure of WMC.

Figure 2. The 15-move (a) and 7-move (b) ToH variants.

777

Illegal moves. Illegal move attempts represent a failure
in either the representation or the monitoring of the
solution process. Excessive illegal move attempts indicate
that the subject either has forgotten the rules to the
problem or is no longer monitoring their attempted moves
for legality.
No main effects were found for illegal moves. As
shown in Figure 4, a marginal 3-way WMC x Gesture x
ToH Version interaction was found, F(1,83) = 24.48, MSE
= 3.00, p = .09. Low WMC solvers demonstrated the
expected benefit from being able to gesture, attempting
fewer illegal moves in both the 15 and 7-move ToH. High
WMC solvers, however, showed the expected benefit in
only the 15-move version. In the 7-move version, high
WMC solvers attempted more illegal moves when allowed
to gesture.

Results
Solution Rate
The solution rate for low WMC subjects was not influenced
by size of the problem space or by ability to gesture. For all
four conditions, low WMC subjects reached the correct
solution approximately 90% of the time.
For the high WMC subjects, however, a significant 2-way
Gesture x ToH version interaction was found, F(1, 58) =
4.00, MSE = .22, p = .05. High WMC subjects attempted to
solve the 15-move ToH, who were allowed to gesture,
demonstrated the lowest rate of solution (75%). In all three
other conditions, high WMC subjects were at ceiling. The
unexpected effects that WMC and gesture had on solution
rate will be explored in more detail below.

Move Analysis
In order to examine the efficiency of solution for correct
solvers, all move attempts were categorized as either legal,
illegal, or restart. Illegal moves were any moves attempted
that violated the rules of the task. Subjects were corrected if
they made illegal moves and had to state a different, legal,
move in order to proceed. Restarts were recorded at any
point that the solver stated that they were beginning again
from the initial problem state.
Legal Moves. As shown in Figure 3, a main effect was
found for problem size, F(1, 91) = 71.29, MSE = 8572.85, p
< .01. As expected, 7-move problems were solved in fewer
moves than 15-move problems. However, the expected
overall effects for gesture and WMC were not found.
Instead, there was a 3-way WMC x Gesture x Problem Size
interaction, F(1, 83) = 5.50, MSE = 661.15, p = .02. High
WMC solvers showed the predicted benefit from the ability
to gesture while solving the 15-move variant of the ToH.
However, high WMC solvers demonstrated poorer
performance in the 7-move variant when allowed to gesture.
Low WMC solvers did not seem to benefit from the ability
to gesture at either problem size.

Figure 4. The effects of Gesture, WMC & Problem Size on
the number of illegal moves attempted during solution.
Restarts. Restarts occur when subjects feel as if they
are lost, when they have forgotten their solution strategy
or their current problem state. Alternately, restarts may
occur when the subjects can see no benefit from
continuing on their current path. Repeated restarts can be
indicative of perseveration on inefficient or difficult
movement patterns or strategies.
No main effects were observed for restarts, but a 3-way
WMC x Gesture x ToH Version interaction was again
found, F(1, 83) = 27.02, MSE = 5.36, p = .02 (see Figure
5). Low WMC solvers with the 7-move version and high
WMC solvers with the 15-move version demonstrated the
expected benefit of gesture in reducing the need to
restart, while low WMC solvers with the 15-move
version did not appear to benefit due to gesture.
Interestingly, a deficit was again found for 7-move, high
WMC solvers, as the ability to gesture resulted in more
restarts.

Figure 3. The effects of Gesture, WMC & Problem Size on
the number of legal moves made to reach solution.

778

The complementary explanations of fixation or
perseveration in ineffective strategies seem to be able to
explain the unexpected effects of gesture on the high
WMC solvers. When given the opportunity to gesture on
the easier problem, it appears that the high WMC solvers
were more likely to use and perseverate on a “trial and
error” strategy. The increased number of illegal
movement errors for these solvers speaks to the use of
such a strategy. Further, the increased number of restarts
suggests that progress toward solution was not deliberate,
or planned, but rather haphazard and halting. Yet, in
conditions where the problem space increased or
gesturing was not allowed, then high WMC were able to
use more effective strategies for solution.
We are currently completing a protocol and gesture
analysis to explore strategy use, perseveration, and the
use of gesture more directly. Some interesting questions
to be explored are how the participants in the gesture
condition used gestures, when they used them, what
kinds of gestures they used, and if different types of
gestures were more or less effective for problem solving
performance.
It will be especially informative to
compare these observations of gesture use during a first
ToH problem solving attempt, with the observations of
Garber and Goldin-Meadow (2002) who performed a
similar analysis on later ToH attempts. Another direction
for future analyses is to examine the relation of the
different domain-specific WMC measures on ToH
performance, and particularly how spatial WMC interacts
with the ability to gesture or the size of the problem
space.
At present the results are highly convergent with
Beilock and DeCaro (2007) who found high WMC
solvers were less likely than low WMC solvers to notice
a more efficient solution path on a waterjugs task. In that
study, when high WMC solvers were put under pressure
(similar to our problem space and gesture manipulations),
then high WMC solvers did use the shortcuts.
Further, these findings are also reminiscent of work
that has been exploring the mixed effects of concrete
representations on learning and problem solving. A
similar tension has been found such that concreteness
may support faster initial learning or problem solving,
but it can work against transfer (Goldstone & Son, 2005;
Schwartz, 1995; Sloutsky, Kaminski & Heckler, 2005).
Like concreteness, the ability to gesture may be
preventing some students from engaging in more
effortful, but ultimately more useful abstract thinking.

Figure 5. The effects of Gesture, WMC & Problem Size on
the number of restarts made during solution.

Discussion
In total, these results suggest a more complicated
relationship between gesture, working memory capacity and
problem solving than one might initially expect. For many
solvers, gesturing played the supporting role that had been
predicted, preventing illegal moves and reducing the need to
restart during solving.
However, in the case of many high WMC subjects, the
ability to gesture hindered performance. Not only was the
lowest rate of solution in the problem found for these
subjects in the 15-move ToH version, but a consistent
pattern of poorer performance on their part was found for
the 7-move version.
These results illuminate the inconsistent findings in the
literature on the relationship between WMC and ToH
performance, as performance of high and low working
memory solvers appeared to vary drastically based on
certain aspects of the presentation of the problem –
specifically the size of the problem space and the ability to
gesture. Interactions such as the ones found in this
experiment suggest that WMC may influence problem
solving performance in a number of ways, and the story is
not as simple as the prediction that higher WMC or lower
“load” will translate to better performance.
Further, these findings are similar to other results that
have recently shown deficits for high WMC participants in a
number of problem solving situations (Beilock & deCaro,
2007; Ricks, Turley-Ames & Wiley, 2007). Suggested
reasons for these deficits are the ability of high WMC
solvers to focus their attention on specific aspects of the
problem (Ricks, Turley-Ames & Wiley, 2007), or the ability
of high WMC solvers to carry out computationally
expensive solution strategies, which may prevent high
WMC solvers from finding more elegant solutions (Beilock
& deCaro, 2007). The ability to focus ones’ attention can
often be a good thing, but in some cases, it can lead to
fixation on an incorrect solution path, or a failure to
consider other strategies for solution.

Acknowledgements
The research reported here is based in part on the Masters
Thesis of the first author. This work was supported by the
National Science Foundation, through Grant 0347887 to
the second author. The opinions expressed are those of
the authors and do not represent views of the funding
agency.

779

Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why
are some problems hard? Evidence from Tower of Hanoi.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 248-294.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N.P., Emerson, M.J., Witzki, A.H.,
Howerter, A., & Wager, T.D. (2000). The unity and
diversity of executive functions and their contributions to
complex “frontal lob” tasks: A latent variable analysis.
Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49-100.
Kotovsky, K., & Simon, H.A. (1990). What makes some
problems really hard: Explorations in the problem space
of difficulty. Cognitive Psychology, 22(2), 143-183.
Newell, A., & Simon, H.A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Newman, S.D., Carpenter, P.A., Varma, S., & Just, M.A.
(2003). Frontal and parietal participation in problem
solving in the Tower of London: fMRI and computational
modeling of planning and high-level perception.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 1668-1682.
Reber, P.J. & Kotovsky, K. (1997). Implicit learning in
problem solving: The role of working memory capacity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 146(2),
178-203.
Ricks, T. R., Turley-Ames, K. J. & Wiley, J. (2007) Effects
of working memory capacity on mental set due to domain
knowledge. Memory & Cognition, 35(6), 1456-1462.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995) The emergence of abstract
representations in dyad problem solving. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 4, 321-354.
Simon, H. A. (1975). The functional equivalence of problem
solving skills. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 268-288.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Wagner, S.M., Nusbaum, H., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2004).
Probing the mental representation of gesture: Is
handwaving spatial? Journal of Memory & Language, 50,
395-407.
Welsh, M.C., Satterlee-Cartmell, T., & Stine, M. (1999).
Towers of Hanoi and London: Contribution of working
memory and Inhibition to Performance. Brain &
Cognition, 41, 231-242.
Zook, N.A., Davalos, D.B., Delosh, E.L, & Davis, H.P.
(2004). Working memory, inhibition, and fluid
intelligence as predictors of performance on Tower of
Hanoi and London tasks. Brain and Cognition, 56(3),
286-292.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R., Kushmerick, N., & Lebiere, C. (1993). The
Tower of Hanoi and goal structures. In J. R. Anderson
(Ed.), Rules of the mind, (pp. 121-142). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ash, I.K. & Wiley, J. (2006). The nature of restructuring in
insight. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(1), 66-73.
Baddeley, A.D. (2002). Is working memory still working?
European Psychologist, 7(2), 85-97.
Beilock, S. L., & DeCaro, M. S. (2007). From poor
performance to success under stress: Working memory,
strategy selection, and mathematical problem solving
under pressure. Journal of Experiment Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 33, 983-998.
Cary, M. & Carlson, R.A. (1999). External support and the
development of problem solving routines. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 1053-1070.
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick,
D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working
memory span tasks: A methodological review and user's
guide. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 12, 769 - 786.
Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as
executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 11, 19-23.
Garber, P. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2002). Gesture offers
insight into problem-solving in adults and children.
Cognitive Science, 26, 817-831.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14,
69-110.
Kane, M.J., Hambrick, D.Z., Tuholski, S.W., Wilhelm, O.,
Payne, T.W., & Engle, R.W. (2004). The generality of
working memory capacity: A latent-variable approach to
verbal and visuospatial memory span and reasoning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(2),
139-217.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2003). Working memory
capacity and the control of attention: The contributions of
goal neglect, response competition, and task set to Stroop
interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 132, 47-70.
Kirsh, D. (1995b). Complementary strategies: why we use
our hands when we think. Proceedings of 7th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

780

