UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Who Framed Roger Rabbit: The effect of legal role and frame on the outcome of civil
disputes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2h79r4v8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Gilliland, Victoria
Dunn, John C.
Navarro, Daniel J.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Who Framed Roger Rabbit:
The Effect of Legal Role and Frame on the Outcome of Civil Disputes
Victoria Gilliland (victoria.gilliland@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide
SA, 5005 Australia

John C. Dunn (john.c.dunn@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide
SA, 5005 Australia

Daniel J. Navarro (daniel.navarro@ adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide
SA, 5005 Australia
Abstract
The present study investigated the effect of framing and legal
role on the propensity to settle by litigants in simulated legal
disputes. Participants were given four different scenarios
which factorially combined legal role, plaintiff vs. defendant,
and frame, positive or gain vs. negative or loss. Participants
also indicated their subjective probability of winning. The
results indicated that positively framed litigants were more
willing to settle than negatively framed litigants. Furthermore,
this analysis revealed that the propensity to settle was a joint
function of frame and the perceived chance of winning, with
no systematic effect of legal role. Accordingly, we suggest
that framing manipulations may be able to influence the rate
of negotiated settlements of legal disputes.
Keywords: Prospect theory; framing; legal decision making;
negotiation; role; plaintiff; defendant

Introduction
Negotiation is increasingly viewed as the preferred means of
resolving disputes in crisis situations, including legal and
non-legal disputes. The term ‘crisis’ here refers to conflict
between two or more parties, where the parties must deal with
each other, and where failure to negotiate a resolution will
result in a risky and uncertain outcome. Litigation is therefore
a primary example of this form of conflict. In a civil dispute,
consisting of a plaintiff and a defendant, the plaintiff can
(usually) only choose to sue one defendant, and similarly the
defendant cannot choose not to be sued. The parties therefore
must deal with each other. This distinguishes a crisis situation
from other forms of negotiation, such as buyer/seller
negotiations, where parties can choose to buy or sell
elsewhere. Furthermore, in litigation, if parties fail to
negotiate a settlement, the resolution of the dispute will be
determined by a third party (a judge or jury) at a trial, where
the outcome is risky and uncertain for both parties. This is in
contrast to other forms of negotiation, where a failure to
negotiate simply results in impasse and an end to
negotiations. Apart from litigation, other types of crisis
situations include inter-state conflict, hostage negotiation and
some types of workplace industrial action.
Failure to resolve crisis situations through negotiations
can have catastrophic consequences. In the case of
litigation, civil trials have a major impact not only on the

individual, in terms of financial and emotional strain, but
also on society and the economy as a whole. For example,
1992 report suggested that litigation cost the US economy
$300 billion per year, a figure which is rising by 12%
annually (Luu, 1993). Furthermore, recent figures suggest
that nearly 90% of US businesses are involved in litigation,
with corporations engaged in an average of 37 lawsuits at
any one time (Insurance Journal, 2005).
In light of this, there is considerable value in investigating
how people evaluate outcomes and make decisions in crisis
situations, using litigation as a framework. Early research
attempted to explain litigant behavior through economic
models of expected utility (Hogarth, 1987; Rachlinski,
1996), a theoretical orientation favored by at least some
legal practitioners. For example, in 2000, the US Federal
Court Judge, Randall Rader, stated his belief that a litigant
will determine the value of a lawsuit by multiplying the
probability of winning in court by the amount they are likely
to win, and then subtracting the legal costs. Based on this
calculation, a settlement offer will be accepted if it is higher
than the expected value of the trial. On this view,
negotiations fail due to differing estimates by plaintiffs and
defendants of the probability of winning at trial.

Cognitive processes in dispute negotiation
The problem with Judge Rader’s approach is that economic
utility models disregard the cognitive processes involved in
decision making, and in doing so fail to adequately describe
human behavior. It is for this reason that attention is now
focused on how an individual represents the facts of the
dispute, the probabilities of different outcomes, and the
nature and value of what is at stake.
Several investigators have attempted to account for failure
of negotiations in terms of differing representations of
plaintiffs and defendants (e.g., van Koppen, 1990; Korobkin
& Guthrie, 1994; Rachlinski, 1996). These studies
investigated the effect of framing on decision making. The
concept of framing was introduced by Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) as part of their development of prospect
theory which they offered as an alternative to traditional
economic utility models. According to prospect theory,
individuals evaluate outcomes in terms of gains and losses

1005

from a given reference point which, in turn, influences an
individual’s risk preferences. Decisions made in the context
of gains are said to be “positively framed” and are generally
characterized by risk aversion. In contrast, decisions made in
the context of losses are said to be “negatively framed” and
are characterized by risk seeking behavior.
Prospect theory suggests that a positively framed litigant
will be risk averse, and therefore be more inclined to reach an
out-of-court settlement (a certain outcome) than their
negatively framed counterparts. In contrast, a negatively
framed litigant will be much more willing to risk a trial rather
than accept a certain outcome in the form of a settlement. The
challenge for researchers is to identify the conditions under
which litigants will be either risk seeking or risk averse, and
whether these conditions can be manipulated to help increase
the number of negotiated settlements.
In one of the first studies to examine the effect of frame on
litigant behavior, van Koppen (1990) proposed that during
settlement negotiations, plaintiffs will be in a positive frame
while defendants will be in a negative frame. This, he
suggested, followed from the fact that a plaintiff typically
chooses between gains – they must decide whether to accept a
sum of money or go to trial – while a defendant typically
chooses between losses – they must decide whether to pay a
sum of money or go to trial. Van Koppen tested this
hypothesis by presenting a civil dispute scenario to
participants in which they adopted the role of either plaintiff
or defendant. Participants were then asked to nominate a sum
that they would be prepared to accept (if the plaintiff) or to
pay (if the defendant) in order to settle out of court. The
results showed, as expected, that plaintiffs were more risk
averse than defendants.
Although van Koppen (1990) showed that plaintiffs are
more risk averse than defendants, it is not possible to attribute
this solely to a difference in frame or reference point since, in
this study, legal role (plaintiff or defendant) and frame
(positive or negative) were perfectly confounded. Van
Koppen attempted to eliminate an effect of legal role by
creating a scenario in which each participant was faced with
largely equivalent facts. This scenario involved participants
imagining that they had purchased a new puppy from a
breeder. Unbeknownst to the purchaser, the puppy has a heart
defect and dies soon after delivery. Different legal roles were
created as follows: in the plaintiff version, the purchaser pays
for the puppy on delivery and subsequently sues the breeder
for a refund. However, in the defendant version, payment is
required later. When the puppy dies, the purchaser withholds
payment, for which breeder then sues. Van Koppen assumed
that the only relevant difference between the scenarios is the
question of suing or being sued. Nevertheless, it is clear that
the facts of the case genuinely differ between the two
versions, and participants may have adopted quite different
interpretations of the relative merits of each case.

Frame and legal role
An important caveat is that, though intuitively appealing,
there is no necessary link between frame and legal role. The
adoption of a frame depends on the evaluation of outcomes

in terms of gains and losses from a given reference point
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1983). Therefore it should be
possible to manipulate how a litigant perceives their
situation, largely independently of whether they play the
role of plaintiff or defendant. Consider, for example, a
company that has purchased a piece of machinery to
perform a particular task. It is soon discovered that the
machine contains a manufacturing fault and it ceases to
function. The manufacturer acknowledges responsibility and
replaces the machine two weeks after the fault was
discovered. The company decides to sue the manufacturer
for income lost during the two weeks it took to replace the
faulty product. According to van Koppen (1990) the
company – as the plaintiff in the legal action – will evaluate
the outcome in terms of potential gains and will thus be in a
positive frame. This is based on the assumption that the
company’s reference point is set at the position in which
they find themselves following the two week hiatus.
However, it is possible (even likely) that the company
chooses a reference point based on the position they would
have been in had the machine not been faulty. This induces
a negative frame, since anything less than full income
reimbursement represents a loss.
Similarly, depending upon where their reference point is
placed, there is no reason why a defendant may not also
adopt a positive frame. Consider, for example, the editors of
a tabloid magazine who decide to print a potentially
defamatory article and are subsequently sued because of it.
In the meantime, they have sold a great number of
additional magazines and have garnered some valuable
notoriety. If they take the current situation as their reference
point then the legal action involves a potential loss of
income and they will be in a negative frame. However, if
they take as their reference point the situation they would
have been in had they not chosen to publish the article then
the current situation would represent a potential gain and
they would be in a positive frame.
If it is possible to manipulate frame independently of
legal role then this may offer a way of helping to resolve
legal and other disputes. In general, a dispute is settled if the
maximum offer that the defendant is prepared to make is
greater than or equal to the minimum price that the plaintiff
is prepared to accept. In the standard view, the plaintiff is in
a positive frame and the defendant is in a negative frame,
which poses difficulties for settlement. While a risk averse
(positively framed) plaintiff may be willing to make a
generous offer, a risk seeking (negatively framed) defendant
is unlikely to accept. From the perspective of promoting
negotiated settlements, negative frames in either plaintiff or
defendant will increase the chance that the action goes to
trial. This observation is consistent with the effect of
framing on both buyer-seller negotiation (Neale, Huber &
Northcraft, 1987) and managerial negotiation (McCusker &
Carnvale, 1995).
The ability to resolve disputes through manipulation of
frame depends crucially on the relative importance of
framing and legal role in determining the decision to
settle. It is possible that although framing effects may

1006

occur, as proposed by Kahneman and Tversky (1979),
they are minor compared to the effects of legal role. In
this case, the capacity to intervene in disputes using this
strategy would be limited. On the other hand, it is also
conceivable that there are little or no intrinsic differences
in legal role in their effects of the decision to settle and
that framing effects dominate. In this case, the
opportunity to alter the outcome of negotiations through
re-framing presents itself.

The present study
The aim of the present study is to examine the effects of
frame and legal role on the decision to reach an out-of-court
settlement in a legal dispute. Participants received a
questionnaire containing four different legal scenarios, each
of which dealt with a civil dispute for a sum of $20,000.
Although the facts concerning each scenario remained the
same, each could be presented in one of four forms that
factorially combined legal role, plaintiff vs. defendant, and
frame, positive vs. negative. For plaintiffs, positively framed
scenarios described potential outcomes in terms of gains
relative to the current situation following the initial loss of
income. Thus, a positively framed plaintiff could either gain
$20,000 in or gain nothing, depending on the outcome of
the trial. Negatively framed scenarios, on the other hand,
described potential outcomes in terms of losses relative to
the situation they would have obtained had the initial loss of
income not occurred. For a negatively framed plaintiff, this
meant that they could either lose $20,000 or lose nothing at
trial. Conversely, for defendants, negatively framed
scenarios described potential outcomes in terms of losses
relative to the current situation following an initial increase
in income. Positively framed scenarios described potential
outcomes in terms of gains relative the situation that would
have obtained had the initial increase in income not
occurred. In each scenario, participants were told that a
single settlement offer of $10,000 was on the table. If this
was rejected and the case went to trial then they had a 50%
chance of either being awarded or having to pay the entire
sum of $20,000 and a 50% chance of being awarded or
having to pay nothing. Participants read each scenario in
turn and were asked if they would accept or reject the
settlement offer. Also, following the results of a pilot study,
participants were asked to indicate what they believed their
(subjective) chance of winning in court was, regardless of
the lawyer’s (objective) advice. We expected to find an
effect of both role and frame on the decision to settle
although the relative sizes of these effects and whether or
not they were independent of each other were unknown.

Materials
Participants completed a questionnaire consisting of four
legal scenarios. Each scenario was presented in one of four
test conditions defined by the factorial combination of role
(plaintiff or defendant) and frame (positive or negative).
Each scenario could be presented to participants either as a
positively framed plaintiff (P+), a negatively framed
plaintiff (P-), a positively framed defendant (D+) or a
negatively framed defendant (D-). Thus, each participant
was under each condition once, and saw each factual
scenario once. The assignment of scenarios to each
role/frame combination was counterbalanced across four
different versions of the questionnaire. In each version, the
four scenarios were always presented in the same order,
but the order in which the conditions were presented was
counterbalanced.
Each scenario outlined the facts of a legal dispute which
could plausibly be presented in both positive and negative
frames for both the plaintiff and the defendant. The first
scenario involved a defamation claim between a shop
owner and a newspaper. The second scenario outlined a
property dispute between an investor and a bed-andbreakfast operator. The third scenario was a contractual
dispute between two business partners regarding
entitlement to income. The fourth scenario described an
inheritance dispute between two cousins. In each case, it
was stated that the plaintiff was suing the defendant for
$20,000, that the chance of winning at trial was 50%. If
the plaintiff won at trial then the defendant would have to
pay the full $20,000 to them, alternatively, if the plaintiff
lost at trial then the defendant would have to pay them
nothing. For simplicity, there were no legal costs
associated with the case. Each participant was told that a
settlement offer of $10,000 had been made and they were
asked if they would be prepared to accept it in order to
avoid a trial. Participants were also asked the following
question after each scenario in order to obtain an
indication of the subjective chance of winning:
‘Your lawyer has advised that you have a 50% chance of
winning in court. Based on the details provided, what
chance (as a percentage) do YOU think you have of
winning in court?’

Each scenario established the relevant legal role by
means of an initial statement of the form: ‘You are the
plaintiff/defendant in a litigation suit…’ The relevant
frame was established through alternative wording of the
trial outcomes and the offer. For example, in the first
scenario, the trial outcome in the positively framed
plaintiff condition is described as follows,
“Your lawyer has estimated that you have a 50% chance
that the judge will rule in your favor and your will receive
$20,000 in compensation and a 50% chance that the judge
will rule against you and you will receive nothing in
compensation”

Method
Participants
The participants in this study were 193 psychology students
from the University of Adelaide who received course credit
for their participation. They were aged between 16 and 39
(M = 19.6, SD = 4.03) and were randomly assigned to one
of four groups.

Similarly, the settlement offer in this condition is
described in the following way,

1007

“If you accept this offer, you will receive $10,000 in
compensation”

In the condition of a negatively framed defendant, the
phrase, “receive … in compensation”, was replaced by
the phrase “pay … in compensation”. For the negatively
framed plaintiff, this phrase was replaced by the phrase,
“lose … in income”, while for the positively framed
defendant, it was replaced by the phrase, “keep … in new
income”.

Design and Procedure
Participants were allocated to one of four groups
corresponding to the version of the questionnaire they
received. They were asked to read through and to respond
to all four scenarios in the order in which they were
presented. They were instructed to consider each scenario
separately and to make their decision solely on the basis
of the details provided, without regard to legal fees or
court costs. They were also asked not to view the
scenarios as moral dilemmas, as both plaintiffs and
defendants would feel that their position was correct.

Results
Due to space constraints, the reporting of these results is
necessarily brief. In order to determine whether the
framing manipulations were successful, the data were
analyzed using logistic regression to determine the main
effects of role, frame and their interaction, with
subjective beliefs about the probability of winning
included as a covariate (see figure 1). An overall
analysis, collapsed across all scenarios, showed
subjective chance of winning to be highly significant (p <
.001) and the biggest predictor of settlement. The
analysis further revealed a highly significant framing
effect (p < .001), with positively framed litigants
approximately 21% more likely to settle than their
negatively framed counterparts, regardless of role.
Importantly, the effect of role was not significant (p >
.05), nor was there an interaction between role and frame.
This suggests that role and frame are distinct constructs,
and it is frame that more strongly influences people’s
decisions.
An examination of individual scenarios revealed a
similar pattern to the overall analysis, with litigants in a
positive frame consistently more likely to settle than
those in a negative frame. Subjective chance of winning
remained highly significant in all scenarios. The effect of
frame was significant (p < .05) in three of the four
scenarios, while role was significant in only one instance
(Scenario 3). As with the overall analysis, there was no
interaction effect between role and frame for any
scenario.

Discussion
This experiment revealed three main results. First, the
decision to settle a simulated legal dispute is strongly
influenced by frame. In three of the four scenarios, a
litigant in a positive frame was more likely to accept the
settlement offer than a litigant in a negative frame. This
effect is consistent with prospect theory, as proposed by

Kahneman and Tversky (1979). When induced to be in a
positive frame and thereby choosing between gains,
participants in this study were consistently risk averse –
they were more likely to accept the settlement offer with
its certain outcome and less likely to go to trial with its
uncertain outcome. Conversely, negatively framed
participants, choosing between losses, were more risk
taking – they were less likely to accept the settlement offer
and more likely to go to trial. The second finding was that
the effect of frame was independent of any effect of legal
role as none of the interaction terms approached
significance. This further supports the view that role and
frame should be viewed as very different constructs.
The third main result is that the effect of legal role on the
decision to settle was inconsistent across scenarios. This
suggests that once the influence of frame has been
controlled, there is little or no difference between plaintiffs
and defendants in their propensity to settle. This
contradicts previous claims that plaintiffs will always be
more risk averse and thus more likely to settle (e.g.,
Rachlinski, 1996; van Koppen, 1990). In fact, the results
for Scenarios 2 and 3 in the present study show that it is
possible, under some circumstances, for plaintiffs to be
less likely to settle than defendants, independent of how
they frame the dispute. This last result, in conjunction with
the variable effect of role across the other scenarios, was
unexpected.

Modelling the Effects of Role, Frame and
Perceived Chance of Winning
By constructing a simple model based on prospect theory,
it is possible to combine the results of this experiment in a
single graph that demonstrates the effects of role, frame,
and perceived chance of winning on the probability of
accepting the settlement offer. In order to do this, we first
note that according to prospect theory, the settlement offer
will be accepted if its perceived value is greater than the
perceived expected value of going to trial. An individual in
a positive frame, whether plaintiff or defendant, should
settle if,
w (1) .v ( $10, 000 ) > w ( p ) .v ( $20, 000 ) + w (1 − p ) .v ( $0 )

where v(.) is a subjective value function that takes a
quantity (money in this case) as its argument, and w(.) is a
weighting function applied to the subjective probability of
winning at trial, p. According to Kahneman and Tversky
(1979), people tend to assign greater weight or importance
to probabilities close to zero and relatively less importance
to probabilities close to one. A similar equation can be
written for an individual in a negative frame. In this case,
such an individual should settle if
w (1) .v ( −$10, 000 ) > w ( p ) .v ( −$0 ) + w (1 − p ) .v ( −$20, 000 )

In other words, they will settle if the perceived value of the
settlement offer is greater than the expected value of going
to trial. This, in turn is determined by the subjective value
of winning at trial, and losing nothing, and the subjective
value of losing at trial and losing the full amount.

1008

In the present study, the objective values of the
settlement offer, $10,000, and the award, $20,000, were
both fixed. According to prospect theory, the subjective
values of these quantities are therefore also fixed for a
given individual. We assume that the respective values are
also fixed across individuals for a given role, frame, and
scenario. This means that, after re-arranging the terms in
the above equations1, for an individual in a positive frame,
the settlement offer will be accepted whenever,
v ( $10, 000 )
= r+
w( p) <
v ( $20, 000 )
while for an individual in a negative frame, the offer will
be accepted whenever,
v ( −$10, 000 )
w (1 − p ) >
= r−
v ( −$20, 000 )
When modelling these data, it is important to note that
the average subjective probability of winning varied
between scenarios. The effect, however, appears to be
consistent across conditions, with participants exhibiting a
high level of agreement regarding the chances of winning.
For example, in Scenario 1, all four conditions believed,
on average, that the plaintiff had a 60% chance of winning
in court. Conversely, in Scenario 3, all conditions believed
it was the defendant who had a 60% chance of winning.
With this in mind, we assume that within each such
condition, subjective probability is approximately normally
distributed with a mean and standard deviation
corresponding to the observed mean and standard deviation
for that condition. We also assume, as a first
approximation2, that w(p) = p. Let mi and si be the mean and
standard deviation of the subjective probability of winning
at trial for condition i. Let Pi be the probability of accepting
the settlement offer in condition i, and let Φ(.) be the normal
cumulative distribution function. Then, for participants in a
positive frame, Pi = Φ((r+ − mi)/si), while for participants in
a negative frame, Pi = Φ((1 − r- − mi)/si).
Figure 1 presents the observed probability of accepting
the settlement offer as a function of the subjective
probability of winning at trial for each combination of
role, frame, and scenario. The figure also shows the
predicted functions for the best-fitting values of r+ and r-.
These values were found to be 0.60 and 0.48, respectively,
and may be interpreted as the relative value of a gain or
loss of $10,000 compared to a similar gain or loss of
$20,000. The best fitting values that we obtained indicate
that for this sample of participants and conditions, a gain
of $10,000 is perceived as equivalent to 60% of a gain of
$20,000 while a loss of $10,000 is perceived as equivalent
to 48% of a loss of $20,000. These values are consistent
with prospect theory which proposes that the subjective
value
function
is
negatively
accelerating
1
The null term in each equation falls out since, according to
prospect theory, v(0) = 0. We also assume that w(1) = 1.
2
Similar results obtain if alternative weighting functions are
assumed.

1

P+
D+
PD-

P(settle)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

P(win)

Figure 1: The probability of settling as function of the
probability of winning across scenario, frame, and role.
for gains and positively accelerating and steeper for losses.
Accordingly, the ratio for gains, r+, is both greater than 0.5,
indicating a negatively accelerating function, and greater
than the ratio for losses, r-, indicating a steeper function for
the latter.
Figure 1 also illustrates two main effects. First, there is a
general trend for participants to become more risk taking as
their subjective probability of winning increases. This
agrees with both prospect theory and commonsense - if you
think you are going to win at trial then, if you are the
defendant, you are more likely to offer a relatively lower
sum to settle and, if you are the plaintiff, you are more
likely to demand a relatively greater sum to settle. However,
these results directly contradict the conclusion reached by
van Koppen (1990) that litigants become less risk taking as
their subjective probability of winning increases. In fact, the
conclusion reached by van Koppen appears to misconstrue
the concept of framing. Framing is a process whereby
individuals evaluate outcomes in terms of gains and losses
from a given reference point and is conceptually distinct
from the expected probability of a particular outcome. Thus,
according to prospect theory, every outcome, regardless of
its probability of occurrence, can be presented in both a
positive and a negative frame. For example, a plaintiff in a
negative frame will feel that they are owed $20,000 and will
still consider anything less than this sum to be a loss,
regardless of their expectation of the money’s recovery. To
assume, as Van Koppen does, that frame is contingent upon
an outcome’s probability is analogous to suggesting that if
you lose $20 from your wallet, you would consider it a loss
only if you expected to find it again (or alternatively, that
you would actually consider it a gain if you recovered it).
Figure 1 also demonstrates the effect of frame. Although
the data tend to be more consistent for positively framed
conditions than for negatively framed conditions, overall,
for a given subjective probability of winning, individuals in
a positive frame are more likely to settle than individuals in

1009

a negative frame. The effect is greatest for probabilities
around 0.5, and the average difference is about 10%.
Finally, Figure 1 also demonstrates the lack of an effect.
Overall, there is little or no evidence of a systematic effect
of legal role. However, it should be noted that there is at
least one anomalous data point corresponding to the
negatively framed defendant (D-) in scenario 4. Although in
a negative frame, participants in this condition agreed to
settle at a rate that would be expected if they were in a
positive frame. At present, we are unable to account for this
effect.

General Discussion
The principal result of the present study is that the
likelihood of accepting an offer to settle out of court can be
shaped by two factors; the frame or reference point under
which the offer is evaluated, and the subjective probability
of winning at trial. Critically, this result is inconsistent with
the view that plaintiffs are risk-averse and defendants are
risk-seeking (van Koppen, 1990). Instead, the present study
showed that both plaintiffs and defendants are equally
susceptible to framing manipulations.
The study also suggests that – at least when evaluating
hypothetical situations – there is no self-serving bias
influencing people’s expectations. That is, while it is
unclear what really does cause participants to disagree with
the lawyer’s assessment of the outcome probability, it is
unlikely to be due to a role effect. Indeed, it seems more
likely that the divergence is a function of the participants’
own assessment of the factual scenarios used, rather than a
systematic effect of role. This study therefore rejects the
assumption that role necessarily determines a litigants’ risk
preferences and subjective assessments. In particular, it
appears that risk preferences are determined by framing, and
that it may be possible to arbitrarily manipulate frame for
both plaintiffs and defendants.
From an applied perspective, these results suggest that reframing may be a useful tactic in negotiations to increase
the chance of reaching a settlement. That said, the study did
not manipulate this directly. Rather, individuals were asked
to assume the role of either plaintiff or defendant and to
evaluate a fixed settlement offer. An obvious extension of
the present study would be to pair plaintiffs and defendants
in different frames. As discussed earlier, prospect theory
predicts a set of ordered outcomes for pairs of litigants in
different frames.
We were able to manipulate frame relatively easily in the
present study as the participants were all involved in
simulated legal disputes. It is unclear how successful it
would be to manipulate frame in the real disputes. Further
research is required to determine the extent to which actual
litigants adopt variable reference points in their evaluations,
the extent to which these are fixed or are labile throughout
negotiations, and how easily they may be influenced by
third parties, such as lawyers.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an Australian Research
Discovery Grant (DP0558407) to JCD. VG was supported
by an Australian Postgraduate Award and DJN by an
Australian Research Fellowship (ARC grant DP0773794).
We thank Nancy Briggs for helpful comments and analysis.

References
Hogarth, R. M. (1987). Judgment and Choice. Chichester:
John Wiley and Sons.
Insurance Journal. (2005). Cost of Litigation Haunts US
Corporations More Than Winning Cases. Retrieved
December 6, 2007 from http://www.insurancejournal
.com/magazines/east/2005/11/07/features/62312.htm
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk. Econometrica, 47, 2,
263-291.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1983). Choices, Values and
Frames. In D. Kahneman & A. Tversky (Eds), Choices,
Values and Frames. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Korobkin, R. & Guthrie, C. (1994). Psychological barriers
to litigation: an experimental approach. Michigan Law
Review, 93, 1, 107-192.
Luu, T. N. (1993). Reducing the Costs of Civil Litigation.
Public Law Research Institute. Retrieved Dec 6, 2007
from http://w3.uchastings.edu/plri/fal95tex/cstslit.html
McCusker, C. & Carnevale, P.J. (1995). Framing in
resource dilemmas: loss aversion and the moderating
effects of sanctions. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 61, 2, 190-201.
Neale, M. A. & Bazerman, M. H. (1992). Negotiating
rationally: the power and impact of the negotiator’s
frame. Academy of Management Executive, 6, 42-51.
Rachlinski, J.J. (1996). Gains, Losses and the Psychology of
Litigation. Southern California Law Review, 70, 113-185.
Rader, R. (2000). The Pace and Expense of Litigation in
United States Courts. Paper presented at the Center for
Advanced Study and Research on Intellectual Property
Symposium. Retrieved December 6, 2007, from
http://www.law.washington.edu/CASRIP/Symposium/Nu
mber5/
Trubek, D.M., Sarat, A., Felstiner, W.L.F., Kritzer, H.M., &
Grossman, J.B. (1983). The Costs of Ordinary Litigation.
UCLA Law Review, 31, 72-127.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1981). The Framing of
Decisions and the Psychology of Choice. Science, 211,
4481, 453-458.
Van Koppen, P. J. (1990). Risk taking in civil law
negotiations. Law and Human Behavior, 14, 2, 151-165.

1010

