UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Worked Examples and Tutored Problem Solving: Redundant or Synergistic Forms of
Support?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sh872dd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Salden, Ron J.C.M.
Aleveen, Vincent A.W.M.M.
Renkl, Alexander
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Worked Examples and Tutored Problem Solving:
Redundant or Synergistic Forms of Support?
Ron J. C. M. Salden (rons@cs.cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Vincent A. W. M. M. Aleven (aleven@cs.cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Educational Psychology, Department of Psychology
University of Freiburg
Engelbergerstr. 41, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany

Rolf Schwonke (rolf.schwonke@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Educational Psychology, Department of Psychology
University of Freiburg
Engelbergerstr. 41, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany

individualized support for learning by doing (i.e., solving
problems) by selecting appropriate problems to-be-solved,
by providing feedback and problem solving hints, and by
online assessment of the student’s learning progress.
Cognitive Tutors are one particular form of intelligent
tutoring systems, grounded in cognitive theory; they
individualize instruction by selecting problems based on a
model of the students’ knowledge state that is constantly
being updated (Corbett & Anderson, 1995).
Although Cognitive Tutors have many advantages, they
are not without limitations. As is the case with most tutoring
systems, their main focus is on correct answers during
problem solving, which may not be ideal for gaining a
conceptual understanding of the domain principles in
problem solving (cf. VanLehn et al., 2005).
One instructional idea to further improve the focus on
principles in Cognitive Tutors, and thereby their
effectiveness, is to reduce problem solving demands by
providing worked-out solutions (e.g., Renkl & Atkinson,
2007) when the primary instructional goal is to gain
understanding (cf. Sweller, van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998).
Thereby, more of the learners’ limited processing capacity
(i.e., working memory capacity) can be devoted to
understanding the domain principles and their application in
problem solving, especially when worked-out examples are
combined with self-explanation prompts (Roy & Chi, 2005).
However, as learners progress through training, workedout examples might not be as effective in later stages of the
training, a phenomenon known as the “expertise reversal
effect” (Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler, & Sweller, 2003).
Empirical results indicate that problem solving is more
favorable in later stages of learning, whereas worked

Abstract
The current research investigates a combination of two
instructional approaches, tutored problem solving and
worked-examples. Tutored problem solving with automated
tutors has proven to be an effective instructional method.
Worked-out examples have been shown to be an effective
complement to untutored problem solving, but it is largely
unknown whether they are an effective complement to
tutored problem solving. Further, while computer-based
learning environments offer the possibility of adaptively
transitioning from examples to problems while tailoring to an
individual learner, the effectiveness of such machine-adapted
example fading is largely unstudied. To address these
research questions, one lab and one classroom experiment
were conducted. Both studies compared a standard Cognitive
Tutor with two example-enhanced Cognitive Tutors, in which
the fading of worked-out examples occurred either fixed or
adaptively. Results indicate that the adaptive fading of
worked-out examples leads to higher transfer performance on
delayed post-tests than the other two methods.
Keywords: Cognitive Tutor, worked-out examples, adaptive
fading

Introduction
Learning and cognitive skill acquisition can be supported
effectively in a number of different ways. One very
successful approach is the use of “tutored problem solving”
by intelligent tutoring systems (Anderson, Corbett,
Koedinger, & Pelletier, 1995; Beal, Walles, Arroyo, &
Woolf, 2007; Koedinger & Aleven, 2007; Koedinger,
Anderson, Hadley, & Mark, 1997; Mitrovic, 2003; Razzaq
et al., 2005; VanLehn et al., 2005). These systems provide

589

students for menu-based self-explanations. Therefore,
example steps can be faded adaptively based on the quality
of students’ menu-based answers to self-explanation
prompts, as a measure of their understanding of the
underlying problem solving principles.
In order to investigate whether tutored problem solving
and worked-out examples are synergistic when examples are
adaptively faded, three experimental conditions were
compared: 1) a problem solving condition that uses the
standard Cognitive Tutor; 2) an example-enhanced
Cognitive Tutor that fades worked-out steps in a fixed
manner; and 3) an example-enhanced Cognitive Tutor that
fades worked-out steps adaptively for each individual
learner. The main hypothesis states that an adaptive fading
procedure, combined with tutored problem solving, will lead
to better learning and higher transfer than a pure tutored
problem solving procedure and a fixed non-adaptive
procedure for fading examples (also combined with tutored
problem solving). Essentially, this hypothesis states that
tutored problem solving and adaptively faded examples are
synergistic forms of support.
We conducted two experiments, both comparing these
three experimental conditions, a lab experiment (in
Freiburg) and a classroom experiment setting (in
Pittsburgh). Implementing and evaluating the same
manipulations in both a lab and a classroom setting enables
us to assess whether and how robust effects found in a lab
setting transfer to a real-life environment. Such transfer
cannot be taken for granted, given the many sources of
variability in the classroom that are typically absent in the
lab (e.g., distractions such as announcements over the
intercom, students arriving late, off-task behavior,
absenteeism, informal peer helping, not always in
ineffective ways, etc.), and the fact that classroom studies
often take place over longer periods of time. Thus, a more
ecologically valid investigation of the experimental
manipulations and a “clean” lab investigation complement
each other, and possible effects will have stronger
implications.

examples are more favorable in earlier stages. The
implications for instructional design are that (a) initially,
worked-out steps should be presented together with selfexplanation prompts, and (b) when the learner demonstrates
understanding, the worked-out steps should gradually be
‘faded’ from worked-out examples (solution is presented to
the learner) to problems (learner must find the solution)
(Atkinson, Renkl, & Merrill, 2003; Renkl, Atkinson, &
Große, 2004; Renkl, Atkinson, Maier, & Staley, 2002; for a
detailed theoretical rationale see Renkl & Atkinson, 2007).
An important issue that has remained unaddressed until
recently is whether “tutored problem solving” and workedout examples are redundant or synergistic forms of support.
On one hand, it might be that the guidance that Cognitive
Tutors give to learners is so effective that embedding
worked-out examples within a tutored problem solving
setting would not improve learning. This kind of tutored
problem solving represents a far tougher control condition
than those that have been investigated in previous studies of
the value of worked examples. On the other hand, it is
conceivable that the two forms of instruction are synergistic:
it is conceivable that early cognitive skill acquisition is
better supported by examples than by tutored problem
solving, because examples prevent potential pitfalls such as
a performance orientation, combined with the use of shallow
strategies or general heuristics instead of efforts to
understand and apply domain principles in the course of
problem solving (cf. also VanLehn et al., 2005).
This issue was addressed in two recent studies by
Schwonke et al. (2007), which found that tutored problem
solving combined with examples that are gradually faded
has beneficial learning effects. In this approach, examples
are added to tutored problem solving, and are faded
gradually, according to a “fixed” fading scheme that is the
same for all learners. Students self-explain the example
steps, as well as problem steps, with feedback from the
tutor, by identifying the geometry theorem that justifies the
worked-out step (see Figure 1). The results indicated that
tutored problem solving combined with example fading
leads to better transfer than tutored problem solving alone.
Furthermore, the combination was less time consuming.
As suggested by Schwonke et al. (2007) the fading of
examples could be even more beneficial for learning if the
rate at which the worked-out steps are faded would be
adapted to the students’ individual learning progress. While
studying and self-explaining worked-out solution steps
prepares the learner to deal with subsequent problem
solving demands in a principle-based way, a learner who
has not yet gained a basic understanding of a principle and
of the way in which it is applied to solve problems should
not be exposed to the corresponding problem solving
demands. Once the student shows a basic understanding of a
principle and its application, s/he should go one step further
and apply this knowledge to solve problem steps. An
adaptive fading procedure will make it more likely that the
student will be able to solve a faded step correctly. Such an
adaptive fading method can take advantage of the fact that
the Cognitive Tutor that we used in our research prompts

Experiment 1: Freiburg Lab Study
For this study 57 students (19 in 9th grade; 38 in 10th grade)
were recruited from a German “Realschule” which is
equivalent to an American high school. The participants
(age M = 15.63, SD = .84) were randomly distributed across
the three experimental conditions.
The experiment focused on a unit in the Geometry
Cognitive Tutor that deals with the geometric properties of
angles, covering four theorems: angle addition, separate
complementary angles, vertical angles, and linear pair.
Every aspect (interface, hints, and glossary) of the Cognitive
Tutor was translated into German. In order to be able to
implement a consistent fading procedure we created new
Geometry problems covering the theorems of the selected
unit. The problems were sequenced from simpler to more
complex; with one-step problems presented first, followed
by two-step problems, and eventually by three-step
problems. In the Problem Solving condition all steps of all

590

have been shown to accurately predict students’ post-test
scores (Corbett & Anderson, 1995).
In the current project, in order to achieve effective fading
of the worked-out steps, the estimates of an individual
student’s mastery of each the geometry theorems were
compared against two thresholds, set at .7 and .5,
respectively. The high threshold represents an estimate of
the level of understanding at which a worked-out step is
faded. However, even if a student attains this level of
understanding, s/he may later fall below that level, due to
errors on subsequent steps of that specific theorem. Once
the estimate of skill mastery falls below the low threshold
the Tutor will again present the student with a worked-out

problems were “pure problem solving,” meaning that the
students needed to solve them. In the Fixed Fading
condition, by contrast, as detailed in Table 1, students
started out with fully worked-out examples, with example
steps gradually being faded in subsequent problems, until in
the last two problems, all steps were pure problem solving.
Table 1: The fading of worked-out steps in the “Fixed
Fading” condition; in problems P1 to P11, steps involving
theorems T1 to T4 were worked-out (W) initially, and were
systematically faded later (S for solving).

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11

T1
S

Problem solving
T2
T3
T4

T1
W

S

Examples
T2
T3
W

S

W
S

S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S

T4

W
W

S
S
S
S
S

W
S
S
S

W
S
S

W
W
W
S
S
S

W
S
S
S
S

W
S
S

For the Adaptive Fading condition the presentation of
worked-out steps was the same as the fixed fading condition
up until the three-step problems (problems 7 to 11). Once
students got to those problems any step could be presented
as either pure problem solving or as worked-out, depending
on the student’s performance explaining worked-out steps in
earlier problems that involve the same geometry theorem
(see Figure 1). As detailed below, in all conditions, students
were required to provide menu-based explanations for all
steps, whether presented as worked-out steps or pure
problem solving. These explanations indicate which
geometry theorem was used. In an earlier study (Aleven &
Koedinger, 2002) involving the Geometry Tutor, these
menu-based explanations were found to improve student
learning. Thus, in the current study, they serve double duty.
Specifically, the fading decisions were based on the
tutor’s estimates of each individual student’s ability to
produce valid explanations on steps involving the relevant
theorem. The tutor maintains these probability estimates
(separately for each of the four theorems) using a Bayesian
knowledge-tracing algorithm (Corbett & Anderson, 1995).
The estimates are updated each time the student explains a
step involving the giving geometry theorem; the direction of
the update depends on whether the explanation was correct
or not. The knowledge-tracing algorithm is a wellestablished method for student modeling in intelligent
tutoring systems. In prior research, Cognitive Mastery
Learning built on top of Bayesian Knowledge Tracing has
been shown to significantly improve student learning
(Corbett & Anderson, 1995). Further, the estimates of skill
mastery based on the Bayesian knowledge tracing algorithm

Figure 1: The circled work area shows the worked-out steps
and the self-explanation to be done.
step for the given theorem, until s/he reaches the high
threshold again. In this manner, the Adaptive Fading
method adapts to each individual student’s evolving level of
understanding.
An example of a worked-out step for the linear pair
(“Lineares Paar”) theorem is shown in Figure 1. The value
for the quantity sought in this step (of “Winkel 2”) is
worked-out. The student still has to explain the step by
indicating which theorem is used. To fill in this explanation
(called “Grund”) the student can either type the name of the
theorem, or select the theorem from the tutor’s online
glossary of geometry knowledge. Figure 1 shows the
“Glossar” hyperlink in the upper right corner which will
open the glossary in which students can browse relevant
theorems and definitions; each is described and illustrated
with a simple example.
The experiment consisted of two lab sessions. Since the
students were unfamiliar with the Cognitive Tutor they
received paper instructions before using the Geometry Tutor
during the first lab session. They then took a pre-test,
administered by the tutoring software, though no tutoring
was provided during this test. Next, the students completed
the actual Cognitive Tutor training (11 problems plus 1
warm-up problem), a built-in untutored post-test, and a
paper post-test. During the Cognitive Tutor training students

591

study, in all three conditions. Thus, the tutor presented
students with remedial problems for the theorems/skills they
had not fully mastered yet, until all theorems/skills were
mastered (according to the tutor’s estimate of the student’s
mastery, described above). As a result, different students
completed slightly different sets of problems. Third, since
the school where the study took place uses the Geometry
Cognitive Tutor as part of their regular geometry
instruction, the study covered more material and had a
longer duration than the first study.
The study comprised all five sections in the tutor
curriculum that deal with the geometric properties of angles,
including the unit that was used in the Freiburg study. New
problems were developed for all units, as our fading
procedure required problems that involve particular skill
combinations. Over a period of three weeks, the students
worked with the Cognitive Tutor for two hours per week,
each according to the condition s/he was assigned to.
Furthermore, online pre- and post-tests were administered
to the participants, which presented students with problems
covering the same Angles theorems as they learned in the
Cognitive Tutor. The pre-test and immediate post-test
contained the same ten transfer problems of which eight
problems
were
transfer
problems
(problem
solving/procedural items) in which the students needed to
indicate whether a step was solvable, and if so, to provide
the value, the theorem that was used to find the value, and
to the geometric objects (in the diagram) to which the
theorem was applied. The remaining two problems were
transfer problems (conceptual knowledge items), where
students were presented with a diagram and given measures
for a small number of angles. For each of the given angle
measures, the students were asked to state which other angle
measures could be derived in a single step (i.e., application
of a single geometry theorem).
In addition to the immediate post-test, a delayed post-test
was administered three weeks after the students finished
working on the Cognitive Tutor. This test contained six
transfer problems, four of which were procedural items and
two of which were conceptual knowledge items. Since the
Angles Unit is part of their regular curriculum participants
were not paid for their participation.

received correctness feedback from the tutoring software
after each step they performed. Furthermore, they could
request hints at any point in time. For each step, several hint
levels were available, explaining which problem solving
principle applies, and how. The final hint level stated the
answer. The online pre- and post-test consisted of the same
three tutor problems. During the online tests, tutoring was
turned off, meaning that the students did not receive
correctness feedback and could not request hints. These tests
were created with the Cognitive Tutors Authoring Tools
(CTAT, see Aleven, Sewall, McLaren, & Koedinger, 2006).
The paper post-test consisted of three different tasks with
the first task being word problems from different domains
with different structures. In another task, participants had to
decide whether a given problem was solvable and if so
provide the principles. In a third task they had to generate
real world examples for the to-be-learned principles and to
illustrate that example in form of a drawing. In other words,
the post-test contained both procedural and conceptual
knowledge items.
During the second session, which occurred one week
later, a delayed post-test on paper was administered which
contained the same procedural and conceptual knowledge
tasks as the immediate post-test. The students received 20
euro for their participation in the study.

Results
In line with the hypothesis a planned contrast comparing the
adaptive fading condition (M = .52, SD = .17) with the
problem solving (M = .41, SD = .19) + fixed fading (M =
.41, SD = .17) conditions revealed higher transfer
performance for the adaptive fading condition on the regular
post-test (F(1, 54) = 5.05, p < .05, η² = .09). This effect was
replicated on delayed post-test (F(1, 54) = 4.42, p < .05, η²
= .08) with adaptive fading: M = .49; SD = .18; fixed fading:
M = .38; SD = .13; and problem solving: M = .38; SD = .20.
There were no differences in time spent on either of the
post-tests (Fs < 1).

Experiment 2: In Vivo Study
The study took place at a vocational school in the Pittsburgh
area, where the Geometry Cognitive Tutor is used as part of
the regular geometry instruction. The participants consisted
of three 9th grade classes with 51 students led by one
teacher. In order to assign the students to the conditions, the
student list was sorted based on the students’ prior grade in
the course. The first three students were then randomly
assigned to one of the three conditions, followed by the
second three students on the list, and so on.
Overall, the materials and procedure were very similar to
the German lab study with a few differences. First, since the
students were already familiar with the Cognitive Tutor, we
did not provide instruction up front about how to use the
tutor. Instead the teacher explained to the students what the
differences were between the standard Cognitive Tutor and
the two example-enhanced versions. Second, the Cognitive
Tutor’s mastery learning mechanism was used during this

Results
Considerable attrition occurred throughout the study, which
explains the varying degrees of freedom in the analyses. Of
the 51 students 20 completed all three tests. Furthermore, 28
students completed both the pre-test and the immediate
post-test. In the analysis of the delayed post-test scores, we
included those students who completed at least one other
test (N = 35), in addition to the delayed post-test.
Among students who completed both pre-test and regular
post-test (N = 28), significant learning occurred in all
conditions from pre-test (M = 15.46, SD = 14.01) to posttest (M = 22.93, SD = 16.64; t(27) = 2.27, p < .05, d = .87;
cf. Cohen, 1988). The planned contrast of adaptive fading
condition versus the problem solving + fixed fading
conditions revealed no differences in performance either on

592

(upon completion of the tutor work) to be more equal than it
was for the students in the lab experiment, who did not
receive any remedial problems. The results indicate that a
possible equalizing effect due to mastery learning did wear
off over time, since the adaptive fading condition attained
higher delayed post-test performance than the tutored
problem solving condition. In other words, even with
mastery learning on, a benefit of worked examples is seen.
The current findings confirm and extend the findings of
Schwonke et al. (2007), which indicated that tutored
problem solving, combined with fixed fading of worked-out
steps, leads to better transfer performance, as well as to
more efficient learning. A tentative explanation might be
that working with examples increases students’ procedural
and conceptual knowledge compared to tutored problem
solving without examples.
It is interesting to view the current findings in light of the
Assistance Dilemma issue that was recently brought to the
foreground by Koedinger and Aleven (2007). The
Assistance Dilemma follows from old observation in the
learning sciences, namely, (a) that the balance between
giving assistance to students and withholding it (while
letting students generate information by themselves,
possibly with feedback) exerts a major influence on
students’ learning, and (b) that current cognitive theory does
not provide the criteria needed to decide when to give, and
when to withhold information, in order to optimize learning.
The choice between worked examples and problems is a key
manifestation of this dilemma: how should a tutor
effectively switch from a “high assistance” form of
instruction (i.e., worked examples) to a “low assistance”
form of instruction (i.e., problem solving) in a manner that
is adaptive to individual students’ needs? The present
results show that an adaptive example fading method, in
which the rate of fading is based on the quality of students’
self-explanations, is a promising way to make this
determination, in a manner adaptive to students’ individual
learning trajectories. A remaining open question is theory
development aimed at being able to predict when examples
will be more/less effective than problem solving (see also
Koedinger, Pavlik, McLaren, & Aleven, in press).
In short, the results of both studies indicate that the
implementation of an adaptive fading procedure of workedout examples within a Cognitive Tutor can be useful in both
lab and actual classroom environments. Tutored problem
solving and worked examples, adaptively faded, are
synergistic, not redundant, forms of support.

the pre-test or on the regular post-test (Fs < 1). Furthermore,
while the planned contrast did not show an effect of the
adaptive fading condition (M = 12.80, SD = 5.61) over the
other two conditions (M = 8.73, SD = 4.97) on the delayed
post-test (F = 2.38, p = .11), it did indicate a tendency in the
expected direction (t(32) = 2.10, p < .05, d = .74). When
excluding the fixed fading condition, the adaptive fading
condition did attain higher transfer performance on the
delayed post-test than the problem solving condition (M =
8.08, SD = 4.68; t(20) = 2.15, p < .05, d = .91). No
differences in Cognitive Tutor time (F < 1) were found.
Lastly, the overall number of worked-out example steps
between the fixed fading and adaptive fading conditions was
fairly close to each other (F < 1).

Discussion
Two studies were conducted comparing “standard” tutored
problem solving with a Cognitive Tutor versus two
conditions in which tutored problem solving was enriched
with worked-out examples. The worked-out examples were
faded in either a fixed or in an adaptive manner. These
manipulations were tested both in a lab study and in an
actual classroom setting as part of a regular vocational
school curriculum. The results of the lab study show that
adaptively fading worked-out examples leads to higher
transfer performance on both regular post-test and delayed
post-tests. While this effect was not fully replicated in the
classroom study, a significant benefit in transfer
performance for the adaptive fading condition over the
problem solving condition was revealed on the delayed
post-test.
A likely explanation for the lesser effect in the classroom
study can be found in the larger amount of “noise” that
inherently exists within a real life environment, as compared
to the laboratory. Also, the classroom study took place over
a longer period of time with a fairly high amount of attrition
of students. More specifically, a considerable number of
students missed one (some even missed two) of the three
online tests that were given. Yet despite the general
difficulty of replicating lab results in the classroom, the
current study still shows a benefit of the adaptive fading
condition over the standard Cognitive Tutor. The failure to
find a significant difference between the adaptive and the
fixed fading conditions might be explained by the
possibility that the fixed fading procedure was already near
optimal. This is supported by the non-significant result of
the comparison in number of worked-out steps between both
fading conditions.
It is also possible that any learning differences between
the fixed and adaptive fading conditions might be offset by
the use of the Cognitive Tutor’s mastery learning criterion,
which, as mentioned, led students in the classroom study to
receive remedial problems for the theorems they had not
mastered fully yet (on an individual basis, after they
completed the problem sequence described in Table 1).
These remedial problems represent additional learning
opportunities for students. It could be that the mastery
learning mechanism caused the students’ knowledge level

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Pittsburgh Science
of Learning Center which is funded by the National Science
Foundation award number SBE-0354420.

References
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2002). An effective metacognitive strategy: learning by doing and explaining with
a computer-based Cognitive Tutor. Cognitive Science, 26,
147-179.
593

Aleven, V., Sewall, J., McLaren, B. M., & Koedinger, K. R.
(2006). Rapid authoring of intelligent tutors for realworld and experimental use. In Kinshuk, R. Koper, P.
Kommers, P. Kirschner, D. G. Sampson, & W. Didderen
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT
2006), (pp. 847-851). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer
Society.
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., &
Pelletier, R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 167-207.
Atkinson, R. K., Renkl, A., & Merrill, M. M. (2003).
Transitioning from studying examples to solving
problems: Combining fading with prompting fosters
learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 774783.
Beal, C. R., Walles, R., Arroyo, I., & Woolf, B. P. (2007).
Online tutoring for math achievement: A controlled
evaluation. Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 6, 4355.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). New York: Academic
Press.
Corbett, A. T., & Anderson, J. R. (1995). Knowledge
tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedural
knowledge. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 4, 253-278.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003).
The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist,
38, 23-32.
Koedinger, K. R., Anderson, J. R., Hadley, W. H., & Mark,
M. A. (1997). Intelligent tutoring goes to school in the big
city. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 8, 30-43.
Koedinger, K. R., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the
assistance dilemma in experiments with Cognitive Tutors.
Educational Psychology Review, 19, 239-264.
Koedinger, K., Pavlik, P., McLaren, B., & Aleven, V. (in
press). Is it better to give than to receive? The Assistance
Dilemma as a fundamental unsolved problem in the
cognitive science of learning and instruction. 30th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mitrovic, A. (2003). An Intelligent SQL Tutor on the Web,
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 13, 171-195.

Razzaq, L., Feng, M., Nuzzo-Jones, G., Heffernan, N. T.,
Koedinger, K. R., Junker, B., Ritter, S., Knight, A.,
Aniszczyk, C., Choksey, S., Livak, T., Mercado, E.,
Turner, T. E., Upalekar., R, Walonoski, J. A., Macasek.
M. A., Rasmussen, K. P. (2005). The Assistment Project:
Blending Assessment and Assisting. In C.K. Looi, G.
McCalla, B. Bredeweg, & J. Breuker (Eds.) Proceedings
of the 12th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence In Education, (pp. 555-562). Amsterdam:
ISO Press.
Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2007). An example order for
cognitive skill acquisition. In F. E. Ritter, J. Nerb, E.
Lehtinen, T. O’Shea (Eds.), In order to learn: How the
sequence of topics influences learning (pp. 95-105). New
York , NY : Oxford University Press.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R. K., & Große, C. S. (2004). How
fading worked solution steps works - a cognitive load
perspective. Instructional Science, 32, 59-82.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R. K., Maier, U. H., & Staley, R.
(2002). From example study to problem solving: Smooth
transitions help learning. Journal of Experimental
Education, 70, 293-315.
Roy, M. & Chi, M. T. H. (2005). Self-explanation in a
multi-media context. In R. Mayer (Ed.), Cambridge
Handbook of Multimedia Learning (pp. 271-286).
Cambridge Press.
Schwonke, R., Wittwer, J., Aleven, V., Salden, R., Krieg,
C., & Renkl, A. (2007). Can tutored problem solving
benefit from faded worked-out examples? In S.
Vosniadou, D. Kayser, & A. Protopapas (Eds.),
Proceedings of EuroCogSci 07. The European Cognitive
Science Conference 2007 (pp. 59-64). New York, NY:
Erlbaum.
Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. (1998).
Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
VanLehn, K., Lynch, C., Schulze, K., Shapiro, J. A.,
Shelby, A., Taylor, D., Weinstein, A., & Wintersgill, M.
(2005). The Andes physics tutoring project: Five years of
evaluations. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 15, 1-47.

594

