UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Connectionist Single-Mechanism Account of Rule-Like Behavior in Infancy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0m01v6h7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Christiansen, Morten H.
Conway, Christopher M.
Curtin, Suzanne

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Connectionist Single-Mechanism Account of Rule-Like Behavior in Infancy
Morten H. Christiansen (morten@siu.edu)
Christopher M. Conway (conway@siu.edu)
Department of Psychology; Southern Illinois University
Carbondale, IL 62901-6502 USA

Suzanne Curtin (curtin@gizmo.usc.edu)
Department of Linguistics; University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1693 USA
Abstract
One of the most controversial issues in cognitive science pertains to whether rules are necessary to explain complex behavior. Nowhere has the debate over rules been more heated
than within the field of language acquisition. Most researchers
agree on the need for statistical learning mechanisms in language acquisition, but disagree on whether rule-learning components are also needed. Marcus, Vijayan, Rao, & Vishton
(1999) have provided evidence of rule-like behavior which
they claim can only be explained by a dual-mechanism account. In this paper, we show that a connectionist singlemechanism approach provides a more parsimonious account
of rule-like behavior in infancy than the dual-mechanism approach. Specifically, we present simulation results from an existing connectionist model of infant speech segmentation, fitting the behavioral data under naturalistic circumstances without invoking rules. We further investigate diverging predictions from the single- and dual-mechanism accounts through
additional simulations and artificial language learning experiments. The results support a connectionist single-mechanism
account, while undermining the dual-mechanism account.

Introduction
The nature of the learning mechanisms that infants bring to
the task of language acquisition is a major focus of research
in cognitive science. With the rise of connectionism, much of
the scientific debate surrounding this research has focused on
whether rules are necessary to explain language acquisition.
All parties in the debate acknowledge that statistical learning
mechanisms form a necessary part of the language acquisition
process (e.g., Christiansen & Curtin, 1999; Marcus, Vijayan,
Rao, & Vishton, 1999; Pinker, 1991). However, there is
much disagreement over whether a statistical learning mechanism is sufficient to account for complex rule-like behavior,
or whether additional rule-learning mechanisms are needed.
In the past this debate has primarily taken place within specific areas of language acquisition, such as inflectional morphology (e.g., Pinker, 1991; Plunkett & Marchman, 1993)
and visual word recognition (e.g., Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins
& Haller, 1993; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989). More recently, Marcus et al. (1999) have presented results from experiments with 7-month-olds, apparently showing that infants
acquire abstract algebraic rules after two minutes of exposure to habituation stimuli. The algebraic rules are construed
as representing an open-ended relationship between variables
for which one can substitute arbitrary values, “such as ‘the
first item X is the same as the third item Y,’ or more generally, that ‘item I is the same as item J”’ (Marcus et al., 1999,
p. 79). Marcus et al. further claim that a connectionist singlemechanism approach based on statistical learning is unable to

fit their experimental data. In this paper, we build on earlier
work (Christiansen & Curtin, 1999) and present a detailed
connectionist model of these infant data, and provide new
experimental data that support a statistically-based singlemechanism approach while undermining the dual-mechanism
account.
In the remainder of this paper, we first show that knowledge acquired in the service of learning to segment the speech
stream can be recruited to carry out the kind of classification
task used in the experiments by Marcus et al. For this purpose we took an existing model of early infant speech segmentation (Christiansen, Allen & Seidenberg, 1998) and used
it to simulate the results obtained by Marcus et al. The simulations demonstrate that no rules are needed to account for
the data; rather, statistical knowledge related to word segmentation can explain the rule-like behavior of the infants
in the Marcus et al. study. We then explore the issue of
timing in stimuli presentation and present additional simulations from which empirical predictions are derived that diverge from those of the rule-based account. These predictions
are tested in experiments with adults. Experiment 1 replicated
the results from Marcus et al. using adult subjects. Experiment 2 confirmed the predictions from our single-mechanism
approach, whereas the dual-mechanism approach cannot account for these results without adding extra machinery to
complement the statistical and rule-based components. Together, the simulations and the experiments thus suggest that
a single-mechanism model provides the most parsimonious
account of the empirical data presented here and in Marcus et
al., thus obviating the need for a separate rule-based component.

Simulation 1: Rule-Like Behavior without
Rules
Marcus et al. (1999) used an artificial language learning
paradigm to test their claim that the infant has two mechanisms for learning language, one that uses statistical information and another which uses algebraic rules. They conducted
three experiments which tested infants’ ability to generalize
to items not presented in the familiarization phase of the experiment. We focus here on their third experiment because it
was controlled for possible confounds found in the first two
experiments: differences in phonetic features (Experiment 1)
and reduplication1 (Experiment 2). Marcus et al. claim that
1
Though the control for reduplication was not entirely complete
(see Elman, 1999).

because none of the test items appeared in the habituation part
of the experiment the infants would not be able to use statistical information in this task.
The subjects in Experiment 3 of Marcus et al. (1999) were
16 7-month-old infants randomly placed in an AAB or an
ABB condition. During a two-minute long familiarization
phase the infants were exposed to three repetitions of each
of 16 three-word sentences. Each word in the sentence frame
AAB or ABB consisted of a consonant-vowel sequence (e.g.,
“le le we” or “le we we”). The test phase consisted of 12
sentences made up of words to which the infants had not
previously been exposed (e.g., “ko ko ga” vs. “ko ga ga”).
The test items were broken into two groups for both habituation conditions: consistent (items constructed with the same
sentence frame as the familiarization phase) and inconsistent
(constructed from the sentence frame the infants were not habituated on). The results showed that the infants preferred
the inconsistent test items to the consistent ones (that is, they
listened longer to the inconsistent items).
The conclusion drawn by Marcus et al. (1999) was that
a single mechanism which relied on statistical information
alone could not account for the results. Instead they suggested
that a dual mechanism was needed, comprising a statistical
learning component and an algebraic rule learning component. In addition, they claimed that a Simple Recurrent Network (SRN; Elman, 1990) would not be able to accommodate their data because of the lack of phonological overlap
between habituation and test items. Specifically, they state,
Such networks can simulate knowledge of grammatical
rules only by being trained on all items to which they
apply; consequently, such mechanisms cannot account
for how humans generalize rules to new items that do
not overlap with the items that appeared in training (p.
79).
In the first simulation, we demonstrate that SRNs can indeed fit the data from Marcus et al. Other researchers have
constructed neural network models specifically to simulate
the Marcus et al. results (Altmann & Dienes, 1999; Elman,
1999; Shastri & Chang, 1999; Shultz, 1999). In contrast, we
do not build a new model to accommodate the results, but take
an existing SRN model of speech segmentation (Christiansen
et al., 1998) and show how this model—without additional
modification—provides an explanation for the results.

The Christiansen et al. Model
The model by Christiansen et al. (1998) was developed as an
account of early word segmentation. An SRN was trained on
a single pass through a corpus of child directed speech. As
input the network was provided with three probabilistic cues
to word boundaries: (a) phonology represented in terms of 11
features on the input and 36 phonemes on the output, (b) utterance boundary information represented as an extra feature
marking utterance endings, and (c) lexical stress coded over
two units as either no stress, secondary or primary stress. Figure 1 provides an illustration of the network.
The network was trained on the task of predicting the next
phoneme in a sequence as well as the appropriate values for
the utterance boundary and stress units. In learning to perform this task the network learned to integrate the cues such

Phonemes

U-B Stress
#

S P

copy-back

#
Phonological Features

S P

U-B Stress

Context Units

Figure 1: Illustration of the SRN used in Simulations 1 and
2. Solid lines indicate trainable weights, whereas the dashed
line denotes the copy-back weights (which are always 1). UB refers to the unit coding for the presence of an utterance
boundary. The presence of lexical stress is represented in
terms of two units, S and P, coding for secondary and primary stress, respectively.
that it could carry out the task of segmenting the input into
words. This involved activating the boundary unit not only at
utterance boundaries, but also at word boundaries occurring
inside utterances. The logic behind the segmentation task is
that the end of an utterance is also the end of a word. If the
network is able to integrate the provided cues in order to activate the boundary unit at the ends of words occurring at
the end of an utterance, it should also be able to generalize
this knowledge so as to activate the boundary unit at the ends
of words which occur inside an utterance (Aslin, Woodward,
LaMendola & Bever, 1996).
The Christiansen et al. (1998) model acquired distributional knowledge about sequences of phonemes and the associated stress patterns. This knowledge allowed it to perform well on the task of segmenting the speech stream into
words. We suggest that this knowledge can be put to use in
secondary tasks not directly related to speech segmentation—
including the artificial language task used by Marcus et al.
(1999). In fact, the experimental procedure used by Marcus
et al. was the same as the procedure used by Saffran, Aslin &
Newport (1996) to study how word segmentation in infancy
can be facilitated by statistical learning. That is, Marcus et
al. sought to demonstrate that the statistically-based learning
mechanism, which Saffran, Aslin, et al. found to be involved
in word segmentation, could not account for their results. It
therefore makes sense to investigate whether the comprehensive speech segmentation model by Christiansen et al. can
account for the Marcus et al. infant results.

Method
Networks Corresponding to the 16 infants in the Marcus et
al. study, we used 16 SRNs similar to the SRN used in Christiansen et al. (1998) with the exception that the original phonetic feature geometry was replaced by a new representation
using 18 features. Each of the 16 SRNs had a different set of
initial weights, randomized within the interval [0.25;-0.25].
The learning rate was set to 0.1 and the momentum to 0.95.
These training parameters were identical to those used in the
original Christiansen et al. model. The networks were trained
to predict the correct constellation of cues given the current

80

Materials Prior to being habituated and tested on the stimuli from Marcus et al., the networks were first exposed to the
training corpus used by Christiansen et al. This corpus consists of 8181 utterances extracted from the Korman (1984)
corpus of British English speech directed at pre-verbal infants aged 6-16 weeks (a part of the CHILDES database,
MacWhinney, 1991). Christiansen et al. transformed each
word in the utterances from its orthographic format into
a phonological form with accompanying lexical stress using a dictionary compiled from the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database available from the Oxford Text Archive.
The materials from Experiment 3 in Marcus et al. (1999)
were transformed into the phoneme representation used by
Christiansen et al. Two habituation sets were created in this
manner: one for AAB items and one for ABB items. The
habituation sets used here, and in Marcus et al., consisted of
3 blocks of 16 sentences in random order, yielding a total
of 48 sentences in each habituation set. As in Marcus et al.
there were four different test sentences: “ba ba po”, “ko ko
ga” (consistent with AAB), “ba po po” and “ko ga ga” (consistent with ABB). The test set consisted of three blocks of
randomly ordered test sentences, totaling 12 test items. Both
the habituation and test sentences were treated as a single utterance with no explicit word boundaries marked between the
individual words. The end of each utterance was marked by
activating the utterance boundary unit.
Procedure The networks were first trained on a single pass
through the Korman (1984) corpus as the original Christiansen et al. model. This corresponds to the fact that the
7-month-olds in the Marcus et al. study already have had a
considerable exposure to language, and have begun to develop their speech segmentation abilities. Next, the networks
were habituated on a single pass through the appropriate habituation corpus—one phoneme at a time—with learning parameters identical to the ones used during the pretraining on
the Korman corpus. The networks were then tested on the
test set (with the weights “frozen”) and the activation of the
utterance boundary unit was recorded for every phoneme input in the test set. Finally, the boundary unit activations for
test sentences that were consistent or inconsistent with the
habituation pattern were separated into two groups. Furthermore, for the purpose of scoring word segmentation performance on the test items, the activation of the boundary unit
was also recorded for each habituation condition across all
the habituation items and the mean activation was calculated.
The networks were said to have postulated a word boundary
whenever the boundary unit activation in a test sentence was
above the appropriate habituation mean.

Results and Discussion
To provide a quantitative measure of performance we used
completeness scores (Christiansen et al., 1998) to assess segmentation performance.

Completeness = Hits Hits
+ Misses

(1)

Completeness provides a measure of how many of the words
in a test set the net is able to discover. With respect to our in-

Percent Completeness

input segment.

70

p < .04

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Con
Incon
Simulation 1

Con
Incon
Simulation 2

Figure 2: Mean completeness scores for the consistent (con)
and inconsistent (incon) test items from Simulations 1 (left)
and 2 (right).
terpretation of the Marcus et al. data, the completeness score
indicates how well networks/infants are at segmenting out the
individual words in the test sentences. As an example, consider the following hypothetical segmentation of two test sentences:
#bab#a#po#ko#gag#a#
where ‘#’ corresponds to a predicted word boundary. Here
the hypothetical learner correctly segmented out two words,
po and ko, but missed the first and the second ba and the first
and the second ga. This results in a completeness score of
2/(2+4) = 33.3%.
For each of the sixteen networks, completeness scores were
computed across all test items, and submitted to the same
statistical analyses as used by Marcus et al. for their infant
data. The completeness scores were analyzed in a repeated
measures ANOVA with condition (AAB vs. ABB) as between network factor and test pattern (consistent vs. inconsistent) as within network factor. The left-hand side of Figure
2 shows the completeness scores for the consistent and inconsistent items pooled across conditions. There was a main
effect of test pattern (F (1; 14) = 5:76; p < :04), indicating that the networks were significantly better at segmenting
out the words in the inconsistent items (35.76%) compared
with the consistent items (28.82%). Similarly to the infant
data, neither the main effect of condition, nor the condition 
test pattern interaction were significant (F 0 s < 1). The better segmentation of the inconsistent items suggests that they
would stand out more clearly in comparison with the consistent items, and thus explain why the infants looked longer
towards the speaker playing the inconsistent items in the Marcus et al. study.
Simulation 1 shows that a separate rule-learning component is not necessary to account for the Marcus et al. (1999)
data. An existing SRN model of word segmentation can fit
these data without invoking explicit, algebraic-like rules. The
pretraining allowed the SRNs to learn to integrate the regularities governing the phonological, lexical stress, and utterance
boundary information in child-directed speech. During the
habituation phase, the networks then developed weak attrac-

tors specific to the habituation pattern and the syllables used.
The attractor will at the same time both attract a consistent
item (because of pattern similarity) and repel it (because of
syllable dissimilarity), causing interference with the segmentation task. The inconsistent items, on the other hand, will
tend to be repelled by the habituation attractors and therefore
do not suffer from the same kind of interference, making them
easier for the network to process.
Importantly, the SRN model—as a statistical learning
mechanism—can explain both the distinction between consistent and inconsistent items as well as the preference for
the inconsistent items. Note that a rule-learning mechanism
by itself only can explain how infants may distinguish between items, but not why they prefer inconsistent over consistent items. Extra machinery is needed in addition to the
rule-learning mechanism to explain the preference for inconsistent items. Thus, the most parsimonious explanation is that
only a statistical learning device is necessary to account for
the infant data. The addition of a rule-learning device does
not appear to be necessary.

Simulation 2: It’s about Time
Simulation 1 demonstrated that a statistically-based singlemechanism approach can account for the kind of rule-like
behavior displayed by the infants in the Marcus et al. study.
However, there may be other cases in which a separate rulelearning component would be required. Here we explore one
such case in which our model makes a prediction which is different from what would be predicted from a dual-mechanism
approach incorporating a rule-learning component.
Recall that algebraic rules were characterized as abstract
relationships between variables, such as item X is the same as
item Y. Marcus et al. Experiment 3 was designed to demonstrate that rule learning is independent of the physical realization of variables in terms of phonological features. The same
rule, AAB, applies to—and can be learned from—“le le we”
and “ko ko ga” (with “le” and “ko” filling the same A slot
and “we” and “ga” the same B slot). As the abstract relationships that this rule represents only pertains to the value of the
three variables, the amount of time between them should not
affect the application of the rule. Thus, just as the physical
realization of a variable does not matter for the learning or
application of a rule, neither should the time between variables. The same rule AAB, applies to—and can be learned
from—“le [250ms] le [250ms] we” and “le [1000ms] le [1000ms]
we” (the “le”s should still fill the A slots and the “we”s the B
slot despite the increased duration of time between the occurrence of these variables). From this property, one can predict
that lengthening the time between variables should not affect
the preference for inconsistent items. Indeed, the connectionist implementation of the rule-based approach found in the
Shastri & Chang (1999) model would appear to make this
prediction.
A lengthening of the pauses between words should, however, have a different effect on our model. In the model, the
preference for inconsistent items observed by Marcus et al. is
explained in terms of differential segmentation performance.
Lengthening the pauses between words would in effect solve
the segmentation task for the model, and should result in a
disappearance of the preference for inconsistent items. Thus,

we predict that the model should show no difference between
the segmentation performance on the consistent and inconsistent items if pauses are lengthened as indicated above. To test
this prediction, we carried out a new set of simulations.

Method
Networks. Sixteen SRNs as in Simulation 1.
Materials. Same as in Simulation 1 except that utterance
boundaries were inserted between the words in the habituation and test sentences, simulating a lengthening of pauses
between words (from 250 msec to 1000 msec) such that they
have the same length as the pauses between utterances.
Procedure. Same as in Simulation 1.

Results and Discussion
Completeness scores were computed as in Simulation 1 and
submitted to the same statistical analysis. As illustrated
by the right-hand side of Figure 2, the segmentation performance on the test items was improved considerably by
the inclusion of utterance boundary-length pauses between
words. As predicted, there was no difference between the accuracy scores for consistent (70.14%) and inconsistent items
(70.49%) (F (1; 14) = :02). As before, there was no main
effect of condition, neither was there any interaction between
condition and test pattern (F 0 s < 1).
Simulation 2 thus confirms the predicted effect of lengthening the pauses between words in stimuli presented to the
statistical learning model. This results in diverging predictions derived from the rule-based and the statistical learning
models concerning the effect of pause lengthening on human
performance on the stimuli. Next, we test these diverging
predictions in an artificial language learning experiment using adult subjects.

Experiment 1: Replicating the Marcus et al.
Results
Before testing the diverging predictions from the singleand dual-mechanism approaches we need to first establish
whether adults in fact exhibit the same pattern of behavior
as the infants in the Marcus et al. study. The first experiment
therefore seeks to replicate Experiment 3 from Marcus et al.
using adult subjects instead of infants.

Method
Subjects. Sixteen undergraduates were recruited from introductory Psychology classes at Southern Illinois University.
Subjects earned course credit for their participation.
Materials. For this experiment, we used the original stimuli
that Marcus et al. (1999) created for their Experiment 3. Each
word in a sentence was separated by 250 msec. The 16 habituation sentences for each condition were created by Marcus
et al. using the Bell Labs speech synthesizer. The original
habituation stimuli were limited to two predetermined sentence orders. To avoid potential order effects, we used the
SoundEdit 16 version 2 software for the MacIntosh to isolate
each sentence as a separate sound file. This allowed us to
present the habituation sentences in a random order for each
subject.

Procedure. Subjects were seated in front of a G3 Power
Macintosh computer with a New Micros button box. Subjects
were randomly assigned to one of two conditions, AAB or
ABB. The experiment was run using the PsyScope presentation software (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, and Provost, 1993)
with all stimuli played over stereo loudspeakers at 75dB. The
subjects were instructed that they were participating in a pattern recognition experiment. They were told that in the first
part of the experiment their task was to listen carefully to sequences of sounds and that their knowledge of these sound
sequences would be tested afterwards. Subjects listened to
three blocks of the sixteen randomly presented habituation
sentences corresponding either to the AAB or the ABB sentence frame. A 1-second interval separated each sentence as
was the case in the Marcus et al. experiment.
After habituation, subjects were instructed that they would
be presented with new sound patterns that they had not previously heard. They were asked to judge whether a pattern
was ”similar” or ”dissimilar” to what they had been exposed
to in the previous phase by pressing an appropriately marked
button. The instructions emphasized that because the sounds
were novel, the subjects should not base their decision on the
sounds themselves but instead on the patterns derived from
the sounds. Subjects listened to three blocks of the four randomly presented test sentences. After the presentation of each
test sentence, subjects were prompted for their response. Subjects were allowed to take as long as they needed to respond.
Each test trial was separated by a 1000-msec interval.

Results and Discussion
For the purpose of our analyses, the correct response for consistent items is “similar” while the correct response for inconsistent items is “dissimilar”. The mean overall score for
correct classification of test items was 8.81 out of a perfect
score of 12. A single-sample t-test showed that this classification performance was significantly better than the chance
level performance of 6 (t(15) = 4:44; p < :0005). Subjects’
responses were then subject to the same statistical analysis
as the infant data in Marcus et al. (and Simulation 1 and 2
above). The left-hand side of Figure 3 shows the ratings as
dissimilar for the six consistent and six inconsistent test items
pooled across condition. As expected, there was a main effect of test pattern (F (1; 14) = 18:98; p < :001), such that
significantly more inconsistent items were judged as dissimilar (4.5) than consistent items (1.69). Neither the main effect
of condition, nor the condition  test pattern interaction were
significant (F 0 s < 1).
Experiment 1 shows that adults perform similarly to the
infants in Marcus et al.’s Experiment 3, thus demonstrating that it is possible to replicate their findings using adult
subjects instead of infants. This result is perhaps not surprising given that Saffran and colleagues were able to replicate statistical learning results obtained using adults subjects

Rated as Dissimilar (N=6)

For the test phase, we also used the stimuli from Marcus et
al.’s Experiment 3, which consisted of four new sentences that
were either consistent or inconsistent with the training grammar. Like the habituation stimuli, each word in a sentence
was separated by a 250 msec interval. As before, we stored
the test stimuli as separate SoundEdit 16 version 2 sound files
to allow a random presentation order for each subject.

6
p < .001

5
4
3
2
1
0

Con
Incon
Experiment 1

Con
Incon
Experiment 2

Figure 3: The mean proportion of consistent (con) and inconsistent (incon) test items rated as dissimilar to the habituation
pattern in Experiments 1 (left) and 2 (right).
(Saffran, Newport & Aslin, 1996) in experiments using 8month-olds (Saffran, Aslin, et al., 1996). More generally,
these results and ours suggest that despite small differences
in the experimental methodology used in infant and adult
artificial language learning studies, both methodologies appear to tap into the same learning mechanisms. Also from
a dual-mechanism approach, one would expect that the same
learning mechanisms—statistical and rule-based—would be
involved in both infancy and adulthood, and that similar results should be expected in both infant and adult studies of
the kind of material used here.

Experiment 2: Testing the Diverging
Predictions
Having replicated the Marcus et al. (Experiment 3) infant data
with adult subjects, we now turn our attention to the diverging predictions concerning the effect of pause length on the
preference for the inconsistent items.

Method
Subjects. Sixteen additional undergraduates were recruited
from introductory Psychology classes at Southern Illinois
University. Subjects earned course credit for their participation.
Materials. The training and test stimuli were the same as
in Experiment 1 except that the 250 msec interval between
words in a sentence was replaced by a 1000 msec interval
using the SoundEdit 16 version 2 software. The 1000 msec
interval between sentences remained the same as before.
Procedure. The procedure and instructions were identical
to that used for Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The mean overall classification score was 5.75 out of 12. This
was not significantly different from the chance level performance of 6, as indicated by a single-sample t-test (t < 1). The
responses of the subjects were submitted to the same further

analysis as in Experiment 1. The right-hand side of Figure
3 shows the ratings as dissimilar for the consistent and inconsistent test items averaged across condition. As predicted
by Simulation 2, there was no main effect of test pattern in
this experiment (F (1; 14) = :56), suggesting that subjects
were unable to distinguish between consistent and inconsistent items. As in Experiment 1, both the main effect of condition and the interaction between condition and test pattern
interaction were not significant (F 0 s = 0).
These results show that preference for inconsistent items
disappears when the pauses between words are lengthened.
This corroborates the prediction from the statistically-based
single-mechanism model, but not the prediction from the
rule-learning component of the dual-mechanism account. It
may be objected that the rules need to work over specific domains, and that by lengthening the pauses between words the
input is no longer chunked into sentences at a pre-specified
length (three words). Hence, the rule can no longer be expected to apply. Note, however, that this requires additional
machinery to pre-process the input prior to the learning or
application of a rule. This would require a separate account
of how this pre-processing ability was acquired and how it
was applied in the specific case of Marcus et al.’s original experiment. Of course, this makes the rule-based account even
less parsimonious in comparison with the statistical learning
model. The latter model can account for both the preference
for inconsistent items in the Marcus et al. Experiment 3 (and
our Experiment 1) as well as the lack of preference in our
Experiment 2 without requiring any extra machinery. Thus,
a language learning device that exploits the statistical properties of language and integrates these multiple cues can account for the Marcus et al. data, thereby removing the need to
posit a dual-learning mechanism.

Conclusion
Infants possess powerful learning mechanisms that allow
them to acquire language rapidly. Saffran, Aslin, et al. (1996)
showed that infants can use statistical regularities to discover
word boundaries in fluent speech. Marcus et al. (1999) found
that infants exhibit rule-like behavior. Because both studies
used the same experimental paradigm, a plausible null hypothesis is that both types of behavior should rely on the
same learning mechanism. Based on unreported SRN simulations, Marcus et al. rejected this null hypothesis. In contrast, Simulation 1 demonstrated that that an existing SRN
model of early infant word segmentation (Christiansen et
al., 1998) could utilize statistical knowledge acquired in the
service of speech segmentation to fit the infant data from
Marcus et al. under very naturalistic circumstances. Experiment 2, which investigated the effect of “variable” timing on
rule-like behavior, provided additional support for the singlemechanism approach. The results confirmed the predictions
from our model (Simulation 2), but do not appear to fit the
dual-mechanism approach because the amount of time between variables should not affect their abstract rule-based relationship. We note that the dual-mechanism account could
possibly be augmented to account for these data, but that this
would require the addition of extra machinery. Our singlemechanism model, on the other hand, can account for the
data from Saffran, Aslin, et al. and Marcus et al. as well as

the results from Experiment 2 without any modifications, obviating the need for a separate rule-learning component. We
therefore conclude that a connectionist single-mechanism approach provides the most parsimonious account of both statistical learning and rule-like behavior in infancy.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Gary Marcus for making his stimuli
available to us for our experiments, and Jeff Elman for his
comments on an earlier version.

References
Altmann, G.T.M. & Dienes, Z. (1999). Rule learning by sevenmonth-old infants and neural networks. Science, 284, 875.
Aslin, R.N., Woodard, J.Z., LaMendola, N.P., & Bever, T.G. (1996).
Models of word segmentation in fluent maternal speech to infants.
In J.L. Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Christiansen, M.H., Allen, J., & Seidenberg, M.S. (1998). Learning
to segment using multiple cues: A connectionist model. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13, 221-268.
Christiansen, M.H. & Curtin, S.L. (1999). The power of statistical learning: No need for algebraic rules. In The Proceedings of
the 21st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
114-119). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cohen J.D., MacWhinney B., Flatt M., & Provost J. (1993).
PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment for designing
psychology experiments. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257-271.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M. (1993). Models
of reading aloud: Dual-route and parallel-distributed-processing
approaches. Psychological Review, 100, 589-608.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science,
14, 179-211.
Elman, J. (1999). Generalization, rules, and neural networks: A
simulation of Marcus et. al, (1999). Ms., University of California,
San Diego.
Korman, M. (1984). Adaptive aspects of maternal vocalizations in
differing contexts at ten weeks. First Language, 5, 44–45.
MacWhinney, B. (1991). The CHILDES Project. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Marcus, G.F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S.B., & Vishton, P.M. (1999). Rule
learning in seven month-old infants. Science, 283, 77–80.
Pinker, S. (1991). Rules of language. Science, 253, 530-535.
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning to system
building. Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month olds. Science, 274, 1926–1928.
Saffran, J., Newport, E., & Aslin, R. (1996). Word segmentation:
The role of distributional cues. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A distributed, developmental model of word recognition and naming. Psychological
Review, 96, 523-568.
Shastri, L., & Chang, S. (1999). A spatiotemporal connectionist
model of algebraic rule-learning (TR-99-011). Berkeley, California: International Computer Science Institute.
Shultz, T. (1999). Rule learning by habituation can be simulated by
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 665-670). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

