UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Sensorimotor Map of Visual Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0nv8476x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Bridgeman, Bruce

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Sensorimotor Map of Visual Space
Bruce Bridgeman (bruceb@cats.ucsc.edu)
Department of Psychology; U.of Ca. Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, Ca. 95064 USA
Abstract
The brain holds two representations of visual space: a cognitive
representation that drives perception, and a sensorimotor
representation that controls visually guided behavior. We
separate spatial values in the two with the Roelofs effect: a target
within an off-center frame appears biased in a direction opposite
the offset of the frame. The effect appears for a verbal measure
(cognitive) but not for a jab at the target (sensorimotor). Subjects
might perform the jab by fixating the target during an exposure
period, and jabbing where their eyes are aimed after the offset of
target and frame. We show that normal humans use a contextfree sensorimotor map even when they do not fixate the target:
the motor map is a true 2-dimensional representation, not a 0dimensional matching process.

Two Visual Systems
Common sense tells us that one must accurately perceive
an object’s location and properties to interact effectively
with it. This intuition is in error, however: several
experimental designs now show that humans can engage in
accurate motor behavior despite inadequate or erroneous
perceptual information. Accurate perception is not required
to visually guide an action.
Early experiments on separation of cognitive and
sensorimotor systems showed that normal subjects could not
perceive jumps of targets that take place during saccadic eye
movements (a cognitive-system function). But they could
still point accurately to the new locations of the same targets
(a sensorimotor-system function), even if their pointing
movements were controlled open-loop (Bridgeman, Lewis,
Heit & Nagle, 1979). This showed that information about
the new location of the target was accurate. But it was not
available to perception, defined here as sensory information
that is experienced, or more operationally information that
can be described and remembered. If a visual stimulus is
masked so that an observer denies seeing it, according to this
definition the stimulus is not perceived even if it can affect
later perceptual judgments or actions.
If each pathway can be probed without affecting the
representation in the other, then they must be coding spatial
information independently. A more rigorous way to separate
cognitive and sensorimotor systems, then, is by double
dissociation, introducing a signal only into the sensorimotor
pathway in one condition and only into the cognitive
pathway in another (Bridgeman, Kirch & Sperling, 1981). A
fixed target was projected in front of a subject, with a frame
surrounding it. When the frame was displaced left or right,
subjects saw illusory induced motion -- the target appeared
to jump in the opposite direction. After target and frame

were extinguished, the subjects pointed to the last target
position. They pointed to the same location despite the
stroboscopic induced motion. But the illusion did not affect
pointing, showing that the displacement signal was present
only in the cognitive system.
In another condition we inserted displacement information
selectively into the sensorimotor system by nulling the
cognitive signal. Each subject adjusted the real target jumps
until the target appeared stationary, with a real displacement
in phase with the background jump equaling the induced
displacement out of phase with the background. Thus, the
cognitive pathway specified a stable target. Nevertheless,
subjects pointed in different directions when the target was
extinguished in the left or the right positions, showing that
the difference in real target positions was still represented in
the sensorimotor pathway. This is a double dissociation
because in the first condition the apparent target
displacement affected only the cognitive measure, while in
the second condition the real displacement affected only the
sensorimotor measure.
A position-motion confound?
If a moving stimulus is sampled at different times for
different functions, apparent dissociations might appear even
though a unified visual representation underlies each
function. Recently, methods have been developed, using
static illusions, that can test dissociations of cognitive and
sensorimotor function without possible confounding effects
of motion. One method is based on the Ebbinghaus illusion,
also called the Titchner circles illusion. A circle appears to
be larger if it is surrounded by smaller circles than if it is
surrounded by larger circles.
Aglioti, DeSouza and Goodale (1995) exploited this
illusion by making the center circle into a 3-dimensional
poker chip-like object and asking subjects either to judge the
size of the circle or to grasp it. The grasp was adjusted closer
to the real size of the circle than to its illusory size. Subjects
were able to see their hands, however, so it is possible that
subjects adjusted their grasp not to the non-illusory true size
of the circle, but to the visible error between the grasp and
the edge of the circle. The adjustments did not occur until
just before the movement was completed, nearly 2 sec after
it started.
Recognizing this problem, Aglioti et al. (1995) noted that
calibration of grip aperture is largely refractory to visual
information available during a movement, relying instead on
motor programming that occurs before the movement
begins. The experimental support cited for this open-loop

property, however, concerns movements to targets without
illusory size modifications, so that visual recognition of
grasp error and subsequent correction would not occur. The
movements can be controlled open-loop because no
correction is necessary. In a subsequent experiment that
avoids the feedback confound, Haffenden and Goodale
(1998) measured the illusion either by asking subjects to
indicate the apparent size of a circle or to pick it up, in both
cases without vision of hand or target. The illusion appeared
for both estimations but was much smaller for grasp,
indicating that the sensorimotor system was relatively
insensitive to the illusion.
Another experiment contrasting grasp and perception,
using the Müller-Lyer illusion, showed that while the
illusion is significantly smaller when measured with grasp
than with perception, there is some illusion under both
conditions (Daprati & Gentilucci, 1997). Again, relatively
slow grasp movements may be responsible, and vision of
both hand and stimulus was allowed.
In summary, in normal subjects there is behavioral
evidence for a distinction between processing in two visual
streams, but we still know very little about processing in the
sensorimotor pathway. With the exception of saccadic
suppression and induced motion methods, all of the methods
address the properties of objects rather than their locations.
A new method has produced large and consistent contrasts
between cognitive and sensorimotor systems, differentiated
by response measure. The dissociation is based on another
perceptual illusion, the Roelofs effect: if a rectangular frame
is presented off-center, so that one of its edges is directly in
front of the subject, that edge will appear to be offset in the
direction opposite the rest of the frame. A rectangle
presented on the left side of the visual field, for example,
with its right edge in the center, will appear less eccentric
than it is, and the right edge will appear to the right of the
subject’s center (Roelofs, 1935).
We have extended and generalized this phenomenon to
apply it to the study of the two-visual-systems theory. First,
the frame need not have one edge centered in front of the
subject; illusions occur whenever the frame is presented
asymmetrically in the visual field. Second, if a target is
presented within the offset rectangle, its location tends to be
misperceived in the direction opposite the offset of the
frame. Misperception of frame position induces illusions of
target position; this is an induced Roelofs effect, but will be
called simply a Roelofs effect here.
Roelofs effects can be observed reliably if subjects
describe the target’s position verbally, a task that addresses
the cognitive system. If their task is to point to the target as
soon as it disappears from view, however, they are not
affected by the frame’s position. This task addresses the
sensorimotor system. Motor behavior for many subjects
remains accurate despite the perceptual mislocalization
(Bridgeman, Peery & Anand, 1997).
Though the motor task in our case is isomorphic with
stimulus position, it is a communicatory act, and might be
closely linked to cognitive representations. An alternative is
to require an instrumental act, in which a subject must do
something to the world rather than simply indicate a position

to another person. Behavior with a purely instrumental goal
might be different from behavior with a communicatory
goal, even if both the stimuli and the motor movements
themselves are identical. Thus in our first experiment
subjects jabbed a 3-dimensional target object, pushing it
backward and making a clicking noise. Their intention was
not to communicate anything, but only to do something to
the world. With this improvement in our technique we
achieve a cleaner separation of cognitive and motor systems.
For a quick jab at a 3-dimensional target, rather than a
pointing motion, almost all subjects show independence
from Roelofs effects in immediate action, along with the
previously observed robust Roelofs effects in verbal
estimation of position.
Because this series of experiments follows up on earlier
studies (Bridgeman et al., 1997), we were able to take
advantage of the results of those studies to improve our
experimental design. In the earlier data nearly all of the
variance in responses as a function of target position was
accounted for by a linear regression, so in the current
experiments we did not need to present 5 target positions:
two target positions would give us the same information, and
allow us to increase the number of trials per condition.

Experiment 1
Using these improved techniques, we begin the job of
characterizing the psychophysics of the sensorimotor
system.

Method
Subjects Nine University of California undergraduates
participated in the experiment, all right-handed with normal
or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. Four were male and 5
female.
Apparatus Subjects sat with heads stabilized before a
white hemicylindrical screen that provided a homogeneous
visual field 180° wide x 50° high. A lever box located in
front of the screen presented 5 white levers, each 1.8° wide,
spaced 2.5° apart center-to-center (Figure 1). The center
lever, marked with a black stripe, functioned as the target.
Each lever was hinged at its base and spring-loaded. It
activated a microswitch when pushed backward by 5mm. A
long black baffle hid the microswitch assembly without
revealing the position of the lever array. In the motor
condition, the task was to jab the black target stripe rapidly
with the right forefinger. The remaining levers served to
record the locations of inaccurate responses.
A rectangular frame 38° wide x 1° in line width was
projected, via a galvanic mirror under computer control,
either centered on the subject's midline, 6° left, or 6° right of
center. Inside the frame, the lever box occupied one of two
positions, 3.5° left of center or 3.5° right of center. On each
trial the frame and target were positioned in darkness during
the intertrial interval. Then a computer-controlled shutter
opened for one second. Stray light from the projected frame
made the screen and the levers visible as well. As soon as

the shutter closed, the subject could jab the target or verbally
indicate its position in complete darkness. Responses were
recorded by the computer on an absolute scale (lever 1, 2, 3,
4, or 5).
Procedure Cognitive Measure: For the cognitive system
the subject verbally estimated the position of the target spot
on the center lever. The choices were ‘far left’, ‘left’,
‘center’, ‘right’, or ‘far right’, so that the response was a 5alternative forced choice. Choices were identified with the
five lever positions, which were centered before the subject
during the instruction period, when the screen was
illuminated by general room lighting and the frame was not
projected. The five levers, and nothing else, were visible
when the five alternatives were defined. By equating the
responses with the visible levers in the apparatus, we could
assign estimations in degrees of angle to the qualitative
verbal responses. Interpretation of the data depends upon
presence or absence of Roelofs effects, however, not on
absolute calibrations of the cognitive measure. In the present
series of experiments the cognitive measure serves as a
control to assure that a cognitive illusion is present,
differentiating the cognitive and sensorimotor systems. All
quantitative results are based on the motor measure.
Subject instructions in the verbal condition emphasized
egocentric calibration. Quoting from the instructions that
were read to each subject, “In this condition you will be
telling the experimenter where you think the target is in
relation to straight ahead.” Further, “If the target looks like
it’s directly in front of you, you will indicate this by saying
‘center’.” Thus center was defined in terms of the subject’s
body rather than the apparatus or the frame.
Sensorimotor measure: the subject rested the right
forefinger on a foam pad mounted on the centerline of the
apparatus just in front of the chin rest, then jabbed the target
with the forefinger as soon as the target disappeared. Thus
both cognitive and sensorimotor measures were open-loop,
without error feedback. Before the experimental trials began,
subjects practiced jabbing the target -- some were reluctant
to respond vigorously at first for fear of damaging the
apparatus. Subjects then received at least 10 practice trials in
the jab condition and 10 the verbal condition.
Trial Execution: A computer program randomly selected
target and frame positions, with the exception that an
identical set of positions could not occur on two successive
trials. For verbal trials, the experimenter recorded the
subject’s response by typing a number (1-5) on the
computer’s keyboard corresponding to the subject’s verbal
estimate. The computer recorded motor responses
automatically.
In each trial one of the two target positions and one of the
three frame positions was presented, exposed for one
second, and extinguished. Since the projected frame
provided all of the illumination, target and frame exposure
were simultaneous. A computer-generated tone told the
subject to respond. For no-delay trials the tone sounded as
the shutter extinguished the frame, while on other trials the
tone began after a 1-sec or 2-sec delay. During the delay the
subject sat in darkness.

Two target positions x three frame positions x two
response modes x three delays resulted in 36 trial types.
Each trial type was repeated 10 times for each subject,
resulting in a data base of 360 trials/subject. There was a
brief rest and a chance to light adapt after each block of 60
trials.
Data were collated on-line and analyzed statistically offline. Two-way ANOVAs were run for each subject, each
response mode, and each delay condition. Factors were
frame position and target position. Summary statistics were
analyzed between subjects.

Results
Cognitive The Roelofs effect, measured as a main effect
of frame position, was significant under all delay conditions.
Subjects tended to judge the target to be further to the left
than its actual position when the frame was on the right, and
vice versa. Six of 7 individual subjects showed a significant
Roelofs effect (F(2,5) > 8.43, p<0.05), and the magnitude of
the Roelofs effect averaged across subjects was 2.23 deg (s.
e. 0.86 deg).

consistent deviation, replicating Bridgeman et al. (1997),
while the sensorimotor measure shows no deviation.

Discussion
This experiment showed that the sensorimotor pathway
can maintain veridical information about target position,
unaffected by visual context, even when perception shows
an illusion of position. The rules are different for the two
systems. Cognition is conscious and must use context, even
when that leads to errors of localization. The sensorimotor
system does not use context, and its spatial values are held
unconsciously. Conflicting spatial values can exist in the two
systems simultaneously.
A possible mechanism of the sensorimotor store is that
subjects might fixate the target visually when it is visible,
then point where they are looking when the target is
extinguished. This would mean a 0-dimensional storage of
information of spatial information limited to the location of
a single point, held in gaze position rather than in an internal
register. If this interpretation is correct, subjects will be
unable to perform the motor task if they are prevented from
ever fixating the target. In the next experiment, extending
the Roelofs effect paradigm, we seek to control for possible
attention and fixation effects by preventing our subjects
from fixating the target.

Response (deg)

6

Motor

4
2
0
-2
-4
-3.5

0

Experiment 2

3.5

Left

We hypothesize that if subjects cannot fixate the target,
the motor system cannot use spatial information from gaze
position and will be forced to call upon the cognitive system
for spatial location information. Further, we prevent covert
orienting to the target by requiring subjects to perform a
continuous oculomotor task throughout the exposure period.

Center

Method

Right

Subjects Seven University of California undergraduates
participated in the cognitive condition, and 7 in the motor
condition, all right-handed with normal or corrected-tonormal visual acuity. Each subject was run in only one
condition, cognitive or motor.
For this experiment we need fixation points that define
eye movements, but give the subject no information about
target or frame positions. A pair of fixation points is added
to the display, in positions statistically uncorrelated with
target or frame positions, to elicit horizontal saccades.
Apparatus In order to present the target, frame and
fixation points simultaneously, and also to improve the
accuracy or our jab recordings, we move to an electronic
apparatus with all stimuli displayed on a CRT screen. The
screen is mounted with its face down and is viewed through
a mirror mounted at 45 deg in front of the eyes, so that the
display appears to be directly in front of the subject. A touch
pad mounted vertically in the apparent plane of the display
records jab responses made with a stylus. The frame’s width
is 24 deg, and the saccade targets are 23 deg apart, displayed
above the frame. As before, targets are at 6 deg. left, center,
and 6 deg. right.

Target Position (deg)
Frame

Figure 1. Motor responses, immediate action.
Sensorimotor The results can best be summarized with
the generalization that subjects hardly ever missed the target,
regardless of target position or frame position (Figure 1).
Seven of 8 subjects showed no significant Roelofs effect
(frame effect p>0.094). Averaged across subjects, the
magnitude of the Roelofs effect was 20 min. arc (s. e. 22
min. arc).
Comparing the two measures Overall, ANOVA showed
a significant difference between cognitive and motor
measures (F1,43=12.45, p=0.001), as expected from the
robustness of Roelofs effects with the cognitive measure and
the absence of Roelofs effects at short delays with the motor
measure.
The sizes of the Roelofs effects under various conditions
can be compared by measuring the difference between
average response with the target on the right and with the
target on the left. The cognitive measure shows a large and

Results
Results were analyzed in the same manner as experiment
1. The cognitive subjects showed an effect of target position,
frame position and fixation point position, all significant at
p<0.0001.
The motor subjects, in contrast, showed no Roelofs effect
(no significant frame effect), but had a target significant at
p<0.0001 and a fixation point effect significant at p<0.0011.
There were no significant interactions in either set of results.

Discussion
Since the subjects in the motor condition showed no
Roelofs effect, while those in the cognitive condition did, we
can conclude that the sensorimotor representation was
controlling the jab for the motor subjects. The representation
is at least 2-dimensional, a true map and not a simple
matching of gaze and jab positions. The single most
important finding of the experiments reported here is that
preventing direct fixation on the target, even when multiple
targets must be discriminated, does not cause a Roelofs
effect. These experiments show that oculomotor fixation and
spatially selective attention are not responsible for accurate
pointing behavior in an illusory visual context.

Conclusions
Once again, the evidence can be interpreted in terms of
two visual systems, one based on egocentric coordinates to
govern motor behavior and another that uses information
from visual context to represent spatial relationships in
perception. Also, these experiments lend support to the
claim that the price in performance the cognitive system
must pay in order to take advantage of visual context
information is a susceptibility to illusions of spatial context.
While it has been shown that direct fixation driven by
attentional selection is not the mechanism responsible for
accurate pointing behavior in a visual context that creates
illusory perceptions in the cognitive system, this shows only
that fixation is not responsible. Other aspects of attention
may be responsible for the continued accuracy of motor
behavior in these experiments.
The visual mechanism by which motor behavior is
governed has been shown to be extremely robust, both by
these and previous studies. Indeed, the reappearance of a
Roelofs effect for motor responses after a delay (Bridgeman
et. al., 1997) shows that the cognitive system can provide
information to the motor system when necessary, and this so
far appears to be the only form of communication between
the two systems. To date there is no evidence that the
cognitive system can access spatial location information in
the motor system, supporting the inference that spatial
information can flow in only one direction, from cognitive to
motor. In normal visual conditions, however (motor
interactions with still-visible targets), spatial information in
the two systems remains segregated.

References
Aglioti S., DeSouza J. F., & Goodale M. A. (1995) Sizecontrast illusions deceive the eye but not the hand.
Current Biology, 5, 679-685.
Bridgeman, B., Kirch, M., & Sperling, A. (1981).
Segregation of cognitive and motor aspects of visual
function using induced motion. Perception and
Psychophysics ,29, 336-342.
Bridgeman, B., Lewis, S., Heit, G., & Nagle, M. (1979).
Relation between cognitive and motor-oriented systems
of visual position perception. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5,
692-700.
Bridgeman, B., Peery, S., & Anand, S., (1997). Interaction
of cognitive and sensorimotor maps of visual space.
Perception & Psychophysics, 59, 456-469.
Daprati, E. & Gentilucci, M. (1997). Grasping an illusion.
Neuropsychologia, 35, 1577-82.
Roelofs, C. (1935). Optische Localisation. Archives für
Augenheilkunde, 109, 395-415.

