UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Algorithm, Heuristic or Exemplar: Process and Representation in Multiple-Cue Judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1188c6rv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Jones, Sari
Juslin, Peter
Olsson, Henrik
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Algorithm, Heuristic or Exemplar:
Process and Representation in Multiple-Cue Judgment
Sari Jones (Sari.Jones@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University
Box 1225, SE-751 42, Uppsala, Sweden

Peter Juslin (Peter.Juslin@psy.umu.se)
Department of Psychology, Umeå University
SE-901 87, Umeå, Sweden

Henrik Olsson (Henrik.Olsson@psy.umu.se)
Department of Psychology, Umeå University
SE-901 87, Umeå, Sweden

Anders Winman (Anders.Winman@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University
Box 1225, SE-751 42, Uppsala, Sweden
Abstract
We present an experimental design that allows us to investigate the representations and processes used in human multiple-cue judgment. We compare three ideal models of how
knowledge is stored and applied in a judgment: A linear additive model (LAM), a heuristic model, Take-the-best (TTB)
and a generic exemplar-based model (EBM). The results
show that people adaptively change processing depending on
what information is present in the learning phase and whether
or not the learning situation is compatible with the test. Feedback on a continuous variable provides information sufficient
to estimate a LAM that can be used both when learning is and
is not compatible with the test. When only dichotomous feedback is provided, the processes differ depending on the
learning-test compatibility. At high compatibility, the processing is best described by EBM, but at low compatibility
heuristic processes such as TTB become more frequent alternatives to LAM.

Introduction
In the 1950’s and 60’s two new research paradigms emerged
in cognitive science, categorization research (e.g., Shepard,
Hovland, & Jenkins, 1961) and research on multiple-cue
judgment (e.g., Hammond, 1955). While the former has
continued to flourish, the Brunswikian inspired judgment
research quietly left the arena in the 80’s, although with a
re-emergence in studies on realism of confidence (Gigerenzer, Kleinbölting, & Hoffrage, 1991; Juslin, 1994). The two
paradigms have a lot in common, but there is seldom crossreference between them (but see Kruschke & Johansen,
1999). A major conclusion from research on multiple-cue
judgment is that linear models fit judgment data well
(Brehmer, 1994) but in regard to knowledge representation
and processes, there has been little research. In the categorization literature in contrast, a variety of models with explicit
representational and process assumptions have been proposed (see Medin, 1989).
In this article, we bring the two paradigms together by
combining multiple-cue learning with theories and methods

from research on categorization. We present an experimental design that allows us to investigate knowledge representations and processes in human judgment. As a point of
departure we take research that postulates multiple levels of
representation (e.g., exemplars, rules) that compete to control the judgments in a specific task (Ashby et al., 1998;
Erickson & Kruschke, 1998; Logan, 1988). The idea is that
experience with some domain may lead to co-existing representations at several levels. A general hypothesis is that the
process and representation that dominates at the time of
judgment is contingent on an interaction between the learning environment and the judgment task to which the knowledge is later applied. We offer some preliminary ideas in
regard to the principles that determine this interaction. The
crucial questions is: In what circumstances will a particular
level of representation dominate the judgments?
We compare three ideal models of how knowledge is
stored and applied in a multiple-cue judgment task. Linear
Additive Models (LAM) suggest that we store information in
memory about: (a) the weight or cue validity attached to
each cue in the form of a linear coefficient, and (b) an algebraic rule for the combination of the cues, in this case a
linear additive rule (Brehmer, 1994). The process at the time
of judgment is cue-integration. Recently, a simpler and
more heuristic alternative has been proposed in terms of the
Take The Best algorithm (TTB; Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1996; Gigerenzer, Todd, & ABC Group, 1999). TTB suggests that the single most valid cue that is applicable is used
and that no information is integrated. The knowledge in
memory are cue validities and the process amounts to cuesubstitution. Finally, Exemplar-Based Models (EBM) from
the categorization literature (e.g., Medin & Schaffer, 1978;
Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997) assert that the memory traces of
each encountered object are stored in memory and that
judgments are based on the similarity between the new object and the already stored exemplars. In this case, the representations are exemplars and the process is similarity-based
retrieval from memory.

Overview of the Experimental Design
The design presented in this article is based on the idea that
an object is judged according to cues. The participants learn
that there is a species of frogs that vary in degree of toxicity
(0 to 100 %). This attribute depends on four characteristics
of the frog; color of the back (green or brown), shape of a
spot on the back (wedge shaped or round), size of glands
above the eyes (large or small) and color of the abdomen
(white or light yellow). These characteristics are binary cues
that have the weights .4, .3, .2 and .1 respectively, in a linear
equation: Toxicity = .4 × Cue 1 + .3 × Cue 2 + .2 × Cue 3 +
.1 × Cue 4. The weights can be understood as the proportions of poison that each cue adds to the total amount of
poison.
Table 1: The exemplars and total proportion of poison when
the weights on Cues 1 to 4 are .4, .3, .2, and .1 respectively.
Exemplar
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Cue 1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Cue 2
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0

Cue 3
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0

Cue 4
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0

Total
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Adding the weights of all cues with positive cue values (1)
gives the total proportion of poison for each frog. For example, if a frog has a green back (1), round spot (0), large
glands (1) and light yellow abdomen (0) the total proportion
of poison is 1 × .4 + 0 × .3 + 1 × .2 + 0 × .1 = .6. It is convenient to describe the frogs according to their binary code.
The above frog is Exemplar 6 (1010) in Table 1. With four
cues, there are 16 possible exemplars. The proportion of
poison varies between 0.0 and 1.0 (see Table 1).
In the learning phase participants learn to judge whether
an exemplar is dangerous or not. Exemplars with a proportion of poison above .5 belong to the category Dangerous,
whereas exemplars with a proportion of poison below .5
belong to the category Not dangerous. The participants
receive dichotomous feedback about the accuracy of their
prediction (e.g., “Correct” or “Wrong”). In addition they
may or may not receive continuous feedback about the exact
proportion of poison (e.g., “The amount of poison is 70%”).
Exemplars that have a proportion of poison of exactly .5 are
randomly assigned as dangerous or not. Three exemplars are
omitted in training to test EBM, as described below.
The single-object test is the same task as in the learning
phase, except that also exemplars that were omitted in the
training phase are introduced. In the pair-comparisons test,
two exemplars are compared in regard to degree of toxicity
(i.e., which is the most dangerous one). Feedback is with-

held in the tests. The two tests allow us to investigate how
knowledge acquired in one task is applied to a new judgment task, and how this affects the choice of representation.

Model Specifications
LAM The characteristic of LAM is that cue validities and a
linear, additive integration rule are retrieved from memory
and all four cues are weighed together to calculate a total
proportion of poison for each exemplar. Clearly, LAM provides the optimal algorithm for the task: If participants have
accurate estimates of the cue validities (linear coefficients)
they will categorize all exemplars in the single-object test
correctly, except when the proportion of poison is .5. With a
correctly estimated LAM the accuracy is .94 (15 out of 16
judgments correct), which provides a ceiling on the accuracy that can be attained.
In the pair-comparisons test, LAM computes an estimated
toxicity of each of the two exemplars and decides on the
exemplar with the higher estimated toxicity. With a correctly estimated LAM all judgments are correct, except
when comparing exemplars with the same poison proportion, where the judgment is a guess (e.g., when comparing
Exemplars 4 and 5). When all exemplars are compared to
each other once (120 comparisons) the success rate is .98 (5
out of 120 comparisons will be guesses). The representations—the cue validities and the integration rule—and the
process of cue integration are the same for all exemplars.
Therefore, in the test phase LAM predicts that there should
be no difference in the accuracy for (old) exemplars previously presented in the learning phase and (new) exemplars
that have not been encountered previously.
TTB The characteristic of TTB is that only one of the four
cues is used to make a judgment: The cue considered to be
the most valid one. In the context of TTB, cue validity is
defined as the conditional probability of a correct choice
across all cases where the cue is applicable. In the singleobject test, TTB implies that an exemplar with cue value 1
on the most valid cue is categorized as dangerous, and an
exemplar with cue value 0 as not dangerous. In this application, the most valid cue (Cue 1) has validity .81 when applied to all 16 exemplars. The highest accuracy attainable
with TTB in the single-object test is therefore .81.
In the pair-comparisons test, a cue is applicable if one exemplar has cue value 1 and the other 0 on this cue. If the
best cue is applicable a judgment can be made, but if the cue
values are identical for both exemplars the second to best
cue has to be considered, and so on. The most valid cue
(Cue 1) has a cue validity of .95 in the application to the
pair-comparisons test. The second to best cue (Cue 2) has a
validity of .93. In the pair-comparisons test the highest possible accuracy with TTB is .95. This presumes consistent
application of the most valid cue that is applicable, correct
conception of cue-directions, and correct rank ordering of
cue validities. Because the representation and process is the
same, TTB predicts that there should be no difference between new and old exemplars.
In addition to these global indices, there are critical exemplars for each cue that discriminate TTB from the other
models. In the single-object test, there are two critical ex-

emplars for each cue. If TTB is used, both of these exemplars will be judged incorrectly, whereas if LAM is used
they will be judged correctly. Exemplars 8 (1000) and 9
(0111) will be incorrectly categorized if Cue 1 is attended
to, because the judgment is based on the binary value of Cue
1 instead of the total poison proportion of the exemplar.
Similarly, in the pair-comparisons test there are comparisons that signal the use of TTB. There are three critical
comparisons that will be judged incorrectly when Cue 1 is
used, because the judgment is based on the binary value of
Cue 1 rather than the overall poison proportion of the exemplars. When Cue 2 is used as the best cue, 10 comparisons
1
are critical.
EBM With EBM the new exemplar is judged by similarity
to retrieved memory traces of previous exemplars. In the
single-object test we assume that the process is wellcaptured by a standard exemplar-based model from the
literature, the context model (Medin & Schaffer, 1978). On
this account, the new exemplar (probe) is assigned to the
category Dangerous with a probability equal to the proportion of the summed similarity to the stored exemplars in the
category Dangerous, relative to the summed similarity to all
stored exemplars. When the context model is applied to the
single-object test with parameters that imply extreme specificity (i.e., all similarity parameters equal to 0), the model
only retrieves identical exemplars. In this case, the context
model produces the same accuracy as LAM, .94.
Application to the pair-comparisons test, where the two
objects (probes) are compared in regard to a continuous
variable, is more complicated. In a learning environment
with only dichotomous feedback, an EBM like the context
model can merely differentiate between pair-comparisons
that contrast exemplars from different categories. This holds
for 50 percent of the comparisons, and for these an EBM
can attain perfect accuracy. For the remaining comparisons
that involve two dangerous or two non-dangerous exemplars
the judgment has to be based on a guess associated with .5
accuracy. Thus: in a condition with only dichotomous feedback an EBM can at most attain an accuracy of .75 (.5 × 1 +
.5 × .5). When feedback is continuous, on the other hand, an
EBM can potentially store also the continuous value with
the exemplar. An extension of the original context model
that applies to estimation of continuous variables is
PROBEX (for PROBabilities from EXemplars, Juslin &
Persson, 1999). When PROBEX is applied to pair comparison it makes one estimate of the continuous variable for
each of the two probes. Each estimate is a weighted average
of the values on the variable that have been stored with
previous exemplars, where the weights are the similarities to
the probe. The rule for computation of similarity is the multiplicative similarity rule of the context model. In a paircomparisons task, PROBEX decides on the probe with the
higher estimated value on the continuous variable. Again, if
parameters are set so that only identical exemplars are retrieved (weighted), PROBEX allows the same accuracy as

2

LAM, that is, .98. The reader is referred to Medin and
Schaffer (1978) and Juslin and Persson (1999) for a complete specification of the models.
For current purposes, it is sufficient to highlight a general
property of many exemplar-based models: Because the
judgments are based on similarity to stored exemplars and
the multiplicative similarity rule implies a particular sensitivity to identical exemplars, accuracy should be higher for
old exemplars that correspond exactly to stored exemplars
than for new exemplars. It should thus be easier to categorize exemplars, or compare two exemplars, that have been
encountered previously, than new exemplars. EBM can be
tested by omitting exemplars in the learning phase and later
introducing them in the test phase. If EBM is used, the proportion correct should be higher for old exemplars than for
new exemplars.

Cost-Benefit Considerations and Learning-Test
Compatibility
We will concentrate on two principles that determines the
representation and process that dominates in a task: costbenefit considerations and learning-test compatibility. As a
preliminary step to this analysis, we have to make a few
additional assumptions about the three models. We interpret
both LAM and TTB to involve conscious, controlled and
analytical processes constrained by short-term memory. We
expect that short-term memory can hold at most a few elements (e.g., cue validities) active at any moment and that the
process requires active mental effort. EBM is memorybased and the retrieval processes are assumed to be preconscious, automatic and to require little mental effort. It is
possible, however, that EBM requires a longer period of
learning to accumulate a sufficient set of exemplars. We
assume that these processes are present simultaneously and
compete to control a specific judgment.
The principle of cost-benefit consideration implies that
the relative gain of applying a process is weighted against
the cost of applying it. In the context of a design like the
present one, the gain is accuracy and the cost is mental effort. The cost involved in applying a process concerns both
investment in the learning phase (e.g., the effort to estimate
linear coefficients with LAM), and in the test phase (e.g.,
cue integration). Payne, Bettman, and Johnson (1993) have
studied cost-benefit considerations in choice of decision
rules in multi-attribute decision making. This research suggests that as the cost of applying a mental algorithm (e.g.,
LAM) increases people adapt and turn to heuristic processes
(e.g., TTB). The principle of learning-test compatibility
implies that for memory-based processes, the conditions for
successful retrieval are optimal when the circumstances at
test match those at learning. This principle is supported by
an extensive literature on memory, and illustrated by concepts such as the principle of encoding specificity (Thomson
2

1

The results for Cues 3 and 4 are not reported because analyses of
the data show that, if TTB is used Cue 1 and Cue 2 are most frequently used as the best cue.

The limits on accuracy are conditional on complete knowledge of
all 16 exemplars. Omitting 3 exemplars in the learning phase
constrains the possibility to estimate linear coefficients and cue
validities, and to store exemplars. These deviations are minor and
have no effect on the conclusions.

& Tulving, 1970) and transfer-appropriate processing (Morris, Bransford, & Franks, 1977).
We apply these principles to three experimental manipulations: (a) Feedback quality: Presentation of continuous or
dichotomous feedback in the learning phase. (b) Test format: Single-object or pair-comparisons test. (c) Cue order:
Fixed or varied presentation order of the cues.

Feedback Quality
Presentation of continuous feedback in the learning phase
should enhance the use of LAM. Continuous feedback facilitates estimation of linear coefficients for each cue. This
decreases the cost required to use LAM and thereby increases its prevalence. Because learning the cue weights
with dichotomous feedback is arduous, cost-benefit considerations suggest that participants are likely to resort to a
computationally simpler process like EBM or TTB.

Test Format
In single-object tests, learning and test consist of the same
task, whereas in pair-comparisons tests the learning phase
and the test differ. The principle of learning-test compatibility implies that EBM should be more common in the singleobject test, where the conditions at learning and test are
identical. This increases the probability of successful retrieval of stored exemplars. Note that LAM and EBM, in
principle, allow the same accuracy, but at different costs:
LAM allows rapid learning but requires larger mental effort.
EBM requires little mental effort but, presumably, more
extended training to attain the same level of performance.
The change of context in the pair-comparisons test should
increase the rate of responses guided by LAM or TTB,
which are not dependent on episodic retrieval. Participants
should have less opportunity to rely on memory (EBM), and
turn to the analytic processes implied by LAM and TTB.
Moreover, when only dichotomous feedback is provided in
the learning phase, EBM provides poor guidance in a paircomparison that concerns continuous values of the exemplars.
The principles of cost-benefit consideration and learningtest compatibility should interact in a specific way. In paircomparisons, more mental effort is needed to make the
judgment compared to in a single-object test. If LAM is
used in a single-object test, four cues are weighted and
added. In a pair-comparisons tests, the cognitive effort is
doubled. This should make participants who use LAM for
single-object judgments swap into a less demanding process
in the pair-comparisons test. Because of lower training-test
compatibility in the pair-comparisons task, however, they
are likely to divert to a heuristic algorithm such as TTB
rather than to EBM.
Predictions for the first two manipulations are summarized in Table 2. The provision of continuous feedback
should allow the participants to estimate a LAM, and this
should be particularly evident in the single-object test where
application of LAM demands less effort. With dichotomous
feedback, EBM should dominate in the single-object test
where training and test conditions match, whereas TTB

should dominate in the pair-comparisons test where this
match is lower.
Table 2: Processes predicted to dominate as a function of
the manipulation of feedback quality and type of test.
Test format
Single-object
Pair-comparisons

Feedback quality
Continuous
Dichotomous
LAM
EBM
LAM/TTB
TTB

Cue Order
In the experiment, we presented the cues in fixed or randomly varied presentation-order across trials. Our hypothesis was that a fixed cue order should enhance the use of
EBM because this should maximize training-test compatibility. This manipulation produced no effects, an observation to which we return in the discussion.

Method
Participants
Sixty-four persons (41 women and 23 men, mean age =
24.4) participated. All but 4 were undergraduate students at
Uppsala University. Participants received a course credit or
a cinema voucher worth approximately 75 SEK for participating.

Design and Procedure
Each learning trial consisted of presentation of an exemplar
of a fictitious frog species with 4 different attributes (described above) with the information presented in written
text. Three exemplars were omitted and the remaining exemplars were judged 10 times each in the learning phase,
making a total of 130 trials. For half of the participants,
exemplars 4, 9 and 10 were omitted, for the other half exemplars 5, 6 and 7. These exemplars are equal in poison
percentage (i.e., 4 is equal to 5, 9 is equal to 6 and 10 to 7).
The omission was thus counterbalanced.
The participants answered the question “Is the frog dangerous or not?” and received dichotomous feedback
“Correct answer“ or “Wrong answer“. Half of the participants also received continuous feedback about the percentage of poison of the frog, for example, “70% poison” The
weights, .4, .3, .2 and .1, were randomized to different cues
for each participant. For half of the participants cues were
presented in fixed order (in the same order and spatial location on the list) and for the other half cues were presented in
a varied order.
After the learning phase, participants received a singleobject test structurally identical to the learning phase, but
without feedback. This phase consisted of 16 trials as all
exemplars were judged once. Finally, a pair-comparisons
test in which 2 exemplars were contrasted, (also without
feedback) was administered. The question was: “Which frog
is most dangerous?”. This test consisted of 120 trials (all
exemplars were compared to each other once). Each session
lasted 45 min to 1h and 30 min.

In the single-object test, the use of LAM and EBM was
predicted and the results support these predictions. Table 3
displays the mean proportions correct (M) and 95 % Confidence Intervals (CI) for each condition.
Proportions correct clearly refute the use of TTB in the
continuous feedback condition since the confidence intervals do not include .81, the maximum performance possible
for TTB. The proportion correct is significantly higher in
the continuous feedback condition than in the dichotomous
feedback condition, t(62)= 2.04, (one-tail) p=.03 This is
expected if participants, to some extent, rely on LAM but
not if they uniformly rely on EBM. In the continuous feedback condition it is easier to estimate cue validities and
therefore the proportion correct is expected to be higher in
this condition if LAM is used.
Table 3: Proportions correct (M ) and 95 % Confidence
Intervals (CI) for each condition of the single-object test.
Feedback
Continuous
Dichotomous
Total

Cue order
Varied
Fixed
M=.86 *
M=.88
(CI: .81-.91) (CI: .80-.88)
M= .82
M= .79
(CI: .78-.87) (CI: .70-.88)
M= .84
M= .84
(CI: .77-.89) (CI: .80-.87)

Total
M=.87 *
(CI: .83-.92)
M=.80
(CI: .76-.85)
M=.84
(CI: .80-87)

old exemplars in the pair-comparison test. In the continuous
feedback condition, there is no difference between new,
mixed or old exemplars, supporting LAM (TTB is refuted
by the proportion correct, see Table 3). More perplexing, in
the dichotomous feedback condition there is no difference
between old and new exemplars, but the proportion correct
on mixed exemplars is significantly lower. This effect reflects a bias to choose the old exemplar, resembling the
recognition principle discussed in the context of TTB
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). This principle states that
when presented with a pair comparison between two objects, only one of which is recognized, the participants will
guess on the recognized object. In sum: In the dichotomous
feedback condition, the comparison of old and new exemplars supports EBM in single-object tests and, potentially,
TTB in the pair-comparison tests. In the continuous feedback conditions, the results support LAM.
.5
'Old' exemplar advantage

Results
Proportion Correct

.4
.3
.2
.1
.0
-.1
Single-object

*The CI does not include .81, the maximum performance possible for TTB.

Old and New Exemplars
The differences in proportions correct for old and new exemplars are presented in Figure 1. The only condition in
which there is a substantial advantage for old exemplars
over new exemplars is the single-object/dichotomous feedback condition, where EBM is predicted to dominate. In the
other three conditions in Figure 1, EBM is not supported.
When feedback quality is high and the cost of applying a
complex algorithm is low, participants can rely on the powerful (but choosy on data) LAM. When feedback is of
poorer quality, the cost of applying LAM is too high and the
participants resort to the less demanding EBM. This is particularly likely to occur when learning-test compatibility is
high (i.e., in the single-object/dichotomous condition).
In Figure 2, proportions correct are displayed separately
for new, mixed (comparing 1 new and 1 old exemplar) and

Figure 1: Mean difference between proportion correct for
old and new exemplars and 95 % Confidence Intervals for
the continuous (filled squares) and dichotomous (open
squares) conditions.
1
.9
Proportion Correct

In pair-comparisons, the participants were predicted to
use LAM in the continuous feedback condition and TTB in
the dichotomous feedback condition. The mean proportion
correct is .90 (CI: .87-.94) in the continuous feedback condition and . 80 (CI: .75-.85) in the dichotomous feedback
condition. The proportions correct are consistent with TTB.
In sum: The proportions correct falsify TTB in the singleobject condition with dichotomous feedback, but the proportions correct are compatible with LAM and EBM in all
conditions. Presentation order of the cues had no effect on
accuracy.

Pair comparison

.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3

New

Mixed

Old

Figure 2: Mean proportion correct and 95 % Confidence
Intervals of pair comparisons with new, mixed and old exemplars for the continuous (filled squares) and dichotomous
(open squares) feedback conditions.

Critical Exemplars
The critical exemplars do not provide much support for TTB
in the single-object conditions. TTB with Cue 1 as the best

cue, should yield wrong judgments on Exemplars 8 (1000)
and 9 (0111) in the single-object test. The proportion correct
on these Exemplars is well above 0 in both conditions, specifically.83 (CI: .72-.94) in the continuous feedback condition and .73 (CI: .62 -.85) in the dichotomous feedback
condition. On individual level, five participants (7.8%) used
TTB, four judged both critical exemplars of Cue 1 incorrectly and one the critical exemplars of Cue 2. These participants were equally distributed in the dichotomous and
continuous feedback conditions. In the pair-comparisons
test, TTB receives some support from the critical comparisons. Although a group level analysis shows no consistent
use of TTB, on an individual level 16 participants (25%)
used TTB: Nine with Cue 1 as the best cue and, surprisingly, seven with Cue 2 as the best cue.

Discussion
We have introduced a design in which the knowledge representations and processes in a multiple-cue learning task can
be studied. The results suggest that humans change cognitive processing, as a function of the information present
during learning and the compatibility of learning and test, in
a way that is consistent with the principles of cost-benefit
and learning-test compatibility derived from previous research.
Specifically, the presentation of continuous feedback in
the learning phase provided participants with information
that allowed them more easily to estimate a LAM. A LAM
is applicable both when learning is, and is not, compatible
with the test, but the application is more demanding in the
pair-comparisons test. Thus, there was more support for the
domination of LAM when continuous feedback was provided, but less so in the pair-comparisons than the singleobject test.
When only dichotomous feedback is available, the estimation of LAM becomes demanding and other processes
come to dominate the judgments. The other processes correspond to the two classical ways of circumventing the limited
capacity of controlled thought processes: memory-based
performance, or automatization, and heuristic processing.
When the test is similar enough to the learning task, processing is memory-based and relies on exemplar representations. When the test is different from learning, heuristic
processes, such as TTB, increase in frequency. Overall,
however, we found little evidence in support of TTB (i.e., a
minority of participants in the pair-comparisons task seemed
to rely on it). This may perhaps be explained by the relatively simple task used in the experiment and, indeed, as the
task became more complex, evidence in favor of TTB
seemed to increase. Nonetheless, at present there is little
empirical data that provide support for the empirical validity
of TTB.
To our surprise, the manipulation of fixed or varied order
of the cues had no effect. Together with the clear effect of
old and new exemplars in the dichotomous/single-object
condition, this suggests that the judgments are sometimes
guided by exemplar-memory, but the representation of the
exemplars may be more conceptual than visual in its character.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Swedish Council for
Research in Humanities and Social Sciences.

References
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., & Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in category learning. Psychological Review,
105, 442-481.
Brehmer, B. (1994). The psychology of linear judgment
models. Acta Psychologica, 87, 137-154.
Erickson, M. A., & Kruschke, J. K. (1998). Rules and exemplars in category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 107-140.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D., G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality. Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbölting, H. (1991).
Probabilistic mental models: A brunswikian theory of
confidence. Psychological Review, 98, 506-528.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hammond, K. R. (1955). Probabilistic functioning and the
clinical method. Psychological Review, 62, 255-262.
Juslin, P. (1994). The overconfidence phenomenon as a
consequence of informal experimenter-guided selection of
almanac items. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 57, 226-246.
Juslin, P., & Persson, M. (1999). Probabilities from exemplars: On the role of similarity and frequency in probability judgment. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Kruschke, J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of
probabilistic category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 10831119.
Logan, D. G. (1988). Towards an instance theory of automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492-527.
Medin, D. L. (1989). Concepts and conceptual structure.
American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1481.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J.D., & Franks, J. J. (1977). Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate processing.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16,
519-533.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplarbased random walk model of speeded classification. Psychological Review, 104, 266-300.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. I., & Jenkins, H. M. (1961).
Learning and memorization of classifications. Psychological Monographs, 75 (13, Whole No. 517).
Thomson, D. M, & Tulving, E. (1970). Associative encoding and retrieval: Weak and strong cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 86, 255-262.

