UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Aspectual Coercion and the Online Computation of Sentential Aspect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14x15786

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Todorova, Marina
Straub, Kathy
Badecker, William
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

CogSci2000

1

Aspectual Coercion and the Online Computation of Sentential Aspect
Marina Todorova (todorova@cogsci.jhu.edu )
Department of Cognitive Science, JHU; 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Kathy Straub (kath@cogsci.jhu.edu )
Department of Cognitive Science, JHU; 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

William Badecker (badecker@cogsci.jhu.edu )
Department of Cognitive Science, JHU; 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Robert Frank (rfrank@cogsci.jhu.edu )
Department of Cognitive Science, JHU; 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
Abstract
We investigate the comprehension of sentences where an
aspectual incompatibility between a verbal predicate (send
a check; completive reading) and a verbal modifier (for
years; durative reading) is resolved through the operation
of aspectual coercion. Aspectual coercion modifies the aspectual properties of the predicate in the direction required
by the verbal modifier; here the result is an obligatory iterative interpretation for the combined string (send a check
for years). We find that sentences where the iterative interpretation arises as a result of coercion (Howard sent a large
check to his daughter for years) show a significant reading
delay in the coercion and post-coercion regions as compared to sentences where an iterative interpretation i s
achieved by other means (Howard sent large checks to his
daughter for years). Such delay does not occur with substitution of an aspectually neutral modifier (last year). We
propose that the observed delay is a processing reflex of
aspectual coercion deriving either from an initial
misanalysis of the aspectual representation of the utterance, or from the need to postulate a null iterative operator
in order to arrive at a coherent interpretation of the coerced
sentence.

Aspectual Coercion
This study investigates the processing correlates of aspectual
coercion. Aspectual coercion has been proposed in the linguistic and computational literature (e.g. Moens & Steedman, 1988) as an operation that resolves a mismatch between the aspectual properties of the verbal predicate, on one
hand, and a (temporal) sentential operator, on the other. In
English, the operation of coercion does not have an overt
morphological reflex. Therefore, it is generally considered to
lack a structural counterpart in the syntax. Instead, the effects of coercion are purely semantic: The verbal predicate
obligatorily receives a specific aspectual interpretation,
which differs from its most natural (or default) aspectual
reading. An inquiry into the processing correlates of aspectual coercion promises to provide valuable information

about the mechanisms of semantic processing in general,
and details of computing the aspectual interpretation of an
utterance, in particular. This study examines the effects of
durative adverbial modifiers on the aspectual interpretation of
the predicate. It is hypothesized that coercion triggered by
such modifiers is associated with a specific processing cost.

Aspect
The grammatical category of aspect relates to the internal
temporal structure of an event. Aspectual distinctions are
anchored around the presence or absence of logical boundaries in the denotation of events. For example, the eventuality denoted by the verb ‘find’ seems to contain a logical endpoint, namely the moment at which one becomes aware of
the existence of some novel object. It is implausible that the
act of finding extends beyond this endpoint; similarly, we
cannot say that an event of finding has been instantiated
unless this endpoint has been realized. By contrast, the state
denoted by the verb ‘love’ can plausibly extend indefinitely
in time. This does not mean that loving cannot reach a terminal point; rather, such a point is not a logically necessary
component of the verb’s meaning. For the purposes of this
paper, we will call those aspectual readings that contain a
necessary and/or realized event boundary telic; aspectual
readings that are open-ended (i.e. indeterminate with respect
to an endpoint) will be called atelic.1

1
Strictly speaking, the labels telic and atelic are usually applied to the lexical-conceptual structure of events; the properties of sentential utterances are described as bounded vs. unbounded; perfective vs. imperfective, etc. We keep only one set
of labels for simplicity; however, it is worth pointing out that
we consider telic at the sentential level interpretations where
the logical endpoint of an event is understood to have been instantiated, i.e. roughly the idea described by the traditional notion of perfectivity.

CogSci2000

While telicity is encoded in the conceptual structure of
events, it can be modified by the larger context within which
an event is embedded. Thus we have a distinction between
lexical and grammatical aspect. Lexical aspect categorizes
verbs into aspectual classes based on their meaning (Dowty,
1978; Vendler, 1967). The atelic lexical classes encompass
states and processes:2 Verbs such as love or write describe
temporally unbounded eventualities, or, alternatively, eventualities with homogenous reference: A subpart (subinterval)
of a state of loving is still a state of loving, and a subpart of
an act of writing is still an act of writing. The telic lexical
class is that of events: Verbs such as find denote eventualities that involve some change or transition between different
states of affairs. The transition corresponds to the logical
boundary of the event. Events have non-homogenous reference: it is hard to conceive of subparts of the event of finding an object, and if we imagine a situation where the object
is found after an active search, then any subparts of this
(larger) event are instantiations of searching, rather than finding.
The aspectual reading of a fully articulated utterance is not
always transparently related to the lexical aspect of its main
verb. Rather, the computation of sentential aspect is influenced by the presence of nominal arguments and temporal
sentential modifiers. Within the verbal predicate, the presence of an object and its cardinality have important consequences for the resulting aspectual reading: Singular and/or
definite (count) objects support telic interpretations, whereas
bare plural and/or mass noun objects support atelic interpretations of the verbal predicate. To illustrate, by itself the
verb ‘write’ denotes an unbounded process; when combined
with a singular object (write a book), it denotes a bounded
event in the course of which some change/transition is effected (i.e., a new object - a book - comes into existence).
This type of predicate is traditionally referred to as an ‘accomplishment’. However, if the same verb is combined with
a bare plural object (write books), it receives an atelic aspectual reading: The predicate now denotes an iterative or habitual process of book-writing. Similarly, punctual eventive
verbs, such as ‘send’, receive an iterative interpretation
when combined with a bare plural or mass noun object: The
predicate ‘send letters’ denotes a process that can potentially
repeat itself over an indefinitely long period. Since there is
no special instance of iteration that is regarded as the terminal point of the iterative event, iterative interpretations are
open-ended. The importance of the cardinality of the object
for the aspectual reading of predicates leads some authors to
propose that aspectual properties are computed over the verbargument complex (Verkuyl, 1993).
To illustrate the effect of temporal operators, the English
progressive operator alters the aspectual properties of its
input into those of an ongoing process (i.e. an atelic eventuality). Consequently, even though the primitive predicate
‘send a letter’ is associated with a telic reading, its progressive version, ‘I’m sending a letter’, is an atelic process that
does not allow an inference to the completion of the ongoing event. The modification of the aspectual properties of a
2
There exist various classifications of verbal lexical aspect;
the one adopted here is due to Mourelatos (1981).

2

verbal predicate by sentential operators is known as aspectual coercion. This paper focuses on the processing cost
associated with one particular instance of coercion, which
arises in the presence of adverbial material denoting temporal
span.

Adverbial Coercion
A long-standing observation in the aspect literature maintains that adverbs denoting extent in time are sensitive to the
aspectual category of the predicate that they modify. Adverbs
of duration, such as ‘for X time’ or ‘throughout’, combine
with atelic predicates: John wrote letters for an hour,
whereas adverbs of completion, such as ‘in X time’, combine
only with telic predicates: John wrote a letter in one hour.
However, this generalization is not entirely correct. Adverbs of duration can occur in combination with any aspectual type of predicate; the output of such combination, however, is necessarily interpreted as an atelic eventuality. Thus,
even though the primitive ‘write a letter’ is a telic accomplishment predicate, its modified counterpart ‘write a letter
for an hour’ is interpreted as an atelic process of letterwriting that lasted one hour. The absence of telicity in this
expression is made evident by the fact that the sentence
‘John wrote a letter for an hour’ does not entail that at the
end of the hour the letter in question has actually been written. Similarly, the primitive punctual predicate ‘send a letter’ can be modified with a durative expression ‘for several
years’. In this case, the overall interpretation shifts to the
eventuality denoted by the predicate repeating itself over and
over (with some pragmatically plausible frequency) for the
extent of several years. Thus, it is clearly the case that adverbs of duration act like coercing operators for some predicates. This behavior is not surprising if we assume that the
denotation of durative adverbs picks out a temporal interval
within which an event unfolds: Since an interval interpretation is necessarily atelic, all input to the durative adverbial
must acquire atelic properties. The specific reinterpretation
that occurs as a result of combination of a predicate with a
durative modifier is still somewhat dependent on the basic
properties of the input event. An accomplishment predicate
(write a letter) contains a simple process within its denotation; therefore, reinterpretation usually amounts to ‘stripping’ off its culmination phase and understanding the predicate as an instance of the underlying process that did not
reach its endpoint (Moens & Steedman 1988). Punctual
events, on the other hand, have neither internal structure nor
internal temporal extent. The only way in which they could
be forced into an interval interpretation is by introducing a
process of repetition of the punctual event. This is what
happens in an example such as John sent a letter to the
company for several years.
To summarize, several factors can potentially contribute
to the overall aspectual reading of an utterance: The aspectual class of the main verb, the cardinality of its object, and
the input specifications of modifying adverbial material.
This situation creates a certain degree of instability within
the parsing system, since material encountered later in an
utterance can conflict with properties of the semantic representation that have been built up on the basis of material
encoded earlier in the utterance. For instance, if the parser is

CogSci2000

assumed to incrementally compute a telic representation for
the entire utterance upon encountering a telic verb (or its
combination with a singular object), subsequent modification with a durative adverbial should trigger (potentially
observable) aspectual reanalysis immediately after the durative modifier is encoded. Alternatively, one might hypothesize that in the absence of overt aspectual markers, such as a
progressive or a perfect operator, aspectual commitment is
postponed until all relevant material has been encoded. On
that view, sentential aspect is left underspecified for the duration of the sentence. Where no further material relating to
aspect becomes available, the aspectual reading for the sentence is determined over the properties of the entities that
make up the predicate. However, if additional salient entities, such as a temporal modifier, emerge, these are taken
into consideration in the initial computation of sentential
aspect. Coercion in this model would amount to nothing
more than a selection of the appropriate aspectual value
based on all the lexical information provided, though we
might expect to observe increased sentence ‘wrap-up’ processing time as the correct aspectual properties of the utterance are calculated, especially when factors informing the
computation of aspect are in conflict. Further complications
can arise if issues of plausibility/frequency are taken into
consideration. It could be, for example, that particular verb +
object combinations (given the importance of the cardinality
of the object) increase the probability that the overall interpretation of the utterance will be of a certain kind (telic or
atelic), and lead to an early adoption of the respective aspectual interpretation. For some verbs, one aspectual usage may
be more frequent than the other (for example, the eventuality
denoted by the verb ‘break’ may be less likely to be represented as an (iterated) process than the eventuality denoted by
the verb ‘kick’, especially when it is understood to affect the
same unique object). The kinds of aspectual reinterpretations
triggered by coercion may also involve varying degrees of
reanalysis: reinterpreting an event as a sequence of iterations
is representationally different from reinterpreting an event as
incomplete. Clearly, we cannot begin to unravel all of these
issues at the same time. The present paper concentrates on
one specific question: Is there a processing cost associated
with the coercion which occurs when verbs denoting punctual events are forced to assume a repetitive interpretation,
and if so, how does this inform our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying semantic parsing?

The Psycholinguistics of Aspect
To date, very little research examining the psycholinguistic
implications of the coercion process has been reported. In
one important exception, Piñango, Zurif and Jackendoff
(1999) examined processing costs associated with coercion
using a cross-modal lexical decision task. They investigated
the effect of interpreting a durative temporal adverbial following a punctual verb (kick) vs. a non-punctual verb (examine). When the presentation of a lexical decision target
coincided with the disambiguation point of the underlined
temporal adverbial in coercion contexts like The man kicked
the little bundle of fur for a long time to see if it was alive,
they observed slower responses in comparison to decisions
made in the corresponding location for non-coercing contexts

3

(i.e., The man examined the little bundle of fur for a long
time to see...). Piñango et al. attribute the longer decision
times to the increased processing costs associated with the
coercion operation.
Although these results are suggestive, one potential problems undermines their interpretation. The creation of minimal pairs by systematically alternating verbs introduces
other interpretive differences to which the observed processing variation might be attributed: Sentences in the “coerced
condition” entail an iterative interpretation, unlike most
sentences in the “non-coerced condition”. This difficulty
suggests that further, more rigorous examination of the online implications of the coercion process is indicated.
The experiment presented here expands on Piñango et al.’s
strategy of contrasting coercion and non-coercion contexts.
We examine the processing correlates of the specific type of
semantic coercion which arises from the combination of
punctual verbs (e.g. send) with a durative adverbial (for X
time), culminating in an iterative reading of the entire utterance. Since it is unclear whether iterative interpretations are
computationally more demanding than non-iterative ones,
the critical alternation in the materials that we employ
hinges on varying the cardinality of the direct object (as opposed to varying the verb) as the factor which controls the
initial repetitive vs. non-repetitive aspectual status of the
predicate. It should be recalled that bare plural direct objects
impose an iterative reading (send letters), whereas singular
direct objects impose a single-instance reading of the event
denoted by the predicate (send a letter). In the case of the
bare plurals, the repetitive event interpretation is signaled by
the plural object prior to the introduction of the durative
adverbial and that adverbial simply specifies the temporal
span over which the repetitive event occurs. Thus, the interpretation of bare plurals modified by durative adverbials
(sent letters for many years) is straightforward, since the
(atelic/iterative) aspectual reading of the predicate is consistent with the aspectual input specifications of the modifier.
In contrast, the introduction of a durative adverbial modifier following a singular object (send a letter for many
years) triggers aspectual conflict between the telic predicate
and the durative adverbial. This incompatibility is hypothesized to be resolved via the coercion process, through which
the predicate is reanalyzed as an iterative event spanning the
specified interval. If the reanalysis process suggested as a
correlate of aspectual coercion is computationally demanding, we should expect to observe increased processing load at
or subsequent to the introduction of aspectual incompatibility (as seen in sentences containing iterative events over
singular objects). Evidence of this cost should be observed
when we compare parallel regions of the singular vs. bare
plural items, just because the coercion operation is hypothesized to occur only over the predicates containing singular
objects.
Further, since aspectual coercion is triggered by a specific
type of temporal modifier, we would not expect to see evidence of coercion with adverbs that are indifferent to the aspectual properties of the predicates that they have scope
over. This expectation is independent of the cardinality of
the direct object of the predicate (sent a letter last year vs.
sent letters last year). Although these sentences come to

CogSci2000

mean different things (singular vs. multiple instances of
letter-sending, corresponding to telic/perfective and atelic/imperfective aspect, respectively), in both cases the aspectual reading is determined solely on the basis of the properties of the verb + object complex, and depends specifically
on the cardinality of the direct object. So, temporal adverbs
which are indifferent to aspect are not hypothesized to contribute to the aspectual interpretation of the utterance and
should combine easily with any type of aspectual input.
Therefore, we would not predict any processing load variation to be observed at, or subsequent to, the introduction of
such adverbials despite the diverging interpretations ultimately required by such sentences.
Thus, this experiment examines the processing cost associated with coercion toward an iterative interpretation of a
telic verb + singular object predicate triggered by the presence of a durative temporal adverbial. Two separate noncoerced, control conditions are employed. First, processing
load for the hypothesized coerced sentences is compared with
processing load for sentences in which there is a telic verb +
bare plural object predicate followed by a durative adverbial.
In this control, the bare plural independently signals an iterative event reading so there is no aspectual conflict between
the predicate and the temporal adverbial. Secondly, sentences
containing durative adverbials are compared to parallel sentences containing non-durative temporal modifiers. This
control should allow us to distinguish any potential effects
of coercion, as we have described it here, from effects that
might instead arise directly out of the singular vs. bare plural object contrast, independent of the coercion operation.

Method
Participants Twenty-four right-handed, native Englishspeaking undergraduates with no history of language deficits
enrolled at the Johns Hopkins University participated in the
experiment for course credit or compensation.

4

Table 1: 2×2 experimental design crossing factors of
Cardinality and Modifier Type.

Singular
object

Plural
object

Durative modifier

Non-durative modifier

Even though Howard
sent a large check to
his daughter for many
years, she refused to
accept his money A
Even though Howard
sent large checks to his
daughter for many
years, she refused to
accept his money B

Even though Howard sent
a large check to his
daughter last year, she
refused to accept his
money
C
Even though Howard sent
large checks to his
daughter last year, she
refused to accept his
money
D

Condition A reflects the hypothesized coerced context: the
aspectual properties of the predicate and the modifier are
mismatched and we expect that any processing costs associated with the coercion operation should be observed in this
condition. In contrast, no effects of coercion should be observed in the other conditions.
Experimental sentences were constructed on a bi-clausal
frame, in which the critical adverbial phrase always occurred
in the initial clause. Table 2 shows each sentence subdivided
into presentation regions (roughly corresponding to phrases),
with the temporal adverbial always occupying Region V.
With the exception of the critical alternation, the lexical
material within particular regions of a given item was identical. Thus, we expect that any processing costs associated
with the coercion operation will be observed at or immediately downstream of region V.3
Table 2: Sentential frame for experimental sentences
with type of material by region.
Region :

II

III

IV

V

VI-IX

Subject
+
verb

Direct
object

Preposi
tional
phrase

Temporal
adverb

2nd
clause

I
Materials Thirty-six transitive aspectual achievement
verbs were used to construct the experimental sentences.
Each verb was used to create two VP predicates which varied
on the cardinality of the direct object (singular indefinite vs.
bare plural) so the resulting predicates differed only in iterativity. For each predicate, adverbial modifiers (durative vs.
non-durative/aspectually neutral) were selected to allow
equally (ultimately) plausible readings in all conditions.
Thus, the experiment consists of a 2×2 design crossing
Cardinality (singular vs. plural) and Modifier Type
(durative vs. non-durative). As can be seen from the stimulus example from Table 1, with the exception of the cardinality of the direct object and the specific temporal adverbial,
the lexical content of the sentences was identical across the
four conditions.

Although
Because
Even
though

Critical items were distributed into 4 lists such that each
list included one token of each of the 36 critical items and
nine items from each of the 4 treatment conditions. The 4
sets of experimental stimuli were each embedded into a list
of 70 filler sentences. Filler items, which were also subdivided into roughly phrasal presentation regions, ranging
from 5 to 9 regions in length, varied in syntactic structure as
well as syntactic and semantic complexity. Since the experimental paradigm employed in this study allowed for the
collection of sensibility judgment data, 30 of the filler items
were designed not to make sense. Nonsense filler items were
3
There is some evidence that processing of semantic information follows a slower time-course than syntactic processing
(Boland 1997). This suggests that a coercion effect is likely t o
occur later than the actual presentation of coercing material,
namely in region VI.

CogSci2000

Results
In sentence-final judgments, participants rejected 19% of the
sentences in Condition A (the coerced condition), but only
7% in Condition B (the non-coerced, bare plural condition):
_2 = 14.73, df = 1. p < .001. Rejection rates in Conditions
C & D were 8% and 9%, respectively. Sentences which were
judged to be nonsensical overall were excluded from further
analysis. However, items for which participants indicated
that one or more regions were nonsensical, but judged the
sentence to be acceptable overall were included in the analysis.

Response Time (ms)

Overview of Task & Procedure This experiment employed a self-paced, makes-sense judgment task in which
participants evaluated sentences presented region-by-region
in the center of a computer screen. Participants were instructed to quickly read each region and indicate whether that
text region “made sense” with respect to the previously presented material from that trial. Two types of data were recorded for each participant for each text region: reading/judgment times and regional rejection rates. The rate of
text presentation was controlled by individual participants in
that new text material replaced the previous material as soon
as a participant indicated a judgment (via a button press). At
the end of each trial, participants were asked to provide
make-sense judgments for the entire sentence. Thus, the data
collected in this task allows us to examine processing load
effects via reading/judgment latencies for specific regions. In
addition, by recording sensibility judgments we can examine
by-region rejection rates to test our intuitions regarding the
aspectual infelicity in the coerced condition. Furthermore,
we can confirm that ultimately participants do arrive at a
meaningful interpretation in all sentence conditions. Finally,
the make-sense judgment task has the added advantage of
discouraging fast readers from buffering text material or
postponing their interpretations until sentence-final regions
are reached. Although no judgment feedback was given on
critical trials, participants were encouraged to actively engage in regional make-sense judgments by receiving negative feedback when their make-sense judgments conflicted
with those of the experimenters on filler trials.

Type emerged (all ps > .25), although a main effect trend
toward Cardinality emerged (Region V: F 1 (1, 23) = 3.71; p
< 0.06; F2 (1, 35) = 1.8; p < 0.19.; Region VI: F 1 (1, 23) =
4.97; p < 0.05; F2 (1, 35) = 2.88; p < 0.09). The interaction
between these two variables was nearly significant at Region
V (F1 (1, 23) = 5.40; p < 0.02; F2 (1, 35) = 2.60; p < 0.11)
and significant at Region VI (F1 (1, 23) = 17.6; p < 0.005;
F 2 (1, 35) = 5.97; p < 0.05). This is not surprising since,
here, the operation of coercion occurs only within certain
factor combinations.
The crucial comparisons contrasted the effects of Cardinality within the Modifier Type alternation. As can be seen in
Figure 1, response latencies for Regions V & VI in Condition A, the Singular+Durative, coerced iterative items, were
significantly longer than those in Condition B, the Plural+Durative non-coerced, iterative items (Region V:F1 (1,
23) = 7.34; p < 0.05; F 2 (1, 35) = 4.66; p < 0.05; Region
VI: F1 (1, 23) = 24.51; p < 0.0001; F 2 (1, 35) = 9.27; p <
0.005). In contrast, as is shown in Figure 2, no effects of
Cardinality emerge in the critical text regions of sentences
modified by Non-Durative adverbials (All Fs <1).

Cardinality
 Singular (A)
 Plural (B)

1400
1200
1000
800

Durative Modifier

600
I

III IV V VI VII VIII
Text Region
Figure 1: Response latency by text region for Duratives
by Cardinality of Object

Response Time (ms)

incongruous based on some grammatical violation (e.g.,
subject/verb agreement), conceptual/pragmatic constraints
(e.g., implausible event), or both. Thus, the experiment
consistent of 4 separate list conditions containing 106 items
each. Individual lists were pseudorandomized for presentation
order such that one or more filler items intervened between
every pair of target items. Presentation lists orders were randomized independently to avoid item-ordering effects.

5

II

1400

Cardinality
 Singular (C)
 Plural (D)

1200
1000
800

Non-Durative Modifier

600
Reading time data Analyses on the reading/judgment
latencies were computed separately using subjects and items
as random factors. Analyses of latencies for text regions
preceding the temporal adverbial (I-IV) and in regions VII
and VIII were not different across treatment conditions (Fs
<1). Subsequent analyses focus on differences observed in
Regions V (the adverbial modifier) and VI (immediately following the coercion region). In the full analysis evaluating
Modifier Type and Cardinality, no main effect of Modifier

I

II

III

IV V VI VII VIII
Text Region

Figure 2: Response latency by text region for Non-Duratives
by Cardinality of Object

CogSci2000

6

Make-sense judgment data As can be seen in Figure 3,
even in sentences which were ultimately judged to be acceptable, subjects indicated that the temporal adverbial Region V
was difficult to integrate more frequently in the coerced singular durative condition than in the other treatment conditions. Chi-squared analysis reflects that this difference also
holds for the Cardinality contrast within the Durative condition (χ2 = 9.40 (df=1); p < .005), but not between the nondurative conditions (χ2 = .07)

Duratives
Singular
Plural
Non-Duratives
Singular
Plural

# Rejections

30
20
10
0
I

II

III

IV
V
VI
Text Region

VII VIII

Figure 3: Regional make-sense judgments.

General Discussion
This study investigated the comprehension of sentences
where an aspectually incompatible predicate - modifier combination is interpreted with the aid of the semantic operation
of aspectual coercion. Aspectual coercion operates by altering the aspectual specifications of the predicate in a direction
matching the input specifications of the adverbial modifier.
In the specific case studied here, the semantic consequence of
coercion is an obligatory iterative (atelic) interpretation of
predicates involving punctual eventive (telic) verbs when
these predicates are modified with adverbs of duration. Iterativity arises in this particular situation as the only temporally unbounded analysis applicable to eventive verbs lacking a durational component in their conceptual structure.
The goal of our study was to establish whether the coercion
operation has any disruptive consequences for sentence comprehension.
We find that participants are significantly delayed when
reading a durative adverbial modifier that follows an aspectually incompatible predicate (punctual verb + singular object), as compared to reading the same adverbial following an
aspectually compatible modifier (punctual verb + bare plural
object). No such difficulties arise when the same predicates
are modified by aspectually neutral adverbials, which do not
trigger coercion. We hypothesize that the observed latency is
indicative of an increase in processing cost associated with
the need to undergo coercion in order to form a coherent representation of the utterance. On the other hand, within the
predicate, objects of specified vs. unspecified cardinality were
read with a comparable degree of ease: this suggests that
decisions about utterance aspectuality are made after both the
verb and its arguments have been encountered
While we take our results to indicate that coercion is, indeed, a costly operation, they are compatible with several
hypotheses as to why this should be the case. On one hand,

it is possible that the difficulty in the comprehension of
coerced sentences reflects a price associated with some
reanalysis of the current representation of the utterance. That
is, it could be that the combination of a telic verb and singular object leads to an early decision of a telic aspectual value
for the utterance under construction; and subsequent modification of that value is undesirable (costly). If this is the
case, we would expect to observe the same degree of processing difficulty to occur in sentences where iteration is introduced by means of an overt lexical item, e.g. Howard sent a
large check to his daughter every year.
Alternatively, the difficulty in interpreting coerced iterative sentences may stem from the fact that the existing representation has to be updated through the mediation of an
iterative operator that is not morpho-syntactically expressed.
To make this point clearer: a durative adverbial must attach
to input which has some atelic properties. When this input
is a process (write) or contains a process-like subcomponent
(write a book), combination with a durative modifier is unproblematic. However, if the input does not have a continuous interpretation (send a check), an attempt to combine it
directly with a durative adverbial will lead to an incoherent
conceptual representation. The strategy of introducing an
iterative operator - which has the effect of creating a novel,
atelic event as input to the modifier - can then be regarded as
a form of repair. It is possible that the observed processing
delay reflects an attempt at the combination of predicate and
modifier without the mediation of an iterative operator with
the concomitant failure to form a sensible interpretation of
the whole. If this is the case, we would expect the coercion
effect to disappear in cases where an overt iterative element
makes the interpretation domain of the modifier explicit,
e.g. again in Howard sent a large check to his daughter
every year. We plan to address these issues in further research.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Géraldine Legendre and Paul Hagstrom for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Boland, J. (1997). The relationship between syntactic and
semantic processing in sentence comprehension. Ms.
Dowty, D. (1978). Word meaning and Montague grammar.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Moens, M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Temporal ontology
and temporal reference. Computational Linguistics, 14,
15-28.
Mourelatos, A. (1981). Events, processes, and states. Linguistics and Philosophy, 2, 415-434.
Piñango, M, Zurif, E., & Jackendoff, R. (1999). Real-time
processing implications of enriched composition at the
syntax-semantics interface. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 28, 395-414.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in Philosophy. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Verkuyl, H. (1993). A Theory of Aspectuality. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.

