UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attention to Action: Securing Task-Relevant Control in Spoken Word Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/91c6261v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Roelofs, Ardi

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attention to Action: Securing Task-Relevant Control in Spoken Word Production
Ardi Roelofs (ardi@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

50
0
-50

300

200

-100
-100
-50
50
100

Performance on the Stroop task is of direct relevance to
theories of language production and comprehension. The
basic modes of language use, namely speaking, listening,
reading, and writing, all seem to make use of overlapping
sets of basic processing components (e.g., Caplan, 1992;
Levelt, 1989; Shallice, 1988). Whereas language perception occurs automatically, hearing or reading a word does
not automatically lead to its production but this is under
the control of a language user. Similarly, seeing an object
does not automatically lead to the naming of it. Furthermore, words do not occur in isolation, but are typically part
of a spoken discourse, a text on a page, or appear on objects in the real world. This points to the need to deal with
the issue of selectivity. It is generally assumed that performance on the Stroop task can provide evidence on how
language is controlled, that is, how a speaker secures taskrelevant control over the basic language processes underlying naming and oral reading (e.g., Allport, 1993).
Since Stroop’s (1935) experiments in the 1930s, over 700
articles have appeared using his task (reviewed by MacLeod, 1991), which established the following basic empirical picture. Color naming is inhibited by incongruent color
words, but word reading not by incongruent color patches.
For example, saying “red” to a red color patch on which
the word “green” is superimposed proceeds slower than
saying “red” in a control condition consisting of a string of
Xs. The stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between color
patch and word has an important effect. Maximal inhibition of incongruent words on color naming is obtained
when the words are presented within 100 msec of the colors (e.g., Glaser & Glaser, 1982). Preexposed congruent
words yield facilitation, which is constant over SOAs.
Whereas color naming is affected by incongruent words,

100

-200

Introduction

150

-300

The Stroop phenomenon is the finding that color naming is
inhibited by incongruent color words but word reading not
by incongruent colors. When the stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) is manipulated, maximal inhibition of incongruent
words on color naming is obtained when the words are presented within 100 msec of the colors, whereas facilitation of
preexposed congruent words is constant. These finding are
obtained both with and without task certainty. Whereas existing models explain the basic Stroop effects, they fail to
account for the time course findings and for performance
under task uncertainty. In this paper, I extend and apply the
WEAVER++ model of spoken word production (Roelofs, 1992,
1993, 1997c; Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999) to performance on the Stroop task and show that the model accounts for
the key findings.

reading aloud words (e.g., “red”) is not influenced by incongruent colors (e.g., green). The asymmetry in effect is
not due to a difference in processing speed between words
and colors (i.e., reading is some 200 msec faster than color
naming), as evident from manipulating the SOA. When a
color patch is presented 300 or 400 msec before the word
to be read, still no effect of incongruent colors is obtained
(e.g., Glaser & Glaser, 1982).
LATENCY EFFECT (msec)

Abstract

SOA (msec)
Figure 1: Time course of the Stroop effects (relative to
control) in color naming under task uncertainty as measured by Glaser and Glaser (1989): = incongruent, =
congruent
In a standard Stroop experiment, participants are certain
about what task to perform. Typically, one group of participants is asked to name the color and to ignore the word,
and another group of participants is asked to read aloud the
word and to ignore the color patch. Thus, trials are blocked
by task. However, in examining the effect of task uncertainty, Glaser and Glaser (1989) asked a single group of
participants to perform both tasks. They instructed their
participants to respond to the second stimulus component
(in the condition with negative SOAs) or the first component (in the condition with positive SOAs). Words had to
be read aloud and colors had to be named. Participants can
perform this task up to differences in presentation time of
50 msec. The experiment was run with SOAs of -300, -200,
-100, -50, 50, 100, 200, and 300 msec (a minus sign indicates preexposure of the irrelevant stimulus). With task
uncertainty, Glaser and Glaser obtained the normal patterns
of inhibition and facilitation observed with task certainty,
for example, with the instruction to name the color and
ignore the word. Inhibition increased when the SOA be-

came less negative, peaking at SOAs between -100 and 100
msec. And there was a flat pattern of facilitation at the
negative SOAs. Figure 1 shows the SOA curves.
The Stroop phenomenon is not restricted to naming colors and reading color words but appears in many other verbal domains. For example, numerals interfere with the
naming of numerosity (e.g., saying “two” to two 6s), but
there is no reverse effect (e.g., Flowers, Warner, & Polansky, 1979). Alternating between tasks that exhibit the
Stroop conflict (i.e., between color naming and numerosity
naming trials) does not yield a greater task switch cost than
alternating between tasks that do not yield the Stroop conflict (i.e., between word reading and numeral reading trials), as observed by Allport, Styles, and Hseih (1994).

The Challenge Posed by Task Uncertainty
The Stroop Conflict as Task Conflict
Recent proposals in the literature (e.g., Rogers & Monsell,
1995) have suggested that the essence of the Stroop conflict is competition between tasks per se (i.e., word reading
and color naming). The Stroop conflict is explained as inhibition of the “weaker” color naming task by the supposedly “stronger” reading task, while the reverse does not
occur. However, task competition fails to explain why the
congruent condition (where the same tasks compete) yields
facilitation. Furthermore, the fact that task uncertainty has
no influence on the SOA patterns poses a challenge. Also,
task competition would predict a greater cost for switching
between conflict trials with color and numerosity naming
than between nonconflict trials with word and numeral
reading, but Allport et al. (1994) found no cost difference.
The findings on the time course of the effects and on
task uncertainty also pose a challenge to models that do no
conceive of the Stroop conflict as a task conflict per se.
Whereas existing models account for the basic Stroop effects obtained with SOA = 0 msec, they fail to explain the
time course findings and they cannot cope with task uncertainty.

The Model of Cohen, Dunbar, and McClelland
(1990)
Among the most influential models of the Stroop phenomenon is the connectionist model of Cohen, Dunbar, and
McClelland (1990). The model assumes a feedforward
network with parallel reading and color naming pathways,
which differ in strength. Task relevant control is achieved
in the model by task nodes for color naming and reading.
These task nodes provide extra input to the color and
reading pathway, depending on the task. Each response
node in the network is connected with an evidence accumulator. Before the beginning of a simulated Stroop trial,
all evidence accumulators are set to zero. A task node is
activated and the model is run until the activation of all
nodes stabilizes. This allows the system to settle into a
“ready state” for the task. Next, the components of a
Stroop stimulus are presented with the appropriate SOA. A
response is selected when one of the accumulators exceeds
a fixed response threshold.

The model of Cohen et al. does well in accounting for
the basic Stroop effects obtained with SOA = 0 msec, but
there are two major problems. First, as simulations by
Cohen et al. (1990, p. 344) showed, the amount of evidence accumulated for the irrelevant stimulus is a positive
function of its preexposure time. That is, more evidence is
collected at more negative SOAs. Thus, the inhibition in
the incongruent condition peaks at the most negative SOA
and decreases when the SOA becomes less negative.
Similarly, the amount of facilitation in the congruent condition peaks at the most negative SOA and decreases when
the SOA becomes less negative. The problem is that these
patterns are exactly contrary to the empirical results, where
maximal impact of incongruent words is observed when
the words appear within 100 msec of the colors and facilitation from preexposed congruent words is constant. The
model also predicts a small Stroop effect at negative SOAs
in reading aloud, contrary to the real data. The second
major problem with the model is that it cannot handle task
uncertainty. Before the beginning of a trial, a task node is
activated and the model is run until the activation of all
nodes stabilizes, which allows the system to settle into a
ready state for the task. But with task uncertainty, the task
is not known beforehand so that such task-dependent settling of activation is not possible.

The Model of Phaf, Van der Heijden, and Hudson
(1990)
Another influential model of the Stroop phenomenon is the
connectionist model of Phaf, Van der Heijden, and Hudson
(1990), called SLAM (for SeLective Attention Model),
which has been developed within the framework of Van
der Heijden’s (1992) general theory of attention. The
model assumes an interactive-activation network. Input
nodes for colors are connected to corresponding hidden
nodes for colors, which in their turn are linked to word
output nodes. Input nodes for words are directly connected
to these output nodes. Thus, unlike the model of Cohen et
al. (1990), the model assumes asymmetrical pathways for
reading and color naming. Processing occurs through activation spreading from color input via hidden to output
nodes, and directly from word input to output nodes,
whereby nodes change their activation with time in a continuous, nonlinear manner. There are excitatory links between nodes representing compatible information and there
are inhibitory links between nodes standing for incompatible information. All nodes of a particular type within a
layer inhibit each other. Selective attention to the color
naming and reading tasks is achieved by adding extra external activation to all hidden color nodes for color naming
and all output nodes for word reading. The task activation
is given from trial onset onward. On each simulated trial,
word and color input is given to the network and activation
cycles around from one unstable pattern to another until a
stable pattern of activation is reached. The excitatory and
inhibitory connections push activation of the response
nodes into one stable state depending on the inputs provided to the layer (e.g., color and task input). To choose
one response or another, activation of the response layer is

output form in parallel. Oral reading is achieved by a
shallow form-to-form route (e.g., from the orthographic
form red to [rεd]) or may involve an extra step of lemma
retrieval (i.e., from red via red to [rεd]), roughly corresponding to what is traditionally called the “semantic”
route (e.g., Caplan, 1992; Shallice, 1988). I refer to Levelt
et al. (1999) and Roelofs, Meyer, and Levelt (1996) for an
extensive discussion.
conceptual
preparation

color
perception

COLOR

lemma
retrieval

word-form
perception

WORD

word-form
encoding

articulation

OVERT SPEECH

Figure 2: Stages of spoken word planning in WEAVER++

Network Structure

RED(X)

GREEN(X)

Control in the WEAVER++ Model
color

Planning Stages
In WEAVER++, naming a perceptual entity such as a color
involves a number of processing stages, illustrated in Figure 2. First, there is the conceptual identification of the
color based on perceptual input (e.g., red) and its designation as goal concept (i.e., RED(X)). Second, the lemma of
the corresponding word is retrieved (i.e., red), in the Stroop
literature often referred to as response selection (except
that it involves here lemmas, which is new). A lemma is a
representation of the syntactic properties of a word, crucial
for its use in sentences (cf. Roelofs, Meyer, & Levelt,
1998). Third, the form of the word is encoded (i.e., [rεd]),
called response programming. Lemma retrieval and wordform encoding are discrete processes in that only the form
of a selected lemma becomes activated and selected
(Levelt, Schriefers, Vorberg, Pechmann, Meyer, & Havinga, 1991). And finally, the name is articulated, called
response execution.
A perceived written word activates its lemma and its

red

adj.

green

lemmas

COLOR(X)

concepts

The model assumes that the mental lexicon is a huge network with information about words, a small fragment of
which is illustrated in Figure 3.

<red>
/r/

/ε/

/d/

forms

input to a sampling and recovery procedure that stochastically favors the most highly activated response node.
The Phaf et al. (1990) model successfully accounts for
the basic Stroop effects with SOA = 0 msec, but, again,
there are the same two major problems. First, the model
does not adequately account for the time course of the
Stroop phenomenon that has been observed by Glaser and
Glaser (1982) and others. As simulations by Phaf et al.
(1990, p. 324) showed, the model predicts that the amount
of inhibition of words in color naming does not vary with
SOA but remains constant for negative SOAs, contrary to
the empirical findings. The reason for predicting a constant
SOA effect in color naming is that after perceiving the
word, the system quickly settles into a stable state of activation for the response corresponding to the word. By definition, the stable state does not vary with time, and hence
making the SOA more or less negative has no effect, until
an SOA is used that is too short for the distractor to reach
an attractor basin. Consequently, the amount of time it
takes for the color name to overcome the inhibition from
the word is constant. The second major problem is that the
model cannot cope with task uncertainty.
In line with Phaf et al. (1990), Cohen and Huston (1994)
discuss an attractor version of the model proposed by
Cohen et al. (1990). The behavior of this model is similar
to that of Phaf et al. (1990). The amount of inhibition at
negative SOAs is constant (see Figure 18.11 of Cohen and
Huston, 1994), contrary to the real data. And the new version of the model also cannot cope with task uncertainty.
An alternative to connectionist task control is provided
by “production rule system” models (e.g., Anderson, 1983;
Anderson & Lebiere, 1998). Below, I show that the
WEAVER++ model of word production (Levelt et al., 1999;
Roelofs, 1992, 1993, 1997c), which falls into this general
class of model, accounts for the findings on task uncertainty. The relevant features of the model are: (1) words
are retrieved by spreading activation and (2) task-relevant
control is achieved by production rule application.

[rεd]

Figure 3: Fragment of the lexical network of WEAVER++
The network comprises three major strata: a conceptual,
a syntactic, and a form stratum. The conceptual stratum
represents concepts as nodes in a semantic network, following Collins and Loftus (1975), and many others. For
example, the concept RED is represented by the node
RED(X). The syntactic stratum contains lemma nodes, such
as red, which are connected to nodes for their syntactic

class (e.g., adjective). And finally, the form stratum contains nodes representing morphemes, segments, and motor
programs. For an extensive discussion of the theoretical
and empirical motivation of these assumptions, I refer to
Levelt (1989), Levelt et al. (1999), Roelofs (1992, 1993,
1996a,b,c, 1997a,b,c, 1998, 1999, 2000, submitted), and
Roelofs and Meyer (1998).

Spreading Activation and Production Rule Application
Information is retrieved from the network by the spreading
of activation. For example, a perceived color (e.g., red)
activates the corresponding concept node (i.e., RED(X)) in
the network. Activation then spreads through the network
following a linear activation rule with a decay factor. Each
node sends a proportion of its activation to the nodes it is
connected to. For example, RED(X) sends activation to
other concepts such as GREEN(X) and also to its lemma
node red. Selection of nodes is accomplished by production rules (i.e., condition-action pairs). A rule is triggered
when its nodes become active. A lemma retrieval production rule selects a lemma if the connected concept is
flagged as goal concept. For example, red is selected for
RED(X) in case it is the goal concept and red has reached a
critical difference in activation compared to other lemmas.
The actual moment in time of the firing of a production
rule whose condition is satisfied is determined by the ratio
of activation of the relevant lemma node and the sum of all
the others. Thus, how fast a node is selected depends on
how active the other nodes are.

Performing the Stroop Task
In color naming, a production rule like P1 controls general
aspects of the task and a rule like P2 achieves the actual
lemma selection (and sets a subgoal to encode the word’s
form, which is omitted here). Word reading is accomplished by a task rule like P3 that maps the orthographic
code of a word onto the corresponding articulatory program. Earlier (Roelofs, 1992) I proposed an “intersection”
mechanism to achieve selective attention in response selection, which has recently been dropped and replaced by
the task production rules (see Roelofs, 2000, submitted).
(P1) IF the goal is to say the name of the color
and the concept is the color of the stimulus
THEN select the concept
and flag the concept as goal concept
and enhance its activation
(P2) IF RED(X) is flagged as goal concept
and the activation of red exceeds threshold
THEN select red
(P3) IF the goal is to say the name of the word
and the morpheme is the name of the stimulus
THEN select the morpheme
and flag the morpheme as goal morpheme
With task uncertainty, the task itself has to be set during

each trial. This is achieved by production rules like P4 and
P5 (in the negative SOA condition).
(P4) IF the first stimulus is a color
THEN the goal is to name the word
(P5) IF the first stimulus is a word
THEN the goal is to name the color
To assess the Stroop performance of the model, computer simulations were run. The simulations employed a
basic set of eight parameters, whose values were the same
as in all earlier simulations (e.g., Levelt et al., 1999; Roelofs, 1992, 1993, 1996a, 1997c) except for two parameter
values, which were changed slightly to fine-tune the fit of
the model to the data. The “distractor duration” was set to
100 msec and the response threshold to 1.6. The distractor
duration determines the gain of the distractor input relative
to the target input. Roelofs (submitted) gives all the details
of the simulations and applies the model to the key findings from over half a century of Stroop research (e.g., reviewed by MacLeod, 1991).

Illustration of a Simulated Trial
Assume that the task is to name the second stimulus, which
may be a color patch or a word. Assume that on a particular trial a red color patch is presented on which the word
“green” is superimposed, with the word presented 100
msec before the color patch (i.e., the SOA is -100 msec).
The simulation starts with the lemma node of “green” receiving external activation (for 100 msec, the distractor
duration). This triggers production rule P5, which sets the
goal to naming the color. Activation spreads through the
network, with the node green sending a proportion of its
activation to GREEN(X), and this node in its turn spreads
activation to the other concept nodes. After the number of
time steps that is the equivalent of 100 msec (the SOA), the
concept node RED(X) receives external input from the
color. Next, production rule P1 fires, RED(X) becomes
flagged as goal concept, and its activation level is selectively enhanced. After the response threshold of the lemma
red is exceeded, production rule P2 fires and red is selected
as response.

Simulation Results
The key finding to account for in this paper is that color
naming is similarly affected by color words under task
certainty and task uncertainty. Maximal inhibition of incongruent words on color naming is obtained when the
words are presented within 100 msec of the colors, whereas
the facilitation of preexposed congruent words is constant.
Whereas color naming is affected by words, reading aloud
is not affected by colors. Again, this holds both for task
certainty and for task uncertainty.
Figure 4 shows how WEAVER++ performs. The figure
shows the SOA curves of the Stroop effects for color naming under task uncertainty. The curves for task certainty
(not shown) exhibit the same patterns. Maximal impact of
incongruent words occurs in the model when the words are

150
100
50
0
-50

300

200

-100
-50
50
100

-200

-100
-300

LATENCY EFFECT (msec)

presented within 100 msec of the color patches, exactly as
empirically observed. For reading aloud in the model, no
inhibition and facilitation is obtained at any SOA (also not
shown), both for task certainty and task uncertainty, as
empirically observed. Thus, WEAVER++ accounts for the
time course findings and for the effect of the task certainty
manipulation.

SOA (msec)
Figure 4: Time course of the Stroop effects (relative to
control) in color naming under task uncertainty from
WEAVER++ simulations:
= incongruent, = congruent
Why is there no inhibition from colors on word reading?
In WEAVER++, lemma retrieval and word-form encoding
are discrete. Only the form of a selected lemma becomes
activated and selected. Thus, activation does not spread
automatically from lemmas to forms but this is under task
control. Furthermore, color naming requires both lemma
retrieval and form encoding, whereas word reading requires form encoding only. In reading “red” superimposed
on a green color patch, the lemma but not the form of
“green” becomes active: Because the task is reading and
not color naming, the lemma of “green” (corresponding to
the color) is not selected and the form of “green” does not
become active. The task rule P3 for reading achieves direct
selection of the morpheme <red> from the orthographic
form red rather than indirect selection of <red> by first
selecting the lemma red and next selecting <red> via the
lemma. Thus, selecting <red> from the orthographic form
red controls the response. Since the form of “green” is not
active, planning the form of “red” is unaffected by the
color patch.
Independent empirical support for the assumption of a
discreteness of stages comes from double-task experiments.
Levelt et al. (1991) asked participants to name pictured
objects. On one third of the trials (the critical ones), a spoken probe was presented, and participants had to perform a
lexical decision on this probe. Peterson and Savoy (1998)
also asked participants to name pictures, but on the critical
trials in their study written words were presented, which
had to be read aloud. The lexical decision and reading latencies showed that in naming a perceptually given entity,

there is no form activation for non-synonymous semantic
relatives (i.e., fellow category members) of the target. For
example, in naming a cat, there is lemma activation for
“cat” and “dog” and word form activation for “cat”, but the
word form of “dog” is not activated. By extrapolation, in
naming a red color patch, the lemmas of “red” and “green”
become active and this also holds for the word form of
“red”, but the word form of “green” is not activated. Only
the form of a selected lemma becomes activated.
O'Seaghdha (1999) argues that the form of “dog” is activated during the naming of a cat, but that the experiments
of Levelt et al. (1991) and Peterson and Savoy (1998) were
insufficiently powerful to measure this. In support, he refers to a study by O'Seaghdha and Marin, who ran six experiments using word reading with word-word stimuli and
an SOA of -500 msec. The effects in the experiments
ranged from -2 to +5 msec and were not significant. However, by pooling the observations from the 248 participants
in all six experiments, an overall effect of +3 msec was
obtained, which reached significance by participants but
not by items. By standard criteria, however, such an effect
is nonsignificant. Moreover, with large negative SOAs
(i.e., -500 msec) expectancy-based priming cannot be excluded (e.g., Neely, 1991). Thus, the findings of O'Seaghdha and Marin do not challenge the discreteness assumption.

Summary and Conclusions
I have argued that performance on the Stroop task provides
evidence on how speech production is controlled, that is,
how a speaker exerts task-relevant control over the basic
language processes underlying naming and oral reading.
Color naming is inhibited by incongruent color words but
word reading not by incongruent colors. Maximal impact
of incongruent words on color naming is obtained when the
words are presented within 100 msec of the colors, whereas
the effect of preexposed congruent words is constant. The
key observation for the current paper is that these finding
are obtained both with and without task certainty. Whereas
existing models (e.g., Cohen et al., 1990; Phaf et al., 1990)
explain the basic Stroop effects, they fail to account for
time course of the findings and for performance under task
uncertainty. In this paper, I have extended and applied the
WEAVER++ model of word production to performance on
the Stroop task, and I have shown that the model accounts
for the findings on the time course as well as for the performance under task uncertainty.

References
Allport, A. (1993). Attention and control: Have we been
asking the wrong questions? A critical review of 25
years. In D. Meyer & S. Kornblum (Eds.), Attention and
Performance XIV: A silver jubilee (pp. 183-218). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Allport, D. A., Styles, E. A., & Hseih, S. (1994). Shifting
intentional set: Exploring the dynamic control of tasks.
In C. Umiltà & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Attention and
Performance XV: Conscious and nonconscious information processing (pp. 421-452). Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press.
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. London: Erlbaum.
Caplan, D. (1992). Language: Structure, processing, and
disorders. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, J., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. (1990). On the
control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed
processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological
Review, 97, 332-361.
Cohen, J. D., & Huston, T. A. (1994). Progress in the use
of interactive models for understanding attention and
performance. In C. Umiltà & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Attention and Performance XV: Conscious and nonconscious information processing (pp. 453-476). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Flowers, J. H., Warner, J. L., & Polansky, M. L. (1979).
Response and encoding factors in “ignoring” irrelevant
information. Memory and Cognition, 7, 86-94.
Glaser, M. O., & Glaser, W. R. (1982). Time course analysis of the Stroop phenomenon. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8,
875-894.
Glaser, W. R., & Glaser, M. O. (1989). Context effects in
Stroop-like word and picture processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 13-42.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levelt, W. J. M, Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-38.
Levelt, W. J. M., Schriefers, H., Vorberg, D., Meyer, A. S.,
Pechmann, Th. & Havinga, J. (1991). The time course of
lexical access in speech production: A study of picture
naming. Psychological Review, 98, 122-142.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the
Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 163-203.
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual
word recognition: A selective review of current findings
and theories. In D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys (Eds.),
Basic processes in reading: Visual word recognition (pp.
264-336). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
O'Seaghdha, P. G. (1999). Parsimonious feedback. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 51-52.
Peterson, R. R. & Savoy, P. (1998). Lexical selection and
phonological encoding during language production: Evidence for cascaded processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24, 539557.
Phaf, R. H., Van der Heijden, A. H. C., & Hudson, P. T.
W. (1990). SLAM: A connectionist model for attention
in visual selection tasks. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 273341.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of
lemma retrieval in speaking. Cognition, 42, 107-142.

Roelofs, A. (1993). Testing a non-decompositional theory
of lemma retrieval in speaking: Retrieval of verbs. Cognition, 47, 59-87.
Roelofs, A. (1996a). Computational models of lemma retrieval. In T. Dijkstra, & K. De Smedt (Eds.), Computational psycholinguistics: AI and connectionist models of
human language processing (pp. 308-327). London:
Taylor & Francis.
Roelofs, A. (1996b). Serial order in planning the production of successive morphemes of a word. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 854-876.
Roelofs, A. (1996c). Morpheme frequency in speech production: Testing WEAVER. In G. E. Booij and J. van
Marle (Eds.), Yearbook of Morphology 1996 (pp. 135154). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Roelofs, A. (1997a). A case for nondecomposition in conceptually driven word retrieval. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 26, 33-67.
Roelofs, A. (1997b). Syllabification in speech production:
Evaluation of WEAVER. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 657-693.
Roelofs, A. (1997c). The WEAVER model of word-form
encoding in speech production. Cognition, 64, 249-284.
Roelofs, A. (1998). Rightward incrementality in encoding
simple phrasal forms in speech production: Verb-particle
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 904-921.
Roelofs, A. (1999). Phonological segments and features as
planning units in speech production. Language and Cognitive Processes, 14, 173-200.
Roelofs, A. (2000). Control of language: A computational
account of the Stroop asymmetry. In N. Taatgen & J.
Aasman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling (pp. 234-241).
Veenendaal, The Netherlands: Universal Press.
Roelofs, A. (submitted). Attentional control of verbal action: Stroop phenomena and their time course.
Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1998). Metrical structure in
planning the production of spoken words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 922-939.
Roelofs, A., Meyer, A.S., & Levelt, W.J.M. (1996). Interaction between semantic and orthographic factors in
conceptually driven naming: Comment on Starreveld and
La Heij (1995). Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 246-251.
Roelofs, A., Meyer, A.S., & Levelt, W.J.M. (1998). A case
for the lemma-lexeme distinction in models of speaking:
Comment on Caramazza and Miozzo (1997). Cognition,
69, 219-230.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictable
switch between simple cognitive tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 207-231.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental
structure. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Van der Heijden, A. H. C. (1992). Selective attention in
vision. London: Routledge.

