UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Committing to an Ontology: A Connectionist Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qj7d14p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Colunga, Elianna
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Committing to an Ontology: A Connectionist Account
Eliana Colunga (ecolunga@cs.indiana.edu)
Computer Science Department; Lindley Hall 215
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology; 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Young children generalize nouns in systematic ways. They
generalize names for solid things by shape and names for
non-solid things by material. Recent evidence suggests
that the source of these biases is in the children's lexicon:
the bias becomes apparent only after they know names for
things that are solid and have a similar shape and they
know names for things that are non-solid and similar i n
material. In Experiment 1, we train a simple connectionist
network with the regularities present in early noun vocabularies and show that this network shows generalization patterns comparable to those of young children. In Experiment 2 we look for other possible biases coming from statistical regularities and find that the network predicts that
children will not cross ontological boundaries in their word
generalizations. In Experiment 3 we test this prediction i n
30-36 month-old children. We explain this finding i n
terms of the statistical regularities present in young children’s noun vocabularies.

Introduction
Young children are excellent learners of object names. After
hearing a noun used once to name one object, they seem to
know the scope of the whole category. To explain this proficiency people have proposed several mechanisms in the
form of constraints or biases (Landau, Smith & Jones,
1988; Markman, 1989; Soja, Carey & Spelke, 1991). This
paper is about the shape and material biases and about a new
“bias”, what one might call an “ontology bias”. In the end,
we propose that all these biases and constraints reduce to
associative learning and generalization by similarity.
Our starting point is a recent study by Samuelson &
Smith (1999). They examined the similarity structure of 300
object categories, the names of which are typically known
by 30 month-olds. They found many nouns that name
things that are solid and similar in shape and fewer nouns
that refer to non-solid substances similar in material. They
also showed that children do generalize novel nouns for solids by shape and for non-solids by material, but only after
they know many of these words. These results suggest that
these biases may be the product of statistical learning. In
other words, children’s noun generalizations are themselves
generalizations over the nouns the child already knows.
In this paper we show that a simple statistical learner,
when trained with the regularities present in early noun vo-

cabularies, generalizes novel nouns like children do. In Experiment 1 we train connectionist networks on the regularities found in early vocabulary by Samuelson and Smith
(1999) and show that, like children, the networks generalize
by shape for solid objects and by material for non-solid substances. In Experiment 2 we examine this early lexicon for
other regularities that might create biases in a statistical
learner and find that networks trained on this set exhibit
what we call an “ontology bias”. In Experiment 3 we test
for this bias in children.

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 is to determine if the regularities
present in early noun vocabularies are sufficient to create
word learning biases in a simple associative learner. If this
is the case, it would support the idea that the biases are
learned as part of learning the regularities in the lexicon. To
do this we trained simple connectionist networks with a
vocabulary organized using the regularities found in early
lexicon by Samuelson and Smith (1999) and then we tested
the network’s performance on an adaptation of the novel
noun generalization task.

Architecture
We used a Hopfield network, which is a simple settling
network. The network was trained using Contrastive Hebbian Learning (Movellan, 1990), an algorithm which adjusts
weights on the basis of correlations between unit activations. Figure 1. shows the architecture of the network. The
network has a Word Layer, in which words are represented
locally. That is, each unit corresponds to one word in the
network’s vocabulary. Individual objects are represented on
what we call the Dimension layer. Activation patterns on
this layer represent the shape and material of each individual
object or substance presented to the network. More specifically, the shape and material of an object (say the roundness
of a particular ball and its yellow rubbery material) are represented by an activation pattern along the whole layer, in a
distributed fashion. In the Solidity layer one unit stands for
Solid and another for Non-Solid. Finally, there is a hidden
layer that is connected to all the other layers and recurrently
with itself. Note that the Word Layer and the Dimension and
Solidity layers are only connected through the hidden layer,
there are no direct connections among them.

Testing

Word Layer

Hidden
Layer

Shape

Material

Solidity

Object Layer
Figure 1. Architecture of the network used in Experiments
1 and 2.

Training
The goal of the training phase was to mimic in the network
the vocabulary learning that a child brings into a novel noun
generalization experiment. We trained the networks on a
subset of the nouns studied by Samuelson and Smith
(1999). We specifically selected the names for objects and
substances, excluding names for people, animals, places and
abstract objects (e.g. wind). There were 149 training nouns.
For each of these noun categories we used the adult judgments from Samuelson and Smith (199) to construct category exemplars. Importantly, although adults judged most
solid things to be categorized by shape, there were exceptions and complications – e.g. muffins are judged to be alike
in both shape and material and bubbles are judged to be nonsolid but similar in shape. Our training instantiated the
structures attributed to these words by adults.
More specifically, the statistical regularities across the
noun vocabularies were built into the network’s training set
in the following way. First, for each word that the network
was to be taught, a pattern was generated to represent its
value along the relevant dimension -- the dimension on
which objects named by that noun were found to be similar.
Second, at each presentation of the word, the value along the
irrelevant dimension was varied randomly. For example, the
word “ball” was judged to refer to things that are similar in
shape; thus, a particular pattern of activation was randomly
chosen and then assigned to represent ball-shape. All balls
presented to the network were defined as having this shape,
although each ball presented to the network also consisted of
a unique and randomly generated pattern defining the material. So, each time the unit representing the word “ball” was
turned on during training, the pattern representing ball-shape
was presented along the shape dimension and a different,
randomly generated pattern was presented along the material
dimension.
Solid objects were assumed to have a bigger range of values along the shape dimension. This assumption is in line
with the fact that solid things can hold more varied and
complex shapes than non-solid things.

We tested the networks in an analog of the novel noun generalization task used with children. Our approach is based
on our conceptualization of the novel noun generalization
task. In that task, the child sees an exemplar and hears its
name. If, for example, the child attends exclusively to the
shape of the named exemplar, then a test object that matches
the exemplar in shape (although different from the exemplar
in material) should be perceived as highly similar to the
exemplar. Thus, we asked if the network’s internal representations – the patterns of activations on the hidden layer -- of
a named exemplar and a test object were similar.
The novel noun generalization task used with children is
typically a forced choice task in which the child must choose
between an object matching the named exemplar in shape
and one matching in material. Accordingly, on each simulated test trial, we measured the similarity of the internal
patterns of representation for two test objects –one matching
the exemplar in shape and one matching the exemplar in
material.
More specifically, on each test trial, we created a novel
exemplar object by randomly generating an activation pattern along the shape and material dimensions. Then we
combined the exemplar’s shape pattern with a novel randomly generated material pattern to create a novel shapematching test object. A similarity measure of the exemplar
and the shape match was computed using the Euclidean distance between the activation patterns in the Hidden Layer
after the exemplar and its shape match had been presented.
Similarly, we generated a novel material-matching test
object by combining the exemplar’s material pattern with a
new randomly generated shape pattern and then computed the
similarity between exemplar and material match. Finally, we
used these similarity measures between the emergent patterns of activation on the hidden layer to calculate the probability of choosing the shape and the material matches using
Luce’s Forced Choice Rule.
In this way, we trained 10 networks (with 10 different
randomly generated initial connection weights) with the object and substance terms young children know. During
training, we presented multiple instances of each trained
noun until the network stably produced the right noun when
presented an instance of each kind. We then tested each of
these networks in the novel noun generalization task using
20 novel exemplars. Half of these exemplars were defined by
patterns of activation representing solid things and half by
patterns representing nonsolid things. If the statistical regularities in early child vocabulary are sufficient to create learning biases then the networks should present a shape bias
when the exemplar is solid and a material bias when the
exemplar is non-solid.

Results
Figure 2 shows the networks’ performance in the novel
noun generalization task. As is apparent, the connectionist
networks prefer the shape match in the solid trials and the
material match in the non-solid trials. This supports the idea
that the statistical regularities in the lexicon are sufficient to

Network's Performance
Experiment 1
1.00

0.75

on 20 novel exemplars; half of them defined as solid and half
of them defined as non-solid. However, to make the ontology violating test, the shape match for solid exemplars was
defined as non-solid and the material match for non-solid
exemplars was defined as solid. So for the solid trials, we
computed forced choice probability between a non-solid
shape match and a solid material match, while in non-solid
trials we compared a non-solid shape match with a solid
shape match.

Results

prop.
shape 0.50
choices

0.25

-

solid trials

non-solid trials

Figure 3 shows the proportion of shape choices predicted
by the networks for solid exemplar trials and for non-solid
exemplar trials. As predicted from the regularities in the
training set, the networks chose the test item that matches
the exemplar in solidity. That is, when the exemplar is solid
the network prefers the solid test object, (even though it
does not match in shape) and when the exemplar is non-solid
the network prefers the non-solid test item (even though it
does not match in material). Thus, the pattern of generalization observed in Experiment 1 (and typical in experimental
tests of children) is now reversed: the networks exhibit a
shape bias in non-solid trials and a material bias in solid
trials. In Experiment 3 we look for this effect in children.

Network's Performance
Experiment 2

Figure 2. Network’s performance in Experiment 1. The networks show shape and material biases comparable to those
of children.
create word-learning biases in a statistical learner. If this is
true, then other regularities present in the language should
create their own “biases”. One ubiquitous regularity that
became obvious to us is that things that share a name share
their solidity value. In other words, names do not refer to
categories that span across ontological boundaries. This is
true for all words in children’s vocabulary except one – egg,
which adults judged to have both solid and non-solid forms.
If noun generalizations by the network are generalizations
over the structures of already learned noun categories, then
the network’s generalizations of new names for novel things
should adhere to this constraint. Given a solid exemplar,
sameness in shape should not count if the test object is nonsolid; given a non-solid exemplar, sameness in material
should not count if that material is now solid. In Experiment 2 give this tests to the networks.

1.00

0.75

prop.
shape 0.50
choices

0.25

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 is to test the network on the
ontology bias. The network architecture and training procedure were the same as in Experiment 1. Ten networks were
trained using the same testing procedure as in Experiment 1
except for the kinds of test objects used.
As in Experiment 1, on each test trial, we created a novel
exemplar object by randomly generating an activation pattern along the shape and material dimensions and then created shape and material matches combining the exemplar’s
shape and material patterns with novel randomly generated
material and shape patterns. Again, the networks were tested

-

solid exemplar
non-solid shape
match

non-solid exemplar
solid material
match

Figure 3. Network’s performance in Experiment 2. The
networks preferences are reversed when the shape match for
the solid exemplar is made non-solid and the material match
for the non-solid exemplars is made solid.

Exemplar

Material Match

Shape Match
Ontology Violating

Traditional

toothpaste with glitter

metalic

shaving cream

blue clay

purple hair gel

burlap

TEEMA

red sand paint

red sand paint

WAZZLE

blue cheese cloth

toothpaste with glitter pink felt with bumps
blue cheese cloth

shaving cream

purple foam

purple hair gel

green fur

Figure 4. Stimuli for Experiment 3A..

Experiment 3
The goal of Experiment 3 is to test the prediction made by
the network in Experiment 1. Given a solid object, will
children refuse to generalize its name to an object of the
same shape if the test object is not solid? Given a non-solid
object, will children refuse to generalize its name to a material match if the test object is solid? Experiment 3A tests
the first question using solid exemplars and Experiment 3B
tests the second question using non-solid exemplars. Constructing stimuli for Experiment 3A (shape matches that
differ in solidity) was easy; we can create the same shape out
of hardened clay and shaving cream. Constructing stimuli for
the second question (material matches that differ in solidity)
required more creativity. What we did was use translucent gel
and translucent hardened plastic for one set and off-white
hand lotion and off-white hardened paint for the other. In
both cases the material looked to be the same and was judged
by adults to be the non-solid and hardened versions of the
same material.

Method
Subjects Twenty-four children between the ages of 30 and
36 months participated in this study. Half of them were ran-

domly assigned to Experiment 3A and half of them were
assigned to Experiment 3B.
Stimuli The stimuli for Experiment 3A are shown in Figure 4. There were two exemplar objects. The exemplar for
one set, the Teema, was a “U” shape covered with red sandpaint. The exemplar for the other set, the Wazzle, was an
irregular “M” shape covered with blue cheese-cloth. For each
exemplar there were three objects matching in material and
two sets of items matching in shape. The Traditional set
consisted of three solid objects that matched the exemplar in
shape and differed in material (e.g. metallic clay, styrofoam
covered with fur). The Ontology Violating set consisted of
shape matches made out of non-solid materials (e.g. shaving
cream, hair gel).
The stimuli for Experiment 3B are shown in Figure 5.
There were two exemplar objects. The exemplar for one set,
the Teema, was a “V” shape made out of translucent gel.
The exemplar for the other set, the Wazzle, was an irregular
“M” shape made out of hand lotion. For each exemplar there
was a set of shape matches made out of three different nonsolid substances. For the Teema, the shape matches were
made out of wax, glitter and noxzema mixed with sand; for
the Wazzle, the shape matches were made out of green sand,
toothpaste with glitter and shaving cream. For each exemplar there were also two sets of “material” matches: a Traditional set and an Ontology Violating set. For the Teema the

Material Match
Shape Match

Ontology Violating

Traditional

translucent plastic

translucent gel

TEEMA

Exemplar

noxzema with sand
glitter

translucent gel

wax crystals

WAZZLE

hardened paint

hand lotion

toothpaste with glitter

hand lotion

fine sand
shaving cream

Figure 5. Stimuli for Experiment 3B.

Traditional set consisted of shapes made out of translucent
hair gel and the Ontology Violating set consisted of shapes
made out of translucent hard plastic. For the Wazzle the Traditional set consisted of shapes made out of off-white hand
lotion and the Ontology Violating set consisted of shapes
made out of off-white hardened fabric paint.
Procedure The procedure used was a forced choice task.
The child were shown an exemplar (i.e., the Teema) and told
its name (“this is the Teema”). The child was then presented
with pairs of objects, a shape match and a material match,
and asked “Can you show me the Teema?”. Each child was
presented with the Traditional set of one exemplar and the
Ontology Violating set of the other. Half of the children
were assigned at random to judge the Traditional version of
one exemplar and the Ontology Violating version of the
other. The two exemplars were presented in separate blocks.
Each shape-match/material-match pair was presented twice in
random order for a total of 12 trials. The order of the sets
was counterbalanced across subjects; the position of the
choices was counterbalanced across trials.

Results
Figure 6 shows the proportion of shape choices for the solid
exemplar (Experiment 3A) and for the non-solid exemplar
(Experiment 3B) Ontological Violating and Traditional sets
respectively. In the Traditional sets, children’s performance
replicates previous findings: they present a clear shape bias
for the trials with solid exemplars (Experiment 3A) and

Children's Performance i
Experiment 3
1

0.75
prop.
shape 0.5
choices
0.25

0
Experiment A
solid exemplar

traditional

ExperimentB
non-solid exemplar

ontology violating

Figure 6. Results of Experiment 3.
show increased attention to the material of non-solid exemplars (Experiment 3B). In the Ontology Violating sets, as

the network simulations predicted, children’s shape bias decreased to chance levels in solid trials and increased to above
chance in the non-solid trials.
Although these results are consistent with a bias in children to extend category names only within ontological
boundaries, there is an alternative explanation. Children’s
preference for the same-solidity item could be a result of the
way the ontological violating choices alter the exemplar-test
items’ similarity. For example, in the case of the solid exemplar, the material match matches in both material and
solidity, while the shape match now only matches in shape
(and imperfectly at that, given the change of solidity). While
we can’t be sure of which explanation is the case in children,
we know for a fact that it is more than just similarity for the
networks.

Conclusions
Learning a first language is a hard problem. However, the
task appears less daunting when we consider that the kinds
of words children know early present an organized structure.
A smart learner could learn to exploit this structure to its
advantage. In this paper we have shown that a simple statistical learner, with no other mechanisms than associative
learning and generalization by similarity, will learn shape
and material biases to match the systematic regularities present in its training set. We have also documented a new
bias, one which could be taken as evidence of an underlying
ontology, but that also makes sense in terms of the statistical regularities present in the language. This suggests that
word-learning biases and constraints could be a product of
learning. While the evidence presented here is consistent
with this account, it does not provide conclusive proof; the
regularities found in children’s vocabularies could be a product of pre-existing biases. However, the fact that we have
demonstrated the computational plausibility of the learning
account and simple parsimony suggest that this is not the
case.

References
Landau, B., Smith, L.B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive Development, 3, 299—321.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in children., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Movellan, J. R. (1990). Contrastive Hebbian Learning in
the Continuous Hopfield Model. Proceedings of the 1990
Connectionist Models Summer School (pp. 10—17). San
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun vocabularies: do ontology, category structure and syntax correspond? Cognition, 73, 1--33.
Soja, N.N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E.S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning: object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38, 179—211.

