UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Collaborative Learning Lead to the Construction of Common Knowledge?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5854s5gf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Jeong, Heisawn
Chi, Michelene T.H.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Collaborative Learning Lead to the Construction of Common Knowledge?
Heisawn Jeong (heis@pitt.edu )
Michelene T. H. Chi (chi@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center; University of Pittsburgh
3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Abstract
This study investigated whether collaborative learning
leads to the construction of shared knowledge among
participants. In this study, college student pairs collaborated to learn a biology text on the human circulatory
system. The results showed that pairs shared not only
correct knowledge that was presented in the text, but
also incorrect knowledge and/or knowledge that had to
be inferred from the text. In addition, pairs who interacted more shared significantly more inferred knowledge
than those who interacted less did. Taken together,
these findings indicate that interaction enables dyads to
construct new knowledge and their representations tend
to converge after collaboration.

Introduction
Traditional cognitive psychology has mainly focused on
how information is processed within individuals’ minds, that
is, how individuals represent stimuli, learn new things, solve
problems, make a discovery, etc. As a consequence, even
when people learn collaboratively, learning has been mainly
defined in terms of what individuals learn and not much attention has been paid to the collaborative aspect of knowledge construction that is shared by both partners. This
study to be described below was an attempt to examine
whether a shared activity such as collaborative learning
would lead to the construction of shared knowledge.
Learning often occurs in the context of a group or community, and many researchers propose that learning, a cognitive activity, is a joint social activity (Lave & Wegner, 1991;
Levine, Resnick, & Higgins, 1991; Resnick, Levine, &
Teasley, 1991; Rogoff, 1998; Tudge & Rogoff, 1989; Vygotsky, 1978). To say that a cognitive activity is a social activity
sounds contradictory at first, but the notion of “socially
shared cognition” has been instantiated in two ways: It has
been used to refer to shared cognitive activities such as
group problem solving (e.g., Larson & Christensen, 1993) or
shared representations such as a team mental model (e.g.,
Klimoski & Mohammed, 1994) or a community memory (e.g.,
Orr, 1992). Even if we operationalize socially shared cognition to be shared representations that all members of a group
have in common, the question remains as to whether this
shared representation can come about from a joint social
activity such as collaborative learning.
In order to hypothesize whether a shared representation is
constructed, we need to reconsider what individual learning

is. Learning requires people to process incoming material
(such as an expository text) and to integrate it with their prior
representations. Thus, we assume that when individuals can
learn by themselves, and they do so by actively constructing new knowledge or skills and/or revising their incorrect
understanding (Chi, in press). Although such active construction of knowledge is critical regardless of whether people learn alone or together (Jeong, under review), learning in
a collaborative context gives rise to an additional question:
Is each member of the dyad constructing and revising her
own individual representation, or are they jointly constructing one representation, or is it a hybrid of the two?
If learning is the construction and revision of representation, then there are at least two hypotheses about what
might be happening during collaborative learning. In the first
case, collaborating partners may each be constructing and
revising her own representation, taking the partner’s comments and explanations simply as additional input or feedback. In this case, they would each be constructing their
own representation, albeit simultaneously. So, partner A and
B each would construct their own unique representations, A
and B. Representations A and B may be totally distinct or
they may overlap, but since partners are constructing and
revising their own representations, their representations
would not resemble one another. The overlap in their representations, if existed at all prior to collaboration, would not
likely to change with collaboration either.
On the other hand, another possibility is that collaborating
partners may be constructing and revising jointly a shared
representation C. Regardless of whether the shared representation C is constructed in addition to or instead of their
own representations A and B, the resulting representations
would reflect the joint learning activity they engaged in during collaboration in that partner A’s representation shares
portions that are similar to partner B’s representation. With
collaboration, A and B share more and more parts in common, so that the common representation C gets larger with
greater collaboration, whereas the representations unique to
A or B would get smaller with collaboration (see Figure 1).1
1

Although not examined in this study, a third possibility
is that collaboration might encourage the two partners to
construct a single repre sentation that is either A or B (that
is, they converged upon one of the partner’s representation), or neither A nor B, but X.

A

C

B

Before collaboration

A

C

B

After collaboration

Figure 1: Changes in the shared representation due to collaboration.
In this paper, we define “shared knowledge” as the knowledge that is common to both partners’ representations. The
question that we need to address is whether this common
knowledge is indeed constructed from collaboration. For
example, if people knew that alcohol in moderation reduces
the incidence of heart attack, then this is a piece of common
knowledge. Such a piece of common knowledge is likely to
arise from similar experiences with the environment, but not
necessarily from collaborative construction in face-to-face
interaction. Members of a group or a culture would possess
a set of common knowledge as a result of exposure to the
same news media (e.g., there was a fire in New York last
month), textbooks (e.g., e=mc 2) or simply being in the same
culture (e.g., it is okay to eat in a classroom).
Researchers from anthropology and linguistics have observed that various kinds of groups that have histories of
interaction tend to share a set of common knowledge. For
example, Orr (1990) reported that people who practice the
same job (e.g., photocopier repair technicians) hold a community memory about machines and customers. Similarly,
teams are reported to have a shared mental model about their
task requirements, procedures, and their responsibilities,
which in turn helps them to work more efficiently especially
in emergencies (Cannon-Bowers, Salas, & Converse, 1993;
Klimoski & Mohammed, 1994; see also Hazlehurst, 1994 and
Sherif, 1936). Thus, it seems that there exists common knowledge, whether it is memory, team mental model, or a way to
interpret an image, common to interacting group members in
the real world.
However, these observations of common knowledge may
arise because the group all experienced the same input,
rather than because they co-constructed it. It is difficult to
tease these two interpretations apart, because people often
share input as well as co-construct during collaboration.
Thus, to clearly differentiate the two, we need to examine
and demonstrate that some new or incorrect knowledge,
knowledge that cannot be experienced directly from the
environmental input (such as incorrect knowledge or inferred knowledge) has been constructed and shared after
collaboration and that construction of such knowledge is
clearly linked to the extent of interaction.
Very few studies have even attempted to capture the existence of shared knowledge that resulted from collaboration
rather than direct experience. Roschelle’s (1992) study did
attempt to show a convergence of representation while one
high school student pair was learning physics concepts of
velocity and acceleration. The students’ representation became more similar to each other’s after collaboration. How-

ever, it was difficult to assess whether the resulting converged representation reflects knowledge that both experienced or was co-constructed, especially based on a single
case.
In general, the evidence for socially shared cognition has
relied on qualitative evidence based on a select few cases.
One of the goals of this study was thus to provide quantitative evidence using clear operationalization of shared knowledge. In this study, college student pairs were asked to collaborate to learn a biology text about the human circulatory
system. We were interested in exploring and identifying the
role of several variables in collaborative learning, their collaboration was unstructured other than the instruction to
collaborate and to talk. Students were individually pre-tested
and only those who had inaccurate mental models about the
circulatory system (see method section for what constitutes
inaccurate models) were allowed to participate. After the
pre-tests, students were paired with another student who
was equally naive about the topic and collaborated to learn
the text and then came back for an individual post-test. Students were given two tests before and after collaborative
learning: Terms Task and Blood Path Drawing Task. The
Terms Task was to assess what students knew about the
topic, specifically about various terms important in understanding the circulatory system. The Blood Path Drawing
Task was to assess what students knew about the blood
flow in the human body.2

Method
Participants
Twenty (nine male and eleven female) pairs of undergraduate
students at the University of Pittsburgh participated in the
study for course credit. Students were asked to participate if
they had not taken any college-level biology classes. Students were asked to stay in the study only if they had inaccurate models (see later coding section) at the pre-test, did
not have relevant personal experiences (e.g., open heart surgery), and could be paired with another student of the same
gender who could come in around the same time for collaborative learning session. The pairs did not interact with their
partner prior to the study except in one pair.

Materials
Text The text used in Chi et al. (1994) was used with a slight
revision (the text was originally taken from the chapter on
the human circulatory system in a high school biology text
by Towle, 1989). The resulting text contained 73 sentences.
They were presented in a binder with each sentence printed
on a separate page.

2

A set of Knowledge Questions was also given to students, but are not included in this paper. It was administered
at the post-test (after Terms and Blood Path Drawing Tasks)
and did not allow comparison between pre -test and test as to
how much new common knowledge was constructed after
collaboration.

Terms Task Students were given 19 terms about the human
circulatory system (e.g., atrium), and asked to talk about everything they knew about each term, even if it seemed unimportant to them.
Blood Path Drawing Task Students were provided with an
outline of a human body (with a heart in it) and asked to
draw the blood path of the circulatory system. They were
asked to talk about everything that came to their mind as
they drew.

Procedures
Pre-test Participants were tested individually on the Terms
Task and the Blood Path Drawing Task. This session was
audio-taped. The pre-test session took about 15 to 30 minutes. At the end of the session, they were asked not to do
outside reading on this topic while the study was in progress.
Collaborative Learning About a week after the pre-test, students were paired with a partner to learn the text. Since most
of them had never met each other, they were given some time
to get to know each other before the session started: after
the experimenter introduced them and initiated conversation
(e.g., who were their psychology instructors), she left the
room supposedly to check the equipment. The experimenter
watched their interaction from a monitor in another room
until they seemed to be comfortable with each other. Most
students quickly established a rapport with each other (in
about ten minutes), discovering a common friend or
exchanging information about classes.
Students were asked to help and encourage each other to
learn and understand the materials during the collaborative
learning session. They were asked to read the text out loud
at least once. Participants were informed that they would be
tested after the learning was over (a few sample test questions were provided). The pairs shared the text binder, and
were provided with paper and pens in case they wanted to
take notes or draw. This session was audio- and videotaped.
The experimenter was not present in the room during this
session, but could hear and watch them from the control
room. Participants knew that the experimenter could hear
them, but not necessarily that she could watch them. They
were allowed to take as much time as they needed to study
the text. The actual learning session took about an hour on
average, ranging from 40 minutes to one hour and 45 minutes
Post-test Participants were tested individually on the Terms
task and Blood Path Drawing Task about a week after the
collaborative learning session. This session was audiotaped. Post-test sessions ranged from 45 minutes to 2 hours.

Coding
All the sessions were transcribed. From the protocol, three
measures were collected. First, individual knowledge pieces
(KPs) students knew were coded using a template from the
students' answers in the pre-test and post-test. Second, students’ mental models about the human circulatory system

were analyzed. Third, turns the two students took during the
collaborative learning session were coded in terms of
whether the turn was relevant to their partner’s previous
contributions. A more detailed coding scheme is reported
below along with the reliability measures. A second coder
coded 20% of the data independently from the first coder.
The coding of the first coder was used throughout.
Template Scoring A template was created to assess how
much students knew about the topic presented in the learning text. The template was created based on the information
presented in the text. The 73 sentences in the learning text
were segmented and collapsed into individual knowledge
pieces (KPs) that roughly corresponded to a proposition
(e.g., “aorta is an artery”). The template contained a total of
173 KPs. There were two types of KPs: KPs that were explicitly stated in the text (Stated KPs) and KPs that could be
inferred from the text (Inferred KPs). An example of a Stated
KP is “atrium is the upper part of the heart” which is directly
stated in sentence 20 “Each upper chamber is called an
atrium.” An example of an Inferred KP is “the heart has four
chambers.” This KP is not explicitly stated in the text but
can be inferred by integrating sentence 17 “The septum divides the heart lengthwise into two sides” and sentence 19
“Each side of the heart is divided into an upper and a lower
chamber.” The template contained 115 Stated KPs and 58
Inferred KPs. The KPs were coded from the students’ protocol during the Terms and the Blood Path Drawing Task. The
agreement between the two coders was 87%.
Mental Model Analysis Students’ initial and final mental
models about the human circulatory system were coded to
assess changes in how individual knowledge is integrated to
form a coherent model of the circulatory system as a whole.
Based on students’ protocols during the Terms and the
Blood Path Drawing task, each student’s initial and final
mental mo dels were coded into one of the following mo dels:
(1) No Loop (NL) model, (2) Ebb and Flow (EF) model, (3)
Single Loop (SL) model, (4) Multiple Loop (ML) model, (5)
Single Loop with Lungs (SLL) model, (6) Double
Loop-1(DL1) model, and (7) Double Loop-2(DL2) model. The
seven models differ from each other in terms of the presence
and the kind of incorrect conceptions (e.g., blood returns to
the heart by way of the same blood vessels) and/or the correct conceptions (e.g., heart pumps blood to the lungs versus left ventricle pumps blood to the lungs). Both the Double Loop-1 and Double Loop-2 models represent the accurate flow of blood through the circulatory system with Double Loop-2 being the most complete model (see Chi et al.,
1994 for more details on this analysis). The inter-rater agreement on mental model coding was 94%.
Turn-taking Each turn that a student took during collaboration was coded whether or not it was relevant to their partner’s previous turn. A turn can be relevant in several different ways. A turn was coded as relevant, for example, if students answered questions that their partner asked, repeated
and/or continued the statement and topic that their partner
initiated, or acknowledged what their partner said. A turn

was defined in this study as a change of speaker in their
learning dialogue. The transcript occasionally contained
non-verbal (e.g., laughs, gestures) turns, but it was coded as
a turn if it had information potentially relevant to the partner.
Thus, turns that contain only “ok” or “umm” were coded as
a separate turn when it could be answers or acknowledgements. Similarly, turns that contained only gestures were
coded as a separate turns if it was communicative (e.g., nodding indicating “yes”). Based on this identification of turns,
a second pass over the transcript was done to determine
whether each turn was “relevant” to their partner’s previous
turns. A turn was coded as relevant as long as the turn contained information relevant to their partner’s previous contribution in some way (see Jeong, under review, for more
details). The reliability for this coding was 85%.

Results
The process and outcome of knowledge construction were
considered to be interdependent between the two members
of the pair in this study. Thus, the unit of analysis in this
study was pairs rather than individuals. Although students’
pre-test scores were mostly independent from each other’s
(unless we start considering cultures), their post-test scores,
although tests were individually administered, were partly
dependent on their partner’s score due to their collaboration.
Thus, we calculated common KPs as well as unique total
KPs to deal with this dependency. In this section, we first
describe how much learning occurred and how much common knowledge was constructed after collaborative learning.
We then examine in more detail whether the increase in
common knowledge was indeed co-constructed from interaction.

Learning and Common Knowledge
Learning was assessed by addressing (1) the number of
Knowledge Pieces (KPs) that were learned after collaborative
learning and (2) improvement in the pairs’ mental model.
Template Scoring: Knowledge Pieces (KPs) Since template
scoring gives scores for each partner, the amount of knowledge that the pairs knew as a whole was calculated by: (a)
an average score of the two students in the pair and (b) a
unique total score. These scores can be best understood by
looking at Figure 1. Circle A represents what Partner A
knows, Circle B represents what Partner B knows. Common
knowledge is defined as the knowledge that both partners
possess, represented by the area C, the overlap of the two
circles. For example, if both partners know the KP that the
heart has four chambers, then they are said to share that
piece of common knowledge. On the other hand, unique
knowledge is defined as the knowledge that only one member of the pair possesses. Learning for each individual is
represented by an increase in the size of each circle (A, B)
from the pre-test to the post-test. On the other hand, learning for the pair as a whole can be best represented by exa mining a unique total score that that represents the number of
distinctive KPs that the pair knew as a whole (see Table 1).

The average score of pairs increased significantly from
19.70 KPs at the pre-test to 47.70 KPs at the post-test,
t(19)=10.08, p<.001, and the unique total score also increased
significantly from 32.15 KPs at the pre-test to 72.85
Table 1: The relationship between various scores.
Scores
Common KPs
Unique KPs
Average KPs
Unique total KPs

Areas in Figure 1
C
(A-C) or (A-B)
(A+B)/2
(A+B-C)

KP at the post-test, t(19)=11.92, p<.001), indicating that students’ understanding of the human circulatory system increased significantly after collaborative learning. The
amount of common knowledge also increased significantly
from 7.25 KPs at the pre-test to 22.55 KPs in at post-test,
t(19)=6.13, p<.001.
Mental Models Consistent with the overall gain in the KPs,
there was an overall improvement in students’ individual
mental models about the circulatory system after learning.
Recall that none of the students had the correct Double
Loop models at the pre-test, since students were selected
that way for the study. The majority of them started with the
Single Loop model (55%), followed by the Single Loop with
Lungs model (25%). After learning, the majority of the students possessed the most accurate and complete Double
Loop-2 model (52.25%), followed by the next most accurate
Double Loop-1 model (37.5%). Thus, learning the text with a
partner improved the accuracy of the students’ individual
mental model as well as increasing the number of individual
knowledge pieces that they knew, as in Chi et al. (1994).
To determine whether partners’ mental models converged
onto the same model, each student’s mental model was compared to their partner’s. At pre-test, 10 pairs (50%) had different initial incorrect models. As stated earlier, none of the
models was the correct Double Loop models. Six of these 10
pairs converged onto the same final mental mo dels. However, five of the six pairs’ final models were the correct Double Loop-2 model, so we cannot rule out the interpretation
that each partner’s model converged on the correct model,
independent of interaction.

Collaboration and Common Knowledge
Students were not coming up with arbitrary knowledge (e.g.,
how to name an ambiguous geometric figure) in this study.
They were learning a science text that strongly constrains
their interpretation and knowledge construction. Since they
all learned the same text, the increase in common knowledge
and the convergence toward the correct final model, could
be the result of individuals learning the same materials from
the text rather than their collaboration. In this section, we
further examined whether there was any evidence that collaborative dyads co-constructed knowledge from interaction,
rather than merely self-constructing their own knowledge, in
the presence of an enabling partner.

Common and Unique Knowledge Although pairs had more
common knowledge after collaborative learning, they also
knew more after learning. Thus, just looking at the number of
common KPs could give a false picture without taking into
account the increase in total amount of knowledge due to
learning. To address this problem, the percentage of common knowledge (over the unique total KPs) was calculated.
The percentage of common knowledge increased after collaboration (from 23% to 31%), whereas the percentage of
unique KPs decreased after collaboration (from 77% to 69%),
F(1, 19)=11.05, p<.005. This significant interaction indicates
that the increase in common knowledge was not a mere reflection of knowing more. In sum, after collaborative learning, pairs gained more KPs overall, but they learned proportionately more common knowledge than unique knowledge.
Nominal Pair Analysis If some parts of common knowledge
is co-constructed (rather than learned individually by each
partner), then collaborative pairs ought to learn more common knowledge than nominal pairs who did not collaborate.
A hypothetical nominal pair was constructed by randomly
pairing each member of the pair with a member of another
pair. The results showed that there was an increase in common KPs in nominal pairs as in real pairs, but the increase
was greater in real pairs (8% versus 4%). Although
ANCOVA (controlling for their pre-test scores), did not reveal significant difference between the two conditions,
F(1,36)=2.36, p<.14, the increase in the proportion of common knowledge from pre-test to post-test was significant in
real pairs, t(19)=2.8, p<.01, but not in nominal pairs,
t(19)=1.20, p>.10. Thus, although part of the common knowledge constructed during collaboration was due to learning
from the same text (as can be seen in the small increase of
shared knowledge in nominal pairs), it seems that part of the
increase in common knowledge can be undoubtedly attributed to collaboration.
Incorrect Knowledge Pieces We also examined incorrect
knowledge at the knowledge piece level from the pre-test
and post-test answers. In total, pairs had 69.25 incorrect KPs
at the pre-test and 91 KPs at the post-test. Out of theses, the
real pairs did not share any incorrect KPs at the pre-test, but
shared a total of 4 at the post-test after collaboration. On the
other hand, nominal pairs had a total of 3 common incorrect
KPs at the pre-test, but 0 KP at the post-test. Although the
numbers are small, the fact that pairs shared 4 incorrect KPs
after collaboration suggest that these incorrect KPs must
have been co-constructed with their partners during collaboration, rather than encoded and inferred from the text alone
independently from their partner.
Common Incorrect Mental Model As mentioned earlier, six of
the ten pairs of students who had different initial mental
models converged onto the same final mental model. Of
these six pairs, five pairs converged on the correct Double
Loop-2 model, which could be attributed to having read a
text that described such a correct model. One pair, however,
converged on an incorrect model. Both of their models had

the same “error”: They both thought that blood from the
lungs goes back to the heart through the ventricle, rather
than through the atrium as in the correct model (see Figure
2). Thus, an incorrect model that both partners share
strongly indicates that they somehow co-constructed it.
Correct Double Loop 2 Model

Body

Lungs
Pair 2's Final Model

Body

Lungs

Figure 2: Pair 2’s final mental model in comparison to Double
Loop-2 model.
Interaction and Common Knowledge If dyads co-constructed
common knowledge from interaction, rather than merely selfconstructed their own knowledge, it would suggest that the
more interaction they engaged in, the more common knowledge they would construct, especially the knowledge that
cannot be obtained directly from the text, that is, knowledge
that need to be inferred. To test this hypothesis, the pairs
were grouped into high-interaction pairs (N=10) and
low-interaction pairs (N=10) based on the amount (percentage) of relevant turns they took during collaborative learning.
As can be seen in Figure 3, high-interaction pairs shared
more inferred knowledge than low-interaction pairs even
after the pre-test difference was controlled, F(1, 17)=6.10,
p<.05. On the other hand, high-interaction pairs did not necessarily shared more stated knowledge than low-interaction
pairs, F(1, 17)=.107, p>.10. Thus, the more interaction pairs
engaged in, the more likely they were to construct knowledge that was inferred (i.e., knowledge that was not given in
the text). Since the knowledge was never presented in the
text, it was more likely that dyads constructed them together
through collaborative interaction.

Acknowledgments
5.0

This study was partially supported by the Spencer Foundation (Grant 199400132) to the second author.

4.0

KPs

References
3.0
High-interaction pairs
Low-interaction pairs

2.0
1.0
0.0
Pre-test

Post-test

Figure 3: The increase in shared Stated KPs and shared Inferred KPs after collaborative learning in high-learning and
low-learning pairs.

Conclusions
In this study, we examined whether collaborative learning,
a shared learning activity, leads to the construction of
shared knowledge. Among the several potential representational outcomes of collaborative learning, one distinct possibility was that collaborating members of dyads (or groups)
would construct common knowledge. To examine whether
the common knowledge would really come from interaction
rather than sharing the same environmental input, we exa mined whether students common knowledge when the knowledge cannot be obtained directly from the input. The results
of this study showed that collaborating pairs shared more
knowledge (correct and incorrect, stated and inferred) after
collaboration. Since the incorrect knowledge and the correct
but inferred knowledge was never presented in the text, it is
more likely that they constructed it during collaboration.
Above all, those who interacted more shared significantly
more inferred knowledge than those who interacted less did.
Even though each of these analyses produced a small effect
and/or small amount of data, taken together, these findings
indicate that participation in joint activity allows participants
to construct a common knowledge.
There are several ways that the pairs went about constructing common knowledge in this study. In one scenario,
the two pairs might have contributed to the construction of
knowledge more of less equally, each generating part of inferences to complete the knowledge construction. In another scenario, one student might have made an inference,
regardless of whether it is correct or incorrect, from the text
by herself and tells her partner about it. At this point, the
other partner had two choices: he or she could either accept
it or reject it (Clark & Schaefer, 1989). It is only when the
partner accepted the other’s contribution that both of them
get to possess the common knowledge. The partner who
just heard the inference was more passive than the other
person, but nonetheless participated in the construction
process.

Brown, A. L., & Palinscar, A. S. (1989). Guided, cooperative
learning and individual knowledge acquisition. In L. B.
Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays
in honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., Salas, E., & Converse, S. (1993).
Shared mental models in expert team decision making. In J.
J. Castellan (Eds.), Current issues in individual and group
decision making. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T. H. (In press).
The dual processes of
self-explaining: Generating inferences and repairing mental
models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T. H. de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Jeong, H. (Under review). Being constructive and interactive
during collaborative learning.
Klimoski, R., & Mohammed, S. (1994). Team mental model:
construct or metaphor. Journal of Management, 20(2),
403-437.
Larson, J. R. J., & Christensen, C. (1993). Groups as problem-solving units: Toward a new meaning of social cognition. British Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 3-30.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate
peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levine, J. M., Resnick, L. B., & Higgins, E. T. (1991). Social
foundations of cognition. Annual Review of Psychology,
44, 585-612.
Orr, J. E. (1990). Sharing knowledge, celebrating identity:
War stories and community memory among service technicians. In D. S. Middelton & D. Edwards (Eds.), Collective remembering: Memory in society . London: Sage.
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D. (1991). Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Rogoff, B. (1998). Cognition as a collaborative process. In
W. Damon (Ed.). Handbook of Child Psychology. New
York: Wiley.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent
conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
2(3), 235-276.
Sherif, M. (1936). The psychology of social norms. New York:
Harper & Row Publishers.
Tudge, J., & Rogoff, B. (1989). Peer influences on cognitive
development: Piagetian and Vygotskian perspectives. In
M. Bornstein & J. Bruner (Eds.), Interaction in human development. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

