UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dueling Theories: Thought Experiments in Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72w340rr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Scott, Sam

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dueling Theories: Thought Experiments in Cognitive Science
Sam Scott (sscott@ccs.carleton.ca)
Department of Cognitive Science
Carleton University
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
Abstract
Brook (1999) identified thought experiments as one of the key
elements of philosophy's contribution to the cognitive
sciences. In this paper, I tackle the question of how and why
thought experiments work, and what exactly it is they do for
us when they do work. I propose that thought experiments
almost always involve two different theories of the world
being compared to show that they do, or more often do not, fit
together. Sometimes both theories are clearly articulated in
the narrative of the thought experiment, but more often one of
the two goes unarticulated - the thought experimenter instead
relies on our shared folk theories of the world. The strength of
some of the more famous and persuasive thought experiments
lies in their ability to show that a given theory runs afoul of
these deeply held folk intuitions. I will compare the "Dueling
Theories" account of thought experiments to both Brook's
"empirical" account and Brown's (1991) platonic account.

Introduction
In Hilary Putnam's famous thought experiment, we are
asked to imagine a possible world called "Twin Earth"
identical in all respects to our own, but for the chemical
composition of what is called "water" on both worlds. On
our world, water is H2O, while on twin earth it is something
else, say XYZ. Now we are asked to consider what happens
when Adam on our world and his counterpart, "Twadam" on
Twin Earth use the word "water". Do they mean the same
thing? Apparently not. Even though their mental states are
the same, the external referent is different. Hence, according
to Putnam, "meanings just ain't in the head". (Putnam, 1975)
In Jackson's (1991) story of Mary the Colorblind
Scientist, we are asked to imagine that Mary knows
everything there is to know about color. That is to say, she
knows everything that can be measured, described, and
communicated about what color is and the process by which
we perceive it. But she has never actually seen color before.
Then one day she sees a color, say red, for the first time and
learns something about color that she did not know before,
namely what red looks like. The moral we are asked to draw
is usually something about the uniqueness and
indescribability of phenomenal experience.
In introducing these two famous thought experiments,
what I am first interested in is how well they "work".
Reactions tend to vary, but if you're like me, you will be
immediately convinced by the story of Mary, but quite
skeptical (at least at first) about the Twin Earth story.
Perhaps your reactions differ, but the interesting question is

why we have the reactions we do. What makes a thought
experiment "work" or "not work"? The thesis that I want to
defend is that thought experimentation is a meta-activity - a
duel between conflicting theories in which one appears to be
a clear winner, thus challenging anyone who holds both
theories. Thought experiments can never tell us something
new about the world, because the world doesn't participate
in the experiments. The objects of evaluation are theories of
the world. On the other hand, thought experiments are a
perfect device not only for revealing problems with various
theories of the world, but in some cases, for making clear to
us what our theories of the world actually are.
It may not be obvious that the two thought experiments
described above fit this "Dueling Theories" story, but if we
take the word "theory" to encompass both scientific and folk
theory, then the story not only works but can be quite
revealing. Consider Mary first. In one corner, we have some
theory in which everything that is part of the physical world
can be fully described in scientific terms. In the other
corner, we have a folk intuition, based on our own
experience of perception, that the phenomenal experience of
color is indescribable and would therefore be unknowable to
someone not directly acquainted with it. What makes this
thought experiment so stunning to so many people is that
they may not have realized that they held the folk theory, or
that the folk theory was so difficult to give up, until it was
put into direct conflict with the other theory. In the Twin
Earth experiment, any theory that imparts semantic
properties solely to brain states is supposed to lose to a
reference theory of semantics. What makes someone
embrace or reject Putnam's conclusion will be their preexisting acceptance or skepticism about whether such
reference theories of semantics can be made to work.
In what follows, I shall attempt to develop this Dueling
Theories view in the context of two alternative views. The
first, from Brown's The Laboratory of the Mind (Brown
1991), states that thought experiments can reveal a priori
truths about the world through their investigation of Platonic
universals. I hope to show that this idea should be rejected,
mostly because it actually has very little to offer in aid of
our understanding of the nature of thought experiments. The
second view, from Andrew Brook's "Does philosophy offer
cognitive science distinctive methods?" published last year
in this forum (Brook, 1999), states that thought experiments
get part of their value from their empirical content. This
empirical content may make thought experiments capable of
testing hypotheses against the real world. I believe that with

careful exegesis, Brook's view is actually quite close to my
own. The main difference is that my conception allows in
principle that there may or may not be empirical content to
thought experiments, and in fact, a thought experiment need
not actually have directly empirical content in order to make
a useful contribution to science or philosophy.

Platonic Thought Experiments
Brown's two paradigm cases of a priori reasoning about the
world through thought experiments are Galileo's Coupled
Falling Bodies and the photon-decay thought experiment by
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, which has become known as
the "EPR Paradox". For the benefit of the uninitiated, both
these experiments will be explained shortly.1 But first, a
short discussion of Brown's brand of Platonism is in order.
According to Brown:
A platonic thought experiment is a single thought
experiment which destroys an old or existing theory
and simultaneously generates a new one; it is a priori
in that it is not based on new empirical evidence nor
is it merely logically derived from old data; and it is
an advance in that the resulting theory is better than
the predecessor theory. (p.77, Brown's italics)
Brown thinks that this kind of a priori thought
experimentation is possible due to the existence of natural
laws as abstract platonic universals, similar to the abstract
objects that he supposes to exist in mathematics and logic.
Postulating abstract objects in a Platonic heaven is
certainly a controversial move, and one that I am not
sympathetic to. But rather than attempting to destroy the
monolith of Platonism entirely, I will concentrate on trying
to demonstrate that the Dueling Theories story does a better
job of accounting for Brown's two favorite thought
experiments than does his own Platonic account. But first I
will digress briefly to point out two aspects of Brown's
Platonism that are clearly problematic from a cognitive
perspective.

Cognitive Science and Abstract Objects
A central feature of Brown's defense of Platonism is its
heavy reliance on the notion of "obviousness". According to
Brown, without Platonism it is "an utter mystery why '3 > 2'
seems intuitively obvious" (p. 56). Later, he continues, "if
there were no abstract objects, then we wouldn't have
intuitions concerning them; '2 + 2 = 4' would not seem
intuitively obvious" (p. 64). Here we can take a lesson from
research on mathematical cognition. What are we to make
of the non-obviousness of mathematical facts like:
8329273847592 < 78374223847532, and
89652 + 15265 = 104917 ?
1

Unless otherwise referenced, more extensive descriptions of the
thought experiments described here can be found in (Brown,
1991).

These mathematical facts are of the same order of
complexity as '3 > 2' and '2 + 2 = 4'. That is, they use the
same number of operators and the same number of
arguments. Only the magnitudes differ. But the facts
expressed are certainly not intuitively obvious to most
people. The reason for the difference is easily accounted for
in symbol-processing terms. We have memorized the order
of the 10 digits, and this makes ordering judgements easy
for single digit numbers, and more complicated for larger
ones. Similarly, we have memorized all possible single-digit
sums. Thus the obviousness of facts about small numbers
and the non-obviousness of facts about large numbers can
be accounted for in cognitive terms, whereas this difference
is difficult to account for in Platonic terms. Perhaps some
abstract objects are bigger than others? Or maybe some are
further away than others? But what do "bigger" and "further
away" mean in the abstract realm?
Brown also makes use of an analogy between sense
perception of objects in the real world and our intuitions
about objects in the abstract world. He defends this analogy
by asserting "the perception of abstract laws of nature is
certainly no more mysterious than [ordinary sense
perception]." He justifies this by stating that,
at best we understand part [of visual perception] - the
physical process starting with photons emitted by an
object and ending with neural activity in the visual
cortex. From there to belief about the object seen is
still a complete mystery. (p. 87, Brown's italics)
Fair enough, but at least we do have: 1) an account of the
links between an object and the visual cortex and 2) a
research program capable of making progress in
understanding how the visual system processes information
from this link and communicates it to the rest of the brain.
As far as I know, we have no account of the link between an
abstract object and whatever organ of abstract sense
perception we use to perceive it. Nor do we have an account
of how these abstract perceptions would be processed in the
brain.
The moral of this digression? Putting the logical neatness
of Platonism aside and ignoring the natural fascination and
attraction that many people feel towards abstract objects,
there is much here to be suspicious of from a cognitive
perspective.

Coupled Falling Bodies and the EPR Paradox
Back to thought experiments. Galileo's Coupled Falling
Bodies is one of Brown's favorite examples of a platonic
thought experiment, and is at the very least an impressive
piece of reasoning. Aristotle held the view that heavier
bodies must fall faster than lighter bodies. This has now
been refuted experimentally - we know that on earth, when
air friction is removed, bodies of different masses fall at the
same rate of acceleration. But before Aristotle's view was
empirically refuted, Galileo supposedly refuted it with an
act of pure thought. He did so by asking us to consider a

cannon ball and a musket ball attached by a string and
asking what will happen when this entire assembly is
dropped from the top of a tower.
According to Galileo, Aristotle would be forced into a
contradiction. On the one hand, the combined system of
musket ball, cannon ball, and string is heavier than the
cannon ball alone. Therefore, the whole should fall faster
than its parts. On the other hand, the lighter musket ball
would try to fall more slowly than the heavier cannon ball,
and would act as a drag on the entire system. Therefore the
assembly should fall slower than its heaviest component, the
cannon ball. So we have a contradiction. If C is the falling
rate of the cannon ball, and S is the falling rate of the
combined system, then both S > C and S < C are true. So
Aristotle must be wrong. But the whole problem goes away
if we propose that everything falls at the same rate (S=C).
Brilliant. But what is justifying this line of reasoning?
The theory that is clearly on trial here is Aristotle's. But
another theory is being brought to bear here as well - our
folk theory (or theories) of how objects behave in the real
world. To see this, we have to poke around for the
assumptions Galileo makes. The celebrated contradiction is
derived from two inferences. First, Galileo assumes that if
Aristotle is right, then the whole assembly should fall faster
than the cannon ball alone. Why? Because if you put the
whole assembly on a scale, it would weight more than the
cannon ball. So far so good. The second inference is that the
musket ball must act as drag on the cannon ball. But what
justifies this inference? Why does the small ball retain its
autonomy as a lightweight when it becomes part of a
heavier whole?
The answer to the above seems to be that we just know
that it does! Imagine holding the two balls attached with
string. If you put the musket ball in your left hand, and the
cannon ball in your right, with the string stretched between
the two, you just know that your right arm will tire more
quickly. Our folk theory of the world, based on real
experience, says that parts of wholes can in some cases be
experienced as if they were autonomous. It is this folk
theory that justifies the crucial second inference and allows
Galileo to complete the contradiction. But what if our folk
theory had been wrong? What if, despite our shared
experience with lifting assemblies of objects, such
assemblies in free fall actually do behave as integrated
wholes? Well then, Galileo's conclusion would have been
wrong, too. The moral of the story is that looking past the
first theory on trial to the second (in this case unarticulated)
theory that it is confronting leads us away from the idea that
Galileo actually proved something through pure thought,
and towards the more productive idea that he demonstrated
that two theories were at odds and therefore one of them had
to be discarded in favour of the other. The obvious choice
for most people was to let go of Aristotle.

Figure 1: The apparatus for the EPR Paradox thought
experiment. Picture from www.reed.edu/~rsavage/epr.html
The EPR Paradox2 is another of Brown's favorite platonic
thought experiments, although this is a slightly less
impressive story because in the end the conclusion of the
thought experiment was tested and refuted in a real
experiment. The target of the EPR Paradox was
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle in particular, and the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics in
general. Heisenberg's uncertainty principle states that we
can never know the complete trajectory of a quantum
particle. "Trajectory" here means position plus momentum,
where momentum is a vector that encodes mass, as well as
direction and velocity. The problem is that in order to
observe a quantum particle, we have to bounce another
quantum particle off it, and this interaction will necessarily
change one of the two aspects of its trajectory. The
Copenhagen interpretation of this result stated that the
indeterminacy existed not in our knowledge of reality, but in
reality itself. That is, the trajectory of a quantum particle is
not actually fully determined until it is observed.
Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen did not accept the
Copenhagen interpretation - they believed that the theory
was incomplete, not that reality was indeterminate. To prove
their point, they published a 1935 Physical Review article in
which they proposed the following thought experiment.
Imagine two quantum particles that interact and then fly
apart. We could later measure one of the particles for either
momentum or position and automatically, through
conservation laws, deduce the corresponding property in the
other particle, even though the particles were far apart and
could no longer interact. (Einstein et al., 1935)
The crucial step in the EPR reasoning was to notice that
we could make either measurement of the first particle, and
deduce the corresponding measurement of the second
2

The name of this thought experiment is rather misleading. "EPR"
stands for Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, but don't expect to find
an actual paradox anywhere.

particle. Since the two particles are now far apart, and could
not be influencing each other, the second particle must have
predetermined real values for both position and momentum.
It must not be indeterminate with respect to any property.
Einstein et al. were aware that they were making a crucial
assumption here, namely that distant particles cannot
influence each other. They named this the locality
assumption and even went as far as to suggest that quantum
mechanics be modified to include this assumption, thus
making it a complete theory again. That is to say, they put
the Copenhagen interpretation into the ring with another
theory (one that Brown calls local realism). Once again, as
seems to happen so often in successful thought experiments,
the second theory accords well with our folk intuitions
about the world - so much so that the EPR Paradox became
a powerful tool for the anti-Copenhagen crowd.
Unfortunately for them, John Bell in 1964 managed to
derive a mathematical result that could be used to pit local
realism against the Copenhagen interpretation in a real
experiment, and local realism made the wrong prediction.
(See Brown, 1991 and Bell, 1987)
The main point in all of this is that we get further in
understanding these thought experiments if we always
assume that two theories must be doing battle. Brown's
Platonic view of what Galileo and Einstein et al. were up to
does not help us to decide whether their conclusions were
right or wrong. That is to say, the assumption that they were
exploring abstract universals does not help us decide
whether the particular universals they discovered
correspond to the universals that happen to operate as
natural laws. Furthermore, the Platonic view does not give
us any real insight into what the thought experimenters were
actually up to in either case. Specifically, there is nothing in
the Platonic story to explain what justified Galileo's
reasoning or why the EPR Paradox failed in the end.
Platonism just doesn't buy us anything here. On the other
hand, viewing their work through the lens of Dueling
Theories forces us to make clear which theories were being
tested, leading in the case of Coupled Falling Bodies to the
exposure of an unstated piece of folk theory, and in the case
of the EPR Paradox, to a simple account of why the result,
which seemed so persuasive, did not stand up in a real
experiment.

Other Types of Thought Experiments
Although Brown focuses most of his attention on Platonic
thought experiments, his taxonomy actually includes a
number of other categories as well. Brown's full set of
thought experiment categories is reproduced in Figure 2
below. Thought experiments are broken down into two main
groups, destructive and constructive. Roughly speaking,
constructive thought experiments build new theories, while
destructive thought experiments invalidate old ones.
Constructive thought experiments are further subdivided
into direct (those that begin with common, unproblematic
phenomena and end with a well articulated theory),
mediated (those that start with a well articulated theory and

help to reach a new conclusion), and conjectural (those that
start with conjectured, rather than common and
unproblematic phenomena and end with a well articulated
theory.) Platonic thought experiments, such as Coupled
Falling Bodies and the EPR Paradox, are those that are both
destructive and directly constructive. That is, they start from
common, unproblematic phenomena and end in both the
destruction of an old theory and the construction of a new
one in it's place.
Thought Experiment

Destructive

Constructive

Direct

Conjectural

Mediative

Platonic

Figure 2: Brown's taxonomy of thought experiments.
Adapted from (Brown, 1991)
Most of the examples Brown uses in any category are
well accounted for by the Dueling Theories idea, but in
some of Brown's examples, one has to dig a little deeper to
get at the "other" theory involved. Perhaps the best example
of this is Schrödinger's Cat, a destructive thought
experiment aimed at the Copenhagen Interpretation of
quantum mechanics (Schrödinger, 1935). In this experiment,
a quantum event is amplified to have an effect on the
macroscopic world - a cat in a box either dies or does not.
The idea is that if the Copenhagen interpretation is correct,
and reality is indeterminate, then the cat in the box is both
alive and dead at the same time. The second theory coming
into play here is just our deeply entrenched theory of the
determinacy of the world around us. Calling us on this
theory is a brilliant move, in which Schrödinger bets that
scientists can accept quantum uncertainty only as long as
they can cut it off from their folk intuitions about how the
macroscopic world works - a sort of philosophical "not in
my back yard" mentality.
The only problematic area for the Dueling Theories story
is in Brown's "mediative constructive" category. Mediative
experiments seem to play an articulatory role only. In these
cases, a theory is already well established, and the thought
experiment behaves like a diagram illustrating some
particular, perhaps counter-intuitive, aspect of it. Most of
the examples here are difficult to analyze for competing
theories, but I suspect that is because they are not the same
sort of thing as the thought experiments in the other
categories. Consider one of Brown's examples - Maxwell's
demon. One of the consequences of the theories Maxwell
was developing was that heat could (with infinitely small
probability) flow from a cold body to a hot body, rather than
the other way around. This is, of course, wildly counterintuitive. So Maxwell told a cute little story about a chamber

of hot gas molecules and another of cold gas molecules
connected by a gate. A little demon controls the gate and
only lets fast (hot) molecules enter the hot chamber and
slow (cold) molecules enter the cold chamber. All this story
really does for us is provide a framework for understanding
a counter-intuitive theory. Maxwell was not trying to prove
anything new, and as a result neither Brown's conception of
thought experiments nor my own has much to say about his
thought experiment. I suspect we would do much better to
reclassify mediative thought experiments as "thought
experimental illustrations" and leave it at that.

Thought Experiments in Cognitive Science
The most famous thought experiments in the cognitive
sciences are destructive in nature. This is true of both
Putnam's Twin Earth experiment, in which the target is all
non-reference-based theories of semantic content, and of
Jackson's Mary the Colorblind Scientist experiment, in
which the target is the scientific describability of
phenomenal experience. It is also true of Searle's (1980)
Chinese Room, arguably the most famous thought
experiment in cognitive science (practically talked to death
in the last 20 years.) For reasons of space, I will apply the
Dueling Theories analysis in detail only to Searle's
experiment - I will not develop the analysis of Putnam or
Jackson any further. I want to show: a) that the Dueling
Theories analysis can be applied, and b) that it would lead
Searle's opponents directly to a particular line of attack.
The theory that Searle is attempting to demolish with the
Chinese Room is the "Strong AI" theory that a computer
programmed to behave indistinguishably from a human who
understands Chinese would really understand Chinese. The
thought experiment works by trading on our strong folk
intuition (i.e. theory) that a non-Chinese-speaking human
taught to behave like [a computer programmed to behave
indistinguishably from a human who understands Chinese]
would not really understand Chinese. Laying out the two
theories explicitly makes it easy to see that in order for them
to be in conflict, the computer and the human must be
equivalent in their ability to execute computer programs.
But that would clearly not be the case in the real world.
Computers are much better and faster at executing programs
than humans. Therefore, Searle must have a fictional superhuman in mind, which leads us to ask why we feel entitled
to any a priori judgements about what such humans would
or would not "understand" about the task they were
performing. The Dueling Theories analysis thus leads
directly to a productive line of attack on Searle - one that
has, in fact, been pursued in the literature (Hofstadter and
Dennett, 1982).

The Empirical Basis of Thought Experiments
Brook's (1999) paper emphasizes a slightly different way of
looking at thought experiments - one which seems at least
partially at odds with Brown's conception, and which differs
in emphasis from mine. He asks:

…are thought experiments also empirical, at least in
part? Yes; they are merely a particular way of
manipulating material stored in memory, material
originally gained from experience. (p. 104)
Since the materials and at least most of the
relationships of the imagined situation are derived
from experience, thought experiments are thus a kind
of empirical investigation. (p. 106, Brook's italics)
Two related questions lurk in the above. First, what is what
the nature of the "material stored in memory", and second,
what is the sense of "empirical" that Brook is employing?
Concerning the first question, it seems clear that the
material referred to must not simply be memories of events
that the thought experimenter has witnessed. If that were the
case, then most observers would have no opinion about
what might happen even in the somewhat ordinary situation
imagined in the Coupled Falling Bodies experiment, to say
nothing of the strange situations of the EPR Paradox, Twin
Earth, Schrödinger's Cat, the Chinese Room, and Mary the
Colorblind Scientist. The material stored in memory must
have some kind of predictive power in order for it to be
applied to the novel situation of a thought experiment.
Therefore, it must consist of generalizations over past
experience - that is, theories, folk or scientific, about the
world.
Concerning the second question, the word "empirical" is a
loaded one, and calling an activity empirical can have a
number of different meanings. In the strongest sense, an
empirical activity might consist of observing events in the
world and carefully recording them for future use. But that
is clearly not the sense being used here. In a weaker sense,
an empirical activity might be any activity that takes into
account memories of actually experienced events. But for
reasons stated above, this cannot the correct sense either we could not perform thought experiments based solely on
remembered events. But there is another sense in which an
activity is empirical if it involves generalizations (theories)
that were derived, at least in part, from actual empirical
experiences. This must be closest to the sense that Brook
has in mind, and it also fits reasonably well with the
Dueling Theories idea.
Brook goes on to situate thought experiments within an
abductive, Popperian view of scientific progress, pointing
out that thought experiments have historically played a role
on both sides of the generate and test paradigm. It is easy to
see how hypothesis generation can be aided by thought
experiments. As Brook notes, "hypothesis generation is
pretty much a pure act of the imagination." As such, it's not
hard to see that thought experimentation can help here. Lots
of counterfactual "what ifs" are bound to be involved, each
of which is likely to be a thought experiment. On the
Dueling Theories account, a thought experiment can also
help to crystallize a folk theory that previously went
unnoticed. This is not exactly the same thing as generating a
hypothesis, but for the purposes of scientific investigation, it

is the same thing - in order to test a theory, it must first be
articulated and acknowledged.
Where I take some issue with Brook is concerning the
role of thought experiments on the testing side of the
generate and test paradigm. On the one hand, Brook makes
the uncontroversial claim that thought experiments have
historically played a role in testing hypotheses - the
paradigm case being Galileo's rejection of Aristotelian
physics based on the Coupled Falling Bodies experiment.
Where Brook and I may part company is on the question of
whether thought experiments ought to play such a strong
role in testing hypotheses. Recall that on the Dueling
Theories account, Galileo's thought experiment made use of
an unarticulated folk theory of ordinary objects to make it's
point. Hence, his conclusion should not have been that
Aristotle's theory was ruled out as a possibility but that the
theory ran afoul of some very ordinary intuitions about the
world. This is a very important result in and of itself. It's just
that the appropriate reaction was not for Galileo to smile
triumphantly from his armchair, but for him to get up and
figure out how to test the two theories with a real
experiment.
The goal of Brook's treatment (and my own) is to see how
much thought experiments can do for us in the cognitive
sciences. Brook's emphasis on the empirical nature of
thought experiments leads to the idea that they can in some
cases stand in for real hypothesis testing.3 What I hope to
have shown with the Dueling Theories account is that the
usefulness of thought experiments actually lies in their
meta-level ability to test theories of the world against each
other, and not in their ability to test the world directly. There
are two further reasons why I would avoid using the term
"empirical" to describe thought experiments - one technical
and one psychological. The technical reason is that folk
theories and intuitions may not need to be based on anything
empirical at all. In fact, there are some thought experiments,
such as Putnam's Twin Earth, Searle's Chinese Room, and
even the EPR Paradox for which it is difficult to nail down
exactly what the relevant empirical evidence supporting our
intuitions actually is. For that reason, it's safer to view
thought experiments as a theory evaluation activity and
leave the question of the empirical nature of the theories
under test open to be evaluated on a case by case basis. The
psychological reason is that we might mistakenly encourage
the idea that thought experiments are empirical in a stronger
sense than what we really mean. And if we do that, we've
done ourselves a disservice.

Conclusion
If I am right, then thought experiments are best viewed as a
picturesque arena in which two competing theories of the
world do battle. Sometimes the Dueling Theories are
explicitly stated ahead of time, but often one of the two
3

From personal communication. Brook also discusses the use of
thought experiments for the elimination of possibilities. This idea
also relies on the characterization of thought experimentation as an
empirical activity.

lurks in the background assumptions. In fact, what gives
thought experiments such as Coupled Falling Bodies and the
EPR Paradox their rhetorical power is precisely their accord
with some of our most deeply entrenched folk theories of
the world of middle-sized dry goods. Thought experiments
are more useful if they clearly contain some kind of
empirical material. This empirical material is not direct
observation, but instead takes the form of predictions
encoded by theories formed on the bases of empirical data.
But this is not the same as saying that thought experiments
can be empirical in the way that real experiments are.
Despite their potential for polemical power, thought
experiments can never actually tell us anything about the
world. No thought experiment can ever be as good as the
corresponding real experiment.

Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge the help and support of Andy
Brook. Thanks also to Ron Boring, Leo Ferres, and Finn
Makela for many useful discussions. This work was
supported in part by Canada's National Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC).

References
Bell, J. S. (1987). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum
Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brook, A. (1999). Does philosophy offer cognitive science
distinctive methods? Proceedings of the 21st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 102108). New York: LEA.
Brown, J. R. (1991). Thought Experiments in the Natural
Sciences. London: Routledge.
Einstein, A., Podolsky B. and Rosen N. (1935). Can
quantum mechanical description of reality be considered
complete? Physical Review.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. and Dennett, Daniel C. (1982)
Reflections. In Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel C.
Dennett (Eds.) (1982). The Mind's I: Fantasies and
Reflections on Self and Soul. Toronto: Bantam Books.
373-382.
Jackson, F. (1991). What Mary didn't know. Journal of
Philosophy. 83-5: 291-295. Reprinted in D. Rosenthal
(Ed.) The Nature of Mind. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of meaning. Mind,
Language and Reality: Philosophical Essays. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Schrödinger, E. (1935). The present situation in quantum
mechanics. Translated and reprinted in J. Wheeler and W.
Zurek, Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Searle, John R. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs. BBS.
Volume 3. Reprinted in Hofstadter and Dennett. Op. Cit.
353-373.

