UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamic Extension of Episode Representation in Analogy-Making in AMBR

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15v9x8x1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Petrov, Alexander

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamic Extension of Episode Representation in Analogy-Making in
AMBR
Boicho Kokinov ( b k o k i n o v @ n b u . b g )
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St, Sofia 1635, Bulgaria
Alexander Petrov

( apetrov+@andrew.cmu.edu )
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St, Sofia 1635, Bulgaria

Abstract
Models that rely exclusively on static representations
cannot account fully for the flexibility of human analogymaking. More sophisticated models should provide
mechanisms for dynamic extension, elaboration, and rerepresentation of episodes. One such mechanism—the
instantiation mechanism—is described. It uses the target
problem as a template for extending the source and vice
versa. These extensions are driven and constrained by
semantic knowledge about general regularities in the
domain. The instantiation mechanism has been developed
within a model of analogy-making called AMBR. It relies
on AMBR's support for parallel, decentralized, and interactive computation. The instantiation mechanism runs in
parallel with the mechanisms for analog access and mapping. Thus, these latter mechanisms guide the instantiation mechanism as to which facts in the large semantic
memory are relevant to the specifics of the current situation.

Re-Representation in Problem-Solving
A substantial body of evidence suggests that people can
change their mental representations dynamically during
various cognitive tasks. Yet, despite the widespread
agreement that human representations are dynamic and
flexible, the mechanisms behind these re-representation
abilities are not well explored and understood. This paper
suggests some mechanisms that can serve that purpose.
In the context of problem solving, there are at least two
complementary aspects of re-representation: re-representation
of the target problem and re-representation of prior
knowledge. These two aspects correspond to Jean Piaget’s
complementary and related processes of assimilation and
accommodation. Re-representation of the target is a process
of assimilation because the new information is transformed
to comply with the existing knowledge. Conversely, rerepresentation of the existing knowledge in the face of new
experience is a process of accommodation.
Re-representation o f the target problem has
received more attention although it is still not fully
understood. Gestalt psychologists (Maier, 1931; Dunker,
1945) demonstrated the importance of dynamic changes of

the target representation for successful problem solving.
However, the mechanisms behind this remained unclear and
somehow mysterious. Unfortunately, contemporary cognitive science has not been particularly successful to fill this
gap, although some progress has been made. Douglas
Hofstadter and his group have worked for many years on the
integration of analogy-making and what they call high-level
perception (Hofstadter, 1995; French, 1995; Mitchell, 1993;
Chalmers, French & Hofstadter, 1992). They have proposed
a number of mechanisms that work together to build several
alternative representations simultaneously, settle gradually
on one of them, and radically restructure the representation
and settle on an alternative one if necessary. Lange &
Wharton (1992) have worked on a similar problem—integrating language comprehension with analogical
reminding. They suggested a mechanism for parallel processing of several possible interpretations of an ambiguous
phrase. This mechanism would allow for re-interpretation of
the phrase if necessary.
The issue of re-representation o f existing
knowledge during the problem solving process has been
systematically ignored in the problem solving literature.
Unfortunately, most classical models of problem solving
take the existing knowledge as constant1 . Long-term
memory structures only have to be retrieved and applied
(Ernst & Newell, 1969; Newell, 1990; Anderson, 1983;
Anderson & Lebiere, 1998). The same is true for models of
analogy-making: they retrieve a ready-made representation of
an old episode when looking for a base for analogy
(Gentner, 1989; Thagard, Holyoak, Nelson & Gochfeld,
1990; Kokinov, 1994a; Forbus, Gentner & Law, 1995;
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997).
The idea that there are ready-made representations of
episodes formed during the encoding stage has been
challenged by researchers of human memory for quite some
time. There is much evidence for the constructive nature of
the “retrieved memory traces”. Thus Loftus (1977, 1979)
and Neisser and Harsch (1992) demonstrate that people can
have vivid “memories” of nonexistent episodes which are
clearly constructed during the “retrieval” process. Bartlett
1

We do not discuss learning here—it involves gradual longterm knowledge change rather than short-term accommodation.

(1932) has shown that episode representations are distorted
and enriched with information inherited from the schema for
the typical event.
The purpose of this paper is to show how episodic
representations can be dynamically extended with
information derived from general semantic knowledge.
AMBR is among the few models of analogy-making which
use both semantic and episodic knowledge (Kokinov,
1994a). However, the version reported in (Kokinov, 1994a)
used them for different purposes. Episodic memory was a
repository of ready-made representations of episodes that
might be used as bases for analogy-making. Semantic
memory served only to establish semantic similarity
between the relations, attributes, and objects participating
in the episodes. In the new version of AMBR described in
this paper, the boundaries between semantic and episodic
memory are blurred and general statements from semantic
memory are instantiated to complement and extend the
representations of episodes.

Main Assumptions of the AMBR Approach
to Episode Re-representation

work. In addition, each of the processes described above is
quite complex in itself and in turn has to be considered as
the result of the interplay of many simpler and more local
processes. These requirements lead to a view that complex
computation is an emergent interactionist phenomenon
rather than pre-specified sequence of algorithmic steps.

Integrated Semantic and Episodic Memory
Semantic memory contains information about concepts and
statements about classes of instances. Episodic memory
contains information about instances, episodes, and
statements about instances. There has been a long-lasting
discussion for and against the distinction between these two
memories (see, for example, Anderson & Ross, 1980,
Herrmann & Harwood, 1980). The third assumption of
AMBR is that semantic and episodic memories are
integrated so as to allow for coordinated search in both
memories. Whenever a cue is provided, both semantic and
episodic memory elements can potentially be retrieved.
Thus, when a past episode is recalled from memory, both
specific and general knowledge is used in the recollection
process. In this way semantic knowledge can extend the
episodic knowledge.

Flexible Dynamic Representations
The first assumption is that episodes and concepts are not
represented by fixed and static complex memory structures
such as schemas, lists of propositions or lists of rules.
Rather, there are fuzzy and overlapping coalitions of simple
memory elements. The key distinction is that complex
memory structures are retrieved in an all-or-none fashion,
while flexible dynamic representations are retrieved and/or
constructed element by element. Each element has an
activation level associated with it. Depending on the specific
pattern of activation over the coalition, various partial
representations of the same episode or concept can be
retrieved. Some elements of the coalition might be strongly
connected with each other and thus tend to be retrieved
together, while others might be retrieved only rarely and
under specific retrieval conditions. There is also a possibility for blends to emerge. This happens when elements
belonging to more than one coalition become active
together. All this flexibility is important for making rerepresentation possible.

Flexible Dynamic Computation
The second assumption is that computations are also
flexible, parallel, and interactive. There are multiple
processes running in parallel and interacting in complex
ways that are not specified in advance. Thus, rerepresentation results from the interplay of many processes
including: (i) retrieval of past episodes, (ii) retrieval of
generic knowledge, (iii) instantiation of the generic rules or
facts, (iv) attempt to build the representation of the past
episode in a form that makes it alignable with the representation of the problem at hand, and (v) attempt to build
the representation of the target problem in a form that
makes it alignable with the representation of the past
episode. As stated earlier, it is believed that all these
processes should run in parallel and influence each other’s

Integration of Memory and Reasoning
The process of re-representation requires that the process of
memory access, on one hand, and the processes of mapping
and instantiation, on the other, run in parallel and interact
with each other. Thus the fourth assumption is that memory
and reasoning are highly integrated.

AMBR: An Analogy-Making Model Based
on the Cognitive Architecture DUAL
An analogy-making model with re-representation capabilities needs the support of a full cognitive architecture that
implements all the assumptions above. The cognitive architecture DUAL is specifically designed to support this decentralized and interactive style of computation (Kokinov,
1994b, 1994c, 1997). The AMBR model of analogy-making
(Kokinov, 1994a) is based on this architecture. This paper
describes the re-representation extensions that have been
added to the model after the original publication. Before
explaining how the assumptions are implemented and how
they contribute to re-representation, a brief and more general
description of DUAL and AMBR is needed.
DUAL is a cognitive architecture based on the society of
mind idea (Minsky, 1986; see also Hofstadter, 1995). Every
DUAL-based system consists of many micro-agents, each of
which is quite simple. The micro-agents do not have goals
and do not plan their activities; they are simple representation and computation devices. They can establish new links
with other agents and some of them can construct new
agents. DUAL-agents form coalitions that collectively represent an episode or a generalized concept, or dynamically
form coalitions that collectively produce an emergent computation process. Each agent can participate in many coalitions to a various extent depending on the weights of the
links connecting that agent to other agents in the coalition.

Knowledge representation in DUAL is highly decentralized. Each episode, concept, general theory, etc. is represented by a coalition of many agents, each of which represents just a small piece of knowledge. Thus a simple
episode such as boiling water in the kitchen would be
represented by a quite big coalition of agents: an agent for
every concept related to the situation such as “water”,
“kitchen”, “boiling”, “plate”, “pot”, “on”, “in”, “hot”,
“cold”, “cause”; an agent for every instance of these concepts
involved in the particular situation, i.e. “water-1”, “kitchen3”, “boiling-2”, “plate-3”, “pot-3”; as well as for every
single statement such as “on-1(pot-3,plate-3)”, “in-1(water1,pot-3)”, “hot-1(plate-3)”, “red-1(pot-3)”, etc. However, it
should not necessarily be the case that all elements of a
coalition become members of the working memory (WM) at
certain moment. On the contrary— typically only part of
the coalition is activated. Thus each episode is almost
always only partially available. Moreover, different subsets
of the coalition are active in different contexts. The longterm memory (LTM) of DUAL is the population of all
permanent agents, active or inactive. The working memory
is simply the active part of LTM plus some newly created
temporary agents.
Each agent is a DUAListic computational and representational device: it has a symbolic and a connectionist
part. While the symbolic part represents a piece of
knowledge (as described above), the connectionist part
represents the relevance of this piece of knowledge to the
current context. The relevance is represented by the graded
activation level computed by the connectionist processor
associated with the agent. All the inferences based on the
knowledge represented by the agent are computed by the
symbolic processor associated with the same agent. These
computations are also based only on local interactions with
neighboring agents. If necessary, the agents are able to
establish new temporary links (and interactions) with other
agents. The speed of symbolic processing of a given agent
depends on the activation level. In this way the
computations are faster if the corresponding knowledge
structures are considered relevant to the context and slower
or even impossible if they are less relevant or irrelevant.
AMBR is a model of analogy-making based on DUAL,
which integrates memory and reasoning. The mechanisms
for memory access, mapping, inference, re-representation,
etc. are based on emergent computations implemented over a
large set of DUAL agents. Memory access is based mainly
on the spreading activation mechanism of the connectionist
aspect of DUAL. Mapping is based on a number of
mechanisms such as marker passing for establishing
semantic correspondence, temporary-agent constructors for
establishing hypotheses about possible correspondences,
link constructors for establishing positive or negative links
among hypotheses and existing long-term agents based on
structure correspondence, etc. All these mechanisms are
running in parallel and influence each other, thus giving rise
to various interaction effects.

AMBR Mechanisms for Dynamic
Extension of Episode Representation
Episode representation is dynamically extended in AMBR by
the interplay of three processes running in parallel: (i)
gradual and partial retrieval of episodic and semantic
memory elements, (ii) gradual and partial mapping the
retrieved episode and semantic elements onto the target
elements, and (iii) gradual and partial instantiation of general
statements from semantic memory.
The gradual retrieval process is based on the
spreading activation over the links between the neighboring
agents. When the activation level of certain agent exceeds a
given threshold, the agent becomes part of the working
memory2 . It is possible that only part of the coalition
passes the threshold, which means that it is possible that
only part of the encoded episode elements are retrieved. Thus
different representations of the past episode are “constructed”
or “retrieved” in different contexts. This differs from other
analogy models. Most of them use centralized episode
representations (Forbus, Gentner, & Law, 1995, Thagard et
al., 1990). Even in LISA (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997)
where the episodes are represented in a decentralized way and
where the retrieval process is a gradual one, there is a final
decision about which episode has won the competition. This
decision is done centrally and all elements of the winner are
switched from “dormant” into “active” state. Therefore, no
partial retrieval of episodes is possible. In AMBR there is
even no in-principle possibility to do this form of forced
retrieval of whole episodes because the system does not keep
any central registry of rosters enumerating the affiliation of
elements to episodes.
Since there are tight links between the elements of
semantic and episodic memory, activated agents do not
necessarily represent elements of an episode. They can also
represent pieces of semantic knowledge. Thus, contrary to
other models, the retrieval process in AMBR brings both
elements of episodic and semantic memory into the WM.
Since semantic knowledge is also represented in a decentralized manner, it has the same degree of flexibility. Two
scenarios are worth mentioning. The spreading activation
mechanism can retrieve (i) a coalition representing schematic knowledge about a typical situation (e.g. “boiling water
in the kitchen”) or (ii) single generic statements (such as “a
pot is made of metal”). Because the process of instantiation
of a schema is much more traditional and well studied, we
will focus on the instantiation of single generic statements.
The gradual mapping process starts as soon as the
first elements from episodic or semantic memory pass the
working-memory threshold. An attempt is made to map
them onto elements from the target description. An external
observer monitoring the behavior of the system as a whole
can ascribe different labels to this process depending on the
particular kind of prior knowledge that the system happens
to use in each particular case. If a past episode is retrieved
and mapped to the target, this could be labelled "analogy".
If a general schema is retrieved and used as a source for the
2
After entering the WM, the graded activation continues to
play an important role since the speed of symbolic processing
performed by the agent depends on its activation level.

mapping, the “analogy-making” mechanism produces an
inference that we might prefer to call deductive3 . The
prevailing number of cases will be mixed, however: both
episodic and semantic elements will be mapped. These are
the cases considered in more detail in this paper. The process
of analogy-making is an emergent process. What actually
happens in the system at the micro-level is that individual
elements of the descriptions try to find their “mates”, i.e. to
form correspondence hypotheses between target elements and
retrieved elements regardless of whether these elements are
originating from episodic or semantic memory. At the same
time all the agents participating in this process establish
temporary links among themselves in order to cooperate in
finding a structurally consistent mapping (Gentner, 1983).
The details of how retrieval and mapping are performed in
a decentralized and emergent way will not be presented here
because of lack of space. Interested readers can find such
descriptions elsewhere (Kokinov, 1994a, Kokinov, Nikolov,
& Petrov, 1996). The focus here is on the processing that
takes place after a mapping between elements of semantic
memory and target elements is established. For example,
when an isolated generic statement from semantic memory,
such as “made-of-1(teapot,metal)” or “is-hot-1(plate)”, is
retrieved it can be mapped onto elements of the target
description such as “made-of-2(vessel-1,wood-3)” or “isburning-2(fire-1)”, respectively.
After the initial correspondence is established, which
might be based on the semantic similarity between the
predicates (established by the marker-passing mechanism), a
generic hypothesis is formed (i.e. a new agent is created)
which puts the target proposition—“made-of-2(vessel-1,
wood-3)”—in correspondence with the general statement
coming from semantic memory that teapots are typically
made of metal: “made-of-1(teapot,metal)”. In case that the
retrieved episode representation already contains a statement
“made-of-3(teapot-1,metal-1)” then most probably it will
win the competition and the generic hypothesis will be
rejected. However, if such statement is not encoded in the
long-term memory since the material of the teapot was not
important at the time of experiencing the event, or it was
encoded but for some reason it is now not retrieved in WM
and therefore does not exist in the current representation of
the episode, then it might happen that the generic
hypothesis wins the competition or at least is strong
enough to start an instantiation process.
The instantiation process
builds up a new
proposition where all the universally quantified variables
will be replaced by specific instances-constants, e.g. “madeof-1(teapot,metal)” goes into “made-of-4(teapot-1,metalprototype)”. How are the constants chosen? If there is a
constant (object) of the same type in the retrieved episode, it
should be used. In the example above, the episode
representation involves such an instance—“teapot-1”. Then
the new proposition will use it as an argument. If the
episode contains no specific instance of that type then a new
instance is constructed which has the properties of the
3
AMBR has been proposed as a unifying mechanism for
deductive, inductive, and analogical reasoning (Kokinov, 1988,
1990, 1992, 1994a).

prototype of the corresponding class. In this example, there
is no instance of metal in the episode representation and
therefore a new instance is formed—“metal-prototype”. Thus
the instantiation mechanism tries to reuse existing instances
whenever possible. The DUAL marker-passing mechanism
provides information about which instances of the concept
“teapot”, if any, are active in the current representation of
the episode and hence are available for instantiation.
Instantiation has been used in analogy-making models so
far only for adding new objects and propositions to the
target problem, i.e. for making analogical inferences
(Holyoak & Thagard, 1989, Falkenhainer, Forbus, &
Gentner, 1989). In AMBR it is used for extending episode
representation and relies heavily on the semantic knowledge
of the system.
In summary, the process of extending the representation
of the episode emerges from the interaction of several
processes that are themselves emergent: the retrieval process
which continuously brings up new episodic and semantic
memory elements into WM, the mapping process which
continuously builds hypotheses about possible correspondences between the retrieved elements and elements from the
target description, and the instantiation process which
continuously constructs new specific propositions based on
generic propositions retrieved from semantic memory.
Why is the continuous interplay between these three
processes important? The interactions guide each of the
processes and therefore make each of them more effective.
They preclude the model from doing exhaustive search. The
influence of retrieval on mapping and instantiation is
obvious since nothing can be mapped or instantiated if it is
not activated (retrieved). The role of mapping is unusual
compared to other models of analogy-making. Since the
retrieval process in AMBR is a piece-by-piece process that
runs continuously and in parallel with the mapping, the
latter can influence the former. It is always the case that the
retrieved elements of the episode send out activation to the
rest of the elements of the episode representation and thus
constantly try to activate the whole coalition. However, if
the coalition is not tight enough (which is the typical case)
they would be able to retrieve only some of their coalition
partners. Exactly which elements will be retrieved depends
not only on the initial set of elements but also on their
mapping status, i.e. which of them are mapped onto target
elements and which are not. Elements that are mapped
receive abundant activation from the target and therefore will
play important role in any further retrieval. In this way the
mapping influences the retrieval process.
The importance of this interaction between processes can
be demonstrated by contrasting two runs of the system: one
with parallelism and interaction and one without. Figure 1
presents such a comparison from a simulation experiment.
In the “parallel condition” (thick lines in the figure) all
processes are running in the way they have been described so
far. In the “retrieval only condition” the mapping process
has been intentionally switched off. The important result is
that, although the target and the background knowledge were
exactly the same in the two runs, two different episodes are
retrieved—a more structurally similar one in the first case
and a more superficially similar one in the second case.

0.50

A

0.25

0.00

B
B
A
0

10

20

30

40

Figure 1. Retrieval indices for two episodes, A and B, in
two different conditions as a function of time. The thick
lines correspond to the parallel condition in which mapping
influences retrieval, the thin lines show ‘pure’ retrieval.
The mapping influences the instantiation process as well.
If there were no such influence, the model would have to
build up unrealistically many instantiations—one or more
for each generic proposition retrieved from semantic
memory. However, the instantiation process is guided by
the mapping process—only general propositions that are
mapped onto target propositions will be instantiated. On the
other hand, once an instantiation is build it supports the
mapping and helps in further retrieval of memory elements.

Conclusions
The mechanisms described above allow for dynamic rerepresentation of the episodes by: retrieving additional
information from episodic memory based on the established
mappings; by constructing new memory elements and
integrating them into the episode representation based on
instantiation of generic statements retrieved from semantic
memory and mapped onto the target description; and by
retrieving elements from other episodes thus producing a
blending between episodes.
In this way AMBR makes the following predictions
which can be tested experimentally. The first prediction is
that the partial mapping established up to a point influences
the further retrieval process. This prediction can be tested by
analysing thinking-aloud protocols. Actually, such results
have been obtained by Ross and Sofka (1986) as a side effect
in a thinking-aloud study. They are summarized in (Ross,
1989) as follows: “... other work (Ross & Sofka, 1986)
suggests the possibility that the retrieval may be greatly
affected by the use. In particular, we found that subjects,
whose task was to recall the details of an earlier example
that the current test problem reminded them of, used the test
problem not only as an initial reminder but throughout the
recall. For instance, the test problem was used to probe for
similar objects, and relations and to prompt recall of
particular numbers from the earlier example. The retrieval of
the earlier example appeared to be interleaved with its use
because subjects were setting up correspondences between
the earlier example and the test problem during the
retrieval.” The simulation data described here are obtained

absolutely independently and are based only on the
theoretical assumptions of DUAL and AMBR and exhibit
exactly the same pattern of interaction.
A second prediction is that people would instantiate
generic knowledge in cases where there is missing
information from the episode representation and where this
information is needed for the mapping, i.e. there is a corresponding piece of information in the target which needs to
be mapped onto something from the base. An experiment is
currently being prepared to test this hypothesis. McKoon
and Ratcliff (1981) demonstrated that people make inferences
and extend episode representation during the encoding
process, e.g. after listening to a sentence such as “Alice
pounded in the nail until the board was safely secured.”
listeners would infer and encode that “Alice used a hammer.”
Our prediction is that they would further extend the representation during the recall process when they use that
episode in order to map it to the target.
Finally, a third prediction is that people will tend to blend
episodic information if the information needed for mapping
is missing in the best retrieved episode, but is present in
another episode that is also partially retrieved. Another
experiment is under development to test this prediction.

References
Anderson, J. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Anderson, J. & Lebiere, C. (1998) The atomic components
of thought. Mahwah, NJ:. Erlbaum
Anderson, J. & Ross, B. (1980). Evidence Against a
Semantic-Episodic Distinction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6 (5), 441466.
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Charlmers, D., French, R., & Hofstadter, D. (1992). HighLevel Perception, Representation, and Analogy: A
Critique of Artificial Intelligence Methodology. Jornal of
Experimental and Theoretical AI, 4 (3), 185-211.
Dunker, K. (1945) On problem solving. In: Psychological
Monographs, vol. 58 (whole No 270).
Ernst, G. & Newell, A. (1969). GPS: A case study in
generality and problem solving. NY: Academic Press.
Falkenhainer B., Forbus K., & Gentner D. (1989). The
structure mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41 (1), 1-63.
Forbus, K., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC: A
model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science, 19
(2), 141-205.
French, R. (1995). The subtlety of sameness: A theory and
computer model of analogy-making. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7 (2),155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.). Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

Herrmann, D. & Harwood, J. (1980). More evidence for the
existence of separate semantic and episodic stores in longterm memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6 (5), 467-478.
Hofstadter, D. & the Fluid Analogies Research Group
(1995). Fluid concepts and creative analogies. New York:
Basic Books.
Holyoak K. & Thagard P. (1989b). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J. & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed representations of structure: A theory of analogical access and
mapping. Psychological Review, 104 (3), 427-466.
Kokinov, B. (1994a). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak and J. Barnden (Ed). Advances in
connectionist and neural computation theory. Vol. 2:
Analogical connections. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Kokinov, B. (1994b). The DUAL cognitive architecture: A
hybrid multi-agent approach. Proceedings of the Eleventh
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Wiley.
Kokinov, B. (1994c). The context-sensitive cognitive architecture DUAL. Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kokinov, B. (1997). Micro-level hybridization in the
cognitive architecture DUAL. In R. Sun & F. Alexander
(Eds). Connectionist-symbolic integration: From unified
to hybrid architectures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Kokinov, B., Nikolov, V., & Petrov, A. (1996). Dynamics
of emergent computation in DUAL. In A. Ramsey (Ed.).
Artificial intelligence: Methodology, systems, applications. Amsterdam: IOS Press
Kolodner, J. (1983). Reconstructive memory: A computer
model. Cognitive Science, 7, 281-328.
Lange, T. & Wharton, C. (1992). Dynamic memories:
Analysis of an integrated comprehension and episodic
memory retrieval model. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Loftus, E. (1977). Shifting human color memory. Memory
and Cognition, 5, 696-699.
Loftus, E. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1981). The comprehension
process and memory structures involved in instrumental
inference. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 20, 671-682.
Maier, N. (1931). Reasoning in humans II: The solution of
a problem and its appearance in consciousness. Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 12, 181-194
Minsky, M. (1986). The society of mind. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-making as perception: A
computer model. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Neisser, U. & Harsch, N. (1992). Phantom flashbulbs:
False recollections of hearing the news about the
Challenger. In E. Winograd & U. Neisser (Eds.) Affect
and Accuracy in Recall. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Newell, A. (1990).
Unified theories of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ross, B. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial simi-

larities: Different effects on the access and use of earlier
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Ross, B. & Sofka, M. (1986). Remindings: Noticing,
remembering, and using specific knowledge of earlier
problems. Unpublished manuscript.
Thagard, P., Holyoak, K., Nelson, G., & Gochfeld, D.
(1990). Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction.
Artificial Intelligence, 46, 259-310.

