UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evaluating Competition-based Models of Word Order

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0p89c9zx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Keller, Frank

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evaluating Competition-based Models of Word Order
Frank Keller
keller@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK

Abstract
The ordering of constituents in semi-free word order languages
has attracted considerable attention in theoretical linguistics.
Three types of models have been proposed to explain word
order preferences, based on (a) weighted constraints, (b) Optimality Theory (c) syntactic weight. All three models use grammatical competition to explain the interaction of word order
constraints. They rely on intuitive judgments or corpus studies, but have not been evaluated against experimental data.
This is the purpose of the present paper. We report the results
of a magnitude estimation experiment investigating word order in German, focusing on the interaction of verb position,
case marking, pronominalization, and information structure.
The experimental data are compatible with models (a) and (b),
indicating that relativized (ranked or weighted) constraints are
essential in explaining word order preferences. Model (c), on
the other hand, is not compatible with the data.

Introduction
The languages of the world differ substantially in the degree
of word order variation they allow. On the one end of the
spectrum, we find languages like English, which exhibit a
relatively fixed word order. On the other end, there are languages like Warlpiri (an Australian language), which allow a
large degree of word order variation. Many languages exhibit
a semi-free word order, i.e., the word order is fixed in some
respects, but variable in others.
Word order variation typically manifests itself not in binary
acceptability judgments, but in the form of word order preferences, to which a diverse set of factors contribute, including
syntactic, pragmatic, and phonological factors. This poses an
interesting challenge for linguistic theory, which is equipped
to deal with binary ungrammaticality resulting from the violation of individual linguistic constraints, rather than with
preferences (degrees of acceptability) that emerge from the
interaction of a diverse set of factors.
A number of approaches have been developed to deal with
this challenge, all of which diverge from conventional linguistic frameworks in assuming a relative (weighted or ranked)
rather than an absolute (binary) notion of linguistic constraints. Three main types of models have been proposed,
based on (a) weighted constraints (Jacobs, 1988; Uszkoreit,
1987), (b) Optimality Theory (Choi, 1996; Müller, 1999),
(c) syntactic weight (Hawkins, 1992). All of these models use
a notion of grammatical competition to explain the interaction
of the factors that influence word order.
Models (a)–(c) rely on informal, intuitive acceptability
judgments (and on corpus data in the case of (c)). It is safe

to assume that such judgments allow to determine binary acceptability reliably. However, their reliability is much less obvious with respect to degrees of acceptability like the ones
that occur in word order data (Bard, Robertson, & Sorace,
1996; Cowart, 1997; Schütze, 1996). This makes it desirable
to evaluate linguistic models of word order against experimentally collected acceptability data.
The purpose of the present paper is to provide a first step
towards such an experimental evaluation.1 The methodology
we use is magnitude estimation, which has been shown to
yield reliable, yet maximally delicate judgments of linguistic
acceptability (Bard et al., 1996). The empirical domain of our
investigation is the variation in the order of verb complements
in German, a semi-free word order language. We outline the
necessary linguistic background in the following section.

Word Order in German
German has a fixed verb order. Subordinate clauses are verb
final, while yes/no questions require verb initial order, and
declarative main clauses have the verb in second position.
In the generative literature, the subordinate clause order is
generally considered the basic order from which the main
clause and question orders are derived by movement (e.g.,
Haider, 1993). The present experiment will focus on subordinate clauses (which is also customary in the processing literature on German, e.g., Bader & Meng, 1999). Using subordinate clauses avoids potential confounds from topicalization
and other phenomena that can occur in verb second clauses.
While verb order is fixed in German, the order of the complements of the verb is variable, and a number of factors
have been claimed to influence complement order. These factors include case marking, thematic roles, pronominalization,
information structure, intonation, definiteness, and animacy
(Choi, 1996; Jacobs, 1988; Müller, 1999; Uszkoreit, 1987;
Scheepers, 1997). The present study focuses on the effect of
case marking, pronominalization, and information structure
on word order.
We elicited acceptability judgments for four subordinate
clause orders, illustrated by the examples in (1). As mentioned above, subordinate clauses in German require verb final order (see (1a), (1b)). Verb initial orders (see (1c), (1d))
give rise to strong unacceptability.
1 Previous

experimental work on word order preferences in German (Pechmann, Uszkoreit, Engelkamp, & Zerbst, 1994; Scheepers,
1997) only dealt with isolated stimuli, i.e., failed to address contextual effects on order, one of the topics of the present paper

(1) a. SOV:
Maria glaubt, dass der Vater

den Wagen kauft.

M.-NOM believes that the father-NOM the car-ACC buys

‘Maria believes that the father will buy the car.’
b. OSV: Maria glaubt, dass den Wagen der Vater kauft.
c. VSO: Maria glaubt, dass kauft der Vater den Wagen.
d. VOS: Maria glaubt, dass kauft den Wagen der Vater.
We also examined the influence of pronominalization on
word order. The experiment included sentences where none
of the NPs was pronominalized (see (1)), but also sentences
where the subject, object, or both the subject and the object
were pronominalized (see (2)).2
(2) a. Maria

glaubt, dass er

den Wagen kauft.

Maria-NOM believes that he-NOM the car-ACC buys

‘Maria believes that he will buy the car.’
glaubt, dass der Vater
ihn
b. Maria

kauft.

Maria-NOM believes that the father-NOM it-ACC buys

‘Maria believes that the father will buy it.’
glaubt, dass er
ihn kauft.
c. Maria
Maria-NOM believes that he-NOM it-ACC buys

‘Maria believes that he will buy it.’
Information structure figures as a determinant of complement
order in the accounts of Choi (1996), Jacobs (1988), Müller
(1999), and Uszkoreit (1987). Information structural effects
can be studied by embedding the sentence in a question context: the wh -phrase marks the focussed constituent, while
the other constituents are non-focussed, or ground (Vallduvı́,
1992). The following contexts were used in the experiment:
(3) a. All Focus: Was gibt’s neues?
‘What’s new?’
b. S Focus: Wer kauft den Wagen?
‘Who will buy the car?’
c. O Focus: Was kauft der Vater?
‘What will the father buy?’
A null context condition was included as a control, allowing
us to study how subjects react in the absence of any contextual
information.

Models of Word Order
Weighted Constraints
Uszkoreit (1987) models word order preferences using
weighted constraints. In such a setting, linguistic constraints
are annotated with a numeric weight that reflects their importance in determining grammaticality (for a similar proposal, see Jacobs, 1988). Uszkoreit assumes constraint competition, i.e., not all constraints are necessarily satisfiable in a
given linguistic structure. This entails that grammaticality is
a gradient notion; the degree of grammaticality of a linguistic
structure is computed as the sum of the of the weights of the
constraint violations the structure incurs.
Uszkoreit (1987, p. 114) proposes the following constraints
on word order in German (constraints irrelevant to the data
under consideration are omitted and constraint names are provided):
2 Note

that only masculine NPs were used, as these are unambiguous in their case marking, both as full NPs and as pronouns
(while the case morphology of feminine and neuter NPs exhibits
syncretism).

(4) a.
b.
c.
d.

V ERB : X ≺ V[−MC]
N OM: [+NOM] ≺ [+ACC ]
F OC : [−FOCUS] ≺ [+FOCUS]
P RO : [+PRO] ≺ [−PRO]

These constraints are constituent order constraints, with ‘≺’
denoting linear precedence. The constraint V ERB relies on
the feature MC (main clause) to specify verb order; if this feature is negative (i.e., in a subordinate clause), then the verb
has to succeed any other constituent. The constraint N OM requires that nominative precedes accusative. The information
structural requirement F OC specifies that ground constituents
(marked [−FOCUS]) precede focused constituents. The constraint P RO requires pronouns to precede full NPs.
Uszkoreit does not provide weights for the constraints
in (4).3 Intuitively, however, we expect a violation of V ERB
to lead to serious unacceptability, i.e., V ERB should receive a
higher weight than the other constraints.

Optimality Theory
Standard Optimality Theory (OT; Prince & Smolensky, 1993)
assumes a binary notion of grammaticality; a linguistic structure is either optimal (and thus grammatical) or suboptimal
(and thus ungrammatical). However, OT can be extended
to model gradient grammaticality; Müller (1999) puts forward a modified version of OT based on the distinction between grammaticality (manifested in binary judgments) and
markedness (associated with word order preferences). Grammaticality is handled in terms of conventional OT-style constraint competition. This competition can yield several grammatical candidates, among which further competition takes
place based on markedness constraints. The markedness competition then induces a preference order on the candidates that
predicts their relative acceptability. (Note that the grammaticality/markedness dichotomy is reminiscent of the distinction
of hard and soft constraints proposed by Keller (1998).)
In Müller’s account, the constraints on pronoun order belong to the realm of grammaticality, while the constraints on
case order and focus-ground order (among others) belong to
the realm of markedness. We omit technical details and only
state constraints relevant to the present data set:
(5) a. N OM: [+NOM] ≺ [−NOM]
b. F OC : [−FOCUS] ≺ [+FOCUS]
c. A N: [+ANIMATE] ≺ [−ANIMATE]
Note that the constraints N OM and F OC are similar to Uszkoreit’s constraints in (4). A N is an additional constraint that
requires animate NPs to precede inanimate ones. In contrast
to Uszkoreit, Müller postulates an explicit constraint ranking:
(6)

NOM

 A N  F OC

In addition to the markedness constraints in (5), a set of grammaticality constraints is postulated (omitted here). These constraints deal with pronoun order and ensure that pronouns occur at the left periphery of the clause. All candidates that fail
to meet this requirement are predicted to be (categorically)
ungrammatical. In contrast to Uszkoreit, Müller does not include constraints on verb order.
3 Pechmann et al. (1994) tentatively assume that all constraints
have equal weights, which entails that the degree of unacceptability
only depends on the number of violations.

Syntactic Weight
Hawkins (1992) proposes an approach to word order preferences that also relies on grammatical competition, but makes
very different assumptions concerning the source of this competition. Hawkins assumes that constituent order is determined by the syntactic weight of the constituents, a notion
that is supposed to reflect how easily the constituents can
be recognized by the human parser. According to Hawkins
(1992, p. 200), relative syntactic weight explains word orders
frequencies in corpora, as well as the relative acceptability of
different orders in native speaker’s judgments.
Hawkins proposes Immediate Constituent to Word Ratio
(ICR) as a metric for syntactic weight. Intuitively, ICR measures the length of a constituent relative to its position in the
clause (see Hawkins, 1992, for details). If two sentences differ in average ICR, the one with the higher average ICR is
predicted to be more acceptable. The ICR for a given word is
calculated as n/m, where n is the number of the constituent,
while m is the number the word, counted from left to right.
The average ICR for a sentence is obtained by averaging the
ICRs of its words. As an example, consider the ICRs for the
sentences in (1):
(7) a. M. glaubt, dass [[der Vater] [den Wagen] kauft.] ICR
1/1

1/2

2/3 2/4

3/5

.65

b. M. glaubt, dass [kauft [der Vater] [den Wagen.]] ICR
1/1

2/2 2/3

3/4

.86

Provided that subject and object have the same length, SO and
OS orders receive the same ICR, i.e., examples (1a) and (1b)
both have an ICR of .65 (see (7a)), while examples (1c)
and (1d) both receive an ICR of .86 (see (7b)). For pronominalized NPs, the following ICRs are predicted:
(8) a. Maria glaubt, dass [[er] [den Wagen] kauft.] ICR
1/1 2/2 2/3

3/4

.86

b. Maria glaubt, dass [[der Vater] [ihn] kauft.] ICR
1/1

1/2

2/3

3/4

.73

c. Maria glaubt, dass [[er] [ihn] kauft.] ICR
1/1 2/2

3/3

1.0

This means that Hawkins’s account predicts that pronouns
have to precede full NPs (if they are longer than a single
word). However, if both the subject and the object are pronouns, then both SO and OS receive an ICR of 1.0, i.e., they
should be equally acceptable.
Note that Hawkins predicts that information structure (focus and ground) should not play a role in determining word
order preferences, contrary to claims by Müller (1999) and
Uszkoreit (1987), among others.

Experiment
Method
Subjects Fifty-one native speakers of German participated
in the experiment. All participants were naive to syntactic theory.
Materials A factorial design was used that crossed the factors verb order (Vord), complement order (Cord), pronominalization (Pro), and context (Con). The factor Con had four
levels: null context, all focus, S focus, and O focus, as illustrated in (3). The factor Vord had four two levels: verb final

(see (1a), (1b)) and verb initial (see (1c), (1d)). The two levels of Cord were subject before object and object before subject, as in (1a), (1c) and (1b), (1d). In the null context condition, the factor Pro had four levels, viz., both S and O full
NPs, S pronoun and O full NP, S full NP and O pronoun, and
both S and O pronouns (see (2)). In the context condition,
Pro only had two levels, viz., no pronoun and pronoun. In the
all focus and S focus contexts, the object was pronominalized, while in the O focus context, the subject was pronominalized. This design ensures that the pronoun is interpreted as
ground and hence is unstressed (as the sentential stress has to
fall on the focussed constituent). We are only interested in the
syntactic behavior of weak (i.e., unstressed) pronouns; strong
(i.e., stressed) pronouns are subject to different syntactic constraints.
This yielded a total of Vord × Cord × Pro = 2 × 2 × 4 = 16
cells for the null context condition, and Vord × Cord × Pro ×
Con = 2 × 2 × 2 × 3 = 24 cells for the context condition. Eight
lexicalizations per cell were used, which resulted in a total of
320 stimuli. A set of 24 fillers was used in the null context
condition; 16 fillers were employed in the context condition.
The fillers were designed to cover the whole acceptability
range.
To control for possible effects from lexical frequency, the
lexicalizations for subject, object, and verb were matched for
frequency. Frequency counts for the verbs and the head nouns
were obtained from a lemmatized version of the Frankfurter
Rundschau corpus (40 million words of newspaper text) and
the average frequencies were computed for subject, object,
and verb lexicalizations. An ANOVA confirmed that these average frequencies were not significantly different from each
other.
Procedure The method used was magnitude estimation as
proposed by Stevens (1975) for psychophysics and extended
to linguistic stimuli by Bard et al. (1996) and Cowart (1997).
Subjects first saw a set of instructions that explained the
concept of numerical magnitude estimation using line length.
Subjects were instructed to make length estimates relative to
the first line they would see, the reference line. They were
told to give the reference line an arbitrary number, and then
assign a number to each following line so that it represented
how long the line was in proportion to the reference line.
Several example lines and corresponding numerical estimates
were provided to illustrate the concept of proportionality.
Then subjects were told that linguistic acceptability could be
judged in the same way as line length. The concept of linguistic acceptability was not defined, but examples of acceptable
and unacceptable sentences were provided.
The experiment started with a training phase designed to
familiarize subjects with the magnitude estimation task. Subjects had to estimate the length of a set of lines. Then, a set
of practice items (similar to the experimental items) were administered to familiarize subjects with applying magnitude
estimation to linguistic stimuli. Finally, subjects had to judge
the experimental items. A between subjects design was used
to administer the factor CON : subjects in Group A judged
non-contextualized stimuli, while subjects in Group B judged
contextualized stimuli. The factors Vord, Cord, and Pro were
administered within subjects. Using a Latin square design,
eight lexicalizations were created for each group. The lexi-

0.5

0.5
no pronoun
S pronoun
O pronoun
S and O pronoun

0.4

0.3
acceptability

acceptability

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

no pronoun
O pronoun

0.4
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

-0.2

-0.2

-0.3

-0.3

-0.4

-0.4
SOV

OSV

VSO

VOS

Figure 1: Interaction for word order and pronominalization,
null context

SOV

OSV

VSO

VOS

Figure 2: Interaction for word order and pronominalization,
all focus context
0.5
no pronoun
O pronoun

0.4
0.3
acceptability

calizations for Group A contained 16 items, while the ones
for Group B contained 24 items.
Each subject saw one lexicalization and 24 fillers in
Group A or one lexicalization and 16 fillers in Group B, i.e.,
a total of 40 items per group. Each subject was randomly assigned to a group and a lexicalization: 20 subjects were assigned to Group A, and 31 to Group B. Instructions, examples, training items, and fillers were adapted for Group B to
take context into account.

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

Results
The data were normalized by dividing each numerical judgment by the modulus value that the subject had assigned to the
reference sentence. This operation creates a common scale for
all subjects. All analyses were carried out on the geometric
means of the normalized judgments, as is standard for magnitude estimation data (Bard et al., 1996; Cowart, 1997).
In discussing the results, we make use of the following abbreviations: SO for subject before object, OS for object before
subject, XV for verb final, VX for verb initial. The indices
‘pro’ and ‘full’ indicate pronouns and full NPs, respectively.
For instance, VSfull Opro stands for an VSO order where the
subject is a full NP and the object is a pronoun.
Null Context Condition Figure 1 graphs the average judgments for each word order. An ANOVA for the null context condition revealed a highly significant main effect of
Vord (verb order) (F1 (1, 19) = 56.911, p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) =
621.924, p < .0005): XV orders (mean = .1879) were more
acceptable than VX orders (mean = −.2129). A highly significant main effect of Cord (complement order) was also
obtained (F1 (1, 19) = 26.966, p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) = 72.610,
p < .0005): SO orders (mean = .0659) were more acceptable than OS orders (mean = −.0909). The main effect
of Pro (pronominalization) was significant by subjects only
(F1 (3, 57) = 5.150, p = .003; F2 (3, 21) = 0.647, p = .593).
The ANOVA also revealed a significant interaction of Cord
and Pro (F1 (3, 57) = 13.026, p < .0005; F2 (3, 21) = 4.663,
p = .012). This indicates that pronominalization has an influence on complement order preference. We also found interactions of Cord and Vord (F1 (1, 19) = 47.437, p < .0005;
F2 (1, 7) = 17.148, p = .004) and of Vord and Pro (significant

-0.4
SOV

OSV

VSO

VOS

Figure 3: Interaction for word order and pronominalization,
subject focus context
by subjects only, F1 (3, 57) = 4.223, p = .009; F2 (3, 21) =
1.107, p = .368). A three-way interaction Vord/Cord/Pro was
also present (significant by subjects only, F1 (3, 57) = 7.415,
p = .009; F2 (3, 21) = 1.900, p = .161).
The meaning of the interactions involving Vord becomes
clear from Figure 1: the effect of pronominalization on complement order is limited to verb final orders; all verb initial
orders are equally unacceptable, independent of complement
order and pronominalization.
Context Condition Figures 2–4 graph the average judgments for each context. An ANOVA for the context condition
confirmed the main effect of verb order found in the null context condition (F1 (1, 30) = 121.507, p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) =
225.903, p < .0005): XV orders (mean = .2519) were more
acceptable than VX orders (mean = −.1973). The main effect
of complement order could also be replicated (F1 (1, 30) =
40.275, p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) = 15.359, p = .006): SO orders (mean = .0785) were more acceptable than OS orders
(mean = −.0239). A highly significant main effect of Con
(context) was also present (F1 (2, 60) = 28.953, p < .0005;
F2 (2, 14) = 54.056, p < .0005), as well as a weak effect of
Pro (F1 (2, 60) = 5.564, p = .025; F2 (2, 14) = 1.511, p =
.259).
The ANOVA uncovered an interaction of Cord and context,

0.5
no pronoun
S pronoun

0.4

acceptability

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
SOV

OSV

VSO

VOS

Figure 4: Interaction for word order and pronominalization,
object focus context
significant by subjects and marginal by items (F1 (2, 60) =
6.016, p = .004; F2 (2, 14) = 3.076, p = .078), which confirms that information structure (manipulated by context) has
an influence on complement order preferences. We also found
a marginal interaction of Cord and Pro (F1 (1, 30) = 4.025,
p = .054; F2 (1, 7) = 3.634, p = .098) and a highly significant interaction of Pro and context (F1 (2, 60) = 11.864,
p < .0005; F2 (2, 14) = 16.07, p < .0005). Recall that our
materials were designed such that in all focus and S focus
contexts, the object was pronominalized, while in an O focus context, the subject was pronominalized. This means that
the Cord/Pro and Pro/Con interactions are only meaningful with respect to the three-way interaction Cord/Pro/Con
which was also significant (F1 (2, 60) = 19.718, p < .0005;
F2 (2, 14) = 7.73, p = .005). This interaction demonstrates
that the ordering of pronouns is subject to contextual effects
(which will be discussed in the next section). The ANOVA also
showed an interaction of Vord and Cord (F1 (1, 30) = 50.960,
p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) = 7.221, p = .031) and of Vord and
context (F1 (2, 60) = 10.589, p < .0005; F2 (2, 14) = 11.945,
p = .001). The meaning of these interactions becomes clear
from Figures 2–4: the interaction between complement order
and context is limited to verb final orders; all verb initial orders are equally unacceptable, independent of context.

Discussion
All differences referred to in the following were significant
according to post-hoc Tukey tests (space limitations prevent
the inclusion of the full set of Tukey results).
Weighted Constraints The experimental findings for the
null context condition provided broad support for the ordering constraints in (4), initially proposed by Uszkoreit (1987).
There was a clear preference for XV over VX, in line with
the predictions of the verb ordering constraint V ERB . The
N OM constraint, which requires nominative to precede accusative, received support from the fact that SO orders were
more acceptable than OS orders. Finally, the constraint P RO ,
which requires that pronouns precede full NPs, explains why
Sfull Opro is less acceptable than Spro Ofull , while Ofull Spro is
less acceptable than both Ofull Sfull and Opro Sfull (see Figure 1).

The interactions involving the factor Vord demonstrated
that the effects of N OM and P RO disappear if the constraint
V ERB is violated. This indicates that a violation of V ERB
is more serious than violations of P RO or N OM, which in
Uszkoreit’s framework means that V ERB receives a higher
weight than both P RO and N OM .
The behavior of V ERB was replicated in the context condition. V ERB leads to serious unacceptability in all contexts and
blocks out all other constraint effects. Note, however, that we
found an interaction of P RO and context that does not readily follow from Uszkoreit’s account. The prediction that pronouns have to precede full NPs is only born out in the all focus context. In the S focus and O focus contexts, the effect of
P RO disappears, which might indicate that P RO is only valid
if the context fails to provide an antecedent for the pronoun.
S focus and O focus contexts showed evidence for F OC ,
the constraint that requires ground elements to precede focus
elements. In both contexts, SO was the preferred order, even
though it violates F OC in the S focus context; in both contexts, the acceptability of OS was reduced compared to SO.
However, this reduction was significantly higher in the O focus context, where OS violates F OC . The overall SO preference (even if it is disfavored by the context) indicates that
the effect of F OC is weak compared to the influence of N OM,
i.e., N OM should receive a higher weight than F OC . Only for
OS orders, i.e., when N OM is violated, the influence of F OC
becomes visible. No effects of context were found for VX orders, which indicates that F OC has a lower weight than V ERB,
just like N OM and P RO .
Overall, we have established the following facts about constraint weights: V ERB has a higher weight than P RO , N OM,
and F OC. N OM, on the other hand, has a greater weight than
F OC . This is compatible with the following weight assignments:
(9) w(V ERB ) = 3, w(P RO ) = w(N OM ) = 2,

w(F OC ) = 1

To conclude, our results provide support for Uszkoreit set of
word order constraints and show that his weighted constraint
model is able to account for the experimental data.
Optimality Theory Note that the weights in (9) can also be
interpreted as a set of OT-style constraint ranks:
(10) V ERB  {P RO , N OM}  F OC
This ranking is compatible with Müller’s ranking in (6). Note
that the effect of the A N (animacy) could not be tested in the
present experiment: all nominative NPs were animate, while
all accusative NPs were inanimate, hence a violation of NOM
also entails a violation of A N.
Müller distinguishes between grammaticality and markedness, and predicts that ungrammatical candidates are categorically unacceptable, while marked structures are only dispreferred. P RO is a classified as a grammatical constraint,
and hence should induce categorical unacceptability. Our
data provides counterevidence to this prediction: in the null
context, Sfull Opro V and Opro Sfull V are equally acceptable
(see Figure 1), even though Sfull Opro V violates P RO while
Opro Sfull V does not (the same pattern occurs in the all focus
and S focus contexts). This is unexpected under the assumption that P RO is grammatical constraint; the data suggest that
it should be reclassified as a markedness constraints.

On the other hand, V ERB seems to be a genuine grammatical constraint. Its violation leads to strong ungrammaticality
in all contexts, independently of which other constraints are
violated (see Figures 1–4). This indicates that V ERB (not explicitly dealt with by Müller) is a grammatical constraint.
Hence our data provides counterevidence for some aspects
of Müller’s particular account of word order in German. However, the main feature of his model, viz., the distinction between grammaticality and markedness, is supported by our
experimental results.
Syntactic Weight Several of the order preferences found
in this experiment are incompatible with Hawkins’s account
in terms of ICR. Most strikingly, we found that Sfull Ofull V
is more acceptable than Ofull Sfull V (see Figures 1–4), even
though both have the same ICR (see (7)).
As far as pronominalization is concerned, we found that in
the null context, Spro Ofull V is more acceptable than Sfull Opro V
and Opro Sfull V is more acceptable than Ofull Spro V (see Figure 1), consistent with the ICR predictions (see (8)). However, the predictions with respect to double pronouns were
not born out: these receive the maximum ICR score of 1.0,
but we found that the orders Spro Opro V and Opro Spro V are as
unacceptable as Sfull Opro V and Ofull Spro V, respectively, even
though these orders only have an ICR of .73 (see (8)). Also,
the fact that Sfull Opro V and Opro Sfull V are equally acceptable
is unexpected as these orders differ in ICR (see (8)). This observation holds across contexts, see Figures 1–4.
Also the focus effects we found are unexpected under a
syntactic weight account: the acceptability of OSV is increased in an O focus context (compared to an S focus context, see Figures 3, 4), even though the ICR remains constant.4 Finally, the fact that VX structures are severely unacceptable across the board does not follow from syntactic
weight—in fact VX orders have a higher ICR than XV orders
(see (7)).5
To summarize, while corpus data seems to support a syntactic weight account (see Hawkins, 1992, for details), the
acceptability judgments in our experiment are largely incompatible with Hawkins’s predictions.

Conclusions
We reported the results of a study of word order variation in
German that investigated the interaction of syntactic (complement order and verb order) and information structural
constraints (pronominalization and focus). The data were
used to evaluate a set of competition-based models of word
order, including (a) Uszkoreit’s (1987) weighted constraint
model, (b) Müller’s (1999) optimality theoretic account, and
(c) Hawkins’s (1992) syntactic weight model.
The experimental data are broadly compatible with models (a) and (b), indicating that a relativized (ranked or
weighted) notion of linguistic constraints is essential for explaining word order preferences. Model (c), however, was not
4 Note that Hawkins (1992, p. 196) concedes that informational
concepts like focus play a limited role in ‘structures for which syntactic weight makes either no predictions or weak predictions’.
5 However, Hawkins argues that languages can grammaticalize
word orders, which then are no longer subject to syntactic weight.
This would explain the general unacceptability of VX in subordinate
clauses in German.

well-supported by the data. While this model may be suitable
for describing word order distributions in corpora, it does not
seem to be directly applicable to contextualized acceptability
judgments such as the ones reported in the present paper.
On the other hand, we found that some of the individual
linguistic assumptions made by Uszkoreit and Müller were
not born out in our data. This highlights the fact that informal
acceptability judgments are not sufficient to clarify the intricate preference patterns that emerge from the interaction of
syntactic, pragmatic, and phonological constraints on word
order. Experimentally collected judgments are necessary to
obtain reliable, delicate data that can inform detailed models
of word order preferences.
The results of the present study have been replicated for
a free word order language (Greek) and for spoken stimuli
(Keller & Alexopoulou, 2000).

References
Bader, M., & Meng, M. (1999). Subject-object ambiguities in German embedded clauses: An across-the-board comparison. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28(2), 121–143.
Bard, E. G., Robertson, D., & Sorace, A. (1996). Magnitude estimation of linguistic acceptability. Language, 72(1), 32–68.
Choi, H.-W. (1996). Optimizing structure in context: Scrambling
and information structure. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Stanford University.
Cowart, W. (1997). Experimental syntax: Applying objective methods to sentence judgments. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Haider, H. (1993). Deutsche Syntax generativ: Vorstudien zur Theorie einer projektiven Grammatik. Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Hawkins, J. A. (1992). Syntactic weight versus information structure in word order variation. In J. Jacobs (Ed.), Informationsstruktur und Grammatik (pp. 196–219). Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Jacobs, J. (1988). Probleme der freien Wortstellung im Deutschen.
In I. Rosengren (Ed.), Sprache und Pragmatik (Vol. 5, pp. 8–37).
Department of German, Lund University.
Keller, F. (1998). Gradient grammaticality as an effect of selective constraint re-ranking. In M. C. Gruber, D. Higgins, K. S.
Olson, & T. Wysocki (Eds.), Papers from the 34th Meeting of
the Chicago Linguistic Society (Vol. 2: The Panels, pp. 95–109).
Chicago.
Keller, F., & Alexopoulou, T. (2000). Phonology competes with
syntax: Experimental evidence for the interaction of word order
and accent placement in the realization of information structure
(Rutgers Optimality Archive No. ROA-351-1099).
Müller, G. (1999). Optimality, markedness, and word order in German. Linguistics, 37(5), 777–818.
Pechmann, T., Uszkoreit, H., Engelkamp, J., & Zerbst, D. (1994).
Word order in the German middle field: Linguistic theory and
psycholinguistic evidence (CLAUS Report No. 43). Department
of Computational Linguistics, Saarland University.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993). Optimality Theory: Constraint
interaction in generative grammar (Technical Report No. 2).
Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers University.
Scheepers, C. (1997). Menschliche Satzverarbeitung: syntaktische
und thematische Aspekte der Wortstellung im Deutschen. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Freiburg.
Schütze, C. T. (1996). The empirical base of linguistics: Grammaticality judgments and linguistic methodology. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Stevens, S. S. (Ed.). (1975). Psychophysics: Introduction to its perceptual, neural, and social prospects. New York: John Wiley.
Uszkoreit, H. (1987). Word order and constituent structure in German. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Vallduvı́, E. (1992). The informational component. New York:
Garland.

