UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Goal Specificity and Learning with a Multimedia Program

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7102p5wc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Vollmeyer, Regina
Burns, Bruce D.
Rheinberg, Falko

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Goal Specificity and Learning with a Multimedia Program
Regina Vollmeyer (vollmeye@rz.uni-potsdam.de)
Institut für Psychologie, Universität Potsdam, Postfach 601553
14415 Potsdam, Germany
Bruce D. Burns (burnsbr@pilot.msu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1117
Falko Rheinberg (rheinberg@rz.uni-potsdam.de)
Institut für Psychologie, Universität Potsdam, Postfach 601553
14415 Potsdam, Germany
Abstract
Previous research has found that nonspecific goals (NSG) lead to
better learning than a specific goal (SG). We studied this effect
with a multimedia program in which participants had to learn about
the outbreak of World War 1 either with the goal to find twenty
dates (i.e., SG) or with the goal to explain the reasons for the war
(i.e., NSG). As expected, the NSG-group better remembered facts
about the text during the task and knew more at the end than the
SG-group. The NSG-group may also better transfer what they had
learnt to a new situation. To try to explain this effect, a number of
process variables (strategy systematicity, motivation, number of
pages read) were measured. SG- and NSG-group differed in terms
of which variable best predicted learning: As expected, for the
NSG-group challenge was the best predictor of performance, but
probability of success was the best for the SG-group.

Introduction
Effects of goal specificity on problem solving have been
found in a number of recent studies (Geddes & Stevenson
1997; Miller, Lehman, & Koedinger, 1999; Sweller, 1988;
Vollmeyer, Burns, & Holyoak, 1996). All these studies have
found that giving problem solvers a specific goal state to
reach led to poorer learning of the task than if they were
given a nonspecific goal, such as to explore. However a
difficulty has arisen when trying to form general
conclusions about this work and its scope: different
researchers have used very different tasks and have given
different instantiations to the concept of goal specificity.
Further the question arises of what relationship does the
work on goal specificity in problem solving have to other
goal specificity in organization psychology (see Locke &
Latham, 1990), and possibly related research, such as that
into explanation effects (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, &
Glaser, 1989).
To deal with this issue, in this paper we propose a
conceptualization that generalizes what goal specificity is
and applies that concept to the development of a new task
for investigating goal specificity effects. This paper is a
preliminary study that aimed to demonstrate goal specificity
effects with a new task, and to show that this task has the
potential to increase our knowledge of why such effects
occur. We chose to use a multimedia learning program as

our task, both because of the explosion of interest in such
programs (Issing & Klimsa, 1997) as cheap computer
technology becomes widely available, and because it is very
different to the problem solving tasks with which goal
specificity effects have previously been found.

Defining Goal Specificity
In Vollmeyer et al. (1996) we proposed that goal specificity
effects could be explained in terms of dual-space theories of
problem solving (Klahr & Dunbar, 1988; Simon & Lea,
1974). Specific goals (SG) could be seen as encouraging
search of an instance or experiment space. Such a space
corresponds to what is usually meant when we refer to
problem solving as search; that is, we set specific subgoals
that are part of that space and reach the goal via those
subgoals. A specific goal is a state in such a problem space,
which is why specific goals encourage a focus on this space.
In contrast, a nonspecific goal (NSG) could be seen as
encouraging search of rule or hypothesis space. Such a
search space contains the possible rules or hypotheses that
may govern the task, but testing such rules requires a
coordinated search of instance and rule space.
If we assume that dual space theories provide an
appropriate way to characterize specific and nonspecific
goals, then it provides a definition of goal specificity.
Specific goals are goals that promote reaching set states,
nonspecific goals are those that encourage discovery of the
nature of the task. By this definition, goal specificity
qualitatively affects how people learn, not just how much.
Self-explanation Theory. Chi et al. (1989) found that
students who explained math problems to themselves did
better than students who only worked out examples.
Although they do not use the term goal specificity, their
characterization of explanations seems to fit to our
definition of a nonspecific goal. Explaining math problems
requires understanding the principles they are based on,
whereas not requiring explanation allows problem solvers to
focus on the solution alone.
However, self-explaining students took more time for the
same task, thus, it could have been that time on task was a
moderating variable. In several studies of the self-

explanation effect, Renkl (1997; for an overview, see Renkl,
1999) pointed out that time-on-task could be a moderator of
performance. Self-explaining students take more time if
given the opportunity, so in his experiments Renkl
controlled for time and manipulated self-explanation in
asking the self-explanation group to learn in a way they
could explain the task to another person. Although both
groups worked for the same amount of time, the selfexplanation group had better learning outcomes than a
group who only solved the problems. Therefore time-ontask appears to be important in these types of tasks.
Goal Specificity in Organizational Psychology. In
organizational psychology, what has been known as goal
specificity has been studied extensively in terms of goal
setting (see Locke & Latham, 1990). In this literature
specific goals are a form of target (e.g., “Make ten widgets”)
whereas nonspecific goals are general admonitions to do
well (e.g., “Make as many widgets as possible”). Tubbs’
meta-analysis (1986) showed that specific goals help
performance (d = .82), although some studies reported
exactly the opposite. However these goals are specific and
nonspecific in a different way to what has been meant in
problem solving research. These goals are forms of targets,
rather than states of the problem. Using our definition of
goal specificity, we can see that the question of whether the
two types of specificity are related depends on how these
target goals might affect which space learners focus on. In
this paper we will not address the possible connections
between these two types of goal specificity.
Goal Specificity in Multimedia. In the literature on
learning from multimedia texts, open tasks have been found
to lead to better understanding than closed tasks. In their
meta-analysis, Chen and Rada (1996) found consistently
strong evidence that learners given an open task were more
effective than learners given a closed task. However, there is
a huge variety in what is subsumed under the closed or open
manipulation. In general, closed tasks can be seen as those
presenting learners with specific goals, for example to find a
particular piece of information, whereas open tasks have
very general goals, for example to learn for a test. Thus this
distinction can be seen as roughly fitting to our definition of
goal specificity: closed and open tasks are those with
specific and nonspecific goals, respectively. Learning with
multimedia is a particularly interesting domain for
examining goal specificity as how people gather information
can be explicitly coded by looking at the sequence of
actions they perform on the computer. So it provides an
opportunity for us to try to measure strategies.
Goal Specificity and Motivation. Kanfer and Ackerman
(1989) proposed that goal specificity might affect
motivation. To examine this issue we applied Vollmeyer
and Rheinberg's model (1998). They proposed a model that
assumes that initial motivation affects learning through the
mediating variables of motivational state during learning
and strategies used for learning. The initial motivation
contains four factors: (1) probability of success, which is the
learners’ level of certainty about whether they will succeed

in performing the task; (2) fear, which is how anxious
learners are about failing in the task; (3) challenge, which is
the extent to which learners perceive this task as requiring
competence; and, (4) interest, which is how much learners
like the topic of the program.
Schiefele (1996) reported that in several experiments
interest had a positive effect on text learning, especially on
understanding texts as opposed to learning facts. Given that
interest and challenge are highly correlated (Rheinberg &
Vollmeyer, in press), we assumed that challenge would have
the same effect. For facts, we assumed that good learning
depends more on the learner's expectancy of receiving a
good result. Our nonspecific goal definition can be seen as
equivalent to what Schiefele called understanding-oriented
learning, whereas our specific goal definition corresponds
to fact learning. Therefore we expected that in a nonspecific
goal condition initial interest and challenge would predict
learning but in the specific goal condition probability of
success and fear (which are indicators of expectancy) should
be better predictors.

Study Aims
This paper reports our first exploration of a multimedia
program we developed to study goal specificity. To develop
this task we had to determine how to apply the concept of
goal specificity in problem solving to a very different task.
Multimedia Program. The topic of the program was the
outbreak of World War 1. The computer could present up to
51 different pages describing the events leading up to the
start of the war. Each page had links to other pages and
could have links to videos, sound files, or text boxes
containing additional information. Most of the pages were
arranged into five sequences, each describing the events
occurring in one of the five critical countries (AustriaHungary, England, France, Germany, and Russia). In
addition, topics such as nationalism and imperialism were
covered. As an event could concern two or three countries
(e.g., declaration of war), learners sometimes saw the same
page in the sequence for multiple countries. After every
page learners could decide whether to continue reading
pages about the same country or to switch to another
country or topic. Thus the program provided us with a way
to examine the learners strategies. In Vollmeyer et al. (1996)
we found that strategy systematicity was critical to
performance but the task was so different that we could not
use this operationalization. Therefore in the multimedia
program we operationalized systematicity as the extent to
which learners followed sequences, instead of jumping from
one topic to another.
To operationalize goal specificity, Chi et al.'s (1989) idea
of explanation seemed most applicable to this task given our
definition of goal specificity. So we had NSG learners go
through the program with the goal of explaining the
outbreak of World War 1 to someone else. However unlike
Chi et al. we did not have participants give explanations
during the task. To increase the contrast between NSG and
SG learners, the SG-learners were given a list of 20 specific
events and asked to fill in the dates for those events.

Predictions. We expected the NSG group to learn more
than the SG group, and to be better able to transfer the
lessons of the outbreak of World War 1 to another situation.
We expected this greater learning to be a result of NSG
learners being more systematic. As the NSG learners are
more systematic, that is they put more effort into
understanding the content of a page they should spend more
time per page than SG participants.
We did not expect goal specificity effects on initial
motivation. However, the motivational state during learning
may change during the task in different ways for the two
groups as they react to their perceived success or failure in
attaining their goal. In particular we tested Schiefele’s
(1996) proposal that challenge and interest would relate
more strongly to performance for NSG than for SG learners.

Experiment
Method
Participants. Forty-five students at the University of
Potsdam participated in the study and received DM 10.00 (~
US$5) or course credit.
Design. There were two levels of goal specificity. The SG
group consisted of 24 participants who received instructions
to look for dates in the history multimedia program. The
NSG group consisted of 21 participants who were told to
understand the problem as if they would have to explain it to
another person.
Procedure. Before the participants started working with the
multimedia program they read that they would learn about
the outbreak of World War 1. They were informed that they
would work with the program for about 25 minutes and then
answer a questionnaire. We set a fixed time span as we felt
it was important to control for time in order to remove any
possibility of time-on-task being used as a factor to explain
goal effects. We also told participants that they would be
interrupted at various times so that we could ask them what
they thought about the task. These interruptions were
necessary in order to measure participants’ motivational
states and to sample their knowledge. The instructions also
contained the goal specificity manipulation. The NSG
participants were asked to “...work with the program so that
you could tell another person about the reasons for the
outbreak of World War 1.” The SG participants were asked
to “... work with the program so that you can fill out
correctly the following time-line.” The time-line consisted
of twenty events, such as the assassination in Sarajevo, for
which the learners had to find the dates in the program.
After reading the instruction participants answered the
QCM (Questionnaire of Current Motivation, by Vollmeyer
& Rheinberg, 1998). This questionnaire measured their
initial motivation on the four factors probability of success
(example items: “I think I am up to the difficulty of the
task”, “I probably won’t manage to do this task”), fear
(example items: “It would be embarrassing to fail at this
task”, “I feel petrified by the demands of this task”), interest
(example items: “After having read the instruction the task
seems to be very interesting to me”, ”For tasks like this I

don’t need a reward, they are lots of fun anyhow.”), and
challenge (example items: “This task is a real challenge for
me”, “If I can do this task, I will feel proud of myself”).
When working with the multimedia program participants
were interrupted every seven minutes for a total of three
times. During each of the three interruptions they were
asked to answer two types of questions: a motivational state
questionnaire, and one factual question about each of the
last three pages the participants had seen in the program.
Process Variables. Three process variables were measured
while learning.
(1) Motivational state. Every seven minutes participants
answered ten questions (example items: “The task is fun”,
“I’m sure I will find the correct solution”) on a seven-point
scale. A composite score was calculated to represent
motivational state. Responses were averaged together.
(2) Strategy systematicity. Our aim was to find indicators for
how systematically a learner works through the program. As
this was our first use of this multimedia program, it was not
clear what the best measure was. We chose to measure how
often learners read a page that followed from the previous
one, as opposed to jumping to a new topic. This variable
was called sequence. For this we counted the pages that
followed logically from the previous one. We then divided
this count by the total number of pages participants looked
at. An example of following a sequence would be if after the
first page for Germany the second page for Germany was
looked at. Switching to the first page of France would have
been counted as not following the sequence.
(3) Number of pages. We counted the number of pages that
participants looked at for more than five seconds. Pages
looked at for 5s or less were probably mistakes, or arose
because the learner realized they had already read the page.
Given that each learner was given about the same amount of
time to work with the program, we expected that looking at
fewer pages would be an indicator of going into the contents
of the pages in greater depth.
Outcome Variables. To measure knowledge we used a
pilot study to develop a questionnaire. For every page that
was part of a sequence for a country or side topic (34 in all),
we formulated a multiple-choice question with five options.
As we had the hypothesis that NSG-learners would read
more carefully than SG-learners we formulated factual as
well as inference questions, similar to the suggestion of
Royer, Carlo, Dufresne and Mestre (1996). So 24 pages had
factual questions, ten had inference questions, and one
general question was asked.
There were three outcome variables, two were indicators
of knowledge and one of transfer.
(1) Sampled knowledge. The relevant item from the
questionnaire was asked about each of the last three pages
learners had seen.
(2) Accumulated knowledge. After participants had worked
with the multimedia program for approximately twenty-five
minutes, they were given the whole questionnaire.
(3) Transfer. If NSG-participants understood the program
on a deeper level then they should have an advantage in

understanding a similar situation. So we asked them to
imagine a scenario in which four tribes were deciding
whether to form alliances. Analogous to World War 1,
between some tribes there were permanent conflicts over
resources and between some there were no fundamental
problems. Participants took the role of one tribe’s leader and
decided whether to form an alliance, then justified their
answer. The arguments of participants agreeing to make an
alliance were classified into two categories: security (“It’s
more secure to have partners.”), and nationalism (“Having a
partner gives my tribe more power.”). Participants who
disagreed with making an alliance had their arguments
classified as either war avoidance (“My tribe has to help the
partner in a conflict even if it is not our conflict.”), or
egoism (“I don’t want to fight for others.”). The
participants’ statements could be assigned to categories with
an inter-rater reliability of Cohen’s (1960) κ = .94.
Nationalism and egoism explanations were considered less
interesting as they were only seldom mentioned in an
unpublished pilot study.

their learning performance. For knowledge during learning,
the possible range for correct answers was 0 to 9 (three
times questions about three pages). As expected, the SGgroup could not answer correctly as many questions as the
NSG-group, t(43) = 3.34, p = .002, as the means in Table 1
show. The same effect was found on the multiple-choice
questions after learning with the program. The answers were
adjusted in that answers were only analyzed to questions
about pages participants had actually seen. Thus the means
in Table 1 show the proportion of correct answers to pages
seen. For the factual questions, the NSG-group answered
44%, compared to 29% for the SG-participants, t(43) =
4.18, p < .001. NSG-participants were also better on
inference questions, t(43) = 3.20, p = .003. Even if we had
not applied the adjustment, the effect for goal specificity on
knowledge for facts holds (SG: M = 8.96, SD = 3.62; NSG:
M = 12.67, SD = 3.34, t[43] = 3.56, p = .001) as well as for
inferences (SG: M = 3.08, SD = 1.21; NSG: M = 4.52, SD =
1.86, t[43] = 3.11, p = .003).
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the SG-group (n = 24) and
the NSG-group (n = 21) on process and dependent variables.

Results
Preliminary Analyses. Our intention was to examine the
process of learning by measuring the variables motivational
state and sampled knowledge, so we interrupted learning
three times. However, motivational state during learning
stayed constant (motivational state at time point 1: M =
5.42, SD = 0.76; at time point 2: M = 5.49, SD = 0.82; at
time point 3: M = 5.52, SD = 0.90; F[2, 86] = 0.84, p =
0.44) and at a high level (scale from 1 = low motivational
state to 7 = high motivational state). There was no feedback
given to participants, but this result suggests that learners
did not experience success or failure while working with the
program. If they had done so, then motivation would
probably have increased or decreased, as Vollmeyer,
Rheinberg, and Burns (1998) showed.
The second variable was sampled knowledge. As a
consequence of the design this measure should not change
over time as participants always received questions about
the last three pages they saw. As the pages were not
cumulative, answers to these questions cannot reflect
accumulation of knowledge. Instead they sample how well
the participants were learning as they worked through the
program. For each set of three questions learners scored
between 0 and 3. We also tested whether knowledge was
constant during learning. Because we expected no
difference between knowledge sampled at different points,
we averaged the knowledge scores as well as the
motivational states.
Effects of Goal Specificity. The first aim of our study was
to test the hypothesis that learners with a specific goal
acquired less knowledge then participants with a nonspecific
goal. Achieving a worse outcome may be a result of poor
strategies and/or motivation, which were measured as
mediating variables.
The most important measures were knowledge during
learning and accumulated knowledge, as these should
demonstrate that giving participants specific goals decreased

sampled knowledge
knowledge (facts)
knowledge (inference)
number of pages
Interest
Challenge
probability of success
Fear
motivation during learning
sequence

Groups
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG
SG
NSG

M
3.79
5.52
0.29
0.44
0.23
0.37
46.58
39.43
4.93
4.93
4.96
4.58
5.47
5.45
2.68
3.06
5.47
5.49
0.71
0.73

SD
1.74
1.72
0.12
0.13
0.12
0.16
13.72
9.83
1.32
0.99
1.00
0.89
0.85
1.04
1.10
1.38
0.70
0.86
0.01
0.01

We found a clear effect of goal specificity on learning
outcomes, so we tested whether our goal specificity
manipulation affected process variables. As Table 1 shows,
SG-participants looked at more pages, t(43) = 1.98, p =
0.054. Although this effect was not quite significant, we
analyzed the process and dependent variables by relating
them to the number of pages looked at.
We did not expect any effect of goal specificity on initial
motivation. As the means in Table 1 indicate, none of the
four factors of initial motivation (interest, challenge,
probability of success, fear) differed, p’s < 0.15. As the
items were answered on a scale from 1 to 7, the means

demonstrate that all participants regarded the task as easy
(probability of success: M = 5.26, SD = 0.93), interesting
(interest: M = 4.93, SD = 1.17), challenging (challenge: M =
4.78, SD = 0.95), and that it aroused few fears (fear: M =
2.85, SD = 1.24).
As process variables, motivational state and strategy
systematicity were measured. The motivational state
measure (averaged over three time points) did not
differentiate the SG-group from the NSG-group, t(43) =
0.11, p = 0.92. The indicator for how systematically learners
work with the multimedia program was the proportion of
pages that followed logically from the previous page.
Although we had expected that the SG-group would jump
around more in the program, we could not find a difference,
t(43) = 0.83, p = .41. Across both groups, participants chose
the next logical page 73% of the time; that is, they followed
the sequence for the country they were reading about
We expected that NSG participants faced with our
transfer task would be less likely to agree to an alliance that
risked a wider war. Therefore, we tested whether the groups
differed in who would agree to an alliance and what
argument they would use. As Table 2 shows, there was a
tendency for more SG-participants than NSG-participants to
agree to an alliance, χ2(1) = 3.27, p = .071.
Table 2: Number of participants in SG- and NSG-group
agreeing to an alliance.

SG
NSG

agreement to alliance
alliance
no alliance
12
12
5
16

When we categorized the arguments used to justify
whether to enter an alliance, we dropped the categories of
nationalism (one in each group) and egoism (7 in SG, 6 in
NSG) from the analysis. These two categories are unlikely
to be influenced by the program. Of the remaining two
categories, we found that war avoidance (the theme our
participants would be likely to use if they understood the
program) was used as a justification more often by NSG
participants than SG participants, who instead were more
likely to use security as a justification, χ2 (1) = 4.82, p =
.028 (see Table 3). Thinking in terms of security might be a
more surface reaction to the event described in the program.
Table 3: Distribution of the SG- and NSG-group which
arguments were given for or against alliance.

SG
NSG

argument pro/con alliance
war avoidance
security
5
11
10
4

Cognitive-motivational Model. The aim of the study was
to explore whether the concept of goal specificity could be
applied to a more realistic multimedia task. Previously we
have looked at how motivation may affect the learning
process in different ways depending on the goal (Vollmeyer,

et al., 1998). However, the sample size in this preliminary
study is not large enough for the type of path analyses
required to examine this issue. Therefore, a first step was to
look for differences between groups in term of which
variables affected accumulated knowledge. As knowledge
for facts and inferences were correlated, r = 0.66, p < 0.001,
and there were fewer inference questions than fact
questions, we will only report knowledge for facts. Number
of pages also did not relate to motivation. Correlations of
final knowledge with initial motivation and process
variables are presented in Table 4.
Independent of the manipulation, sampled knowledge and
strategy systematicity (i.e., sequence) should be positively
correlated with accumulated knowledge. Whereas for
sampled knowledge a relationship to accumulated
knowledge was found, this was not the case for sequence.
The latter result makes doubtful whether sequence is a valid
indicator for strategy systematicity.
We examined Schiefele’s (1996) proposal that interest and
challenge could play a more important role for NSG
learners. Table 4 shows that interest and challenge correlate
with accumulated knowledge for the NSG-group but not for
the SG-group. However, the difference in correlations is
only significant for challenge (z = 2.59, p = 0.014).
To analyze which variable was the best predictor for
accumulated knowledge, we calculated a regression on the
four initial motivational factors, motivation during learning
and sampled knowledge. As the correlations had shown
different patterns in the experimental groups, they were
analyzed separately. For the SG-group the best predictor for
knowledge is probability of success, β = 0.46, t = 2.56, p =
0.018, R2 = .23, whereas for the NSG-group challenge, β =
0.61, t = 3.42, p = 0.003, R2 = .27, is the best.
Table 4: Correlations r (p) of accumulated knowledge with
initial motivation and process variables separated in SG- (n
= 24) and NSG-groups (n = 21).

sampled knowledge
interest
challenge
probability of success
fear
motivation during learning
sequence

Correlations with
accumulated knowledge
SG
NSG
0.35 (0.10)
0.46 (0.03)
0.02 (0.92)
0.51 (0.02)
-0.23 (0.28)
0.51 (0.02)
0.48 (0.02)
0.31 (0.17)
-0.45 (0.03) -0.31 (0.17)
0.19 (0.37)
0.39 (0.08)
-0.11 (0.62) -0.14 (0.55)

Discussion
The major result of our study was that we could demonstrate
an effect of goal specificity on a more realistic task than
those on which this type of research has previously been
based. Switching from a problem-solving task to multimedia
learning in the domain of history presented two difficulties:
the first was that goal specificity had to be re-interpreted,
the second was that the theoretical constructs needed new
operationalizations.

Goal Specificity. With a new task and a different
operationalization of goal specificity we could replicate the
effect that an NSG group would learn more than a SG
group, even when the task was to learn about the causes that
led to the outbreak of World War 1. Therefore we met our
aim of generalizing the concept of goal specificity from
problem solving to multimedia learning.
Goals and Motivation. Compared to our research on
problem solving, motivation during the task seemed to play
a different role when working with a multimedia program.
As our previous task was difficult to solve, motivation
changed while working with that task. When working with
this shorter and easier program no changes of motivation
during learning were observed, but initial motivation was
more predictive than was previously found. However, what
motivational factors were most influential varied with goal
specificity. For NSG interest and challenge were most
important, but for SG fear and probability of success were.
This provides further evidence that the way motivation
affects performance varies with the type of goal.
Operationalizations of Theoretical Constructs. In a
problem solving task every input can be categorized on a
continuum of systematicity, but with a multimedia program
it is not clear how to operaterationalize this variable. Even if
learners can choose after every page what to see next, it is
unclear whether choosing the next page in the sequence is a
systematic strategy as we defined it. As our measure does
not correlate with performance it is still open as to whether
this is a valid measure. However, we have shown that this is
a useful task for examining goal specificity, so it should be
worthwhile in future research to try to develop and validate
better measures of strategy.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the German-American
Academic Council to Regina Vollmeyer and Bruce Burns.

References
Chen, C. & Rada, R. (1996). Interacting with hypertext: A
meta-analysis of experimental studies. Human-Computer
Interaction, 11, 125-156.
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 18, 439-477.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,
37-46.
Geddes, B.W. & Stevenson, R.J. (1997). Explicit learning of
a dynamic system with a non-salient pattern. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A,
742-765.
Issing, L.J. & Klimsa, P. (1997). Information und Lernen
mit Multimedia [Information and learning with
multimedia] (2nd ed.). Weinheim: Psychologie Verlags
Union.
Kanfer, R. & Ackerman, P.L. (1989). Motivation and

cognitive abilities: An integrative/aptitude-treatment
interaction approach to skill acquisition. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 74, 657-690.
Klahr, D. & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-55.
Locke, E.A. & Latham, G.P. (1990). A theory of goal setting
and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Miller, C.S., Lehman, J.F., & Koedinger, K.R. (1999).
Goals and learning in microworlds. Cognitive Science, 23,
305-336.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A
study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 129.
Renkl, A. (1999). Learning mathematics from worked-out
examples: Analyzing and fostering self-explanations.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 477488.
Rheinberg, F. & Vollmeyer, R. (in press). Sachinteresse und
leistungsthematische Herausforderung [Topic interest and
achievement thematic challenge]. In U. Schiefele & K.P.
Wild (Eds.). Lernumgebung, Lernmotivation und
Lernverhalten. Münster: Waxmann.
Royer, J.M., Carlo, M.S., Dufresne, R., & Mestre, J. (1996).
The assessment of levels of domain expertise while
reading. Cognition and Instruction, 14, 373-408.
Schiefele, U. (1996). Motivation und Lernen mit Texten
[Motivation and text learning ]. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Simon, H.A. & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule
induction: A unified view. In L.W. Gregg (Ed.),
Knowledge and cognition (pp. 105-127). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving:
Effects of learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285.
Tubbs, M.E. (1986). Goal setting: A meta-analytic
examination of the empirical evidence. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 71, 474-483.
Vollmeyer, R., Burns, B.D., & Holyoak, K.J. (1996). The
impact of goal specificity on strategy use and the
acquisition of problem structure. Cognitive Science, 20,
75-100.
Vollmeyer, R. & Rheinberg, F. (1998). Motivationale
Einflüsse auf Erwerb und Anwendung von Wissen in
einem computersimulierten System [Motivational
influences on the acquisition and application of
knowledge in a simulated system]. Zeitschrift für
Pädagogische Psychologie, 12, 11-23.
Vollmeyer, R., Rheinberg, F., & Burns, B.D. (1998). Goals,
strategies, and motivation. In M.A. Gernsbacher & S.J.
Derry (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 10901095). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

