UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Human Belief Revision and the Order Effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3wb4r7kf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Wang, Hongbin
Zhang, Jiajie
Johnson, Todd R.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Human Belief Revision and the Order Effect
Hongbin Wang (Hongbin.Wang@uth.tmc.edu)
Jiajie Zhang (Jiajie.Zhang@uth.tmc.edu)
Todd R. Johnson (Todd.R.Johnson@uth.tmc.edu)

Department of Health Informatics1
University of Texas - Houston Health Science Center
7000 Fannin, Suite 600
Houston, TX 77030

Abstract
The order effect, a phenomenon in which the final belief is
significantly affected by the temporal order of information
presentation, is a robust empirical finding in human belief revision. This paper investigates how order effects occur, on
the basis that human belief has a coherence foundation and a
probability/confidence distinction. Both the experimental results and the UEcho modeling suggest that confidence plays
an important role in human belief revision. Order effects in
human belief revision occur where confidence is low and disappear when confidence increases. UEcho provides a computational model of human belief revision and order effects

Introduction
It is generally agreed that one constantly conducts belief
revision – a process in which one revises one’s beliefs in the
light of new information, with a goal to maintain a reasonably consistent and up-to-date belief system. It is of great
philosophical and psychological interest to investigate
whether one is able to achieve such a goal and what the underlying regularities are.
Psychological investigations of human belief revision
have revealed an important finding – the order effect (e.g.,
Hogarth & Einhorn, 1992; Schlottmann & Anderson, 1995;
Zhang, Johnson, & Wang, 1997). Generally speaking, the
order effect refers to the phenomenon that the temporal order in which information is presented affects the final judgment of an event. Undoubtedly, the temporal order of incoming evidence often carries important information about
the true meaning of an event. However, robust order effects
have been found even in situations where the temporal order
of incoming evidence seems not meaningful. It is these
cases that make the order effect a very interesting phenomenon.
This paper aims to investigate how order effects occur in
human belief revision, both empirically and computationally. It consists of four sections. In the first section, some
previous studies on human belief and belief revision, uncertainty, and order effects are briefly reviewed. Then a psychological experiment and its UEcho modeling (see Wang,
Johnson, Zhang; 1998; Wang, 1998) are reported in the next

two sections. The final section provides general discussions
and conclusions.

Human Belief Revision and Uncertainty
There are two main views regarding how an unconvinced
belief could be justified (e.g., Gardenfors, 1990). According
to the foundations approach, a rational individual derives
beliefs from reasons for these beliefs. In other words, a
belief is justified if and only if it possesses some satisfactory
and “hard” underlying reasons. The coherence approach, in
contrast, maintains that a belief may be held independent of
its supporting reasons. An individual holds a belief as long
as it logically coheres with the individual’s other beliefs.
Therefore, coherent beliefs can mutually justify each other,
and no belief is more fundamental than another.
How beliefs are justified has a direct implication on how
beliefs should be revised when new information becomes
available. Based on the foundations view, one should simply
give up those beliefs that lose their underlying reasons and
accept new beliefs that become well supported. An example
is the Truth Maintenance System developed by Doyle
(1979). In contrast, the coherence view emphasizes consistency and conservatism. Therefore, in belief revision one
should retain as many of one’s beliefs as possible while accommodating any new evidence. In other words, as long as
the coherence of the resulting state is maintained, a belief
can survive without solid reasons. The so-called AGM theory of belief revision (Alchourron, Gardenfors and Makinson, 1985; Gardenfors, 1990) is one well-known example
that adopts the coherence approach.
The coherence approach to human belief revision is generally preferred (see Gardenfors, 1990; Thagard, 1989). It
has been argued that the foundational approach involves
excessive computational cost. It is intellectually very costly
to keep track of the reasons of beliefs. Moreover, it has
been shown that the foundational approach conflicts with
observed human behavior. For example, the belief preservation effect (e.g., Ross & Lepper, 1980) suggests that people are reluctant to give up some beliefs even when the
original evidential bases of these beliefs are completely destroyed.

1
Portions of this research were conducted when the authors were at The Ohio State University, Departments of Psychology (Drs. Wang
and Zhang) and Pathology (Dr. Johnson).

Uncertainty is the ultimate reason for human belief and its
revision. It is well agreed that there are two general types of
uncertainty (see Walley, 1991). First, when the truth of a
proposition is unknown but the average proportion of that
proposition being true in the long run can be precisely specified, the indeterminacy involved in this case is called uncertainty. An example is tossing a fair coin. Second, in some
cases, one can neither completely determine the truth of a
proposition nor precisely specify the average proportion of
that proposition being true in the long run. This type of
uncertainty – the indeterminacy of the average behavior – is
usually called imprecision.
The distinction between imprecision and uncertainty is so
fundamental that it has caused a “holy war” in the field of
uncertainty management. On the one hand, probability theory (along with Bayes’ Theorem for belief revision), the
best-established formal method for uncertainty management, has long been criticized for its difficulty in handling
imprecision. It has been suggested that while a probability
number is sufficient to summarize the uncertainty dimension, a confidence measure is needed to handle the imprecision dimension, with a high confidence measure representing precise belief and a low confidence measure representing imprecise belief (see Almond, 1995). On the other
hand, fuzzy sets and the possibility theory (see Zadeh, 1978)
often deal with imprecision but not uncertainty. The theory
of belief functions (see Shafer, 1976) deals with both imprecision and uncertainty. Along with Dempster’s rule for evidence combination, it thus provides a more complete picture
of formal belief management.

The Order Effect
A large number of empirical studies on human reasoning
have demonstrated that people often systematically deviate
from normative postulates. With the assumption that these
normative postulates prescribe how a reasonable individual
should behave, these systematic deviations are often labeled
as cognitive illusions, biases, or fallacies (e.g., Kahneman,
Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). Several well-known biases include base rate fallacy, conjunction fallacy, and overconfidence(see Kahneman & Tversky, 1996 for a review).
The order effect in human belief revision is yet another
robust empirical finding (e.g., Hogarth & Einhorn, 1992).
By a similar standard, the order effect should also be called
a bias since the normative postulates, in particular Bayes’
Theorem, have no room for it – it simply violates commutativity. However, as many researchers have already pointed
out, calling it a bias is nothing more than giving it a label,
which provides no help to understand how and why the order effect occurs.
Miller and Campbell (1959) argue that order effects in belief revision represent order effects in memory. Specifically, due to memory decay, previous evidence items get
weighted less as time goes by. Later studies showed that
this view is problematic since direct comparisons suggest
that beliefs are largely independent of recall of evidence
items (e.g., Anderson & Hubert, 1963).
The serial integration model (e.g., Schlottmann & Anderson, 1995), proposed in the framework of information integration theory (Anderson, 1981), claims that people pay less

attention to successive items of evidence due to attention
decrement. Attention decrement results in different weights
being assigned to different evidence items, which in turn
results in order effects. Unfortunately, this model fails to
specify what factors affect the attention decrement.
Hogarth and Einhorn (1992) proposed an anchoring and
adjustment model to explain order effects. According to
this model, belief revision is a sequential anchoring-andadjustment process in which people adjust the current belief
(the anchor) on the basis of how strongly new information
confirms or disconfirms this belief. In addition, the adjustment weight is a function of both the anchor and the new
evidence. More specifically, when the impact of the new
evidence is smaller than the reference point, the adjustment
weight is proportional to the anchor. And when the impact
of the evidence is larger than the reference point, the adjustment weight is inversely proportional to the anchor. It is
this kind of contrast effect that results in order effects. The
model further adopts two parameters (α and β) to regulate
this weight assignment process. It claims that the two parameters represent people’s sensitivity toward negative and
positive evidence, respectively. In particular, the model
argues that some individuals tend to view negative (or positive) evidence more seriously than others. Therefore, in
terms of the underlying factors that regulate the weight assignment, the model actually points to unidentifiable individual differences.

Summary
The above review reveals two important findings in the area
of human belief and its revision. First, human belief has a
coherence foundation. A belief can survive without solid
foundational evidence. Beliefs hold each other as a coherent system. Second, human belief has a multi-component
structure. The probability/confidence distinction suggests
that a single probability number cannot capture all the important aspects of a belief. A confidence component is necessary.
Previous theories of order effects hardly take these findings into consideration. They often attempt to explain order
effects by a weight assignment mechanism that weighs
members of the evidence sequence differentially. However,
they encounter great difficulties in fully explaining why
weights have to be assigned in a particular way at a particular time. Consequently, in some cases, one or more task
characteristics are particularly emphasized (e.g., memory
decay, or attention decrement), which of course often only
account for a fragment of the order effect. In some other
cases, arbitrary parameters are adopted in the weight assignment to summarize unidentifiable sources.
The probability/confidence distinction suggests that the
impact of the new evidence cannot be fully understood
without the nature of the current beliefs being sufficiently
appreciated. More specifically, the confidence component
of a belief, mainly determined by the amount of previous
experience, represents how easily this belief can be revised.
A belief with no previous experience has very low confidence and is easiest to change. And a belief established by
significant previous experience is committed with a high
confidence level and thus is hard to change. In the context

of order effects, this analysis implies that the order effect
pattern may change with different levels of experience. The
rationale is as follows. As one keeps interacting with the
environment, one gains more and more experience. As a
result, beliefs are gradually tuned to the statistical structure
of the environment (see Anderson, 1990). In addition, confidence increases as more experience is gained. Both factors will make one react to any new evidence more realistically rather than over-react or under-react. Since overreacting and under-reacting are the fundamental causes of
the order effect, then when one gains more and more experience about the environment, the order effect in belief revision should tend to diminish and disappear.
The experiment reported in the next section is designed to
test this hypothesis.

Experiment
Design and Procedure
A modified version of the CIC (Combat Information Center,
Towne, 1995; see also Wang, Johnson, & Zhang, 1998;
Zhang, Johnson, & Wang, 1997) simulation was used as the
task domain. In the CIC task used for this experiment, the
goal of the participant, acting as a commanding officer of a
naval ship, was to collect two pieces of information sequentially about an aircraft in the radar area and accurately identify its intention.
One piece of information was about the route (R), which
indicates the target is either on or off a commercial air route.
The other piece of information was self-identification (SelfID), which indicates the target’s response after being
warned. In a typical trial, the participant was shown a target
and had to report the degree of belief (on a 0-100 scale) that
the target is friendly before any evidence (i.e., initial belief)
and after each piece of evidence (i.e., sequential belief revision). Finally, the participant was forced to make a twoalternative (i.e., friendly or hostile) judgment about the
identity of the target. After the decision was made, the participant could request the true identity of the target if available. Whether this true identity information is available or
not depends on the type of the trial, as explained later.
The experiment adopted a 3x(4) factorial design. The between-subject independent variable was the ratio of total
friendly targets to total hostile targets in the training samples. The ratio was 1:1 (equal number of friendly and hostile targets), 3:1 (friendly targets are three times as frequent
as hostile targets), or 1:3 (hostile targets are three times as
frequent as friendly targets). The purpose of this factor was
to create environments with different statistical structures
and test if participants could gradually tune their beliefs to
capture these structures.
The experiment attempted to investigate how the patterns
of order effects changed with training. The training was
organized in four blocks, which is the within-subject variable (see Figure 1). Five evaluation blocks were inserted in
the process to provide a way to easily evaluate the pattern
changes of order effects. The major difference between
training trials and evaluation trials is that no true identity
feedback was provided at the end of each evaluation trial.

Evaluation
(8 Trials)

Training
(36 Trials)

Training
(36 Trials)

Training
(36 Trials)

Training
(36 Trials)

Evaluation
(8 Trials)

Evaluation
(8 Trials)

Evaluation
(8 Trials)

Evaluation
(8 Trials)

Figure 1. The experimental design
Each evaluation block had eight evaluation trials in it.
The eight evaluation trials were constructed in the following
way. There were two pieces of evidence (Route and SelfID), each of which had two possible values (“on” and “off”
for Route, and “friendly response” and “no response” for
SelfID), so there were 4 kinds of trials. Since each piece of
evidence could be collected before the other, we had a total
of eight different evaluation trials. Participants were instructed to summarize their training experience in order to
perform these evaluation trials.
Each training block consisted of 36 trials. The trial distribution is dependent on the friendly-hostile ratio and is
shown in Table 1. Since a value of “on” for Route and a
value of “friendly response” for SelfID are regarded as positive evidence for a friendly target, they are represented by
“+”s in Table 1. Similarly the opposite values are represented by “-”s.
Table 1. The trial distribution
1:1
Route
SelfID
+
+
+
+
Total

F
8
4
4
2
18

3:1
H
2
4
4
8
18

F
12
6
6
3
27

1:3
H
1
2
2
4
9

F
4
2
2
1
9

H
3
6
6
12
27

140 undergraduate students participated in the experiment. They were randomly assigned to the three friendlyhostile-ratio treatment groups. The trials in each block were
completely randomized for each participant.

Results
The five evaluation blocks, distributed in the critical positions in the training, are the focus of our analysis. In addition, for the purpose of easily examining order effects, only
the data from the two critical evidence sequences (“+-“ and
“-+”) are reported. The results are shown in Figure 2.
Three major findings are identified. First, the effect of
the friendly-to-hostile ratio is evident. While the average
initial belief judgment (i.e., before any evidence) tends to
increase with training in the 3:1 group (56.7, 59.0, 67.1,
68.6, from block1 to block4, respectively), it tends to decrease with training in the 1:3 group (47.8, 43.0, 41.3, 40.2,

from block1 to block4, respectively). Note that it is largely
unchanged with training in the 1:1 group (50.0, 50.0, 49.5,
53.3, from block1 to block4, respectively). This pattern of
result suggests that the initial belief judgments were gradually tuned to more closely reflect the built-in friendly-tohostile ratios.
100
1:1
1:3
3:1
Base

Belief

75

50

that participants fluctuated less in their belief judgments as
more experience was gained, which further suggests that
participants tended to be less sensitive to new evidence as
confidence goes up.
In summary, the experiment results reveal that the recency effect disappeared as more training trials were performed. The disappearance of the recency effect suggests
that instead of over-reacting in the light of new evidence,
participants made more proper and more realistic reactions.
As suggested previously, as more experience was acquired
during training, the statistical tuning led participants to
make more confident belief judgments, which eliminated
over-reaction.
UEcho, first proposed in Wang, Johnson, and Zhang
(1998) as a model of belief evaluation in abduction, is further developed to model the experiment results.

A UEcho Model

25

0
init e1 e2
block0

init e1 e2
block1

init e1 e2
block2

init e1 e2
block3

init e1 e2
block4

Evidence Sequence

Figure 2. The belief revision patterns in all three
friendly-to-hostile ratio conditions. The initial evaluation block before any training is labeled as block0,
which also combines data from all three ratio groups.
The evaluation blocks after each training block are labeled as block1 to block4, respectively. In each block,
belief evaluation (from 0 to 100) is plotted against the
evidence sequence, from init (before any evidence is
presented) to e1 (the first piece of evidence is presented) to e2 (the second piece of evidence is presented). Because in general positive evidence raises belief ratings and negative evidence lowers belief ratings,
plotting opposite evidence sequences (“+-“ and “-+”)
together results in a diamond shape (e.g., block4). Importantly, when the final belief ratings after both pieces
of evidence are different, the diamond shape becomes
the fish-like shape (e.g., block0), which indicates a recency order effect.
Second, the belief revision patterns change significantly
across the whole training session. A recency effect is evident in block0 (the final belief judgment is 41.9 for the “+-“
sequence vs 50.8 for the “-+” sequence), and this recency
effect tends to disappear in the later blocks. More specifically, recency effects appear in block1 and disappear in
block3 and block4 in all three ratio groups. This pattern is
consistent with our prediction that order effects diminish
and disappear with training.
Finally, it is interesting to note that the areas inside the
diamond-like order effect patterns tend to become systematically smaller as the training progresses. Since the pattern
is approximately symmetric vertically, we could use the
height of the diamond as a rough estimation of the size of
the area. The result shows that the area size decrement is
statistically significant in the 1:1 and 3:1 groups, though not
in the 1:3 group. This pattern of area decrement indicates

UEcho is based on Echo, which is a connectionist implementation of the Theory of Explanatory Coherence (TEC),
proposed by Thagard (1989, 1992) as a model of human
abductive reason. Different from other theories of belief
revision such as Hogarth & Einhorn’s anchoring and adjustment model, Echo takes a coherence view of belief
evaluation as its foundation. According to Echo, a belief
should be accepted if it is coherent with other beliefs, and
rejected if it incoherent with other beliefs. By quantitatively
defining (explanatory) coherence, an Echo system pursues
highest coherence by considering all related beliefs in a holistic manner. When the system converges, the most believable hypothesis set will defeat any competitors and pop out.
Although Echo has gained much empirical support, they
have serious limitations (e.g., Wang, Johnson, & Zhang
1998): (1) Echo does not handle sequential belief revision;
(2) Echo does not learn from experience; and (3) Echo does
not distinguish confidence and probability. All these limitations cast doubt on Echo as a general model of human belief
revision .
Wang, Johnson, and Zhang (1998) proposed UEcho (“U”
for Uncertainty) as an extension of Echo to address the first
two problems. They have shown that UEcho is able to
model order effects. UEcho is further extended here to embed the probability/confidence distinction. By doing so, we
expect that UEcho, as a coherence-based model of belief
evaluation, provides an alternative model of human belief
revision that is more plausible than the traditional weighassignment-based integration models.
UEcho maintains that the activation of a node determines
acceptability, thus representing the probability component
of a belief. UEcho adopts three mechanisms to add a confidence dimension to the system.
All three mechanisms try to tune critical parameters based
on previous experience. The first parameter is the parameter of skepticism θ. In Echo, θ represents the decay rate in
the activation updating. The higher θ is, the faster does the
node activation decay.
Confidence cures skepticism.
Gradually tuning down θ, based on experience, is a natural
way to represent confidence. The second mechanism has to
do with the parameter α and β in the anchoring and adjustment model. As mentioned earlier, α and β represents one’s

sensitivity toward negative and positive evidence, respectively. Although the anchoring and adjustment model attributes the sensitivity to some unidentifiable factors of personality, the two parameters are functionally closely related
to confidence in the sense that as confidence goes up, the
sensitivity to new evidence goes down. Incorporating and
gradually tuning α and β represents another aspect of confidence management in UEcho. Finally, UEcho extends
Echo’s parameter of data excitation. In Echo, data excitation is used to represent the assumption that observed data
nodes have independent support of their own. The hypothesis nodes have no associated data excitation. By generalizing this parameter to hypothesis nodes, UEcho enables hypothesis nodes to learn and remember their activation values, thus to gradually gain self-support (or dis-support) of
their own, based on past experience. For a detailed description of these tuning mechanisms, please see Wang (1998).
The exact same design and procedure was used to train a
UEcho network, and the corresponding simulation results
are shown in Figure 3.

100
1:1
1:3
3:1
Base

Belief

75

50

25

0
init e1 e2
block0

init e1 e2
block1

init e1 e2
block2

init e1 e2
block3

init e1 e2
block4

Evidence Sequence

Figure 3. The belief revision patterns in all three
friendly-to-hostile ratio conditions, based on the UEcho
simulation.
The modeling results match the experiment results remarkably well. First, the gradual separation of the curves of
the three ratio groups nicely reflects the statistical tuning
toward the built-in environmental friendly-to-hostile ratios.
From block1 to block4, the average initial belief judgment is
50.0,.50.0, 50.0, 50.0 for the 1:1 group, 58.8, 63.9, 67.2,
69.0 for the 3:1 group, and 41.4, 36.7, 33.6, 32.7 for the 1:3
group, respectively. Second, the order effect pattern change
is evident. A recency effect is significant in block0 (23.3
for “+-“ vs 76.7 for “-+”). The magnitude of the rececny
effect, measured as the difference between the final judgment in “+-‘ and the final judgment in “-+”, decreases significantly from block1 to block4. More specifically, they
are 8.4, 3.6, 2.0, 0.8 for the 1:1 condition, 9.1, 3.5, 1.6, 1.3
for the 3:1 condition, and 11.1, 6.1, 3.6, 2.5 for the 1:3 condition, respectively. Finally, the areas inside the diamond

shapes become systematically smaller with training as well,
indicating the fluctuation in belief revision tends to be
smaller as the training progresses.
In summary, by embedding the probability/confidence
distinction, UEcho is capable of capturing the changes of
order effect patterns at different experience levels. The
close match between the simulation results and the experimental results in the decrement and disappearance of order
effects with the increase of experience supports UEcho as a
model of coherence-based and complex human belief revision.

Discussions and Conclusions
Human belief and human belief revision are ubiquitous in
everyday life and scientific discovery. The order effect, a
phenomenon in which the final belief is significantly affected by the temporal order of evidence is a robust empirical finding in human belief revision. The order effect is
generally regarded as a manifestation of human biases and
an indication of human irrationality. It is the goal of this
paper to study how the order effect occurs.
Previous research leads to the conclusion that human belief has a coherence foundation and consists of multiple
components. Such a conclusion motivates and guides both
the experimental study and the computational modeling
work described in the paper. Both the experimental results
and the UEcho modeling results show that order effects in
belief revision exist at the early stage of training when the
confidence level is low and they tend to diminish and disappear later when the confidence increases.
It is interesting to further speculate how the UEcho modeling results could tell us the possible rational basis of order
effects. First of all, the fact that UEcho, which is based on
rational postulates and intended to prescribe what people
should do, naturally shows order effects (when the confidence level is low) convincingly “debiases” order effects.
Second, the existence of order effects has ecological implications. UEcho reveals that order effects appear when the
relevant experience is scarce, and order effects disappear
when the relevant experience becomes rich. When the relevant experience is rich, one has confident expectations,
which eliminate the need to over-react. When the relevant
experience is scarce, one has to sufficiently appreciate every
single piece of information since its relevance cannot be
easily and accurately determined in the first place. In this
sense, both the existence and the disappearance of the order
effect are rational.
It should be noted that this study involves only the recency effect. It would be of great importance to explore
how it can be tuned or extended to model the primacy effect. Whether it can model the full range of order effects
using the same mechanism is a strong test for UEcho as a
general model of human belief revision.
What does the current study say about human rationality
in general? For a long time, the order effect, along with
various other heuristics and biases (Tversky & Kahneman,
1974), has been taken as a demonstration that people systematically deviate from rationality. This view has been
greatly challenged recently. Beyond philosophical debates,
systematic investigations have been carried out to determine

the conditions under which the biases appear or disappear.
For example, Gigerenzer (1991, 1994, 1996), among others,
has shown that while people perform poorly in assessing
subjective probability they assess relative frequencies reasonably well. Since using/reporting subjective probability is
not something people are equipped with, “biases are not
biases” (Gigerenzer, 1991, page 86), and heuristics are
meant to explain something that does not exist. It has been
demonstrated that all the biases, including the base rate fallacy, conjunction fallacy, and overconfidence, disappear or
are significantly reduced when information is presented to
participants in frequency format (e.g., 10 out of 100) instead
of single-event subjective probability format (e.g., 10%)
(Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995). Noting that normative postulates often assume a stationary and discrete environment,
many researchers have argued that the environment is neither stationary nor discrete. People may appear biased or
deficient according to those normative postulates, but they
are in fact very functional and optimal when a continuous
and dynamically changing environment is assumed (e.g.,
Jungermann, 1983). The current study provides another
example to show that this might be the case.

Acknowledgements
This work is funded by Office of Naval Research Grant No.
N00014-95-1-0241.

References
Alchourron, C., Gardenfors, P., & Makinson, D. (1985). On
the logic of theory change: Partial meet contraction functions and their associated revision functions. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 50, 510-530.
Almond, R. G. (1995). Graphical belief modeling. London:
Chapman & Hall.
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Press.
Anderson, N. H. (1981). Foundations of information integration theory. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Anderson, N. H., & Hubert, S. (1963). Effects of concomitant verbal recall on order effects in personality impression formation. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 2, 379-391.
Doyle, J. (1979). A truth maintenance system. Artificial
Intelligence, 12, 231-272.
Gardenfors, P. (1990). The dynamics of belief systems:
Foundations vs coherence theories. Revue Internationale
de Philosophie, 172, 24-46.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). How to make cognitive illusions
disappear: Beyond “heuristics and biases”. In W. Stroebe
& M. Hewtone (Eds.), European review of social psychology, Vol 2. Chichester, England: Wiley.
Gigerenzer, G. (1994). Why the distinction between singleevent probabilities and frequencies is relevant for psychology and vice verse. In G. Wright & P. Ayton (Eds.),
Subjective probability. New York, NY: Wiley.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague heuristics: A rebuttal to Kahneman and Tversky (1996). Psychological Review, 103(3), 592-596.

Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency format. Psychological Review, 102(4), 684-704.
Hogarth, R.M. & Einhorn, H.J. (1992). Order effects in belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 1-55.
Jungermann, H. (1983). The two camps of rationality. In R.
W. Scholz (Ed.), Decision making under uncertainty.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1996). On the reality of cognitive illusions. Psychological Review, 103(3), 582-591.
Miller, N., & Campbell, D. T. (1959). Recency and primacy
in persuasion as a function of the timing of speeches and
measurement. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59, 1-9.
Quine, W. V., & Ullian, J. S. (1978). The web of belief. New
York, NY: Random House.
Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1980). The perseverance of beliefs: Empirical and normative considerations. In R. A.
Shweder (Ed.), Fallible judgment in behavioral research:
New directions for methodology of social and behavioral
science, Vol. 4. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schlottmann A., & Anderson, N. H. (1995). Belief revision
in children: Serial judgment in social cognition and decision-making domains. Journal of Experimental Psychology: LMC, 21(5), 1349-1364.
Shafer, G. (1976). A mathematical theory of evidence.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory Coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12(3), 435-502.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Towne, D. (1995). CIC: Tactical Decision Making (Version
2.0). Unpublished manuscript. Behavioral Technology
Laboratories, University of Southern California.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.
Walley, P. (1991). Statistical reasoning with imprecise
probabilities. New York, NY: Chapman and Hall.
Wang, H. (1998). Order effects in human belief revision.
Ph.D. Dissertation, The Ohio State University.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Zhang, J., (1998). UECHO: A
model of uncertainty management in human abductive
reasoning. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Zadeh, L. A. (1978). Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of
possibility. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 1(1), 3-28.
Zhang, J., Johnson, T.R., & Wang, H. (1997). The relation
between order effects and frequency learning in tactical
decision making. Thinking and Reasoning, 4(2), 123-145.

