UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hypertext Navigation and Conflicting Goal Intentions: Using Log Files to Study Distraction
and Volitional Protection in Learning and Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7s96j7j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Scheiter, Katharina
Gerjets, Peter
Heise, Elke

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hypertext Navigation and Conflicting Goal Intentions:
Using Log Files to Study Distraction and Volitional
Protection in Learning and Problem Solving
Katharina Scheiter

Peter Gerjets

Elke Heise

Graduate College for Cognitive Science
University of Saarland
D-66041 Saarbruecken/Germany
katharis@cops.uni-sb.de

Collaborative Research Center 378
University of Saarland
D-66041 Saarbruecken/Germany
pgerjet@cops.uni-sb.de

Department of Psychology
Georg-August-University
D-37073 Goettingen/Germany
eheise@gwdg.de

Abstract
This paper describes a theoretical analysis and experimental investigation of difficulty related distraction by conflicting goal
intentions in learning and problem solving with hypertext. Log
files are used to capture hypertext navigation in the face of opportunities to implement competing goal intentions. We study
how differences in task difficulty influence the volitional protection of the current goal intention. First attempts to integrate volitional processes of action control into cognitive architectures are
presented.

Conflicting Goal Intentions
in Hypertext Navigation
The investigation of learning and problem solving with
hypertext gains increasing importance as the use of computer-based learning environments and information retrieval systems develops. The term "hypertext" refers to
"computer-based texts that are read in a non-linear fashion
and that are organized in multiple dimensions" (Landow,
1992, p. 166). A main feature of hypertext is that the user
is not reacting to static texts, but is rather choosing according to his or her current intention when and in which
order the information is to be presented (Barab, Bowdish,
Young & Owen, 1996). Thus, the navigational path
through a given hypertext environment depends mainly on
the current intentions of the user. Accordingly, Barab et al.
(1996) have shown that users' intentions in interacting
with hypertext can be predicted from navigational paths
captured in log files (computerized records of screens visited that are stamped with the amount of time spent on
each screen). The opportunity of navigating through hypertext environments allows for great flexibility and adaptivity of learning and problem solving with hypertext, it is
however also responsible for some difficulties. Users tend
to be structurally or conceptually disoriented in complex
hyperspaces and they seem to suffer from cognitive overload, if the navigational task consumes too much of their
resources (Conklin, 1987).
In this paper we will focus on a further problem concerning navigating through hypertext environments,
namely the problem of being distracted by conflicting goal
intentions. We assume that learning and problem solving
are to be analyzed as goal-directed behavior and furthermore that most learners possess numerous waiting goal
intentions not related to the current problem. These waiting
intentions can be activated by situational cues in the hy-

pertext environment and then compete with the current goal
intention for execution. If the user is attracted by these
cues, the current goal intention may be suspended in favor
of activities related to the competing intention, or in favor
of deliberating which of the two intentions should be further pursued. These interruptions and distractions due to
conflicting goal intentions should lead to more or less severe efficiency impairments in learning and problem solving depending on the relative strength of the competing
goal intentions. As a theoretical basis for analyzing these
issues theories of action control are especially useful.

Cognitive, Motivational, and Volitional Approaches to Action Control
If actions are considered as sequences of activities directed
toward a common goal, the term "action control" can be
used to describe automatic and controlled processes determining which activity is selected in the next step. Furthermore, action control includes processes that are predominantly cognitive (like the selection of a schema or production rule), predominantly motivational (like the deliberation
of goal values in the course of intention formation), or predominantly volitional (like the maintenance of a goal intention in the face of competing intentions). Accordingly,
theories from different fields of psychology are concerned
with the analysis of action control.
Purely cognitive approaches Most of these approaches to
action control postulate processing goals, but do not assume
that differences in goal values are relevant for action control. Examples are theories of working memory and attention that postulate a supervisory attentional system responsible for intentional shifts of task sets and the control of
working memory contents (Norman & Shallice, 1986). On
a higher level of abstraction, theories of planning, strategy
selection and metacognition are purely cognitive approaches. All of these approaches typically confine themselves to assuming mental representations and cognitive
variables describing them, like activation, availability, or
subjective probability. Furthermore, most cognitive approaches focus on single task situations and do not consider
conflicting goal intentions.
Approaches with motivational assumptions Expanding
on cognitive assumptions these approaches introduce variables that can be interpreted as goal values or as being dependent on goal values. Examples are theories of motiva-

tion and decision making that postulate expectancy-valueconsiderations as a basis for choosing between goals and
action alternatives. Goal values and success probabilities
are combined by calculating resulting motivational tendencies or subjective utilities that serve as a basis for decisions
between goals or actions. An example from cognitive science is the cognitive architecture ACT-R (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998). The mechanisms of production rule selection
in ACT-R depend on expected utilities of production rules
calculated from goal values and success probabilities. A
problem of many approaches to action control based on
motivational assumptions is that they take differences in
goal values for granted without giving further explanations
for these values (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998, p. 63).
Approaches with volitional assumptions These theories
describe control processes that help to initiate goal intentions, to maintain them in the face of difficulties and to
protect them against distractions and competing goal intentions. Like motivational theories, volitional approaches are
based on variables that depend on goal values (e.g volitional strength of intentions) but, volitional approaches also
describe how these variables change after a goal intention
has been formed. They postulate automatic processes of
goal protection like the adaptive increase of volitional
strength in the face of increasing task difficulty (Gollwitzer,
1990; Heckhausen, 1991) as well as several kinds of volitional strategies to maintain goal intentions (Kuhl, 1987).
Because our paper is concerned with efficiency impairments caused by situational cues for competing goal intentions, theories of volitional action control seem to be best
suited for a first analysis. As a framework for the description of volitional control processes we use a condensed and
precise version of the rubicon theory of action phases
(Gollwitzer, 1990; Heckhausen, 1991) called PART (Heise,
Gerjets & Westermann, 1994), which comprises the Pivotal
Assumptions of the Rubicon Theory.
PART allows for the derivation of specific predictions
concerning efficiency impairments due to competing goal
intentions under different conditions. We designed a hypertext learning environment in order to test these predictions within an experimental setting. PART can also serve
as a basis for developing cognitive models of our experimental log file data, because the integration of motivational
and volitional aspects of action control into cognitive architectures is easier, if a formalized model of volitional
action control is available.

PART: A Theory of
Volitional Action Control
PART describes the entire course of actions from a timesequential perspective. In addition to analyzing volitional
processes, such as maintaining and protecting a goal intention, the theory also handles motivational processes, such
as choosing a goal or assessing action outcomes. Within
this framework, an action is typically composed of a sequence of four phases, beginning with the predecisional
action phase and followed by the preexecutive, executive,
and postexecutive phases (see Figure 1).
In the predecisional phase, one of several possible goals
is chosen as the current goal intention to be pursued. This
decision is based on the motivational tendencies associated

with the possible goals. In the preexecutive phase, which
commences after commitment to a goal intention has been
formed, intention-related activities are planned and the intention is maintained until a favorable opportunity for the
initiation of these activities occurs.

Predecisional

Preexecutive

Executive

Motivational
Tendency

Fiat Tendency

Fiat Tendency

Postexecutive

Time

Intention A
Efficiency
Impairment
for Action A

Intention B
Time

Motivational
Tendency

Fiat Tendency

Fiat Tendency

Predecisional

Preexecutive

Executive

Postexecutive

Figure 1: Action phases in PART
The initiation of intention-related activities is controlled by
the so called fiat tendency and marks the transition to the
executive phase. The fiat tendency of an intention depends
partly on the suitability of a situation for the implementation of goal-directed behavior. During action execution, the
fiat tendency is responsible for the maintenance of the goal
intention. If difficulties occur, the fiat tendency of the goal
intention increases. This variable is thus of central theoretical importance for explaining volitional action control. It
can be interpreted as expressing how strongly an intention
demands for implementation in a given situation. The executive phase is followed by the postexecutive phase in
which the attained outcome is evaluated.
The theory of action phases is especially suitable for the
analysis of action conflicts. In this paper we consider a specific type of conflict that can be described as suspendedintention conflict and is illustrated in Figure 1. It occurs
when subjects are instructed to keep working on a task A
for a longer period of time, while a competing intention B
is waiting to be executed subsequently. In this case, one
intention is supposed to remain in the executive phase,
while the other is to remain in the preexecutive phase (preexecutive-executive conflict). Contrary to the superficially
similar task-shift paradigm, where subjects are required to
rapidly alternate between the execution of two intentions,
no alternation is supposed to take place.
If the fiat tendency of the waiting intention B is strong,
then the efficiency of action A should be impaired, because
activities related to the competing intention occur or because a process of decision making is initiated in order to
determine which intention should be pursued further. The
distracting effect of the waiting intention B should be larger
the stronger the fiat tendency of B is in comparison to the
fiat tendency of the current intention A. The theory of action phases allows for the derivation of several empirically
testable hypotheses, from which we chose two predictions
that can be easily applied to hypertext navigation:
Hypothesis of distraction by competing goal intentions:
The efficiency of a currently executed action A will be impaired if a favorable opportunity for the implementation of
a competing intention B occurs. This prediction results

from the assumption that an opportunity to realize goal
intention B leads to an increased fiat tendency of B.
Hypothesis of difficulty-related volitional protection: Efficiency impairments due to waiting intentions should be
stronger for a low level of task difficulty than for a high
level of task difficulty. This prediction results from the assumption that an increasing level of task difficulty for intention A results in an increased fiat tendency of A.
In several simple reaction time experiments using word
classification tasks we were able to confirm both of these
predictions (Heise, Gerjets & Westermann, 1997). In the
domain of hypertext navigation we can test our predictions
within a naturalistic setting, where problems of distraction
due to competing intentions are of practical relevance. Furthermore, the use of log files to capture hypertext navigation
enables us to investigate whether the distractional effects of
a competing goal intention can be traced back to cognitive
activities related to the implementation of this competing
intention. Finally, we assume that research on hypertext
navigation can benefit from insights in the way information
processing strategies may change in the face of conflicting
goal intentions.

Experiment
Method
Subjects: 134 students (84 female, 50 male) at the University of Goettingen, Germany participated in the experiment.
The average age was 24,8 years.
Procedure The subjects' main task (the current goal intention) consisted of a hypertext-based learning and problemsolving task. Subjects had to solve three probability word
problems. For each problem the correct solution principle
and two correct variable values had to be marked in a multiple-choice form available in the hypertext environment.
All three problems were presented at the beginning of the
experiment. Subjects were instructed to solve the problems
as fast and as correctly as possible using information provided in the hypertext environment. To acquire the relevant
knowledge subjects could browse the hypertext environment freely. Six problem categories from the domain of
probability theory were explained using worked out examples for illustration. All examples were embedded in interesting cover stories about attractiveness and mate choice
(e.g., the probability of guessing the first three winners in a
beauty competition between 10 people). The examples and
the explanations of the problem categories were available
during the whole experiment.
Design As independent variables two different levels of
difficulty of the word problems to be solved (easy versus
difficult problems) and two levels of distraction due to conflicting goal intentions (strong versus weak distraction)
were introduced. Both variables of the resulting 2x2-design
were varied interindividually. Two further levels of distraction were introduced as control conditions.
In accordance with preliminary studies we manipulated
the level of difficulty by using smaller numbers in the easy
problems and by stating them in a more familiar way than
the difficult problems. The method used to increase difficulty was similar to the one used by Ross and Kilbane

(1997). The cover story and the underlying solution principle of a problem were not affected by this manipulation.
In the condition with strong distraction we introduced a
competing intention and a favorable opportunity for its
implementation. Subjects were informed that they would
have to work on a second task within the same hypertext
environment after having finished the problem-solving
task. The second task consisted of answering three questions about attractiveness and mate choice that were presented briefly at the beginning of the experiment. Subjects
were instructed to work on the problem-solving task first
and to postpone thinking about the question-answering task
until they finished the three word problems. They were
assured to have enough time afterwards to browse the hypertext environment for information relevant to the second
task. Subjects were told that all information available could
be helpful in solving the word problems. As favorable opportunities to execute activities related to the waiting intention we included additional information about attractiveness and mate choice in the hypertext environment. This
information was not helpful for solving the probability
word problems, but it was related to the topic of the waiting
intention. To make this information available during the
first task, the examples used to explain the solution principles contained "hot words" linked to that information.
In the condition with weak distraction no competing intention was induced. Subjects were only required to solve
the three word problems. In order to keep the number of
hyperlinks in the learning environment constant, the same
amount of irrelevant information was linked to the worked
out examples as in the condition with strong distraction. In
order to prevent subjects from forming an intrinsically motivated competitive intention to browse the irrelevant information, we replaced the interesting information about
attractiveness and mate choice with rather uninteresting
information concerning irrelevant terms in the cover story.
To control motivational effects of this replacement a
condition with intermediate distraction was used. In this
condition hyperlinks to irrelevant information about attractiveness and mate choice were inserted but no competing
intention concerning that information was induced. If subjects form competing intentions based on personal interest,
stronger effects of distraction than in the condition with
uninteresting irrelevant information are to be expected.
A baseline condition with no hyperlinks to irrelevant information was implemented as a second control condition.
This condition was used to estimate additional cognitive
costs of navigating hypertext environments containing irrelevant information.
Dependent variables To test our hypotheses concerning
efficiency impairments we obtained two different kinds of
dependent variables. As an outcome measure the percentage of errors for the three word problems was registered.
As process measures several time and frequency parameters
were calculated from the log file data recorded during subjects' interaction with the hypertext system. Especially, the
total amount of time spent on relevant information as well
as time spent on irrelevant information was calculated. The
latter measure was obtained to test whether efficiency impairments can be traced back to cognitive activities related
to the competing intention.

Results and Discussion
These data support the assumption that the observed efficiency impairments under the condition of low task difficulty result from cognitive activities which are relevant for
the implementation of the competing intention.
120
100
80

SEC

Comparing the conditions with strong and weak distraction
yields a significant main effect of distraction on error rates
1
(cf. Figure 2) . In accordance with our distraction hypothesis, subjects with competing intentions and favorable opportunity to initiate corresponding activities show worse
performance in the problem-solving. No differences between the condition with weak distraction and the two control conditions were found.
50

40
20

40

Errors in %

60

0

30

Easy Problems

Difficult Problems

20

Weak Distraction

Strong Distraction

10

0

Easy Problems
Weak Distraction

Difficult Problems
Strong Distraction

Figure 2: Error rates as a function of
task difficulty and distraction (N = 68)
The manipulation of difficulty was successful. The respective main effect is significant. As predicted, the influence of
the competing intention on performance depends on the
difficulty of the problem-solving task. In the condition with
low task difficulty, efficiency impairments due to competing intentions are larger than in the condition with high task
difficulty. The respective interaction is significant.
To test whether these efficiency impairments can be
traced back to cognitive activities related to the competing
intention, we compared the four conditions regarding time
spent on irrelevant information (see Figure 3). In the groups
with competing intention and opportunity for implementation, the time spent on irrelevant information was significantly longer than in the groups with no competing intention. This was especially the case for the easy word problems. The respective interaction was marginally significant.
1600

SEC

1200

In a second step we analyzed time spent on relevant information (Figure 4). As can be seen, higher difficulty of the
word problems caused no increase in time on relevant information. Unexpectedly, the groups with a competing intention and opportunity for implementation spent significantly less time on relevant information than groups without such intention. This main effect is caused by differences in the low difficulty task condition. The respective
interaction effect is significant.
Taken together, our data support the following conclusions: For high levels of task difficulty no distraction effects can be observed, whereas for low levels of task difficulty the presence of a competing intention leads to an increase in error rates and in time spent on irrelevant information as well as to a decrease in time spent on relevant
information. This pattern of results can be interpreted as
indicating strategy shifts if a strong competing intention
with favorable opportunity is present (speed-accuracy
trade-off).
Further analysis of the log file data yields several other
strategy shifts under different levels of distraction and difficulty. For example, they concern the time spent on
studying the solutions of worked out examples or the order
in which the three word problems were solved.

Summary

800

400

0

Easy Problems
Weak Distraction

Difficult Problems
Strong Distraction

Figure 3: Time spent on irrelevant information as a
function of task difficulty and distraction (N = 68)
1

Figure 4: Time spent on relevant information as a
function of task difficulty and distraction (N = 68)

Our specific predictions have been tested using one-tailed ttests. Concerning the general advantage of planned contrasts as
opposed to unspecific ANOVA F-tests see Hays (1988) or
Rosenthal and Rosnow (1988).

The aim of our study was to investigate how conflicting
goal intentions can influence learning and problem solving
in hypertext environments. As a theoretical background we
used a theory of volitional action control (PART) that describes efficiency impairments caused by competing goal
intentions under different levels of task difficulty. We used
PART to derive two hypotheses about hypertext navigation
in the face of conflicting goal intentions. These hypotheses
could be confirmed in an experimental study. Furthermore,
the experimental log file data show that there are numerous
differences between the experimental conditions that cannot be completely explained by our volitional framework
(e.g., different kinds of strategy shifts). To further analyze
this data, it would be helpful to use a theoretical model that
combines volitional assumptions about conflicting goal
intentions and more detailed cognitive assumptions about

learning and problem solving behavior. We therefore began
to integrate the volitional mechanisms of PART into the
cognitive architecture ACT-R (Gerjets, 1997).

Modeling Volitional Action Control
As illustrated in Figure 5, PART includes detailed assumptions about the interrelations of variables underlying volitional processes.
Intention A (executive)
Error Rates
Difficulty

Effort

Efficiency

Volition
Motivation

Motivation

Reaction Times
Fiat Tendency

Volition
Fiat Tendency

Favorable Opportunity

Intention B (preexecutive)
Interrelations:

Positive monotonous function:

Curvilinear:

Negative monotonous function:

Comparison:

Figure 5: Interrelations between variables
related to fiat tendencies in PART
Each possible goal is associated with a certain motivational
tendency that determines which of the competing goals in
the predecisional action phase will be pursued as goal intention. Each goal intention is assigned a specific degree of
volitional strength that determines how much effort will be
exerted for the implementation of that goal intention. Furthermore, each goal intention is assigned a fiat tendency
that expresses its demand for implementation. In the preexecutive-executive conflict, the fiat tendencies of the
competing goal intentions determine which of the two intentions becomes dominant. The fiat tendency of the current intention A depends essentially on the volitional
strength of this intention. The volitional strength, however,
not only determines the respective fiat tendency but also the
level of effort and the efficiency of the implementing activities. The volitional strength of the current intention is
affected by its motivational strength and the level of task
difficulty. An increase in task difficulty results in an increased volitional strength of the current goal intention.
This dynamic regulation of volition and effort in the face of
increasing task difficulty is one of the main volitional
mechanisms of the action phase theory and corresponds to
the so-called law of difficulty (cf. Heckhausen, 1991).
The fiat tendency of the waiting intention B not only depends on its volitional strength but also on the perceived
favorability of the opportunity to initiate corresponding
activities. If the fiat tendency of the waiting intention becomes sufficiently large (relative to the fiat tendency of
intention A), then the efficiency of the current action can be
impaired as will be reflected in error rates or reaction times.
It can also be assumed that the presence of a waiting intention with a strong fiat tendency will be perceived as an increased level of task difficulty that reactively results in an

increased level of volitional strength. This may at least
partly compensate for efficiency impairments. Volitional
action control is most adaptive when it results in a balance
between shielding a current intention against competing
intentions and flexibly responding to situational changes.
Based on our theoretical framework and our experimental findings, there are at least three requirements for the
cognitive modeling of volitional action control. First, a
cognitive model of our task will have to take into account
that learners may simultaneously possess multiple conflicting goal intentions of differing strength. The model has
to explain efficiency impairments caused by situational cues
related to waiting intentions. Second, the model has to reflect the law of difficulty. Third, the model has to account
for data indicating strategy shifts under different levels of
distraction and difficulty that cannot be explained at
PART's level of abstraction (time spent on different kinds
of information, order of solving different problems and
trade-offs between speed and accuracy).
As a theoretical basis for cognitive modeling we will refer to Anderson's ACT-R architecture (Anderson & Lebiere,
1998). ACT-R has been developed as a unified theory of
cognition applying to domains as diverse as problem solving, learning, or memory. In ACT-R human actions are
analyzed in terms of production rules and spreading activation in a network of declarative memory chunks. Production rules are matched to currently activated memory
chunks and can be executed if their conditions are sufficiently satisfied. Actions are described as sequences of production rule firings. Action-guiding intentions can be represented by a specific type of declarative memory chunks
(goal chunks). These chunks are organized by means of a
last-in-first-out goal stack and act as temporary sources of
activation that guide current information processing by
spreading activation to other memory chunks and by thus
constraining the set of executable production rules. Most
productions are goal specific and can only be executed if
the goal referred to in their conditions is the current goal on
top of the goal stack.
A major drawback of the ACT-R architecture for our current purposes is that ACT-R is mainly designed as a singletask architecture for modeling tasks in isolation. Processing
is completely controlled by the current goal on top of the
goal stack. Production rules referring to other than the current goal cannot be selected for execution. Alternative cognitive architectures like EPIC (Meyer & Kieras, 1997) are
explicitly designed for modeling dual task performance and
multiple goal handling but are however restricted to very
simple cognitive tasks lacking complex goal structures.
Furthermore, they are not capable of integrating different
cognitive components like learning, memory, and problem
solving. For that reason, it seems easier to adapt ACT-R to
handling multiple goals than to adapt architectures like
EPIC for modeling complex cognition.
Our approach for modeling volitional action control in
ACT-R comprises two main steps: In a first step we will try
to map the concepts and assumptions of PART onto concepts and assumptions of ACT-R. These mappings can be
evaluated theoretically (Gerjets, 1997) as well as empirically (Gerjets, Heise & Westermann, 1997). Because dynamic variables like motivational tendency, volitional
strength and fiat tendency are of major importance in

PART, the modeling in ACT-R will focus on variables with
analogous functional roles, e.g., goal values or source activation. If no satisfying mapping can be found for necessary
assumptions of PART, we attempt to develop new concepts
and mechanisms based on the ACT-R framework that are
compatible with the main assumptions of the theory.
The aforementioned requirements for modeling volitional action control lead to three main subtasks in developing an ACT-R model for our domain.
Efficiency impairments Efficiency impairments due to
competing intentions cannot be explained in ACT-R without
additional theoretical assumptions, since the theory assumes that only the top goal on the goal stack controls performance. To model our data it will be necessary to introduce a new chunk type representing preexecutive intentions
waiting for implementation. To allow the system to interrupt its performance for information processing related to a
waiting intention, we will have to introduce goal unspecific
production rules which, in the case of goal conflicts, initiate
a decision about which task to pursue further. These interrupt productions should be executed whenever declarative
memory chunks associated to waiting intentions become
activated. Chunks representing waiting intentions can be
equipped with additional functional characteristics like an
increased base level activation to account for their superior
availability in memory (Goschke & Kuhl, 1993).
Difficulty-related effort allocation Two interpretations of
effort can be modeled in ACT-R. First, high effort can be
interpreted as working more accurately. This can be modeled by high goal values, which lead to the selection of
production rules with higher probability of success. These
rules, however, also yield higher costs for execution. Second, high effort can be interpreted as working faster. This
can be modeled by high source activation of goal chunks,
which leads to a high amount of activation that spreads to
associated chunks in declarative memory. Matching a production rule to chunks in declarative memory will be the
faster the higher these chunks are activated. To model the
law of difficulty, the concept of task difficulty has to be
mapped onto analogous concepts in ACT-R. In our experimental context task difficulty can be best interpreted as
missing declarative or procedural knowledge that results in
problem-solving impasses. These impasses can be connected to goal values and source activation without violating the ACT-R theory.
Strategy shifts As our log file data indicate, level of distraction and difficulty influence the trade-off between
speed and accuracy, the order in which test problems are
solved, and the time spent on studying the solutions of
worked out examples. As aforementioned, speed-accuracy
trade-offs can be modeled by goal values and source activation. Time spent on studying worked out examples can
be interpreted as reflecting a time demanding strategy with
high success probability. Deviations from a given order of
test problems can be explained by interrupt productions that
react to activated chunks representing waiting intentions.
To test whether these ideas suffice to model the influences
of difficulty and distraction on strategy selection it will be
necessary to develop a detailed ACT-R model of our experimental task.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Peter Breuer for his support.

References
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barab, S. A., Bowdish, B. E., Young, M. F. & Owen, S. V.
(1996). Understanding kiosk navigation: Using log files
to capture hypermedia searches. Instructional Science, 24,
377-395.
Conklin, J. (1987). Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey. Computer, 20, 17-41.
Gerjets, P. (1997). Volitionale Handlungssteuerung und
kognitive Mechanismen: Reduktionsmöglichkeiten auf der
Basis intertheoretischer Bänder. Psychologische Beiträge,
39, 441-470
Gerjets, P., Heise, E. & Westermann, R. (1997). Motivational strength of goals and cognitive strength of goal representations. In M.G. Shafto & P. Langley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (S. 928). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1990). Action phases and mind sets. In
E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of
motivation and cognition: Vol II (pp. 53-92). New York:
Guilford Press.
Goschke, T. & Kuhl, J. (1993). Representation of intentions: Persisting activation in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
19, 1211-1226.
Hays, W. L. (1988). Statistics (4th ed.). Fort Worth, TX:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Heckhausen, H. (1991). Motivation and action. New York:
Springer.
Heise, E., Gerjets, P. & Westermann, R. (1994). Idealized
action phases: A concise Rubicon-theory. In M. Kuokkanen (Ed.), Structuralism, idealization and approximation
(pp. 141-158). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Heise, E., Gerjets, P. & Westermann, R. (1997). The influence of competing intentions on action performance: Efficiency impairment and volitional protection in tasks of varying difficulty. Acta Psychologica, 97, 167-182.
Kuhl, J. (1987). Action control: The maintenance of motivational states. In F. Halisch & J. Kuhl (Eds.), Motivation,
intention, and volition (pp. 279-291). Berlin: Springer.
Landow, G.P. (1992). Hypertext. The convergence of contemporary literary theory and technology. Baltimore:
John Hopkins University Press.
Meyer, D. E. & Kieras, D. E. (1997). A computational theory of executive cognitive processes and multiple-task performance: Part 1. Basic mechanisms. Psychological Review, 104, 3-65.
Norman, D. & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action. In
R. J. Davidson (Ed.), Consciousness and self-regulation
(pp. 1-18). New York: Plenum Press.
Rosenthal, R. & Rosnow, R. L. (1988). Contrast analysis:
Focused comparisons in the analysis of variance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ross, B. H. & Kilbane, C. (1997). Effects of principle explanation and superficial similarity on analogical mapping in problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 427-440.

