UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infant Familiarization to Artificial Sentences: Rule-like Behavior Without Explicit Rules and
Variables

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9sf4p667

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Shultz, Thomas R.
Bale, Alan C.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infant Familiarization to Artificial Sentences: Rule-like Behavior Without Explicit
Rules and Variables
Thomas R. Shultz (shultz@psych.mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology; McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Alan C. Bale (alan_bale@sympatico.ca)
Department of Linguistics; McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 1G5 Canada

Abstract
A recent study of infant familiarization to artificial sentences
claimed to produce data that could only be explained by symbolic rule learning and not by unstructured neural networks.
Here we present successful unstructured neural network
simulations showing that these data do not uniquely support a
rule-based account. In contrast to other neural network simulations, our simulations cover more aspects of the data with
fewer assumptions using a more realistic coding scheme based
on sonority of phonemes. Our networks show exponential decreases in attention to a repeated sentence pattern, more recovery to novel inconsistent sentences than to novel consistent sentences, some preference reversals, and extrapolation.

One of the most simulated phenomena in developmental
psychology is a data set that was claimed to be immune from
simulation by unstructured neural networks (Marcus, Vijayan, Bandi Rao, & Vishton, 1999). Although the authors
maintained that their results could only be explained by explicit rules and variables, there are now at least eight
connectionist simulations of the data, most of which do not
use explicit variable binding and none of which use explicit
rules. Here we present additional neural simulations of these
data, arguing that our model may provide the currently most
satisfying account. The paper reviews the relevant infant
data, presents various interpretations and models, and then
focuses on our current model.

The Infant Data
The relevant experiments familiarized 7-month-old infants to
three-word artificial sentences and then tested them on
novel sentences that were either consistent or inconsistent
with the familiar pattern. The design of these experiments is
shown in Table 1. In Experiment 1, infants were familiarized
to sentences with either an ABA pattern (e.g., ni la ni) or an
ABB pattern (e.g., ta gi gi). There were 16 of these sentences, constructed by combining four A-category words
(ga, li, ni, and ta) with four B-category words (ti, na, gi, and
la). After infants became familiar with a sentence pattern,
they were tested with two sentences having novel words

that were either consistent or inconsistent with the familiar
pattern.
Table 1: Marcus et al. (1999) experiments.
Pattern
Familiarize
Consistent
Inconsistent

Experiments 1 & 2
Cond. 1 Cond. 2
ABA
ABB
ABA
ABB
ABB
ABA

Experiment 3
Cond. 1 Cond. 2
ABB
AAB
ABB
AAB
AAB
ABB

When an infant looked at a flashing light to the left or
right, a test sentence was played from a speaker situated
next to the light. Each test sentence was played until the
infant either looked away or 15 s elapsed. Infants attended
more to inconsistent novel sentences than to consistent
novel sentences, showing that they distinguished the two
sentence types.
Experiment 2 was the same except that the words were
chosen more carefully so that phoneme sequences were different in the familiarization and test patterns. Experiment 3
used the same words as Experiment 2, but in contrastive syntactic patterns that each duplicated a consecutive word:
AAB vs. ABB. The idea was to rule out the possibility that
infants might have used the presence or absence of consecutively duplicated words to distinguish sentence types.
In all three experiments, infants attended more to inconsistent than to consistent novel sentences. Our concern is with
the best theoretical account of these data. Is the infant cognition based on rules and variables or on connections?

A Rule and Variable Interpretation
Marcus et al. (1999) argued that these grammars could not be
learned by the statistical methods common to standard neural networks. They also tried some unsuccessful neural network simulations using Simple Recurrent Networks (SRN).
The authors proposed that a only a rule-based model could
cover their data. "We propose that a system that could account for our results is one in which infants extract algebralike rules that represent relationships between placeholders
(variables) such as 'the first item X is the same as the third

item Y' (p. 79)." They allowed that their data might also be
accounted for by structured neural networks that implement
explicit rules and variables in a neural style: "The problem is
not with neural networks per se but with the kinds of neural
networks that are currently popular. These networks eschew
explicit representations of variables and relations between
variables; in contrast, some less widely discussed neural
networks with a very different architecture do incorporate
such machinery and thus might form the basis for learning
mechanisms that could account for our data (pp. 79-80)."

Psychology of Familiarization
A leading psychological analysis of familiarization assumes
that infants build categories for stimuli (Cohen, 1973;
Sokolov, 1963). Subsequently, they ignore stimuli that correspond to their categories, and concentrate on stimuli that are
relatively novel. These processes are often discussed in
terms of recognition memory. If there is substantial recovery
to a novel test stimulus, then it is considered novel. But if
there is little or no recovery, then the stimulus is considered
to be recognized as a member of a familiar category. During
familiarization there is typically an exponential decrease in
attention.

Familiarization in Neural Networks
Encoder networks that learn to reproduce their inputs on
their output units can simulate familiarization and novelty
effects in infants (Mareschal & French, 1997). Relations
among stimulus features are encoded in hidden unit representations, and accuracy is tested by decoding these hidden
unit representations onto output units. Discrepancy between output and input representations is network error.
Familiar stimuli produce less error than novel stimuli, which
presumably deserve further learning. Such hidden unit representations enable prototypes, generalization, and pattern
completion (Hertz, Krogh, & Palmer, 1991).

Other Neural Network Models
There are at least eight alternative computational models of
the Marcus et al. (1999) data, all of them connectionist mo dels, presumably attracted by the challenge that ordinary
connectionist models would not be able to simulate the data.
Most of these models are ordinary unstructured
connectionist models without explicit rules and variables. All
eight of these models cover the basic finding of the Marcus
et al. (1999) experiments, namely noticing the difference between consistent and inconsistent sentences. It is beyond
the scope of this brief paper to thoroughly review all of
these models, many of which are as yet only sketchily reported. However, we can briefly characterize each model and
identify what we believe to be its best virtue and most significant limitation.
Four of the unstructured models use the SRN architecture,
construing the network's task to be prediction of the next
word in a sentence. Negishi (1999a, b) used an SRN without

hidden units, coding each word in analog fashion with place
of consonant articulation and vowel height. This is a simple
network requiring no unusual hand-wired assumptions or
pre-experimental experience. However, Marcus (1999a)
claimed that it essentially implemented variables by using
continuous values on the input units that are transmitted
directly to the outputs, thus arguably disqualifying the
model from meeting the challenge that variable binding is
required.
Following an argument that Marcus et al.'s (1999) SRNs
failed because they lacked normal phonemic experience (Seidenberg & Elman, 1999), Elman (1999) pre-trained an SRN to
distinguish whether each word differed or not from the previous word. Each word was coded on 12 binary phonetic
features. Although 7-month-olds obviously know something
about phonemes and it may be reasonable to include such
knowledge in models, it is unlikely that infants receive any
target signals about phonemic sameness and difference.
More seriously, the network's task in both the pre-training
and habituation phases of the simulation was discrimination
rather than habituation as it was for the infants.
Christiansen and Curtin (1999) pre-trained an SRN on word
segmentation. The network learned to predict the identity
and stress of the next phoneme in sentences from information on 11 binary phonological features and the stress and
utterance boundaries of individual phonemes. Presented
with the Marcus et al. test sentences, the network then
showed slightly better prediction of words occurring in inconsistent than those occurring in consistent sentences.
Again, the use of prior knowledge seems reasonable. However, it is unclear why the network would perform better on
inconsistent sentences, with which it is less familiar, than on
consistent sentences whose pattern it has just learned.
Altmann and Dienes (1999) used SRNs with an extra encoding layer between the input and hidden layers. Unlike
some models, this one does not require any questionable
pre-training and is performing the habituation task. On the
negative side, Marcus (1999b) reports that only when somewhat unconventional correlation and distance measures are
used can the network discriminate between consistent and
inconsistent sentences. It would be more typical to measure
error or relative output activation for such networks.
Gasser and Colunga (1999) used a specially-designed network with micro-relation units whose activations correlated
with inputs from two different syntactic categories. Hardwired connections caused similar syllables to be synchronized, producing low activations on the micro-relation units,
and dissimilar syllables to be desynchronized, producing
high activations on the micro-relation units. No pre-training
was necessary, but the hardwiring of connection weights is
of questionable psychological validity.
Shastri and Chang (1999; Shastri, 1999) designed a structured connectionist model with explicit variable binding, implemented by temporal synchrony of activations on units
representing sequential position and other units representing arbitrary binary word features. The network learned to
represent an ABA pattern by firing the first position unit
synchronously with the third position unit. This network
would seem to generalize well to any novel sentences of

three words, regardless of the particular features of the
words used. But the network is extensively hand-built, and
the critically important feedback signals about the position
of words in a sentence are psychologically implausible.
None of the foregoing reports of models include evidence
on the course of habituation or provide predictions that
could be tested with infants.
Shultz (1999) used an encoder version of the cascadecorrelation algorithm with arbitrary analog coding of syllables. With an encoder network, the task is construed as
word and sentence recognition. Besides covering the consistency effect, these networks learned the training patterns
with an exponential decrease in error and showed occasional
reversals of preference that were found with the infants. Because the coding was arbitrary, however, it was not possible
to simulate the detailed phonetic differences between Marcus et al.'s (1999) Experiments 1 and 2.

Our Model
Here we present a simulation like that of Shultz (1999), but
with phonetically realistic encoding of the input sentences
using a continuous sonority scale. A successful result
would suggest that such coding could be used by infants in
their sentence processing. Sonority is the quality of vowel
likeness, and can be defined by perceptual salience (Price,
1980) or by openness of the vocal tract (Selkirk, 1984). The
coding scheme is shown in Table 2. The specific numbers
are somewhat arbitrary, but their ordering is based on
phonological work (Selkirk, 1984; Vroomen, van den Bosch,
& de Gelder, 1998).
Table 2: Sonority scale with examples in IPA.
Phoneme category
low vowels
mid vowels
high vowels
semi-vowels and laterals
nasals
voiced fricatives
voiceless fricatives
voiced stops
voiceless stops

Examples
/a/ /æ/
/ε/ /e/ /o/
/I/ /i/ /U/ /u/
/w/ /y/ /l/
/n/ /m/
/z/ /v/
/s/ /f/
/b/ /d/ /g/
/p/ /t/ /k/

Sonority
6
5
4
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

Sonorities range from -6 to 6 in steps of 1, with a gap and
change of sign between the consonants and vowels. Each
word was coded on two units for the sonority of its consonant and that of its vowel. This is similar to Negishi's (1999b)
coding, except that we place consonants and vowels on a
single scale, rather than on separate scales. We coded each
sentence in the artificial language with six units, two for each
one-syllable word. For example, the sentence ni la ni was
coded as (-2 4 -1 6 -2 4).
Our learning algorithm, cascade-correlation, grows during
learning by recruiting new hidden units into the network as
required to reduce error (Fahlman & Lebiere, 1990). Recruited

hidden units are installed each on a separate layer, receiving
input from the inputs and from existing hidden units. The
candidate hidden unit that gets recruited is the one whose
activations correlate best with current error. After recruiting
a hidden unit, the network returns to the phase in which
weights feeding the output units are adjusted to reduce error. An encoder option to cascade-correlation (Shultz, 1999)
freezes direct input-output connections at 0 to prevent trivial
solutions in which weights of about 1 are learned between
each input unit and its corresponding output unit.
The cascade-correlation algorithm has been used to simulate many other aspects of cognitive development, including
the balance scale (Shultz, Mareschal, & Schmidt, 1994), conservation (Shultz, 1998), seriation (Mareschal & Shultz,
1999), discrimination shift learning (Sirois & Shultz, 1998),
pronoun semantics (Oshima-Takane, Takane, & Shultz,
1999), and integration of velocity, time, and distance cues
(Buckingham & Shultz, in press).
In these models, network behavior becomes rule-like with
learning, but knowledge is clearly not represented in rules
and cognitive processing is definitely not accomplished by
explicit variable binding and rule firing. Instead, rules are
viewed as abstract, epi-phenomenal characterizations of processes occurring at the sub-symbolic level of unit activations and connection weights (Smolensky, 1988).
There are several advantages of implementing rule-like behavior with neural processes, including the acquisition of
psychologically realistic non-normative rules, integration of
perceptual and cognitive phenomena, natural variation
across problems and individuals, and achievement of the
right degree of crispness in knowledge representations. In
many cases, universally quantified rules are too crisp to
model knowledge representations in children.
Neurological justification for generative networks such as
cascade-correlation is provided by recent findings on learning-driven neurogenesis and synaptogenesis throughout
the lifespan (Quartz & Sejnowski, 1997). Although neurogenesis and neural migration may be too slow to account for
learning within the time frame of the typical infant familiarization experiment, there is evidence that synaptogenesis can
occur within seconds (Bolshakov, Golan, Kandel, & Siegelbaum, 1997).
Like most models of higher cognition, cascade-correlation
is not a model of detailed neural circuits. Instead, it is an
abstracted and simplified model that is partly inspired by
neural principles. Individual units in cascade-correlation
networks may correspond roughly to groups of biological
neurons, and connection weights may correspond roughly
to neural pathways.

Results
Mean network error on test patterns for the three experiments is shown in Table 3. Main effects of consistency were
significant at p < .0001. The results show more network error
to inconsistent test patterns than to consistent test patterns

for each experiment. On the assumption that error represents
a need for further cognitive processing, these results capture
the infant data.
Table 3: Mean error on test patterns.
Expt.
1
2
3

Patterns
ABA v. ABB
ABA v. ABB
AAB v. ABB

Consistent
8.2
13.1
12.9

Inconsistent
14.5
15.8
15.3

The proportion of networks showing a reversal of the
consistency effect was .0667, which is close to the .0625 obtained with infants.
A plot of mean error over epochs for a representative network from the ABB condition of Experiment 1 is shown in
Figure 1. The first few epochs are omitted for clarity because
error started so high, at around 350. Such plots reveal exp onential decreases in error on the training patterns over time,
similar to the shape of declining attention in infant familiarization. The epochs at which hidden units are installed are
shown with diamond shapes just above the training error.
As in most cascade-correlation simulations, error decreases
sharply after a hidden unit is recruited. After training, error is
higher on inconsistent test patterns than on consistent test
patterns.

25

Train
Hiddens

Mean error

20

Consistent
15

Inconsistent

10
5
0
0

5

10

15

20

Epochs

Figure 1: Error reduction in one network.
Generalization tests show that the consistency effect actually grows larger with increasing distance from the training
set, a prediction quite different than universally quantified
rules would make.
Network analysis revealed that hidden units used sonority
sums of consonant and vowel to represent sonority variation first in the duplicated-word category and second in the
single-word category. Networks decoded this hidden unit
representation with virtually duplicate weights to outputs
representing the duplicate-word category.

Discussion
Like other neural models, our model easily captures the consistency effect. In contrast to alternate models of these data,
ours has several features to recommend it. Our model does
not require extensive pre-experiment experience (Christiansen & Curtin, 1999; Elman, 1999), extensive hand-wiring of
networks (Gasser & Colunga, 1999; Shastri & Chang, 1999),
external feedback signals not available in the stimuli (Elman,
1999; Shastri & Chang, 1999), unusual interpretation of outputs (Altmann & Dienes, 1999), or explicit variable binding
(Shastri & Chang, 1999). On grounds of theoretical parsimony, the more unsupported assumptions that a model requires the less plausible it becomes.
Unlike some alternate models (Shastri & Chang, 1999;
Shultz, 1999), our model uses a realistic coding of the stimuli.
Like Negishi (1999b), we used an analog coding of inputs
based on the manner in which the phonemes are produced.
But our representation scheme is a bit more compact and
uniform because we use a single sonority scale for both
consonants and vowels, whereas he used two separate
scales, one for place of consonant articulation and another
for vowel height. Moreover, our use of hidden units with
non-linear transfer functions ensures that any possible variable binding at the input level is lost as activation is propagated forward through the hidden layers.
Our model is the only one so far to capture the other feature of the Marcus et al. (1999) infant data, the occasional
reversal of preference for novel patterns. It is unclear how
easily other models might be able to capture these reversals,
but there are hints that it might be difficult for some models.
Elman's (1999) model, for example, had such a strong consistency effect that reversals of preference would be unlikely:
mean activation to ABB sentences was 123 times higher than
to ABA sentences. Likewise, the Shastri and Chang (1999)
model learns a very strong representation of serial position.
The correlation between weights to position nodes were
.9993 for positions 1 and 3 in networks habituated to ABA
sentences, and .9998 for positions 2 and 3 in networks habituated to ABB sentences. This rather crisp representation
produced 3.4 times more error to inconsistent than to consistent sentences in the ABA condition of Experiment 1, which
would seem to preclude reversals.
Although it is not known why infants show occasional reversals, our simulations show that they can be a natural part
learning. With limited exposure, as in both the psychological
experiments and our simulations, exceptions naturally occur.
This is a parsimonious explanation of reversals because it
does not require assumptions of any extraneous processes.
In summary, our model might be currently preferred because it covers more of the infant data, with less preexperimental experience, less network design, and more realistic stimulus coding than alternate models. It also uses a
general learning algorithm that has been applied successfully to several other phenomena in cognitive development.
With so many successful neural models of the consistency effect, there is no question that ordinary, unstructured
neural networks can cover these data. The modeling shows

that some of the functionality of symbolic rules and variable
binding can be constructed from sub-symbolic processes
without having to be explicitly built in. The time is now ripe
to generate and test predictions from these alternate models.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. We
thank David Buckingham, Jacques Katz, Yuriko OshimaTakane, Sylvain Sirois, and Yoshio Takane for comments.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Dienes, Z. (1999). Rule learning by
seven-month-old infants and neural networks. Science,
284, 875.
Bolshakov, V. Y., Golan, H., Kandel, E. R., & Siegelbaum, S.
A. (1997). Recruitment of new sites of synaptic transmission during the cAMP-dependent late phase of LTP at
CA3-CA1 synapses in the hippocampus. Neuron, 19, 635–
651.
Buckingham, D., & Shultz, T. R. (in press). The developmental course of distance, time, and velocity concepts: A generative connectionist model. Journal of Cognition and
Development.
Christiansen, M. H., & Curtin, S. L. (1999). The power of statistical learning: No need for algebraic rules. Proceedings
of the Twenty-first Annual conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 114-119). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, L. B. (1973). A two-process model of infant visual
attention. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 19, 157-180.
Elman, J. L. (1999). Generalization, rules, and neural networks:
A
simulation
of
Marcus
et
al.
www.crl.ucsd.edu/~elman/Papers/MVRVsim.html
Fahlman, S. E., & Lebiere, C. (1990). The Cascade-correlation
learning architecture. In D. S. Touretzky (Ed.), Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 2 (pp. 524-532).
Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Gasser, M., & Colunga, E. (1999). Babies, variables, and
connectionist networks. Proceedings of the Twenty-first
Annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p.
794). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hertz, J., Krogh, A., & Palmer, R. G. (1991). Introduction to
the theory of neural computation. Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley.
Marcus, G. F. (1999a). Do infants learn grammar with algebra
or statistics? Science, 284, 433.
Marcus, G. F. (1999b). Response: Rule learning by sevenmonth-old infants and neural networks. Science, 284, 875.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule learning by seven-month-old infants. Science,
283, 77-80.
Mareschal, D. & French, R. M. (1997). A connectionist account of interference effects in early infant memory and
categorization. Proceedings of the 19th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 484-489).
Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Mareschal, D., & Shultz, T. R. (1999). Development of children's seriation: A connectionist approach. Connection
Science, 11, 149-186.
Negishi, M. (1999a). Do infants learn grammar with algebra or
statistics? Science, 284, 433.
Negishi, M. (1999b). Rule learning by seven-month-old in fants and by a simple-recurrent-network. www.cnsweb.bu.edu/pub/mnx/sci.html
Oshima-Takane, Y., Takane, Y., & Shultz, T. R. (1999). The
learning of first and second pronouns in English: Network
models and analysis. Journal of Child Language, 26, 545575.
Price, P.J. (1980). Sonority and syllabicity: Acoustic correlates of perception. Phonetica, 37, 327-343.
Quartz, S. R, & Sejnowski, T. J. (1997). The neural basis of
cognitive development: A constructivist manifesto. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 20, 537-596.
Seidenberg, M. S., & Elman, J. L. (1999). Do infants learn
grammar with algebra or statistics? Science, 284, 433.
Selkirk, E.O. (1984). On the major class features and syllable
theory. In M. Aronoff & R.T. Oehrle (Eds). Language
sound structure (pp. 107-136). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Shastri, L. (1999). Infants learning algebraic rules. Science,
285, 1673.
Shastri, L., & Chang, S. (1999). A spatiotemporal
connectionist model of algebraic rule-learning. TR-99-011.
International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA.
www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~shastri/babytalk
Shultz, T. R. (1998). A computational analysis of conservation. Developmental Science, 1, 103-126.
Shultz, T. R. (1999). Rule learning by habituation can be
simulated in neural networks. Proceedings of the Twentyfirst Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 665-670). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., Mareschal, D., & Schmidt, W. C. (1994). Modeling cognitive development on balance scale phenomena.
Machine Learning, 16, 57-86.
Shultz, T. R., Oshima-Takane, Y., & Takane, Y. (1995).
Analysis of unstandardized contributions in cross connected networks. In D. Touretzky, G. Tesauro, & T. K.
Leen, (Eds). Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 7 (pp. 601-608). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sirois , S., & Shultz, T. R. (1998). Neural network modeling of
developmental effects in discrimination shifts. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 71, 235-274.
Smolensky, P. (1988). On the proper treatment of
connectionism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11, 1-74.
Sokolov, E. N. (1963). Perception and the conditioned reflex. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vroomen, J., van den Bosch, A., & de Gelder, B. (1998). A
connectionist model for bootstrap learning of syllabic
structure. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13, 193220.

Simulation of Self-affirmation Phenomena in Cognitive Dissonance
Thomas R. Shultz (shultz@psych.mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology; McGill University
Montreal, QC H3C 1B1 Canada

Mark R. Lepper (lepper@psych.stanford.edu )
Department of Psychology; Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Abstract
The consonance constraint-satisfaction model, which has
simulated the major paradigms of classical cognitive dissonance theory, is here extended to deal with more contemporary findings concerning self-affirmation phenomena in dissonance reduction. The key addition to the model, which has
also figured in recent simulations of arousal phenomena, is to
lessen activity level within the neural network model in selfaffirmation conditions. These and other simulations continue
to show that dissonance phenomena can be explained in terms
of constraint satisfaction.

Introduction
One of the fundamentally important theories in social psychology is cognitive dissonance theory, which has generated a literature of more than 1000 studies over the past 40
years (Festinger, 1957; Thibodeau & Aronson, 1992). We
have recently modeled a number of the central dissonance
phenomena using constraint-satisfaction neural networks
(Shultz & Lepper, 1996, 1998a&b, 1999a&b). Our so-called
consonance model covered insufficient justification, free
choice, arousal, and some self-concept phenomena. The
model also predicted new free-choice effects that were subsequently confirmed by further psychological experimentation (Shultz, Léveillé, & Lepper, 1999). In this paper, we report on an extension of the model to deal with a prominent
self-concept effect in dissonance called self-affirmation.
Dissonance is hypothesized to occur when behavior is inconsistent with self-concept (Steele, 1988; Thibodeau &
Aronson, 1992). Because most people have a positive selfconcept, behaviors such as lying or trying to persuade others of a position that one does not agree with arouse dissonance and lead to attitude change that reduces the dissonance. However, if important aspects of the self-concept
have been recently affirmed, even aspects irrelevant to an
experimentally induced inconsistency, there may be no need
to reduce dissonance via attitude change. Steele (1988) presented experiments in which fairly subtle self-affirmation
manipulations eliminated dissonance effects. Some of these
experiments concern insufficient justification via forced
compliance, and others deal with free choice. We return to
these experiments after reviewing the consonance model
used in the simulations.

The Consonance Model
The consonance model holds that dissonance reduction is a
constraint satisfaction problem. The motivation to reduce
dissonance stems from the various soft constraints on the
beliefs and attitudes that an individual holds. A consonance
network corresponds to a person's representation of the
situation created in the conditions of a dissonance experiment. Activations of network units represent the direction
and strength of a person's cognitions. Weights between
cognitions represent psychological implications. These unit
activations and weights may vary across the different conditions of a single experiment.
Consonance is the degree to which similarly evaluated
units are linked by excitatory weights and oppositely valued
units are linked by inhibitory weights. More formally, consonance in a network is defined by
consonance = ∑ ∑ w ij a i a j
i

j

where wij is the weight between units i and j, a i is the activation of the receiving unit i, and a j is the activation of the
sending unit j.
Activation spreads over time cycles by two update rules:
ai (t + 1) = ai (t ) + net i (ceiling − ai (t ) ) when net i ≥ 0

ai (t + 1) = ai (t ) + net i ( ai (t ) − floor ) when net i < 0
where a i(t+1) is the activation of unit i at time t + 1, a i(t) is
the activation of unit i at time t, ceiling is the maximum activation, floor is the minimum activation, and neti is the net
input to unit i, defined as:
net i = resist i ∑ w ij a j
j

where resisti refers to the resistance of receiving unit i to
having its activation changed.
At each time cycle, n units (normally the number of units
in the network) are randomly selected and updated. The update rules ensure that consonance increases or stays the
same across cycles. Consonance increases because positive
net inputs drive unit activations toward the ceiling and negative net inputs drive them toward the floor. Consonance increases until units reach extreme values or net inputs fall to
0. When consonance reaches asymptote, updating stops.

Method
Network specifications for the three conditions are shown in
Table 1. There are two relevant cognitions, attitude and es-

Human

Simulation

12

0.45
0.35

10

0.25
8
0.15
6
0.05
4

Mean Simulated Attitude

Forced Compliance
Forced compliance is the most popular dissonance technique within the most prominent dissonance paradigm of
insufficient justification. Insufficient justification concerns
cases in which a person does something inconsistent with
his or her attitudes without much justification. The less the
justification, the more cognitive dissonance is created.
In a forced-compliance experiment (Steele, 1988, p. 272),
college students were selected for their strong opposition to
an increase in tuition fees. They were then persuaded to
write essays supporting a substantial tuition increase. In one
condition, they were given a choice about whether to write
the essay; in another condition, they were given very little
choice about whether to write the essay. When a person
freely agrees to argue against personal beliefs, this creates
dissonance, which can be reduced by changing attitudes in
the direction of the argument. There should be little or no
dissonance when one is pressured to make such arguments.
Before measuring post-experimental attitudes, some participants were first asked to complete the political sub-scale
of the Allport-Vernon Study of Values. One-half of them had
been previously assessed as having a strong economicpolitical value orientation, whereas the others did not have
this value orientation. Completing the political value scale
was supposed to affirm a valued self-concept only for those
students with a strong economic-political value orientation.
As shown by the solid line in Figure 1, there was the familiar dissonance effect of more attitude change under high
choice than under low choice. Moreover, as predicted, selfaffirmation eliminated attitude change, even under high
choice conditions. Two other experiments with minor variations yielded similar results (Steele, 1988).

say, and relations between them. As in our previous simulations, each cognition is implemented with a pair of negatively related units, one to represent the positive aspect of
the cognition and the other to represent the negative aspect.
Net activation for a cognition is computed as activation on
the positive unit minus activation on the negative unit. Positive relations between cognitions are implemented by positive weights between their positive units and between their
negative units, and negative weights between the positive
unit of one cognition and the negative unit of the other cognition. All weights are bi-directional.

Mean Human Attitude

Consonance networks are hand-built to implement particular dissonance experiments using a set of five principles
that map dissonance theory to the consonance model:
1. A cognition is implemented by the net activation of a
pair of negatively connected units, one of which represents the positive aspect and the other the negative aspect of the cognition.
2. Cognitions are connected to each other based on their
causal implications.
3. Dissonance is the negative of consonance divided by
the number of nonzero inter-cognition relations.
4. Networks settle into more stable, less dissonant states
as unit activations are updated.
5. Unit activations, but not connection weights, are allowed to change, and some cognitions are more resistant to change than others. In particular, beliefs, behaviors, and justifications are more resistant to change
than are evaluations and attitudes.
Additional details about the consonance model and its assumptions are available in our previous papers (Shultz &
Lepper, 1996, 1998a).

-0.05

2

-0.15
Choice

Low Choice

Affirmation

Condition

Figure 1: Mean attitude following forced compliance.
All weights and initial unit activations are assigned either
high (0.5) or low (0.1) values, according to the five mapping
principles described earlier and the descriptions of the experiments being modeled. The floor parameter is 0; the ceiling parameter for positive units is set to 1, and that for negative units is set to 0.5. A cap parameter is set to -0.5. This
corresponds to the value of the weight between each unit
and itself and it prevents activations from growing to ceiling.
The resist parameter is set to 0.5 for low resistance, and 0.01
for high resistance. These parameter settings are standard
across all our dissonance simulations, and some justification
for them is provided in our longer papers, (Shultz & Lepper,
1996, 1998a, 1999a).
Table 1: Network specifications for forced compliance.
Condition
Choice
Low Choice
Affirmation

Attitude
-0.5
-0.5
-0.25

Essay
0.5
0.5
0.25

Relation
0.5
0.1
0.25

In this experiment, there is a positive relation between attitude and essay because the more positive one's attitude
toward tuition increases, the more likely one would be to

agree to write an essay in favor of tuition increases. This
relation is high in the choice condition and low in the lowchoice condition. Initially, attitude is given a high negative
value to reflect students' initial attitudes; and essay is given
a high positive value because the essay was indeed written
by all students. An activity-level scalar of 0.5 (the same
value used in our other simulations of arousal and self concept) reduces initial activations and weights in the selfaffirmation condition, relative to the no-affirmation conditions. The theoretical justification for using a scalar in this
way is that self-affirmation is hypothesized to reduce the
importance of a dissonant situation (Steele, 1988, p. 292).
All initial unit activations and weights are randomized for
each network by adding or subtracting a random proportion
of their initial amounts. The three proportion ranges in which
additions or subtractions are randomly selected under a uniform distribution are .1, .5, and 1. This increases psychological realism because not everyone can be expected to share
the same parameter values. It also allows a test of robustness of the model. Twenty networks were run in each condition at these three different levels of parameter randomization. Networks were run for 30 cycles, which was sufficient
to approach asymptotic activation levels.

Results
Mean attitude toward the view espoused in the essay is presented, in the dashed line in Figure 1, for networks at the .5
level of parameter randomization. As with Steele's (1988)
subjects, attitudes are more positive under choice than under the other two conditions. An ANOVA with condition as
the single factor revealed significant main effects of condition, F(2, 57) = 67, p < .001. A contrast F with weights of +2
for choice, -1 for low choice, and -1 for self-affirmation is
significant F(1, 57) = 135, p < .001, with no significant residual, F(1, 57) < 1. Proportion of total variance accounted for
by this F is .99.
0.3

Mean Dissonance

Choice
0.2

Low Choice

0.1

Affirmation

0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
0

10

20

30

Cycles

Figure 2: Mean dissonance following forced-compliance.
Mean dissonance scores over time cycles, for networks
run at .5 parameter randomization for the three conditions,
are shown in Figure 2. Dissonance starts high in the choice

condition and is greatly reduced over time. In contrast, there
is minimal dissonance in the other two conditions and very
little dissonance reduction. Similar results were obtained at
parameter randomization levels of .1 and 1.

Discussion
The consonance networks provide a good fit to the attitude
change data reported by Steele (1988). There is considerable
attitude change in the choice condition, but very little in the
low-choice and self-affirmation conditions. There is also a
close correspondence between amount of attitude change
and plots of dissonance reduction in that the condition with
sharp dissonance reduction is also the one with the most
attitude change. Examination of dissonance plots is a bonus
of computer simulations -- there is no known way to measure
dissonance directly in humans. Such plots of simulated dissonance can help to understand the more indirect attitudechange effects that occur as a way of reducing dissonance.

Free Choice
Steele (1988, p. 276) also presents a free-choice experiment
that shows self-affirmation effects. Participants rated and
ranked 10 music albums and were then given a choice to
keep either their fifth- or sixth-ranked album. Choosing between qualitatively distinct objects creates dissonance because the chosen object is less than perfect and the rejected
object has some desirable features that are forgone when an
irreversible choice is made. The dissonance arising from a
free choice is typically reduced by increasing evaluation of
the chosen object and decreasing evaluation of the rejected
object (Brehm, 1956; Shultz et al., 1999).
In Steele's experiment, one-half of the participants had
been previously selected for having a strong scientific-value
orientation and for indicating that a lab coat symbolized
these values. The others did not share these values. Onehalf of the participants in each of these groups were asked to
wear a lab coat for the rest of the experiment, during which
they rated the albums again, after making their choices.
Post-decisional spread of alternatives was measured by
adding the increase in the value of the chosen item and the
decrease in the value of the rejected item. There were three
control conditions, one with participants not having a science orientation and not wearing a lab coat, another with
participants not having a science orientation but wearing a
lab coat, and a third with participants having a science orientation but not wearing a lab coat. There were identical dissonance effects in all three control conditions, but not for the
self-affirmed, scientifically-oriented students wearing a lab
coat. Mean spread of alternatives was higher in the control
conditions than in the self-affirmation condition, as shown
by the solid line in Figure 3. Once again, apparently irrelevant self-affirmation precluded dissonance reduction.

Method
Network specifications for these two groups of conditions
are shown in Tables 2 and 3. There are three cognitions: a
decision and evaluations of the chosen and the rejected objects. Because the decision is public and irreversible, it has

high resistance and high initial activation; the two evaluations have low resistance. Initial evaluation of the chosen
object is somewhat higher than that for the rejected object
because people generally choose items that they rate higher.
Human

tions, it drops only in the control condition. Similar results
were found at parameter randomizations of .1 and 1.
Table 3: Relations between cognitions for free choice.

Simulation

Relation of
chosen to
Decision
Rejected

Mean Spread of Alternatives

1.2
1.0

Condition
Control
Affirmation
.50
.25
-.50
-.25

Discussion

0.8

Consonance networks yield greater separation of alternatives in the control than in the self-affirmation condition, as
found with human participants (Steele, 1988). Dissonance
reduction is also greater in the control than in the selfaffirmation condition, consistent with the idea that attitude
change is driven by dissonance reduction.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Control

Affirmation

0.05

Figure 3: Mean spread of alternatives following free choice.
The relation between the decision and the chosen object
is positive because the better-liked object is chosen. The
two objects are negatively related because they compete for
an exclusive choice. Both relations have high values in the
control condition. To implement self-affirmation, initial activations and weights are scaled by .5. Networks in each condition were run for 40 cycles, which was sufficient for saturation. As is customary in our simulations, all weights and
initial unit activations were randomized at up to .1, .5, or 1 of
the values shown in Tables 2 and 3. Other parameter settings
are also the same as in our other dissonance simulations.
Table 2: Initial net activations for free choice.

Cognition
Chosen
Rejected
Decision

Condition
Control
Affirmation
.30
.15
.20
.10
.50
.25

Results
Spread between evaluations of the two choices was computed as in Steele (1988). Change in evaluation of each object is the difference between initial evaluation and evaluation after 40 cycles. Spreading of alternatives is the sum of
the increase in evaluation of the chosen alternative and the
decrease in evaluation of the rejected alternative. Mean
spreading of the alternatives is plotted, on the dashed line in
Figure 3, at the .5 level of parameter randomization. There is a
larger spread of the alternatives in the control than in the
self-affirmation condition, F(1, 38) = 76, p < .001.
Mean dissonance scores across time cycles in networks at
.5 parameter randomization are shown in Figure 4 for the two
conditions. Although dissonance starts low in both condi-

Mean Dissonance

Condition
-0.05

Control
Affirmation

-0.15

-0.25
0

10

20

30

40

Cycles

Figure 4: Mean dissonance following free choice.

General Discussion
These simulations extend the consonance model to rather
subtle aspects of dissonance reduction involving the selfconcept, using the same conventions, mapping principles,
and default parameter values as in previous simulations. In
all of these cases, dissonance arises when constraints between simultaneously held cognitions are unsatisfied. Dissonance is reduced as the constraints are satisfied, typically
by changing evaluations of entities in the situation defined
by the dissonance experiment. The self-affirmation phenomena considered here had not previously been simulated and
were not generally seen as being closely related to other
contemporary dissonance phenomena on emotional arousal.
As in earlier simulations, the consonance model is here
shown to be robust against parameter variation, as revealed
by the fact that even a high degree of parameter randomization does not affect the pattern of overall results.
A key, unifying concept in simulating contemporary dissonance phenomena in self-concept and arousal is that of
activity level. An activity scalar adjusts the overall level of
activation in networks that represent dissonant situations. In
the present simulations, the activity-level scalar operates

much like a tranquilizing drug in arousal simulations (Shultz
& Lepper, 1999b), by decreasing activation of the representation of the dissonant situation.
Self-affirmation manipulations are thus hypothesized to
decrease the relative importance of being in a dissonant
situation. When you feel good about yourself, being in a
dissonant situation is not nearly so bothersome, and you
become immune to the effects of dissonance reduction. This
reveals a somewhat unexpected theoretical communality
between arousal and self-concept effects.
This analysis is consistent with recent results on trivialization as a mode of dissonance reduction (Simon, Greenberg, & Brehm, 1995). Merely making salient to participants
asked to write counter-attitudinal essays the contrast between issues they believe to be of great consequence and
the less important topic of their own essays reduces attitude
change in the direction of the position advocated.
At the level of the brain or an artificial neural network, the
key theoretical notion is that of activity level. Dissonance
effects are enhanced by increases in activity level and
dampened by decreases in activity level. There are a variety
of ways to modulate activity level, including general manipulations such as drugs (Cooper, Zanna, & Taves, 1978)
and specific manipulations such as attention to particular
cognitions (Read & Miller, 1998a). Consequently, activity
level has the potential to unify theoretical understanding of
several apparently different dissonance phenomena.
The general success of the consonance model enables a
theoretical reinterpretation of dissonance that stresses commonalties with other psychological phenomena that result
from constraint satisfaction. Phenomena such as analogical
reasoning, person perception, schema completion, attitude
change, and dissonance reduction can all be understood in
terms of the dynamics of constraint satisfaction (Holyoak &
Thagard, 1989; Read & Miller, 1998a, b; Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton, 1986; Spellman & Holyoak, 1992;
Spellman, Ullman, & Holyoak, 1993; Thagard, 1989).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant to the first author
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada and by grant MH-44321 to the second author from
the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health.

References
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Post-decision changes in the desirability
of choice alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 52, 384-389.
Cooper, J., Zanna, M. P., & Taves, P. A. (1978). Arousal as a
necessary condition for attitude change following forced
compliance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1101-1106.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Read, S. J., & Miller, L. C. (1998a). On the dynamic construction of meaning: An interactive activation and competition

model of social perception. In S. J. Read & L. C. Miller
(Eds.). Connectionist models of social reasoning and social behavior (pp. 27-68). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Read, S. J., & Miller, L. C. (Eds.). (1998b). Connectionist
models of social reasoning and social behavior. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rumelhart, D. E., Smolensky, P., McClelland, J. L., & Hinton,
G. (1986). Schemata and sequential thought processes in
PDP models. In D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.),
Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 7-57). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Constraint satisfaction
modeling of cognitive dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review, 103, 219-240.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1998a). The consonance
model of dissonance reduction. In S. J. Read & L. C. Miller
(Eds.), Connectionist models of social reasoning and social behavior (pp. 211-244). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1998b). A constraintsatisfaction model of Machiavellianism effects in cognitive
dissonance. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 957-962).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1999a). Computer simulation
of cognitive dissonance reduction. In E. Harmon-Jones &
Mills, J. (Eds.), Cognitive dissonance: Progress on a pivotal theory in social psychology (pp. 235-265). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1999b). Consonance network
simulations of arousal phenomena in cognitive dissonance. Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 659-664).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., Léveillé, E., & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Free choice
and cognitive dissonance revisited: Choosing "lesser
evils" vs. "greater goods." Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 40-48.
Simon, L., Greenberg, J., & Brehm, J. (1995). Trivialization:
The forgotten mode of dissonance reduction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 247-260.
Spellman, B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). If Saddam is Hitler,
then who is George Bush? Analogical mapping between
systems of social roles. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 62, 913-933.
Spellman, B. A., Ullman, J. B., & Holyoak, K. J. (1993). A coherence model of cognitive consistency: Dynamics of attitude change during the Persian Gulf war. Journal of Social Issues, 49, 147-165.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp.
261-302). New York: Academic Press.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12, 435-502.
Thibodeau, R., & Aronson, E. (1992). Taking a closer look:
Reasserting the role of the self-concept in dissonance
theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18,
591-602.

