UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Irregularization: The Interaction of Item Frequency and Phonological Interference in Regular
Past Tense Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9z62543x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Long, Christopher J.
Almor, Amit

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Irregularization: The Interaction of Item Frequency and Phonological Interference
in Regular Past Tense Production
Christopher J. Long (clong@usc.edu)
Linguistics Department
University of Southern California
University Park, GFS 301
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1693

Amit Almor (almor@gizmo.usc.edu)
University of Southern California
Program in Neural, Informational, and Behavioral Sciences
Hedco Neurosciences Building
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2520
Abstract
Both dual mechanism and connectionist single
mechanism accounts predict that phonologically similar
irregulars can interfere with regular past tense
production.
In dual mechanism accounts, such
interference depends on irregular frequency but not on
the frequency of regulars with the possible exception of
high frequency regulars. Such models predict that high
and low frequency regulars are equally susceptible to
interference from irregulars, or that high frequency
regulars would be more affected than low frequency
ones. Connectionist single mechanism models, on the
other hand, claim that low frequency regulars are more
susceptible to interference from irregulars than high
frequency regulars. We present results from two
experiments that investigate interference from irregulars
on the past tense production of high and low frequency
regular verbs. In these experiments, high frequency
regulars were less affected by interference from
phonologically similar irregulars than low frequency
regulars. These results support connectionist single
mechanism models of past tense verb production.

The dichotomy between regular and irregular patterns
permeates many levels of language. In many areas,
accounting for differences between regular and irregular
patterns has become the battlefield on which competing
theories of language processing win or lose. One such case,
which has received much attention in recent years, is the
production of the past tense form of English verbs. This
case has become the focus of an ongoing debate between
dual mechanism and connectionist single mechanism
models of word processing (MacWhinney B. & Leinbach,
J., 1991; Marchman et al., 1999; Marcus, 1995a, 1995b,
1996; Pinker 1991, 1999; Pinker & Prince, 1991, Plunket &
Marchman, 1993, 1996; Rumlehart & McClelland, 1986;
Seidenberg 1997).
Dual Mechanism Accounts. In dual mechanism accounts
(Marcus, 1995a, 1995b, 1996; Pinker 1991, 1999; Pinker &
Prince, 1991), regular past tense is produced via a rule (add
–ed) that applies to the root stem of the verb, which is stored
in the mental lexicon. Irregulars, on the other hand, are

formed via associations between present and past tense
forms, each of which is stored as a separate lexical entry.
The add –ed rule applies as a default to verbs without a
separate lexical past tense entry (regulars and non-words).
The existence of a separate past tense entry, as in the case of
irregulars, blocks the application of the add –ed rule.
However, if the representation of a past tense entry is weak
(due to low frequency), the add –ed rule could be applied
erroneously, causing an over-regularization error (buy >
*buyed). Such errors are well documented both under
natural and experimental conditions (Berko, 1958; Bybee &
Slobin, 1982; Marcus et al., 1992). In addition to irregulars
being regularized, regulars can also be incorrectly produced
as if they were irregulars (e.g., vie > *vought). This
phenomenon of "irregularization" has also been documented
both in and out of the laboratory (Bybee and Moder, 1983;
Xu & Pinker, 1995).
Pinker (1999), in his most recent version of a dual
mechanism model, provides an account of irregularization.
In his model, the word association mechanism responsible
for irregular past tense production is a connectionist type
neural network that contains both irregular and high
frequency regular items. In the course of past tense
production, the network attempts to compose a past tense
form on the basis of the present tense. Phonological overlap
between regular and irregular items can cause two types of
interference during this computation. First, an incorrect
form may gain enough activation to actually block the add –
ed rule resulting in an irregularization error. Alternatively,
regular past tense production could be successful, but the
spurious activation caused by interference may slow down
production.
By this account, interference (and past tense production)
is generally insensitive to the frequency of regular verbs.
One exception may result from the encoding of regular past
tense forms of high frequency regular verbs in the
associative network. The encoding of these past tense forms
in the network can sometimes cause high frequency regulars
to be more affected by interference from irregulars than low
frequency regulars:

"As mentioned in note 11, sometimes highfrequency regular verbs are, paradoxically, slower to
produce than low-frequency verbs. One explanation is that
stored forms always inhibit the rule, even if they are
identical to the form the rule is trying to create. Just as
broke blocks the creation of breaked an entry for walked
that is stored in memory may block the creation of walked
by rule, slowing down the rule production (compared to,
say, stalked, whose memory entry is too weak to slow
down the rule)."
(Pinker, 1999, page 303, fn 22)

Connectionist single mechanism Accounts. Connectionist
single mechanism models rely on a single mechanism to
account for both regular and irregular past tense production
(MacWhinney, B. & Leinbach, J., 1991; Marchman,
Wulfeck, & Weismer,1999; Plunket & Marchman, 1993,
1996; Rumlehart & McClelland, 1986; Seidenberg 1997).
The claim is that both regulars and irregulars are represented
in a single neural network. The network encodes mappings
between present and past tenses as weighted links between
forms. More exposure to a particular mapping strengthens
the corresponding link. In this way, the strength of
mappings for both regular and irregular items is determined
by item frequency and the consistency of the present to past
tense mapping within the neighborhood of phonologically
similar verbs.
In this model, interference on regular and irregular past
production is the result of a single mechanism. As
activation spreads and a past tense form (regular or
irregular) is being selected, interference from overlapping
mappings (regular or irregular) can cause interference. In
past tense production, a target form must reach a critical
activation level before it is selected. In order for this to
happen, activation of competing forms must be suppressed.
If a competing form is not suppressed and its activation
exceeds that of the correct form and reaches a critical
threshold, an irregularization error occurs. However, even if
correct selection is eventually successful, the activation of
competing forms may cause the system to take longer to
settle on the correct form and may thus result in slowed
production. In this account, due to the greater strength of
their mappings, high frequency regular and irregular verbs
are less susceptible to interference from other items than
low frequency verbs. Thus, the connectionist single
mechanism account and the dual mechanism account both
predict the same two types of possible interference: (1)
irregularization errors, and (2) slowing of correct
production. However, the two accounts differ in their
prediction of how interference will affect high and low
frequency regulars. The dual mechanism account predicts
that interference should result in more errors and slower
production for high frequency regular verbs than for low
frequency regular verbs.
The connectionist single
mechanism account, on the other hand, predicts more errors
and slowed production for the low frequency regulars than
for the high frequency regulars. The following experiments
tested these contrasting predictions.

Experiment 1
This experiment investigated the effects of interference from
irregulars on regular past tense production.
More
specifically, we tested the degree to which high and low
frequency regulars are differentially affected by such
interference.
One potential problem facing an investigation of this
type is the subtle nature of interference effects from
irregulars. In order to get around this problem, we designed
the experiment so as to enhance the interfering effects of
irregulars. According to both models, phonological overlap
can yield irregularization errors and slowed production. We
reasoned that one possible way to enhance the effect of
phonological similarity is to make this similarity more
salient by having participants produce the past tense form of
an irregular verb (e.g., buy) immediately prior to producing
the past tense form of a phonologically similar regular verb
(e.g., die). This was done for both high and low frequency
regulars creating the two interference conditions shown in
Table 1. We decided on an all auditory presentation of
stimuli and responses so as to further enhance the (possibly
interfering) effect of phonological similarity. We also had a
control condition in which the same regular verbs were
preceded by non-similar irregulars, creating the two control
conditions shown in Table 1. Thus, the complete design
was 2 X 2 with factors Frequency (high vs. low) and
Context (interference vs. control).
Table 1: Experiment 1 Conditions. Shown is the regular
target (in bold) with the irregular from the preceding trial.

Frequency
High
Low

Context
Interference
Buy
Die
Buy
Vie

Control
Hear
Die
Hear
Vie

Both models predict that the interference condition will be
slower and more error prone than the control for both high
and low frequency regulars. However, the two models
differ in their predictions for the interaction between context
and frequency. The dual mechanism model claims that the
difference between the interference and control conditions
will either be equal for both high and low frequency
regulars, or perhaps be greater for high than low frequency
regulars. According to Pinker (1999), high frequency
regulars should be more susceptible to interference when the
experimental list includes a high proportion of irregular
verbs, as in the present experiment (50%):
"… the harmful effects of high frequency tend to occur
when the word list has a high percentage of irregular forms,
encouraging subjects to go to their mental lexicons on every
trial…"
(Pinker, 1999, pp. 303, f. 22)

The connectionist single mechanism account, on the
other hand, predicts that the difference between the
interference and control conditions will be greater for the
low frequency regulars than for the high frequency regulars.

Method
Participants. 61 undergraduate students from the
Department of Psychology at the University of Southern
California received extra credit to participate in the
experiment. All were native speakers of English.
Materials. 20 Monosyllabic English irregular present tense
verbs were matched with 20 phonologically similar
monosyllabic high frequency (Mean frequency 185) and 20
phonologically similar monosyllabic low frequency (Mean
frequency 3) present tense regular verbs creating 20 high
interference pairs and 20 low interference pairs. The same
set of items was then regrouped such that each irregular
verb was matched with a non-similar sounding high and low
frequency regular verb creating 20 high control pairs and 20
low control pairs. Verb frequencies were taken from the
Francis & Kucera (1982) corpus.
To ensure that each participant responded to each regular
item only once, the prime and control pairs were divided
into four lists (1A/1B, 2A/2B) each containing one-quarter
of the experimental pairs with the number, type, and
frequency of pairs balanced across lists. 23 regular and 44
irregular monosyllabic present tense verbs were selected as
fillers to balance the appearance of regular and irregular
items on the four lists. The lists were ordered in a pseudorandom fashion. Presentation of lists was balanced across
participants.
A practice list was also created consisting of 10 regular
and 10 irregular present tense verbs that were not included
in the experimental lists.
All items were read by a male native speaker of English
and digitally recorded in 16 bit 20 MHZ format. Individual
words were later excised using a digital sound manipulation
program.
Procedure. Stimuli were presented to participants through
headphones at 2000 ms intervals using the PsyScope
program (Cohen, J., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost,
J., 1993). Participants were instructed to say the past tense
form of the verb they heard. In order to encourage rapid
responses and reduce possible strategy effects, participants
were instructed to say the past tense as quickly as possible.
If participants didn’t answer within a 1500ms interval, they
were signaled with a beep. Responses were coded as either
'correct', 'incorrect' or 'equipment error'. All participants
received the same 20-item practice list before being tested
on one of the two A/B list sets. Order of presentation of the
lists was alternated giving a total of four potential
presentation patterns (1a>1b, 1b>1a, 2a>2b, 2b>2a) that
were counterbalanced across participants. There was a short
break between the lists. The total testing time was
approximately 30 min. Participant responses were recorded.

Recordings were used to verify initial coding of responses
and to transcribe and code responses for the error analysis.

Results
Data were included only for responses to regular targets that
followed the correct production of the preceding irregular
item. Responses to regulars that followed an incorrect
irregular were not included because in such cases it is not
clear whether participants had processed the preceding
irregular. Six participants (4% of data) and three items (2%
of data) had to be removed from the analyses due to
insufficient data contribution. Initial analyses of list order
effects indicated that there was no interaction between list
presentation order and any of the conditions of the
experiment. Thus, the data from initial and second
presentations were collapsed.
Error analysis. Responses were classified as follows:
(1) Correct: the regular past tense form was correctly
produced.
(2) Irregularization Error: the regular past tense form
was incorrect and the form of the error had a direct
relationship to an existing past tense irregular form. (e.g.,
the past tense of ‘vie’ produced as ‘vought’).
(3) Miscellaneous Error: the regular past tense form was
incorrect and the form of the error did not relate to an
existing irregular past tense form (e.g., vie > died).
Table 3 shows the distribution (raw numbers and
percentages) of response types in the different conditions.
Table 3: Response types in Experiment 1

Response Type
Correct
Irregularization Error
Misc. Error
Correct
Irregularization Error
Misc. Error
Correct
Irregularization Error
Misc. Error

Context
Interference Control
High
344 (95%)
349 (96%)
7 (2%)
3 (1%)
13 (4%)
10 (3%)
Low
256 (88%)
273 (91%)
13 (4%)
4 (1%)
20 (7%)
22 (7%)
Total
600 (92%)
622 (94%)
20 (3%)
7 (1%)
33 (5%)
32 (5%)

To assess the effect of frequency and context on
response type we conducted a log-linear analysis on these
responses starting with the maximal model – Context
(interference vs. control) x Frequency (high vs. low) x
Response Type (correct vs. irregularization error vs.
miscellaneous error). The only terms that are of potential
interest here are the interaction terms that included the
response type and that were crucial for the model's fit. The

terms that met these criteria in this experiment were the
term expressing the interaction between context and
response type (LR χ2(2)=7.03, p<.0297) and the term
expressing the interaction between frequency and response
type (LR χ2(2)=15.17, p<.0005). The three-way interaction
between context, frequency and response type was not
significant (LR χ2(2)=.7698). Thus, while both context and
frequency had an effect on response type, these effects were
independent of each other. Participants made more errors
with the low frequency verbs than with the high frequency
verbs but this frequency effect was comparable in the
interference and control conditions. To better examine the
distribution of the different response types in the
interference and control conditions, we combined the
responses from the high and low frequency conditions (as in
the bottom part of Table 3). While in both prime and
control conditions there is an equal percentage of
miscellaneous errors (5%), the prime condition has more
irregularization errors (5%) than the control condition (3%).
This difference proved to be significant according to a chisquare test including correct responses in the analysis
(χ2(1)=6.47, p<.0394), as well as an analysis of the error
data alone (χ2(1)=6.62, p<.0364).
Latencies. Figure 1 shows RTs for correct responses in all
four conditions. While low frequency regulars were
produced slower in the interference than in the control
condition, high frequency regulars were actually produced
faster in the interference condition. An ANOVA with
factors Frequency (high vs. low) and Context (interference
vs. control) revealed a main effect of frequency whereby
participants took significantly longer to produce the past
tense form of low frequency regular verbs compared to high
frequency ones (1322 ms vs.1214 ms), F1(1, 54)=111,
p<.001, F2(1, 35)=7.244, p<.01. Context had no main
effect, F1, F2<1. The interaction between context and
frequency was significant by participants, F1(1, 54)=4.095,
p<.048, although not by items, F2<1.
Figure 1: RT Experiment 1

1350
1335

RT

1300

1308

1250
1228
1200

Interference

1200
1150

Control

1100
High

Low

Frequency

Discussion
Consistent with the predictions of both the dual mechanism
and the connectionist single mechanism accounts,
interference from a similar sounding irregular was found to

increase the likelihood of making an irregularization error in
producing the past tense form of regular verbs. However,
the error data show that, in contrast to the claims of Pinker’s
(1999) dual mechanism account, the production of low
frequency regulars is overall more prone to errors than the
production of high frequency regulars. Nevertheless, the
error data did not provide strong support for the
connectionist single mechanism account because high and
low frequency regulars were affected equally in both the
control and interference condition. This failure to detect a
significant effect may be a reflection of a true lack of
interaction, as the dual mechanism model may predict, or it
may simply be a result of a lack of power due to the subtlety
of the effect and low cell count (participants produced very
few errors overall.) A more informative measure of
performance that is not prone to the small cell size problem
and its associated low power was provided by response
latencies in correct regular past tense production.
The analysis of response latencies revealed, as in the
error data analysis, a general advantage for high frequency
regulars such that they were faster than low frequency
regulars. Importantly, this finding precludes a speed
accuracy trade-off explanation of the error data. There are
two aspects of these results, however, that need to be dealt
with before any further interpretation of the latency data can
be made. First, the past tense form of high frequency verbs
was produced faster in the interference condition than in the
control condition, in contrast to the predictions of both
models. Second, the fact that the interaction between
frequency and context was significant only in the byparticipants analysis but not in the by-items analysis
suggests that items varied in some important aspect that we
may have overlooked. One such aspect may be related to
priming effects between the present tense forms,
independent of the production of the past tense. To perform
the task, participants had to, first, process the present tense
form of each verb, and, second, generate the past tense
form. Thus, response times in this task indicate not only the
time it took participants to generate past tense forms but
also the time it took them to process the present tense forms.
It may be that phonological similarity, which caused
interference in the production of the past tense form,
facilitated the processing of the present tense form. The
high frequency regulars may have thus elicited faster
responses in the interference condition because, for these
verbs, phonological similarity benefited the processing of
the present tense forms more than it interfered with the
production of the past tense forms. For the low frequency
regulars, on the other hand, phonological similarity may
have interfered with the production of the past tense forms
more than it benefited the processing of the present tense
forms. Differences between items in the relative strengths
of the benefit and the interference associated with
phonological similarity may also help explain the
differences between the by-participants and by-items
analyses. It is important to note here that this interpretation
only applies for the specific irregular/regular pairs as used in

this experimental manipulation and not for regular verbs in
general. In order to test this interpretation, it is necessary to
confirm the facilitatory effects of phonological similarity on
the processing of the present tense in the interference
condition and then reanalyze the data taking these effects
into account. Experiment 2 was undertaken to directly
measure the effect of phonological similarity on the
processing of the present forms.

Discussion

Experiment 2
This experiment was identical to Experiment 1 in materials
and procedure but employed a repetition task instead of past
tense generation. Thus, in Experiment 2, the interference
condition of Experiment 1 became a priming condition in
which the preceding phonologically similar irregular could
prime the recognition of the regular target item.

Method
Participants. 25 undergraduate students (different from
Experiment 1) from the Department of Psychology at the
University of Southern California received extra credit to
participate in the experiment. All were native speakers of
English
Materials. Same as in Experiment 1.
Procedure. Same as in Experiment 1 except that
participants were instructed to repeat the verb that they
heard rather than produce the past tense. The presentation
interval was reduced to 650 ms and the time-out interval to
600 ms.

Results
As with Experiment 1, only responses to regular verbs that
followed the correct repetition of the preceding irregular
verb were included. 3 subjects (5% of data) and 4 items
(7% of data) were excluded from the analysis due to
insufficient data contributions. Mean RTs are shown in
Figure 2. An ANOVA with factors Frequency (high vs.
low) and Context (prime vs. control) revealed a main effect
Figure 2: RT Experiment 2
670

RT

630
590
550

600

574

584

544

Prime
510

Control

470
High

Low

Frequency

of frequency whereby high frequency verbs were repeated
faster than low frequency verbs (558 ms vs. 591 ms), F1(1,
21)=39.59, p<.0001, F2(1, 34)=3.923, p<0.056. There was
also a main effect of context whereby participants were
faster at repeating target items in the prime condition than in
the control condition, (564 ms vs. 592 ms), F1(1, 21)=7.062,
p<.015, F2(1, 34)=6.062, p<0.019. There was no interaction
between context and frequency, F1, F2<1.

The fact that both high and low frequency regulars were
repeated faster in the prime condition confirms the claim
that the interference condition of Experiment 1 also
involved facilitation of the initial processing of the present
tense. Furthermore, the lack of context by frequency
interaction in Experiment 2 suggests that the context by
frequency interaction observed in Experiment 1 was not
related to the processing of the present tenses but was only
related to the generation of the past tense.
Most
importantly, however, the results of Experiment 2 can be
used to reanalyze the results of Experiment 1 while
factoring out the priming effects related to the processing of
the present forms.
Combined Experiment 1 and 2 Analyses. One possible
way to factor out the effects of present tense priming is by
repeating the by-items analysis of Experiment 1 with
Experiment 2 response times as covariates. Due to
differences in the magnitude and variability of response
times in the two experiments, response times were log
transformed (Emerson, 1991). An ANCOVA of the log
transformed RTs in Experiment 1, with factors Frequency
(high vs. low), Context (interference vs. control), and
covariates Prime and Control Log RTs from Experiment 2,
found no main effect for context, F<1, a marginally
significant main effect of frequency, F(1,32)=3.391, p<.075,
and finally, a significant interaction between context and
frequency, F(1, 32)=4.176, p<.049. Thus, a by-items
analysis in which the processing of present tenses was
controlled for, found, as did the original by-participants
analysis, a significant interaction between context and
frequency.
To further explore the nature of this interaction we
calculated the partial correlation between the interference on
each item in Experiment 1 (RT in interference condition
minus RT in control condition) and their frequency (log
transformed) while controlling for the item’s priming in
Experiment 2 (RT in prime condition minus RT in control
condition). This analysis found that item frequency and the
extent of interference for that item were negatively
correlated (r= -0.35, p<.037) such that the higher the item
frequency, the less was the effect of interference.

Discussion of Combined Analyses
The reanalysis of Experiment 1 showed that once the effects
of processing the present tense were factored out, the item
analysis corroborated the participant analysis in showing a

significant interaction between interference and frequency.
Importantly, this analysis revealed that low frequency
regulars were affected by interference more than high
frequency regulars. This finding is squarely incompatible
with Pinker’s (1999) dual mechanism account.

General Discussion and Conclusions
Two production experiments tested the extent to which
irregular verbs could interfere with the past tense production
of regular verbs. Irregularization errors were more likely
when regular verbs were preceded by phonologically similar
irregulars than when they were preceded by phonologically
dissimilar irregulars. Furthermore, overall production errors
were more likely for low frequency regular verbs than for
high frequency regular verbs. Finally, an analysis of
latencies of correct responses showed that, once the effects
of processing the present tenses are controlled for, high
frequency regulars are more immune than low frequency
regulars to interference from phonologically similar
irregulars.
These findings are incompatible with the prediction of
Pinker's Words and Rules dual mechanism model (Pinker,
1999) that high frequency regulars should be affected by
interference more than low frequency regulars. One
obvious way in which Pinker's model could be modified to
account for our findings is by simply changing it to say that
regular past tense production could benefit (rather than be
hindered) by the existence of a form in the associative
network. While such modification may help account for the
current findings, it is not clear what its other consequences
may be.
Clearly, frequency effects are not the only relevant
evidence for understanding the mechanisms underlying past
tense production. Thus, the present findings should not be
viewed as the ultimate proof that the connectionist approach
is right and that the dual mechanism account is wrong.
Rather, the present findings should be viewed as adding one
piece to a growing body of evidence that suggests that the
separation of language processing into two mechanisms is
buying less and less in terms of explanatory power but
costing more and more in terms of unnecessary theoretical
baggage.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by USC graduate merit
fellowship (C.J.L) and NIA grant AG11773-05 (A.A.). We
are grateful to Mark Seidenberg and Elaine Andersen for
helpful feedback at various stages of this work.

References
Berko, J. (1958). The Child's learning of English
morphology. Word, 14 150-177.
Bybee, J. L. & Moder, C. L. (1983). Morphological classes
as natural categories. Language, 59, 251-270.

Bybee, J. L. & Slobin, D. I. (1983). Rules and schemes in
the development and use of the English past tense.
Language, 58, 265-289.
Cohen, J., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J. (1993).
PsyScope: Software developed at Carnegie Mellon
University, Department of Psychology.
Emerson, J. D. (1991). Introduction to Transformations. In
D. C. Hoaglin, F. Mosteller, & J. W. Turkey (Eds.),
Fundamentals of Exploratory Analysis of Variance. New
York: Wiley.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency Analysis of
English Usage: Lexicon and Grammar. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
MacWhinney, B. and Leinbach, J. (1991). Implementations
are not conceptualizations: Revising the verb learning
model. Cognition, 40, 121-157.
Marchman, V. A., Wulfeck, B., & Weismer, S. E. (1999).
Morphological productivity in children with normal
language and SLI: A study of the English past tense.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
42(1), 206-219.
Marcus, G. F. (1995a). The acquisition of the English past
tense in children in multilayered connectionist networks.
Cognition, 56, 271-279.
Marcus, G. F. (1995b). Children's overregularization of
English plurals: a quantitative analysis. Child Language,
22, 447-459.
Marcus, G. F. (1996). Why do children say “breaked”.
Current directions in Psychological Science, Vol. 5(3),
81-85.
Marcus, G., Ullman, M., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., Rosen,
T., & Xu, F. (1992). Overregularization in language
acquisition. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 57.
Pinker, S. (1991). Rules of language. Science, 253, 530-535
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and Rules. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Pinker, S. & Prince, A. (1991). Regular and irregular
morphology and the psychological status of rules and
grammar. Proceedings of the 1991 Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society, USA.
Plunkett, K. & Marchman, V. A. (1993). From rote learning
to system building: acquiring verb morphology in
children and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Plunkett, K. & Marchman, V. A. (1996). Learning in a
connectionist model of the acquisition of the English past
tense. Cognition, 61, 299-308.
Rumelhart. D. & J. McClelland (1986). ‘On the learning of
past tense of English verbs. Implicit rules or parallel
distributed processing?’ In J. McClelland, D. Rumelhart
and the PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Seidenberg, M.S. (1997). Rules of language. Science, 275,
1599-1603.
Xu, F. & Pinker, S. (1995). Weird past tense forms. Journal
of Child Language, 22, 531-556.

