UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Lexical Retrieval in Speech Production like Recall or Recognition? The Effects of Word
Frequency and Neighbourhood Size

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xn678xq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
MacAndrew, Siobhan B.G.
Harley, Trevor A.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Lexical Retrieval in Speech Production like Recall or Recognition? The Effects
of Word Frequency and Neighbourhood Size
Siobhan B. G. MacAndrew (s.macandrew@abertay-dundee.ac.uk )
Division of Psychology, School of Social & Health Sciences
University of Abertay Dundee
Dundee DD1 1NJ, UK

Trevor A. Harley (t.a.harley@dundee.ac.uk) & Sheila Colgan
Department of Psychology, University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 4HN, UK

Abstract
We investigate the effects of word frequency and lexical
neighbourhood density on word recall and recognition. We
found a three-way interaction between memory task, the size
of lexical neighbourhood of a target word, and target word
frequency. In particular, performance on low frequency
words with many lexical neighbours was surprisingly good
in the recognition condition. The results show that the
number of lexical neighbours of the target moderates the
word frequency effect in recognition. Large neighbourhood
size always has a facilitatory effect upon performance. The
findings are contrasted with those observed in lexical access
in speech production.

Introduction
To what extent is retrieving a word when speaking like
accessing a fact from long-term memory? In particular,
how do the language processes involved in lexical access
for spontaneous speech production relate to the memory
processes involved in the retrieval of word lists from long
term memory? On the one hand, our intuition is that lexical
retrieval is like recall. Indeed, we even talk in these terms
in every day use, using constructions such as “I cannot
recall that word”. On the other hand, some models of
lexical access in speech production involve search through
a list of phonological forms (Butterworth, 1980, 1989; Fay
& Cutler, 1977). Such a search might well involve an
element of recognition when the appropriate form is
reached. This paper looks at two psycholinguistic variables
that are well known to influence lexical access (word
frequency and lexical neighbourhood size), and
investigates their effect on free recall and recognition
performance. We compare their effects on a memory task
with their effects on a language production task.
Word frequency is an important variable in all
language tasks, including speech production (Harley,
1995). Frequency always has a facilitatory effect in speech
production. For example, we are faster to name high
frequency words and objects with high frequency names
(see Jescheniak & Levelt, 1994; Oldfield & Wingfield,
1965). Harley and Bown (1998), using a laboratory-based
“tip-of-the-tongue” (TOT) induction task (Brown &

McNeill, 1965), showed that we are more likely to
experience a TOT state on less common words.
The second variable employed in this study is
lexical neighbourhood size. Some words (e.g. “corpse”)
are phonologically unique in that there are no other words
that sound like them. Other words (e.g. “cage”) have a
large number of phonological neighbours (“page”, “rage”,
“sage”, and “cave”, among others). Obviously we need a
suitable measure of lexical similarity; we discuss this
below. It is well established that a word’s lexical
neighbours play in an important role in word recognition
(e.g. Glushko, 1979; Grainger, 1990). It is now also
becoming apparent that they play some role in word
production. Harley and Bown (1998) showed that the
number of phonological neighbours a word has affects
lexical retrieval in the tip-of-the-tongue state. In particular,
they showed that when word length and frequency are
controlled for, people are more likely to have difficulty
with words that have few phonological neighbours. This
result showed that a large set of potential responses can in
fact increase the chances of successful retrieval of the
target. Harley and Bown hypothesised that structurally
similar items provide supporting activation for each other.
This finding also supports the “insufficient activation”
hypothesis for the origin of TOTs (Burke, MacKay,
Worthley, & Wade, 1991).
Although research on the effects of neighbourhood
density on lexical access in speech production is at an early
stage, the pattern observed is that it is easier to produce
frequent words that have many neighbours. Will this
pattern be observed in memory tasks? Of course, the
pattern observed might well differ depending upon the
exact task used. In particular, we might observe different
outcomes depending on whether we use a recognition or
recall memory task.
The effect of word frequency on recognition is well
known, if poorly understood. The “word frequency effect”
is the finding that recognition memory is better for low
frequency words than high frequency words (Baddeley,
1990; Gregg, 1976; see Guttentag & Carroll, 1998, for a
recent review). In recognition, we make a judgement about
whether or not we have recently seen a particular item. Is

the stimulus activated because of recent exposure, or is it
activated just because of an intrinsic property, such as its
high frequency? There is no such conflict in the case of
low frequency words, where high activation of the stimulus
representation is much more likely to have come from
recent exposure in the study list. Put more colloquially,
frequent words are less distinctive. This line of reasoning
is commonly known as the memorability hypothesis (e.g.
Brown, Lewis, & Monk, 1977).
Less is known about how word frequency affects
performance in a recall task. If frequency operates by
raising the activation levels of frequently used items (e.g.
Morton, 1979), then the free recall of a high frequency
word should be relatively easy and that of a less frequent
word relatively difficult. In summary, frequency should
facilitate recall but might hinder recognition. In the light of
these hypotheses, the finding that in speech production
high target word frequency always has a facilitatory effect
suggests that lexical access is more like recall than
recognition.
The effect of a large lexical neighbourhood is to
increase the number of potential responses. The existence
of plausible alternative responses may have different
effects on recall and recognition. Recognition is more
difficult when selecting from a large set of plausible
responses than a smaller set (e.g. in the long-term memory
version of Sternberg, 1966). Crucially, the similarity
between targets and distractors affects recognition (Dale &
Baddeley, 1962). Hence large lexical neighbourhoods
should hinder recognition.
It is less clear how neighbourhood size will affect
recall. If free recall acts like speech production, we would
expect that words with many neighbours should be
relatively easy to recall. One way of conceptualising this is
that a word’s neighbours should act as possible retrieval
cues. On the other hand, in the two-process, generationrecognition account of free recall (Anderson & Bower,
1974; Kintsch, 1970), recall contains within it an element
of recognition. In this case, the recall of words with many
neighbours will be either hindered, or the effects of the two
processes may cancel out so that no difference is observed.
We attempt to explore these issues by examining the effect
of the target word’s phonological neighbourhood.
It is unclear how word frequency and lexical
neighbourhood size will interact. If either recognition or
recall resembles speech production while the other does
not, we will obtain a three-way interaction with
particularly poor performance on low frequency words
with few neighbours. The simplest prediction is that speech
production resembles recall, and that the pattern observed
in speech production should therefore also be observed in
the free recall task. It is less clear what should happen in
the recognition task. One possibility is that the word
frequency effect should overwhelm any effects of
neighbourhood size, but any prediction here is prematurely
speculative.

In summary, the aim of this paper is to examine the
effects of word frequency and lexical neighbourhood size
on measures of memory.

Method
Participants
We tested 30 volunteers, who had a mean age of 34 years.
They were all psychology undergraduates of the University
of Dundee, Scotland. Ten females and five males took part
in each of the two experimental conditions.

Materials
All of the words used in the experiment were nouns of one
or two syllables in length. The experiment required a
printed list of target words used in the learning phase of the
study, and a printed list of these words plus distractor
words in the recognition condition.
The target items were the same as those of
Experiment 2 of Harley and Bown (1998). There were 60
words in the target list, of which 30 were of high frequency
(at least 100 instances per million words, with a mean of
163.7, as sampled in Francis & Kucera, 1982), and 30 of
low frequency (under 9 instances per million, with a mean
of 3.7). Within each list of 30, 15 of the target words had a
dense lexical neighbourhood as evidenced by a mean N
value of 15.1 (see Coltheart, Davelaar & Besner, 1977; our
figures were taken from the MRC Database of Coltheart,
1981). The remaining 15 words had no close orthographic
neighbours as evidenced by a mean N value of 0. The N
value is a measure of a word’s orthographic
neighbourhood size: it is the number of other words that
can be made from a particular word by changing one letter.
Obviously the higher the N score, the larger the
orthographic
neighbourhood.
Orthographic
and
phonological neighbourhood sizes are highly correlated.
This issue is discussed in depth in Harley and Bown
(1998), who found the same results whether orthographic
or phonological neighbourhood size was used. The
properties of the materials are summarised in table 1.
Table 1: Properties of materials
Condition
High F, high N
High F, low N
Low F, high N
Low F, low N

Frequency

N Value

246.7
225.5
7.2
5.6

15.1
0
15.1
0

This process yielded four sets of fifteen target
words, balanced for frequency and orthographic
neighbourhood size, comprising words of high frequency
and high N value, high frequency and low N value, low
frequency and high N value, and low frequency and low N
value. The words were combined in random order to form
one list.

Procedure
All participants were given 5 minutes in which they were
told to read the presentation list of 60 words and to try to
remember them. This was followed by an interval of 5
minutes during which participants engaged in conversation
and listened to music. Participants in the recall condition
were then given 5 minutes to write down as many words as
they could recall from the presentation list. Participants in
the recognition condition were told they had 5 minutes to
read the recognition list of 120 words and underline in
pencil any words that they thought they had previously
seen.

neighbourhood size (F(1, 28) = 1.2). Figure 1 summarises
these results.
As was expected, the level of recognition
performance was better than that of free recall.
Performance on words with dense lexical neighbourhoods
was better than that on words with sparse neighbourhoods
across both the recall and recognition conditions.
Performance on high frequency words was generally better
than on low frequency ones. The likely source of the threeway interaction, however, is that low frequency, denseneighbourhood words perform unusually well in the
recognition task (or unusually poorly in the recall
condition). Words with many neighbours are significantly
easier to recognise than those with few neighbours (t[28] =
4.01, p < 0.001). There is no difference between the
corresponding conditions in the recall task (t[28] = 1.10).
Indeed, recognition performance for the less frequent
words with many neighbours was the best of all conditions.
A consequence of this interaction is that there is no word
frequency effect for words with few neighbours in the
recognition task; performance on low frequency words is
in fact worse than that on high frequency words, although
not significantly so (t[28] = 0.95).
10
9
8
Score

The target words were printed in black ink, one
beneath the other, in two columns on A4 paper in random
order for use in the presentation phase of the experiment.
Examples include “ball” and “date” (high frequency, high
N), “cage” and “dove” (low frequency, high N), “growth”
and “view” (high frequency, low N) and “corpse” and
“tinsel” (low frequency, low N).
The recognition condition of the experiment
consisted of the targets and 60 distractor items. In this
particular experiment, the distractors were related in
meaning to items from the target word set. Although it is
clearly of interest to study other types of distractor, we
wanted to make this task similar to speech production.
Therefore the potential competing words were maximally
plausible alternatives that were semantically similar to the
targets. The target words were paired with close semantic
associates. The items for the recognition task were also
hand-printed in black ink, one beneath the other, in random
order, on a single sheet of A4 paper.

Hi F Hi N

7

Hi F Lo N

6

Lo F Hi N

5

Lo F Lo N

4
3

Results
The experimental design comprised three factors. There
was a between-subjects factor of memory task (with the
two levels of free recall and recognition). There were two
within-subjects factors, one of word frequency (with the
two levels of high and low frequency) and one of lexical
neighbourhood size (with the two levels of high N score
and low N score).
A 2x2x2 ANOVA on the correct memory scores of
the participants showed main effects of memory task (F(1,
28) = 14.72, p < 0.001; MSE = 143.0), word frequency
(F(1, 28) = 7.71, p < 0.025; MSE = 27.1), and
neighbourhood size (F(1, 28) = 27.9, p < 0.001; MSE =
130.2).
Importantly, there was a significant three-way
interaction between memory task, word frequency, and
lexical neighbourhood size (F(1, 28) = 10.80, p < 0.01;
MSE = 27.1). There was also a significant two-way
interaction between memory task and word frequency
(F(1, 28) = 12.96, p < 0.005; MSE = 49.4). The interaction
between memory task and neighbourhood size approached
significance (F(1, 28) = 3.95, p = 0.06, MSE = 18.4), but
there was no hint of any interaction between frequency and

2
Recall

Recognition
Condition

Figure 1: The effects of word frequency and lexical
neighbourhood size on recall and recognition.

Discussion
In summary, we obtained a three-way interaction
between memory task, word frequency, and phonological
neighbourhood size, demonstrating that these two variables
have significant differential effects upon recall and
recognition. Large neighbourhood size always has a
facilitatory effect on both recall and recognition
performance, suggesting that the neighbours of target items
act as a source of support rather than interference. In the
recognition task, performance on words with few
neighbours was better on high frequency words than low
frequency words, reversing the usual frequency effect.
In the recall task, performance on high frequency
words was uniformly better than on low frequency words,
confirming our predictions based on the consideration of
lexical activation levels. The amount of facilitation
provided by dense lexical neighbourhoods is not large, but

words with many neighbours are easier to recall than
words with few.
The findings in the recognition task are more
complex. The word frequency effect in recognition,
whereby less frequent items are easier to recognise than
high frequency words, was replicated only for words with
many lexical neighbours. There was no advantage (indeed,
a slight disadvantage) for low frequency words with few
neighbours. This suggests that any account of the word
frequency effect must take into account the role of lexical
neighbourhood size. The other conditions in the
recognition task are in line with those of the recall task,
bearing in mind the expected generally better performance
in the recognition task.
Why should low frequency words with no or few
neighbours be particularly difficult to recognise? The result
appears contrary to the memorability hypothesis. A word
which is orthographically and phonologically unique as
well as uncommon should be more noticeable and
therefore memorable than one with many neighbours.
There are at least two possible explanations. The
first is that during the study phase, a target word primes the
words in its neighbourhood. During the test phase of the
experiment, the primed items then cue the target. The more
neighbours there are to act as primes in the test phase, the
more likely is a correct response. Words with few
neighbours do not have this advantage.
Consideration of the attention-likelihood model of
Glanzer and Adams (1990) suggests another explanation.
They suggested that in the study phase of a recognition
experiment, people pay more attention to some items than
others. In general people might redistribute effort at
encoding or in rehearsal towards troublesome items (see
also Fritzen, 1975; Hastie, 1975; Murnane & Shiffrin,
1975). Low-frequency words with many neighbours may
strike participants as odd. They therefore pay a
disproportionate amount of attention to them, in particular
ensuring that the low-frequency target is not in fact one of
its own neighbours. On the other hand, it is possible that
participants consider low-frequency words with few
neighbours to be “obvious”, and therefore pay little
attention to them. In the recognition phase, performance
will be poor on those items that had less attention allocated
to them in the study phase (the low-frequency fewneighbours words). We cannot distinguish between these
two possible explanations on the basis of our current data,
and of course, they may not be incompatible.
Attention-likelihood theory is one explanation of the
“mirror effect”. Consider an experiment with two
conditions (e.g. high and low frequency items) where the
items in one are better recognized than items in the other.
Then the superior condition will give better recognition of
previously-seen items (i.e. targets) as being old but also
better recognition of new items (i.e. distractors) as being
new. (See Glanzer, Adams, Iverson, & Kim, 1993;
Glanzer, Kim, & Adams, 1998; Stretch & Wixted, 1998;
but see also Murdock, 1998.) Consideration of lexical

neighbourhood size may be helpful in giving an account of
the mirror effect.
Another surprising finding is that, counter to our
intuitions and prediction, the pattern of performance
observed by Harley and Bown (1998) in the TOT task is
here mirrored in the recognition task, and not in the recall
task. In particular, Harley and Bown found a large
difference between low frequency words with dense and
sparse neighbourhoods. Here we only observed this
difference in the recognition task. This suggests that lexical
access in speech production contains an important
recognition component. Of course, some caution is
necessary in making this claim; it is necessary to reproduce
our findings on a task more directly oriented to speech.
There are at least two possible loci for a recognition
component in lexicalization. First, lexical search models
such as those of Butterworth (1980) and Fay and Cutler
(1977) involve search through ordered lists of lexical
entries. Selecting the correct entry might involve
recognition. Second, speech production might contain an
element of monitoring and editing. These processes might
involve recognition. There is independent evidence for the
existence of monitoring processes from self-repair of
speech (see Levelt, 1989) while others (e.g. Baars, Motley,
& MacKay, 1975; Butterworth, 1982) postulate that it is
necessary to account for characteristics of speech errors.
An important caveat to any conclusion regarding the
resemblance of speech production to other memory tasks
concerns what happens in the tip-of-the-tongue state. The
presumption in the literature is that a TOT state is an
extended form of a hesitation in normal speech (see
Harley, 1995, for a review; see also Levelt, 1989). Harley
and Bown (1998) suggested that strategic factors might
sometimes be operative in laboratory-induced TOT states.
In particular, we suggested that there might be an editor
responsible for monitoring the output of the interlopers, the
words that often spontaneously come to mind when in a
TOT state. Others have also proposed that our potential
speech output can be edited by a late-acting monitor (e.g.
Levelt, 1989). This editor might sometimes discard grossly
implausible candidates. The editor must be far from
perfect, however, as many implausible candidates are often
output; and about a quarter of the time these interlopers
bear no obvious relationship to the target. If and when it
operates, this post-access monitor might plausibly contain
an element of a recognition process. There is no reason to
suppose that this applies to either spontaneous production
or the strivings to retrieve the target word itself.
If this is the case, the recognition component
observed in TOT states comes from the action of postaccess strategic processes, rather than the processes of
lexical retrieval themselves.
In summary, we have shown that lexical access in
the tip-of-the-tongue state surprisingly resembles
performance on a recognition task rather than on a free
recall task. We have also shown that the word frequency
effect in recognition is moderated by the size of the lexical
neighbourhoods of the target items. The exact way in

which neighbours exert their effects in these tasks remains
to be explored.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to several anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments. Our data were collected by Sheila
Colgan as part of an honours dissertation at the University
of Dundee. We gratefully acknowledge financial assistance
from the University of Abertay Dundee research
development fund.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. (1974). A propositional
theory of recognition memory. Memory and Cognition,
2, 406 – 412.
Baars, B. J., Motley, M. T., & MacKay, D. G. (1975).
Output editing for lexical status in artificially elicited
slips of the tongue. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 14, 382-391.
Baddeley, A. (1990). Human memory: Theory and
practice. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, J., Lewis, V. J., & Monk, A. F. (1977).
Memorability,
word
frequency,
and
negative
recognition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 29, 461-473.
Brown, R., & McNeill, D. (1966). The “tip of the tongue”
phenomenon. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 5, 325-337.
Burke, D., MacKay, D. G., Worthley, J. S., & Wade, E.
(1991). On the tip of the tongue: What causes word
finding failures in young and older adults? Journal of
Memory and Language, 30, 237-246.
Butterworth, B. (1980). Some constraints on models of
language production. In B. Butterworth (Ed.), Language
production, Vol. 1: Speech and talk (pp. 423-459).
London: Academic Press.
Butterworth, B. (1982). Speech errors: Old data in search
of new theories. In A. Cutler (Ed.), Slips of the tongue.
Amsterdam: Mouton.
Butterworth, B. (1989). Lexical access in speech
production. In W. Marslen-Wilson (Ed.), Lexical
representation and process (pp. 108-135). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic
Database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33A, 497-505.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic
(Ed.), Attention and performance VI (pp. 535-555).
London: Academic Press.
Dale, H. C. A., & Baddeley, A. D. (1962). On the nature of
alternatives used in testing recognition memory. Nature,
196, 93-94.
Fay, D., & Cutler, A. (1977). Malapropisms and the
structure of the mental lexicon. Linguistic Inquiry, 8,
505-520.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis

of English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin company.
Fritzen, J. (1975). Intralist repetition effects in free recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 1, 756-763.
Glanzer, M., & Adams, J. K. (1985). The mirror effect in
recognition memory. Memory and Cognition, 13, 8-20.
Glanzer, M., Adams, J. K., Iverson, G. J., & Kim, K.
(1993). The regularities of recognition memory.
Psychological Review, 100, 546-567.
Glanzer, M., Kim, K., & Adams, J. K. (1998). Response
distribution as an explanation of the mirror effect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 24, 633-644.
Glushko, R. J. (1979). The organization and activation of
orthographic knowledge in reading aloud. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 5, 674-691.
Grainger, J. (1990). Word frequency and neighborhood
frequency effects in lexical decision and naming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 228-244.
Gregg, V. (1976). Word frequency, recognition, and recall.
In J. Brown (Ed.), Recognition and recall. Chichester:
John Wiley and Sons.
Guttentag, R., & Carroll, D. (1998). Memorability
judgements for high- and low-frequency words. Memory
and Cognition, 26, 951-958.
Harley, T. A. (1995). The psychology of language. Hove:
Psychology Press.
Harley, T A., & Bown, H. E. (1998). What causes a tip-ofthe-tongue state? Evidence for lexical neighbourhood
effects in speech production. British Journal of
Psychology, 89, 151-174.
Hastie, R. (1975). Intralist repetition in free recall: Effects
of frequency attribute recall instructions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 1, 3-12.
Jescheniak, J. D., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1994). Word
frequency effects in speech production: Retrieval of
syntactic information and of phonological form. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 824-843.
Kintsch, W. (1970). Learning, memory, and conceptual
processes. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to
articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morton, J. (1979). Word recognition. In J. Morton & J. C.
Marshall (Eds.). Psycholinguistics series 2: Structures
and processes. London: Paul Elek.
Murdock, B. B. (1998). The mirror effect and attentionlikelihood theory: A reflective analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 524-534.
Murnane, K., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1991). Interference and
the representation of events in memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 17, 855-874.

Oldfield, R. C., & Wingfield, A. (1965). Response
latencies in naming objects. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 17, 273-281.
Sternberg, S. (1966). High speed scanning in human
memory. Science, 153, 652-654.
Stretch, V., & Wixted, J. T. (1998). On the difference
between strength-based and frequency-based mirror
effects in recognition memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24,
1379-1396.

