UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning from a Computer Workplace Simulation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5nz5854v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Jeong, Heisawn
Taylor, Roger
Chi, Michelene T.H.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning from a Computer Workplace Simulation
Heisawn Jeong ( h e i s @ p i t t . e d u )
Roger Taylor (rtaylor@pitt.edu)
Michelene T. H. Chi ( c h i @ p i t t . e d u )
Learning Research and Development Center; University of Pittsburgh
3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
Workplaces are rapidly changing, placing increased cognitive demands upon workers. The use of computer workplace
simulations has been proposed to help students successfully make the transition from school to work. In this
study, we examined what kinds of learning occurred when
students used a computer workplace simulation called Court
Square Community Bank. We hypothesized that three
types of learning would occur: (1) students would gain
knowledge about the banking business in which the simulation is situated and (2) students would also learn general
business knowledge and problem solving/decision making
skills that they could apply in other work contexts. Thirteen pairs of high school students used a workplace simulation. The results showed that students knew significantly
more knowledge about the banking business. Students also
adopted a new perspective to organize their knowledge and
their problem solving activities became more coordinate.
Taken together, the results of this study showed that computer workplace simulation can serve as a useful tool to
prepare students to make a better school-to-work transition.

Introduction
There is a growing concern that many of today’s high-school
graduates are ill-prepared for succeeding in today’s demanding
and rapidly changing workplaces. The world of work is experiencing a dramatic transition: jobs increasingly require
complex thinking skills and adaptive performance. As a consequence, there have been many calls for school-to-work
transition programs such as youth apprenticeship or technical preparation. Recently, Ferrari, Taylor, and VanLehn
(1999) advocated the use of computer simulations as a way
to facilitate the school to work transition. They argued that
computer simulations of workplace environments can help
familiarize students with a particular workplace and assist
them in developing the analytical/problem-solving skills
needed to successfully participate in the workplace, while
allowing them to remain safely situated in the classroom.
The goal of this paper is to assess what kinds of learning
opportunities are afforded and how much learning actually
occurs when students use such a computer simulation.
For our study, we selected a workplace simulation called
Court Square Community Bank (CSCB), one of the simulations recommended by Ferrari et al. (1999). CSCB is an
episode-based simulation. Students play the role of vice
president, engaging in activities such as interacting with

bank customers, consulting the opinions of other bank employees, and making business decisions. Each of the 14 episodes poses different kinds of problems that the vice president of a small community bank must deal with such as
approving mortgages or selecting the best candidate for a
position (see Ferrari et al., 1999 and McQuaide, Leinhardt,
& Stainton, 1999 for more details on the program).
In assessing learning from CSCB, 1 we were less concerned with evaluating the specific workplace simulation and
were more interested in understanding the learning issues
involved in workplace simulations in general. We hypothesized that two types of learning can occur when students
interact with a computer workplace simulation. Students
could acquire (1) knowledge about the banking business in
which the simulation is situated, and (2) general business
knowledge and problem solving skills that are applicable to
a wide variety of workplaces. Below, we describe these in
more detail and speculate on how learning such knowledge/skills might occur.

1. Knowledge about the Banking Business
One of the most notable features of the computer workplace
simulation in comparison to other medium of instructions
(e.g., reading an expository text or listening to a lecture) is
its contextualized nature. In the case of CSCB, the specific
business context was a small town community bank. The
contextualization was done by using the problems that arises
from the banking business (e.g., when to approve a mortgage) and implementing interactions with simulated characters who are primarily bank personnel or customers. This
means that much of the information about banking business
is embedded in the problem descriptions and the students’
interactions with the characters of the simulation. In addition
to this contextualization, declarative banking knowledge is
presented in the form of on-line dictionary and procedural
manual. In sum, the simulation provides extensive amount
of information about banking business, either implicitly or
explicitly. Although this banking knowledge is never the
focus of the simulation (e.g., the program never asks stu1

The effect of the simulation is likely to be different when
used in schools compared to when it was used in the laboratory
as in this study. For example, in one of the schools that used the
CSCB as part of their curriculum, it was augmented with instructional and teacher supports (see McQuaide et al., 1999 for more
details).

dents to supply the definition of various financial terms), it
seems reasonable to expect that students would at least learn
some amount of banking knowledge as a result of using the
simulation.

2. General Business Knowledge and Skills
Although learning about banking is meaningful and could be
helpful in other contexts, we hope that students would also
learn general knowledge or skills that can be used in contexts other than banking. When students go through the
simulation episodes, they need to process episode-specific
information (e.g., salary of the mortgage applicants) as well
as banking specific knowledge (e.g., interview loan applicant before approving the loan). Such knowledge, although
useful in making banking-related decisions required in the
episode, is largely irrelevant in other contexts.
Concrete contexts can help initial learning because they
can be elaborated and help students appreciate the relevancy
of new information in problem solving. Context can also be
helpful to learning by facilitating the construction of a more
accurate representation in a manner similar to how context
helps to disambiguate word meaning. On the other hand,
context can also present a problem for abstracting general
principles or features (e.g., category structure). Overly contextualized learning tasks could potentially impede the abstraction of general principles (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999).
Despite its benefits for learning, learning in context could
also present a challenge to students in that the contextualized
nature of the simulation may impede learning general
knowledge or skills that can be useful in other work contexts.
It should be noted that this problem is not unique to
computer workplace simulations. The same issue is present
in on-the-job or apprenticeship training. There is an abundance of context/job-specific information in the actual work
context. Although people need to pay attention to this information, often the ideal learning goal can be met only
when people go beyond this information and understand
more general business issues (Pearlman, 1997). For example, students need to learn that one needs to consider all the
available options before making the final decision or that the
role of the vice president may be complicated due to potential conflicts of interest or concerns about nepotism.
According to the analysis of Ferrari et al. (1999), approximately two thirds of the information presented in the
two simulations that they examined in detail were specific to
the particular type of the industry simulated (i.e., banking
and software development). Only one-third of the information was general work knowledge that dealt with issues such
as decision making, information management or interpersonal relations that occur across many jobs. In other words,
unlike textbooks that often present this decontextualized
knowledge in the form of abstract principles or concepts,
simulations like CSCB embed this general knowledge in a
specific context. The question then is what the kinds of general knowledge or skills students could learn from their experience with the simulation that could be used in other work
or business contexts. In this study, we examined the following two candidates.

Perspective Taking In the simulation, students are
asked to play the role of bank’s vice president and interact
with various characters related to the business (e.g., customers, managers, etc.). Given that prior to using the simulation, almost all of the students’ interactions with business
would have occurred while they were in the role of a consumer (i.e. purchasing items from stores), one would expect
students to answer banking terms to be answered from a
similar perspective. For example, a banking term such as
interest can be defined from the perspective of a consumer or
a business. When students approach the term from a customer’s perspective, interest is more likely to be defined as
an expense paid to banks. On the other hand, when students
approach the same term from a business perspective, interest
is more likely to be defined as a means for earning profit.
The ability of students to take multiple perspectives would
reflect a richer understanding of the terms and principles under discussion. Thus, being given the opportunity to take on
new roles might affect how students frame their experiences,
allowing them to think about the same issue in multiple
ways.
Decision Making/Problem Solving Skills Most of
the episodes in CSCB require some kind of decision to be
made. In each episode, students are first presented with basic
descriptions of the problem (e.g., the treasurer announces
that the downtown branch has a shrinking profit margin).
Students attend a meeting to hear what managers think may
be the cause of the problem, read newspaper article about
how the community is reacting to the possible closing of
the branch, and evaluate various options to address the problem of the branch. The simulation provides a set of alternatives regarding the closing of the branch and asks the students to choose and justify their choice.
Although the decisions in the simulation are simplified
by using multiple choice format, they are still complex in
nature, resembling the kinds of decision making that might
occur in real workplaces. In general, the problems given in
the simulation episodes are different from the problems
commonly dealt in the classroom (e.g., algebra problems).
First, they require an understanding of a both specific context (banking business in this case) and general problem
solving skills (e.g., goal state). Second, there is no single
right answer as is the case in typical problems taught at
schools. There often exist multiple equally viable options
that can solve the problem, and even the best solution can
be flawed in some way. Third, the problems are complex in
that the goals and solution options of the problem are often
unclear. The problems also have multiple, interacting
causes.
Engaging in such decision making is a complex task.
Successful problem solving requires students to understand
several factors and their relationships (e.g., governmental
regulations or why the branch is losing money). Like in real
workplaces, problems in the simulation often do not have a
single right answer. Additionally, students often need to
evaluate each option based on their own criteria. For example, students need to evaluate the relative merits of advanced
technology (e.g., ATM) versus personal attention to cus-

tomers (e.g., human tellers). Due to such characteristics of
the problem presented in the simulation, we postulated that
students would learn how to solve such ill-defined problems
better after using the simulation. According to the notion of
“Preparation for Future Learning” proposed by Bransford and
Schwartz (1999), the benefits of previous experience often
do not reveal themselves immediately. Instead, the benefit
takes the form of helping to prepare students to learn new
information. Thus, we examined not only how the overall
quality of their decision improved, but also whether they had
a better understanding of the problem solving process after
using the simulation.
In this study, to get a detailed picture of students’ learning, we asked high school students to do eight (out of fourteen) CSCB episodes in the lab. We constructed three assessment tools to test and elaborate our hypotheses about
potential learning outcomes from the workplace simulation.
They were: (1) Definition Task, (2) Question Answering
Task, and (3) two transfer problems.

Method
Participants
Twenty-six high school students (23 from public and 3 from
parochial schools) participated in this study. The students
were either juniors or seniors from local urban high schools.
During recruitment, students were asked to bring a friend of
the same gender to participate in the study, which resulted in
four male and nine female pairs. On average, they had
known their partner for about 4 years, having engaged in
academic and after-school activities together. As compensation for participation in the study, students were provided
with a base pay of $75 and up to $25 as a bonus if they kept
their appointments. With regard to their familiarity with
computers, about half of the 26 students (54%) reported that
they had computers in their home. Almost all students
(96%) reported that they used computers 1-15 hours per
week and had experience with word processing or e-mail. A
majority of the students (58%) reported that they used other
computer simulations or games.

Materials
CSCB Episodes A representative subset of CSCB episodes (8 out of 14) was selected so that diverse topics would
be covered (e.g., ethical as well as financial issues) with
minimum overlap.
Definition Task The aim of this task was to assess the
context-specific knowledge that students might learn about
the banking business. This task consisted of 13 terms relevant to banking (e.g., collateral) that were covered in the
eight selected episodes. Students were asked to talk about
everything they knew about these terms.
Question Answering Task This task was to assess
general business knowledge that students might have abstracted from their experience with the simulation. This task

consisted of 12 questions that were constructed based on the
propositional content of the simulation episodes. These were
general questions about how business operates (e.g., name 3
ways that a business can stay competitive) or about a vice
president’s role (e.g., name three kinds of activities/jobs that
a CEO or a vice president has to do in a company). We expected that students would find this task difficult due to the
lack of specific contexts. We thus included in the instructions that they could use examples of specific businesses to
help to answer these questions.
Problem Solving Task This task was to assess broad
changes in students’ problem solving. Two transfer problems called Fresh Food and Giant Gallery were constructed
based on two episodes of the simulation (Episode 9 and 10,
respectively). They were identical to the problems presented
in the simulation episodes in terms of the underlying problem/goal, constraints, and options, but differed from the
simulation problems in two respects.
First, instead of banking, the transfer problems used the
supermarket business (also familiar to high school students)
as the context. Thus, although the surface features were different, the underlying structures of the transfer problems
were identical to the problems presented in the simulation.
Second, transfer problems were less structured than the
problems presented in the simulation episodes. Unlike the
simulation episodes that provide a set of alternative choices,
in the transfer problems students were asked to generate their
own solutions. A set of seven open-ended probes about various aspects of students’ reasoning were included. Each transfer problem consisted of two general phases: information
interpretation and probe answering. Students were first presented with a set of documents about the problem and then
responded to a set of five probes. They were then provided
with an additional set of documents and they responded to
two more probes. The seven probes were the following:
Probe 1:Could you please state the store’s problems in your
own words?
Probe 2:If you could request more information about this
supermarket’s problem, what information would
you request and how would you get this information?
Probe 3:As vice president of this supermarket, how (or
where) would you get this information?
Probe 4:What factors do you have to take into account to
solve the supermarket’s problems?
Probe 5:As vice president, how would you go about implementing your options?
Probe 6:What do you think is the best way to solve the
problem and why?
Probe 7: What kind of information did you use to make your
decision?

Procedures
The study was carried out in the laboratories located in the
Learning Research and Development Center at the University of Pittsburgh. Students visited the laboratory over four
sessions: (1) pre-test, (2) simulation session I, (3) simulation session II, and (4) post-test. On average, each session

was separated by approximately four days. All sessions were
audio-taped. In addition, the two simulation sessions were
video-taped to provide a context for the interaction between
the students.
Pre- and Post-test During the pre-test and post-test, students were given the three tasks described earlier. Students
first generated answered to the terms in the Definition Task.
They then solved the two transfer problems, Giant Gallery
and Fresh Food. Lastly, they completed the Question Answering Task. The order of the two transfer problems was
counterbalanced across pairs and pre/post-test sessions.
Throughout the sessions, students were asked to think aloud
and to talk about everything that came to their mind. To
familiarize them with think-aloud procedure, students were
given a short think-aloud practice at the beginning of the
problem-solving during the pre-test. The pre-test and posttest sessions were individually administered. The pre-test
took about two hours, and the post-test took about one and a
half hours on average.
S i m u l a t i o n S e s s i o n s The first three episodes in each
simulation session (Episode 1, 2, & 5 in the simulation
session I, and Episode 9, 10, & 11 in the simulation session
II) were done collaboratively by the pair, and the last episode
in each session (Episode 7 in the simulation session I, and
Episode 12 in the simulation session II) was done individually. In the collaborative simulation session, the pairs were
instructed to work as a team, in discussing how to handle
the problems and to reach a consensus before making a decision. After the collaborative learning session, students were
led to separate rooms and completed an episode alone while
thinking aloud. Students took approximately 40 minutes per
episode, a total of five hours on the simulation over both
sessions (excluding time spent on breaks).

Results
Please note that only a subset of results was reported in this
paper for the two types of learning examined: (1) learning
about the banking business and (2) learning about general
knowledge or problem solving skills. We presented two
sets of results for the first type of learning and four sets of
results for the second type of learning.2

1. Knowledge about the Banking Business
Increase in Correct Knowledge and Decrease in
Incorrect Knowledge A Knowledge Piece (KP) roughly
corresponds to an idea (e.g., ATM costs banks less than
tellers). A template was constructed by identifying individual
Knowledge Pieces (KPs) relevant to the 13 terms in the
Definition Task. The template consisted of 113 KPs captured from the information presented in the simulation in
various formats (e.g., on-line dictionaries or reports given to
2

Due to recording errors, the following data was lost: student
9B’s pre-test answers to the Definition Task and in the Giant
Gallery problem and student 8B’s post-test answers to Question
3 in the Giant Gallery problem.

the vice president). The template represented the maximum
possible knowledge that students could learn from the eight
episodes of the simulation. Based on their answers to the
Definition Task, students received one point for every unique
KP that they stated (partial credit was given if their answer
was vague or they expressed uncertainty). Students knew on
average 24 KPs at the pre-test and 27.98 KPs at the posttest, t(24)=3.79, p<.01. In addition, we examined the terms
in which students either provide no answer or provided incorrect (or irrelevant) answers (e.g. principal was a “person in
school”) and found that such answers decreased significantly
from 2.28 (18%) at the pre-test to .88 (7%) at the post-test,
t(24)=4.09, p<.001.
Schema about Banking Business A subset of questions in the Question Answering Task asked students to
explain general business operations. The answers to these
questions were analyzed in terms of the type of business
schema used (e.g. manufacturing, retail, banking, etc.). For
example, to the question “Please name three kinds of expenses that a business has,” one student answered: (1) rent,
(2) expense to make the product, and (3) expense to get the
products out to the public (e.g., shipping or mailing expenses). In this case, the first answer was an expense that
was applicable to the banking business, whereas the second
and the third answers were not. On average, students’ answers applicable to the banking business significantly increased after using the simulation (from 62% to 77%),
t(25)=5.02, p<.01, suggesting that students learned some
rudimentary schema about the banking business.

2. General Business Knowledge and Problem
Solving Skills
From Customer to Business Perspectives To assess the change in the perspectives, we examined the perspectives that students used in defining the terms in the
Definition Task. We coded their answers to each term in the
following two perspectives: (1) customer perspective, (2)
business perspective. The results showed that there was a
significant decrease in answers with customer perspective
(3.44 to 2.44), t(24)=2.45, p<.05, and a significant increase
in answers with a business perspective (1.04 to 2.44),
t(24)=3.03, p<.005. Thus many students now demonstrated
the ability to think about banking terms from additional
framework (i.e. a business perspective in addition to their
initial consumer perspective).
Improvement in the quality of the students’ final
decision As mentioned before, due to the nature of the
problem, it was often difficult to determine optimal solutions. What constituted the “best” solution was highly dependent on one’s beliefs and priorities (e.g., the importance
of technology versus that of renovation in business). Nonetheless, we examined whether there were any improvements
in the quality of students’ final decisions that they chose in
the two transfer problems. This was done based on their
response to Probe 6 (“What do you think is the best way to
solve the problem and why?”). Based on the analysis of the

simulation episodes, we selected five constraints important
to the decision-making and examined how many constraints
each of their final decision satisfy. In the Giant Gallery
problem, students’ final decision met 3.20 constraints (out
of 5) at the pre-test and 3.96 constrains at the post-test,
t(24)=1.93, p<.05. In the Fresh Food problem, there were
no significant changes in the numbers of constraints (3.62
to 3.54).3
Improved Understanding of the Problem Solving
Component We examined students’ understanding of
problem solving components, specifically, their understanding of solution option. At pre-tests, when asked to generated
options to solve the store’s problem in Probe 3, students
were more likely to generate options that did not really solve
the problems that the supermarket was facing. For example,
students answered “look [at] every aspect of the store” or
“get ideas from other stores.” These answers may be steps to
arrive at the final solution, but were not options that could
solve the specific problems that the supermarkets had. Generation of such non-options decreased significantly both in
the Fresh Food problem (1.31 to .52), t(25)=2.33, p<.05,
and in the Giant Gallery problem (.78 to .32), t(24)=1.83,
p<.05, suggesting that students understood better what a
solution option was after using the simulation.
Integrated Problem S o l v i n g In addition, students’
problem solving activities became more integrated and coherent. First, students became better at gathering the information. In Probe 2, students were asked to request information they need to understand and solve the problem and then
specify how to get it. At pre-tests, they tended to specify the
steps to gather information in general rather than the information they requested. For example, in the Fresh Food
problem, one student requested three pieces of information:
(a) how old the current machines at the checkout counter
were, (b) whether customers use the machines properly, and
(c) why the machines at the checkout counter was not connected to the main computer system. Then, she specified
that she would get that information by (a) asking the company that made the checkout machines in the store about
how to fix it, (b) talking to the competitor whether they had
similar problems, and (c) talking to the bank about the
compatibility of the card and the machine. In this example,
none of her information gathering methods were about the
information she requested, although they were valid ways of
getting information. At post-tests, students were more
likely to specify information gathering methods to get the
information they requested. Although the increase was only
significant in the Fresh Food problem (53% to 71%),
t(25)=2.45, p<.05, the trend was also present in the Giant
Gallery problem (58% to 69%).
A similar finding was obtained when students were justifying their final decisions in Probe 6. We coded whether
students actually considered the constraints that they listed in
3

This seems to be due to the fact that students pre-test decisions were highly similar to the decisions that were reinforced
in the simulation in the Fresh Food problem.

their response to Probe 4 (“What factors do you have to take
into account to solve the supermarket’s problems?”). After
students did the simulation, they were more likely to consider the constraints that they listed in Probe 4. In the Fresh
Food problem, students used .81 reasons at the pre-test (out
of 1.58 reasons they used to justify their final decision) that
they had named and 1.17 reasons (out of 1.96) at the posttest, t(25)=1.74, p<.05. In the Giant Gallery problem, students used .84 reasons at the pre-test (out of 2.04) that they
had named and 1.24 reasons (out of 2.60) at the post-test,
t(24)=1.79, p<.05. Thus, it seemed that students’ problem
solving activities became more connected or coherent in that
they generated ways to get the information they requested
and used more of the constraints that they initially thought
were important in solving the problems.

Discussion
In this study, we attempted to identify and assess the
learning outcomes of computer workplace simulations. We
first speculated that students would learn about the work
context of the simulation. The CSCB simulation uses banking as a context, but other simulations have used other
businesses (e.g., hotel management or software development). We also speculate that students would learn general
knowledge about business and how to solve complex realworld like problems.
First, the results showed that the simulation helped students to learn about the banking business. They knew more
knowledge about banking, which was accompanied by a
corresponding decrease of incorrect knowledge. Students also
acquired a schema about banking business. Such results are
interesting, considering the fact that (a) students were never
asked to learn about banking explicitly and (b) they were not
likely to have accessed all the relevant information about the
banking business even though they were provided in the
simulation.
Second, the results also showed that the simulation helped
students to learn general business knowledge and problem
solving skills. Students learned to take a business perspective, one that they would not have likely gained from their
everyday experiences. As a result, students’ answers to the
banking terms became more organized from a business perspective rather than from a customer perspective. In addition,
students understanding of the problem improved and became
more coherent, which seems to be one of the reason why the
quality of their final answer improved after the simulation.
Considering the fact that the simulation never teaches these
knowledge and skills didactically and embeds them in contexts, it is encouraging to discover that students can not
only learn about the banking business in which the simulation is contextualized, but also some general knowledge and
problem solving skills that they can use in other business
and work contexts as well. These results of this study are
consistent with the findings obtained with other instructional mediums that use contexts or cases, although they did
not deal with workplace issues (e.g., mathematical problem
solving as in Jasper Series; see Barron, Zech, Schwartz,
Bransford, Goldman, Pelligrino, Morris, Garrison, Kantor,
1995). Taken together, it seems that workplace computer

simulation could be useful in preparing students for the future workplaces.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the grant to Michelene T. H. Chi,
Gaea Leinhardt, and Kurt VanLehn from the A. W. Mellon
and Russell Sage Foundation (495006544). The authors
acknowledge the help of Cindy Hmelo and Alex Vincent
who participated in the initial phase of the study.

References
Barron, B., Vye, N., Zech, L., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J.,
Goldman, S., Pellegrino, J., Morris, J., Garrison, S., &
Kantor, R. (1995). Creating contexts for communitybased problem solving: The Jasper Challenge Series. In
C. N. Hedley, P. Antonacci, & M. Rabionwitz (Eds.),
Thinking and literacy: The mind at work (pp. 47-71).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking
transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications. In
A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of Research
in Education (Vol. 24). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Ferrari, M., Taylor, R., & VanLehn, K. (1999). Adapting
work simulations for schools. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 21(1), 25-53.
McQuaide, J., Leinhardt, G., & Stainton, C. (1999). Ethical
reasoning: Real and simulated. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 21(4), 425-466.
Pearlman, K. (1997). Twenty-first century measurer for
twenty-first century work. In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, J., &
A. Black, M. (Eds.), Transitions in work and learning implications for assessment. Washington, D. C.: National
Academy Press.

