UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic Labels and the Development of Inductive Interference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81888179

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.
Lo, Ya-Fen

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic Labels and the Development of Inductive Inference
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu )
Center for Cognitive Science & School of Teaching & Learning, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Ya-Fen Lo (lo.37@osu.edu )
Center for Cognitive Science & School of Teaching & Learning, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
The paper presents a model suggesting that inductive
generalizations in young children could be a function of
similarity among compared stimuli. Predictions derived
from the model were tested in two experiments where
young children and preadolescents were presented with
triads of schematic faces (a Target and two Test stimuli)
that varied in perceptual similarity, with one of the Test
stimuli sharing a linguistic label with the Target.
Participants were taught a biological property about the
Target and asked to generalize the property to one of
the Test stimuli. Results from both experiments support
predictions, indicating that for young children,
proportions of label-based generalizations varied with
featural overlap among the compared stimuli. There were
also developmental differences found in effects of
labels: while for young children these effects varied with
featural overlap, preadolescents relied solely on
linguistic
labels
when
performing
inductive
generalizations.

Introduction
Inductive generalization is an important component of
human thought. Furthermore, some believe that it the most
important component because "inductive inference is the
only process… by which new knowledge comes into the
world" (Fisher, 1935). Therefore, understanding of the
development of induction is an important step in
understanding of human thought.
One theoretical proposal suggests that induction starts
out as a category-based process (see Gelman & Coley, 1991;
Gelman, Coley, & Gottfried, 1994, for reviews and
discussions). In this case, independent of similarity,
generalization within a theoretically-defined category is more
likely than generalization across categories. For example, a
person is more likely to generalize a property (e.g., the ability
to drink) from a bird to another dissimilar looking bird than
from a bird to a similar looking airplane (Mandler &
McDonough, 1998; Gelman & Markman, 1986; Gelman &
Coley, 1991).
The alternative, similarity-based approach, suggests that
induction starts out as a special case of the "universal law of
generalization" (Shepard, 1987). The law states that the
probability of generalizing a response (e.g., fear) from one
stimulus to another stimulus varies with featural similarity
between the stimuli.
Although the similarity-based approach seems to be more

appealing on the basis of parsimony, it has been often
criticized for the failure to constrain the notion of similarity
(e.g., Goodman, 1992/1972). Indeed, with the increase of the
complexity of predicate structure, it becomes unclear which
of these predicates will be used in computing similarity.
Recently, we proposed a model suggesting that for young
children, linguistic labels might be an important constraining
factor (Sloutsky & Lo, 1999). In a series of experiments, we
demonstrated that linguistic labels have larger weights in
similarity judgment of young children than other perceptual
attributes. We argued that similarity between stimuli patterns
decreases as a function of exponential decay (cf. Estes, 1994;
Medin, 1975). That is similarity between two labeled stimuli
patterns could be calculated using Equation 1:

Sim (i , j ) = S 1− L S N - k

Label Vis. attr

where N denotes the total number of visual attributes, k
denotes the number of matches, S vis.attr. denotes values
(weights) of a mismatch on a visual attribute, S Label denotes
values of label mismatches, and L denotes a label match.
When there is a label match, L = 1, and S Label = 1; when there
is a label mismatch, L = 0, and S Label < 1. Because S varies
between 0 and 1, similarity equals to one when there are no
mismatches, otherwise it is smaller than 1.
We also suggested that when a child is presented with a
Target feature pattern (T) and Test feature patterns (A and
B) and asked which of the Test patterns is more similar to the
Target, the probability of choosing B could be predicted
using Equation 2:

P( B) =

Sim (T , B)
Sim (T , B) + Sim(T , A)

In this paper, we present evidence that the model can
account not only for similarity judgement, but for inductive
inference of young children as well.
Of course, it could be argued that reliance of young
children on linguistic labels when performing induction is an
indicator that they perform induction in a category-based
manner, because they use linguistic labels as category
markers. There is an important caveat, however. If they rely
on linguistic labels as category markers, labels should affect
induction in a qualitative "all-or-none" manner (i.e., presence
or absence of the shared label should be a critical factor in

induction). We predict an alternative course: labels affect
induction in a quantitative manner, in accordance with
equations 1 and 2. In other words, proportions of labelbased generalizations in young children should vary, with
the number of visual attributes shared between the
compared entities.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants A group of 87 children aged 4 to 12 years
participated in the study. The participants represented three
age groups: (1) 32 four-to-five year-olds (M = 4.5 years, SD =
0.56 years; 14 boys and 18 girls), 30 seven-to-eight year-olds
(M = 8.1 years, SD = 0.5 years; 15 boys and 15 girls), and 25
eleven-to-twelve year-olds (M = 11.8 years, SD = 0.5 years;
15 boys and 10 girls). The participants were recruited from
daycare centers, elementary and middle schools located in
middle class suburbs of Columbus, Ohio.
Materials The materials included triads of 2” by 2” schematic
faces, two of which were Test stimuli and one of which was a
Target. Each schematic face had three distinct attributes
(shape of head, shape of ears, and shape of nose), and each
attribute had three values (e.g., “curve-lined” nose,
“straight-lined” nose, and “angled” nose). These materials
were identical to those used in Part 1 experiments (Sloutsky
& Lo, 1999). Materials also included 36 artificial bi-syllable
labels (e.g., Bala, Gula, and so forth) and a set of
unobservable biological properties of the Target. These
properties were as follows:
1. Has pink bones
2. Has green brain
3. Has white heart
4. Has orange stomach
5. Has blue fat
6. Has yellow blood
Participants were asked which of the Test stimuli was more
likely to share a biological property with the Target.
Design and Procedure The experiment had a mixed design
with age and labeling condition (label vs. no-label) as
between-subject factors and a stimulus pattern condition as
a within-subject variable. For both levels of the labeling
condition, participants were presented with the same triads
of schematic faces, two of which were Test stimuli and one
of which was a Target. The only difference was that in the
label condition all stimuli were labeled, whereas in the nolabel condition these stimuli were not labeled. The stimulus
pattern condition included six levels, T-00, T-11, T-22, T-01,
T-12, and T-02. Note that T refers to the Target, the first digit
refers to the number of attributes shared by Test B with the
Target, and the second digit refers to the number of
attributes shared by Test A with the Target. In the label
condition, the Target always shared labels with Test B and
always had labels different from Test A. A female researcher
interviewed children in a quiet room in their schools. Before
the experimental task, children were introduced to some
warm-up questions and were given feedback. In the warm-up

tasks, children were presented with Test and Target stimuli
and were asked to choose the Test stimulus that shared a
biological property with the Target.
Warm up Trials . In the first warm-up trial, participants were
presented with a Target (a shark) and two Test stimuli (a
bear and a tree branch). In the second warm-up trial, they
were presented with a rabbit as a Target, and an apple and a
dog as Test stimuli. In the third warm-up trial, children were
presented with a fish as a Target, and a turtle and a spider as
Test stimuli. In all these warm-up trials, children were first
told that the Target stimuli either had bones, blood, or
skeleton inside the body. Children then were asked to
determine which of the two Test stimuli has the same thing
inside the body as the Target. If a child failed to answer
induction questions, the researcher explained how each of
the Test stimuli could have the same thing as the Target.
Experimental Trials . If a child was capable of giving correct
answers in two out of three warm-up trials, the researcher
proceeded to the main experiment. No child was eliminated
from the study since all participants provided satisfactory
responses in at least two out of three warm-up trials. In the
Label condition, children were first introduced to the labels
for the Target and Test pictures and asked to repeat them.
All labels used were the same artificial names (e.g. Bala,
Guga) as in Part 1 experiments. After each stimulus was
labeled, children were asked to repeat these labels. No labels
were introduced in the no-label condition. Children were
then introduced to an unobservable biological property that
belonged to the Target stimuli and were asked which of the
Test stimuli was likely to have this property. Positions of the
two Test pictures were counterbalanced across the
experimental trials. After children answered the questions,
they were asked to provide their justification for their
choices. In both conditions, participants of the two older
groups had 24 experimental trials (6 within-subject stimulus
patterns with 4 trials each), while participants of the
youngest group had 18 experimental trials (6 within-subject
stimulus patterns with 3 trials each). This reduction in the
number of trials was important to avoid fatigue that could
lead to random responding in young children. The order of
presenting of stimulus patterns was randomized within
participants.

Figure 1: Example of stimuli presented in one trial in the T-1-2
condition: The Target shares the overall shape and the nose
with Test A and the size of the ears with Test B.

Results indicate that in the no-label condition,
participants of all age groups based their inductive
inferences on available perceptual information. Proportions
of Test B choices broken down by stimulus pattern
condition and age groups are presented in Figure 2. Recall
that B-choices refer to the selection of the Test stimulus that
in the label condition shares the label with the Target. As
predicted (see Table 1), for all indeterminate stimulus pattern
conditions, when the Target shared equal numbers of
attributes with each Test stimulus (i.e., T-00, T-11, and T-22),
the proportions of B-choices for all age groups were at
chance (one-sample t-tests, all ps >. 25). Also as predicted,
in all determinate stimulus pattern conditions where Test B
shared fewer attributes with the Target than Test A (i.e., T01, T-12, and T-02), the proportions of B-choices for all age
groups were below chance (one-sample t-tests, all ps < .01).

Proportion of Test B choices

0.6
0.5
0.4

Youngest
Middle
Oldest

0.3
0.2

no-label condition. Recall that in the label condition, Test B
always shared the label with the Target. Proportions of Bchoices (i.e., label-based generalizations) in the label
condition broken down by age group and stimulus pattern
condition are presented in Figure 3. In the oldest group, all
participants on all trials, with the exception of one participant
on one trial, used labels as the only basis of their induction.
At the same time, effects of labels in the two younger groups
varied across stimulus pattern condition. Because
participants in the older group exhibited no variability in
their responses (311 out 312 responses were label-based
generalization), while participants in the two younger group
exhibited variability, the former were not included in the
analysis of label-based generalizations across stimulus
pattern condition.
Proportion of Test B (Label-based) choices

Results and Discussion

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Youngest
Middle
Older

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
T00

T11

T22

T01

T12

T02

0.1
0
T00

T11

T22

T01

T12

T02

Figure 2: Induction in the No-Label condition broken down
by stimulus pattern condition and age group.
To examine the direction of differences among the
stimulus pattern conditions in the no-label condition,
proportions of B-choices were subjected to a two-way
ANOVA with age as a factor and stimulus pattern condition
as a repeated measure. Because proportions of B-choices
across the T-00, T-11, and T-22 conditions were very similar
(all ts < 1), proportions of B-choices were averaged across
these conditions into a new aggregated variable T-Equal
("T" stands for the Target and "Equal" indicates that each of
the Test stimuli shared equal number of features with the
Target). While there were no significant differences in
proportions of B-choices among the age groups, F(2, 35) =
.8, p = .45, there was a significant main effect due to the
stimulus pattern condition, F(3, 105) = 13.5, MSE = 0.1, p <
.0001. Planned comparisons indicated that T-Equal exhibited
the largest proportion of B-choices (46%), whereas T-02
exhibited the smallest proportion of B-choices (11%), all ts >
2.2, ps < .05. At the same time, T-12 and T-01 did not differ
significantly, t < 1. These results indicate that when only
perceptual information was available, participants based
their inductive inference on this information: in all age
groups inductive inference was a function of the number of
attributes shared by the Target with Test stimuli.
Introduction of labels, however, dramatically changed
the proportions of B-choices that had been observed in the

Figure 3: Induction in the Label condition broken
down by stimulus pattern condition and age group.
Proportions of label-based choices across stimulus
pattern condition in the two younger groups were subjected
to a two-way (age by stimulus pattern condition) ANOVA
with stimulus pattern as a repeated measure. Because
proportions of label-based generalizations across the T-00,
T-11, and T-22 conditions were statistically equivalent (t <
1), these proportions were averaged across these conditions
into a new aggregated variable T-Equal. The analysis
indicates a significant main effect due to stimulus pattern
condition, F(3, 102) = 2.8, MSE = 0.06, p < .05, whereas
neither main effects of age group, nor the interaction of the
two factors were significant (p = .15 and p = .8, respectively).
Planned comparisons pointed to significant differences
between the T-Equal condition and the T-12 and T-02
conditions, all ts (35) > 2.1, ps < .05. In short, as predicted, in
the oldest group the proportion of selecting Test B did not
vary across the stimulus pattern conditions, whereas this
proportion did vary as a function of stimulus pattern
condition in the two younger groups. Although differences
among the stimulus pattern conditions may appear relatively
small (in particular, differences between T-02, on the one
hand, and T-01 and T-12, on the other hand, fell short of
statistical significance), the direction of these differences,
except for the T-02 condition in the middle group, closely
match predictions derived from Equations 1 and 2.
Overall fit between predicted probabilities and observed
frequencies is presented in Figure 4. Each data point in
Figure 4 represents responses of to each stimulus pattern

r = .96
2
R = 0.9196

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.2

0.4

Experiment 2
Method
Participants A group of 30 four-year-old children (M = 4.3
years, SD = 0.5 years; 19 boys and 11 girls) participated in
the experiment. The participants were recruited from daycare
centers located in middle class suburbs of Columbus, Ohio.
Materials The materials included triads of schematic faces
identical to those used in Experiment 1.
Design and procedure The design and procedure were
identical to that in Experiment 1 with three exceptions. First,
the current experiment included only a label condition.
Second, the "why" questions that accompanied children's
choices in Experiment 1 were dropped. Finally, the number
of trials within each stimulus pattern condition was
increased from three to four.

Results and Discussion

0.6

0.8

1

Predicted Theoretically (Equations 1 and 2)

Figure 4: Theoretical probabilities (computed from the model
using Equations 1 and 2) and observed probabilities of
generalization of biological properties to Test B. Note:
parameter S was estimated from our previous research.
Findings of this experiment support our predictions
regarding quantitative contribution of labels to inductive
inferences of young children. In the absence of labels,
participants of all age groups based their inductive inference
on perceptual information. However, when labels were
introduced, the pattern of choices changed dramatically:
preadolescents based their induction solely on labels,
whereas younger children based their induction on a
combination of labels and the number of overlapping
attributes. Therefore, it seems reasonable to infer that
preadolescents performed induction in a category-based
manner, whereas younger children performed induction in a
similarity-based manner.
However, it could be argued that these findings strongly
support predictions for preadolescents' induction, while
providing only tentative support of predictions for young
children's induction. The support is tentative because some
differences among the stimulus pattern conditions, while all
in predicted directions, failed to reach significance. Because
of this, we deemed it necessary to conduct a second
experiment, replicating the current experiment for young
children while simplifying the task, and increasing the
sample sizes and the number of trials.

Proportions of label-based generalizations across the
stimulus pattern conditions are presented in Figure 5.
Because proportions of label-based generalizations in T-00,
T-11, T-22 conditions were statistically equivalent (87%,
85%, and 87% respectively, ts < 0.5), participants' responses
were averaged across these conditions into a new variable
T-Equal. Proportions of label-based generalizations in TEqual, T-01, T-12, and T-02 conditions were subjected to a
one-way repeated measures ANOVA. The analysis points
to significant differences among the stimulus pattern
conditions, F(3, 87) = 16.744, MSE = 1.15, p < 0.0001.
Planned comparisons pointed to the following order among
the conditions in the proportion of label-based
generalizations: T-Equal (86%) > T-12 (63%) = T-01 (56%) >
T-02 (39%). All indicated differences were significant, all ts
> 3.5, Bonferroni adjusted ps < .01, while the difference
between T-12 and T-01 was not significant, t < 1. These
results clearly indicate that the proportion of label-based
generalizations varied as a function of the number of
features shared by the Target with each of the test stimuli,
thus further supporting the notion of similarity-based
specific induction in young children.

Proportion of Label-based generalizations

Observed

averaged within age groups. Note that Figure 4 depicts
performance of children in the two younger groups in the
label and no label conditions. In addition to a high
correlation between the predicted and observed probabilities
(r = .96), the proposed theoretical model accounts for
approximately 92% of the observed variance (R2 = .919).
These findings support the notion that for younger children
labels contribute to specific induction in a quantitative
manner and that this contribution varies with the number of
attributes shared by Test A and Test B with the Target.
Note that Figure 4 does not include performance of the
oldest group, because their induction was not derived from
Equations 1 and 2. On the contrary, their induction was
predicted to be category-based, as opposed to similaritybased induction of younger children.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
T-00

T11

T22

T12

T-01

T02

Figure 5: Proportions of label-based generalizations
across the stimulus pattern conditions.

General Discussion
Results of the two reported experiments are as follows. In
Experiment 1, when labels were not provided, 4-5 year-olds,
7-8 year-olds, and 11-12 year-olds relied on perceptual
similarity when making specific induction with novel entities.
At the same time, when labels were introduced,
preadolescents made inductive inferences based solely on
the basis of the provided label, whereas specific induction of
younger children varied with the number of attributes (which
includes labels) shared by the Target and Test stimuli.
Results of Experiment 2 further indicated that proportions of
label-based generalizations in young children varied as a
function of visual attributes shared by the Target with each
of the Test stimuli. These results fit predictions, indicating
that the model proposed by Sloutsky & Lo (1999) can
account for specific induction of younger children and that
specific induction of the younger children is similaritybased.
The results of the no-label condition indicate that for all
three age groups, similarity-based specific induction is the
default mechanism (cf. Keil, 1989).
When no other
information was available, participants of all age groups
used perceptual similarity to generalize biological properties
from the Target to Test stimuli. Therefore, if similarity-based
induction is the default mechanism, it seems likely that it
might developmentally precede category-based induction.
This contention was supported by results of the label
condition.
The results of the label condition supported the notion of
different mechanisms underlying specific induction in young
children and preadolescents, thus allowing the resolving of
an apparent paradox of specific induction. The paradox is as
follows. On the one hand, if specific induction is categorybased, it should be dependent on general induction and the
ability to perform induction-deduction coordination. On the
other hand, even three year-olds are capable of performing
specific induction (Gelman & Markman, 1987). The reported
results suggest that specific induction does not have to be
category-based -- it may start out as similarity-based and
develop into category-based later. The reported experiments
support this notion, suggesting that this shift may occur
sometime between nine and eleven years of age. Indeed,
while specific induction of 7-8 year-olds appeared to
conform to the proposed model and to vary with a number of
perceptual attributes shared by the Target and Test stimuli,
specific induction of 11-12 year-olds appeared to be
independent of shared attributes and to be a function of
labels.
It is also important that for younger children, labels exert
similar effects on similarity judgment and specific induction.
At the same time, in preadolescents these effects are
fundamentally different. While labels had no effect on
similarity judgment of preadolescents (Sloutsky & Lo, 1999),
in specific induction preadolescents relied solely on labels.
These findings further support the possibility of a
developmental shift from similarity-based to category-based
induction occurring between 9 and 11 years of age.
This developmental shift may be a function of the

development of a categorical structure: when two objects
share a label they are more likely to be considered members
of the same category than to be considered members of
different categories. When a categorical structure is in place,
the probability that two remotely similar entities that have
the same label would be considered members of different
categories could be estimated by the base rate of homonyms
(and homophones), and therefore is negligibly small. In fact,
we drew a random sample of 200 most frequently used
English nouns from Francis and Kucera (1982) and asked
three native English speakers to mark those that have
homonyms and homophones. While the overall rate of
homonyms and homophones appeared to be relatively high
(ranging from 20% to 30%), many of these homonyms and
homophones were adjectives and verbs (e.g., horse/hoarse
or board/bored). At the same time, the rate of noun-noun
homonyms (e.g., case/case) was around 5%. Furthermore,
the rate of a noun having a homonym within the same
ontological class (e.g., living creature having a homonym
that indicates a completely different living creature) was
practically nonexistent. Hence, remotely similar entities that
share the label should be interpreted as members of the same
category and, therefore, to share unobservable properties as
well. In short, the label-as-attribute model proposed by
Sloutsky & Lo (1999) can account not only for similarity
judgment of younger children, but also for their specific
induction.
While the model provides a reasonable account of specific
induction with artificial stimuli that are relatively similar on
the overall scale, it remains unclear whether or not the model
is capable of handling more naturalistic and diverse set of
stimuli. Our most immediate concern is to test the model
with these kinds of stimuli. Because our stimuli were quite
similar overall s (all pictures represent human-like faces) it is
possible that results might have been different had the
stimuli been more different. It is also possible that results
might have been different if stimuli were not human-like:
infants and young children have been shown to develop
different types of representations of humans and animals
(Quinn & Eimas, 1998). While the former could be
represented as individual exemplars, the latter may have
summary
(i.e.,
category-based
yet
perceptual)
representations. However, we believe that introduction of
more different and more diverse stimuli would make
differences between younger and older children even more
apparent, because stimuli would increase perceptualsimilarity-based variance in the younger groups without
increasing this variance in the older group.
If induction in young children is based on overall
similarity among compared entities then introduction of new
attributes (both perceptual and non-perceptual) that
contribute to overall similarity, should also contribute to
inductive generalizations. It would be important to test this
prediction and to estimate weights of different classes of
attributes. It would be also important to trace changes in
these weights with development and learning. Finally, it
would be necessary to test the model on younger
participants and have more dense developmental
observations.

Because the proposed model is capable of formulating
specific predictions, these predictions can be tested in future
research. For example, we contend that specific induction in
young children is similarity-based, whereas preadolescents it
is category-based. If this is true, then for younger children
specific induction should be easier than general induction,
while for older children it should be more difficult (because
category-based specific induction requires more mental
steps than general induction). However, if specific induction
in younger children is also category-based, then in both
younger and older children specific induction should be
more difficult than general induction.
Recall that the label-as-attribute model also affords the
computation of specific probabilities of inductive
generalizations across stimuli that vary in overall similarity.
In future research, we plan to test these predictions of the
model with respect to naturalistic stimuli. Because it is
impossible to individuate features and to precisely calculate
featural overlap with complex naturalistic stimuli patterns, we
will manipulate similarity by "morphing" naturalistic pictures
into each other in a fixed number of steps.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by a grant from the James
S. McDonnell Foundation to the first author.

References
Estes, W. K. (1994). Classification and cognition. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Fisher, R. (1935). The design of experiments. Oliver & Boyd,
London: UK.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In S.
A. Gelman, S. & J. P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on
language and thought: Interrelations in development
(146-196). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D. & Gottfried, G. M. (1994).
Essentialist beliefs in children: The acquisition of
concepts and theories. In L. Hirschfeld & S. Gelman (Eds.),
Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and
culture (pp. 234-254). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Goodman, N. (1992/1972). Seven strictures on similarity. In
M. Douglas & D. Hull (Eds.), How classification works
(pp. 13-23). Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh University
Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mandler, J. M., & McDonough, L. (1998). Studies in
inductive inference in infancy. Cognitive Psychology, 37,
60-96.
Medin, D. (1975). A theory of context in discrimination
learning. In G. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning

and motivation (pp. 263-314), Vol. 9. New York: Academic
Press.
Quinn, P., & Eimas, P. (1998). Evidence for global categorical
representation of humans by young infants. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 69, 151-174.
Shepard, R. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization
for psychological science. Science, 237, 1317-1323.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y.-F. (1999). How much does a shared
name make things similar? Part 1: Linguistic labels and the
development of similarity judgement. Developmental
Psychology, 6, 1478-1492.

