UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory versus Perceptual-Motor Tradeoffs in a Blocks World Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mn4s2zt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Fu, Wai-Tat
Gray, Wayne D.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory versus Perceptual-Motor Tradeoffs in a Blocks World Task
Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@gmu.edu)
Wayne D. Gray (gray@gmu.edu)
Human Factors & Applied Cognition
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030 USA
Abstract
Using information in-the-world as external memory may
be a low-cost alternative to internal memory: storage is free,
and retrieval is often quick (involving a saccade) and
reliable. However, when the cost of accessing external
information increases, in-the-head storage and retrieval may
become the least-cost solution. We employ the rational
analysis framework (Anderson, 1990) to study the effect of
varying the cost of information access on interactive
behavior. Increasing the cost of information access induced
a switch from information in-the-world (the perceptualmotor strategy) to information in-the-head (the memory
strategy). Given the effort and unreliability of internal
storage, the threshold for switching from an in-the-world to
an in-the-head strategy is surprisingly low.

Introduction
Information stored in-the-world can be considered as
external memory (O'Regan, 1992). Information is retrieved
from external memory via visual perception as rendered by
the appropriate saccades and fixations. Recent research has
suggested that when information in-the-world is readily
accessible, internal storage is not needed (Ballard, Hayhoe,
& Pelz, 1995); perceptual-motor strategies will be deployed
to reacquire information as needed. However, when the cost
of information access was increased from a simple saccade
to a head movement, the perceptual-motor strategy was
replaced with a strategy that placed task-relevant
information into working memory (Ballard et. al., 1995).
This suggests that the decision to store information in-thehead versus in-the-world is sensitive to least-cost
considerations.

The rational analysis framework
One explanation for this kind of trade-off was given by
Anderson (1990). Anderson casts human memory as an
optimization process. In his rational analysis framework, the
goal of human memory is to retrieve knowledge that would
allow us to perform the task we are currently facing. The
optimization process maximizes the expected utility of the
memory system by balancing the cost of memory search
against an assumed constant expected gain1 of retrieving a

desired memory item for the current task. A clear cost of
memory search is time (and possibly a metabolic cost
associated with time). Under Anderson's rational analysis
framework, the human memory system would search a
memory structure until the probability of getting the desired
memory item (the expected gain) is lower than the cost of
further search (i.e., when the expected utility becomes
negative).
If information in the external environment can be
considered as an external memory store, the cost in
searching for the relevant information in the external
environment can be taken as the "memory" search cost as in
Anderson's rational analysis framework. In most tasks, the
information stored in the external environment is
continuously available (high expected gain and fixed
expected cost).
If the only cost associated with internal memory were a
search cost, then we would expect that in most situations
internal search would be faster than external search.
However, for internal memory a significant additional cost
is internal storage (encoding). Storage costs would seem to
be particularly problematic in the type of real-time, dynamic
tasks studied by Ballard and associates. For example, in a
task that required frequent memory updates, Altmann and
Gray (2000) estimated that approximately 10 cycles of
encoding with a duration of approximately 100 msec per
cycle are needed to encode an item so that it can be
retrieved 5,000 msec later. In contrast, the time for a
saccade and dwell is typically estimated as 230 msec (Card,
Moran, & Newell, 1983, pp. 25-28).
Compared to a memory strategy that includes encoding
plus retrieval, a saccadic eye movement to a known location
has a much lower time cost. Therefore, under many
conditions, the expected utility of using the external
environment as external memory is much higher than that of
the internal human memory system. However, when the cost
of information access from the external environment is high
enough, the expected utility of external memory would be
lower than that of internal memory. In this case, the rational
analysis framework would predict a shift from external
memory to internal memory. In other words, people would
be more likely to adopt a memory strategy than a
perceptual-motor strategy.
Unlike retrieving an item from a known external location
with a saccade and dwell, retrieving an item from memory is

1

The expected gain is defined as the product of P and G, where
P is the estimated probability that the target memory item can be
found, and G is the gain associated with retrieving the target

memory item. If C is the memory search cost, then expected utility
E = PG - C.

subject to interference from previously encoded as well as
other currently encoded items. If we make the additional
assumption that the strength of an encoded trace fluctuates
as a function of noise (Altmann & Gray, 1999; Anderson &
Lebiére, 1998), then retrieval from memory may take longer
and is more error prone than the corresponding retrieval
from the external environment. The rational analysis
framework suggests that searching for an item should stop
as soon as the expected gain from finding the item is less
than the cost of searching. Therefore given an assumed
constant expected gain, the higher the search cost of a
memory item, the fewer items would be searched for and
inspected before the memory system would stop searching.
Since the more items the memory system considers, the
more likely that the target item can be found (thus
improving accuracy), increasing the search cost implies a
decrease in accuracy; that is, an increase in errors. Therefore
the rational analysis framework not only predicts that
increasing the cost of information access in the external
environment would induce a shift from external memory to
internal memory, but also an increase in errors.
In this paper, we employ the rational analysis framework
to study the effect of varying the cost of information access
on interactive behavior. Specifically we test two predictions
that we have derived from the rational analysis framework:
that an increase in the perceptual-motor cost of information
access will induce a shift from an external to an internal
memory strategy, and that this switch will occur even
though the internal search is difficult and error prone.

Unlike Ballard et al., in our Block World task all three
windows were covered by gray boxes. Throughout the task
only one of the windows could be uncovered at a time. The
resource and workspace windows were uncovered by
moving the mouse cursor into the window. They were
covered again when the mouse cursor left the window. The
effort required to uncover the target window varied between
each of our three conditions.
To access the information in the target window
participants could adopt either a predominately perceptualmotor or a predominately memory strategy. As per Ballard
et al.'s TRTW strategy, the predominately perceptual-motor
strategy would entail one uncovering at the target window to
obtain color information and another to obtain position
information. In contrast, a predominately memory strategy
(TRW) would entail one uncovering at the target window to
obtain both color and position. Deciding which blocks
remained to be copied would entail a second set of
strategies. On these strategies Ballard is silent. However, a
predominately perceptual-motor strategy might entail
multiple quick uncoverings between the target and
workspace window. A predominately memory strategy
might entail encoding the color and position of multiple
blocks at one glance.

Experiment
The blocks world task is based on the paradigm used by
Ballard et al., (1995). The task is to copy a pattern of
colored blocks shown in the target window to the
workspace window, using the colored blocks in the resource
window (for our version see Figure 1).
To do the task, participants have to remember three pieces
of information: (a) the color of the block to be copied, (b)
the position of the block to be copied, and (c) which blocks
have or have not been copied. The first two pieces have to
be obtained from the target window whereas the third piece
has to be obtained by comparing the target window with the
workspace window.
Ballard reported a point-of-gaze (POG) sequence of target
window, resource window, target window, workspace
window (TRTW). The implication of this sequence is that
during the first POG to the target window (T) subjects
encoded the color of the block and then picked up a block
from the resource window (R). On the next POG to the
target window (T) subjects encoded the block's location in
the pattern. They then moved to the workspace window (W)
and placed the block in the appropriate location.
As the effort needed to acquire information from a
window increased from a POG to a head movement the
sequence tended to change to TRW. In this case, the
implication is that subjects encode both the color and the
position during the first (and only) POG to the target
window (T). The encoded trace persists as the subject
acquires the block from the resource window (R) and places
it in the workspace window (W).

Figure 1. The blocks world task. In the actual task all
windows are covered by gray boxes and at any time only
one window can be uncovered. The window at the top left is
the target window, at the bottom the resource window, and
at the top right the workspace window.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight George Mason University undergraduates
participated in the study for course credit and were
randomly assigned to one of the three experimental
conditions.
Equipment and software
The experiment was written in Macintosh Common Lisp
and was conducted with a Macintosh PowerPC connected to

an extended keyboard, a mouse, and a 17-inch monitor. All
mouse movements and keypresses were recorded and saved
to a log file with 16.67 msec accuracy.
The blocks (48 x 48 pixels) that constitute each pattern
were randomly chosen with the constraint that no color was
used in one pattern more than twice. The blocks were placed
at random in the target window’s 4 x 4 grid. The workspace
window was the same size as the target window and
contained the same, non-visible, 4 x 4 grid.
Design and Procedure
The three conditions were designed to vary the cost of
uncovering the target window. In the low-cost condition,
participants had to press and hold down a function key.
(Participants were asked to use different hands for the
keyboard and the mouse.) The target window remained
uncovered until they released the key, or until the mouse
cursor entered either the workspace or resource window.
Once the target window was covered, to uncover it again
participants had to release the key and press it again (this is
to avoid the strategy of holding the key down throughout the
task). In the control condition, the conditions for uncovering
the target window were the same as for the workspace and
resource windows. The target window was uncovered when
the mouse cursor entered the window. The high-cost
condition was similar to the control condition, except that
participants had to move the mouse cursor inside the target
window and endure a one second lockout before the target
window was uncovered.
To select a block, participants moved the mouse cursor to
the resource window and mouse clicked on the desired
colored block. The mouse cursor then changed to a small
version (16 x 16 pixels) of the selected block (eliminating
the need to remember its color). To place a block in the
workspace window, the cursor was moved to that window
(which was then uncovered), moved to the desired position,
and then clicked. When the participants believed that the
pattern had been copied to the workspace window, they
press the "Stop-Trial" button. A feedback window indicated
whether the copied pattern matched the target pattern. If the
pattern was different, participants were required to go back
to finish the task before they could move on to the next
pattern.
At the beginning of the experiment, instructions were
given and participants were led through one demonstration
trial by the experimenter. Participants then completed 40
trials. The whole experiment lasted about 45 minutes.

Results
Trial Time
The first ten trials of the experiment were considered
practice and were excluded from further analyses. Analysis
of variance (ANOVA) of time for condition by trial showed
significant main effects of condition (F (2, 45) = 9.11, p =
0.0005, MSE = 726), and of trial (F (29, 1305) = 131.6, p <
.0001, MSE = 53.2). There was no interaction between trial
and condition. To determine whether the main effect of
conditions was solely due to the one second delay in the

high-cost condition, the per trial time in this condition was
adjusted by subtracting the amount of delay for each time
the target window was uncovered. After the adjustment, the
main effect of condition was not significant (F (2, 45) =
.969, p = .39, MSE = 564). However, the main effect of trial
remained significant (F (29, 1305) = 120.1, p < .001, MSE =
46.0). Orthogonal linear contrasts showed a significant
linear downward trend of time across trials for the low-cost
condition (p = .0001), control condition (p = .0001), and
high-cost condition (p = .0001), suggesting speed-up across
trials. No other higher order trends were significant. The
interaction between trials and conditions was not significant.
Use of the Target Window
The trial time results seem to suggest no difference between
conditions. However, detailed analyses revealed the effects
of the cost of information access. An ANOVA on the
number of times the target was uncovered showed a
significant main effect of condition (F (2, 45) = 10.17, p =
.0002, MSE = 159). Planned comparisons revealed a
significant difference between the high-cost and control (p =
.0045), as well as high-cost and low-cost conditions (p <
.0001) (See Figure 2). Subjects in the high-cost condition
uncovered the target window significantly fewer times than
the other two conditions. However, there was no significant
difference between the low-cost and control condition.
9
8

Number of times the target
window was uncovered

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Low-cost

Control

High-cost

Figure 2. Mean number of times per trial that subjects
uncovered the target window.
ANOVA on the time subjects spent looking at the model
showed that there were significant main effects of
conditions (F (2, 45) = 20.6, p < .0001, MSE = 300), with
the high-cost condition significantly spending more time
than the low-cost condition (p < .0001), or the control
condition (p < .0001). The difference between the low-cost
and control condition was not significant. Overall, there was
a significant downward linear trend of time spent on the
target window across trials (p = .0002). However,
orthogonal linear contrasts showed that the downward linear
trends for the high-cost (p = .02) and control condition (p =
.001) were significant, but that the trend for low-cost
condition (p = .10) was not (see Figure 3).

Seconds

Time spent on looking at target
window

2.9
2.4

Low-cost
Control
High-cost

1.9
1.4
0.9
0.4

Trial
11-15

Trial
Trial
Trial
16-20 21-25 26-30

Trial
Trial
31-35 36-40

Figure 3. Time spent on looking at the target window.
For each trial, we looked at how many colored blocks the
subjects copied following each of their first four accesses of
the target window. We conducted a 3 x (4 x 30) ANOVA on
conditions, the nth (1 to 4) uncovering of the target window,
and trial (11-40). There were significant main effects of
conditions (F (2, 45) = 19.5, p < .0001, MSE = 7.75), and
the nth uncovering of the window (F (3, 135) = 39.5, p <
.0001, MSE = 13.3). The interaction between conditions and
the nth window uncovering was significant (F (6, 135) =
7.8, p < .0001, MSE = 13.2) (see Figure 4). The main effect
of trials was not significant. No other interactions were
significant.
Number of blocks copied after each
uncovering of the target window

4

Low-cost
Control
High-cost

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

First
Check

Second
Check

Third
Check

Fourth
Check

Figure 4. The number of colored blocks copied after each
uncovering of the target window.
Summary. The analysis of how the target window was used
suggest that although there was no significant difference in
trial times between conditions, the strategies used by the
subjects in the high-cost condition were very different from
the other two conditions. Subjects in the high-cost condition
uncovered the target window a fewer number of times and
copied more colored blocks after each uncovering at the
target window. Figure 4 illustrates the interaction between

condition and the number of blocks copied in the first four
uncoverings of the target window. Clearly, the significant
decrease in the number of blocks copied within a trial is at
least partially due to the decreasing number that remained to
be copied. However, this potential artifact does not explain
the significant interaction. Subjects in the high-cost
condition tended to copy more blocks in the first few
accesses at the target window. In contrast, in the low-cost
condition, subjects tended to copy the same number of
blocks after each access. This suggests that subjects in the
high-cost condition tended to adopt a memory strategy memorizing the information of the colored blocks to reduce
their reliance on the external display. On the other hand, as
the cost of information access was low subjects in the lowcost condition relied more on a perceptual-motor strategy getting the information from the display when needed.
With practice, subjects in the high-cost condition spent
less time looking at the target window, but copied more
colored blocks after each uncovering. This increase in
efficiency (measured in terms of the time required to
memorize the information of a fixed number of colored
blocks) partly explains the speed-up across trials in the highcost condition. However, the same trend was not observed
in the low-cost condition. It seems that practice had no
significant effect on the use of the target window in the lowcost condition (in terms of number of times they uncovered
at the target window, number of colored blocks copied after
each uncovering, and time spent on the target window per
uncovering).
Strategies
A finer-grained analysis is needed to understand the actual
differences in strategies used. For each copied block, we
extracted the sequence in which subjects uncovered
windows. In the notation below, these sequences are
abbreviated using the first initial of the window name. Wb
indicates that they uncovered the workspace window and
placed a block, Wu indicates that they uncovered the
workspace window but did not place a block. For example,
TRWb refers to a target-source-workspace windows
sequence that ends with the placement of a block.
Table 1. Strategies used by subjects. T = uncover target
window, R = uncover and pick a colored block from resource
window, Wb = put selected colored block to workspace
window, Wu = uncover workspace window. For example,
TWuRWb represents the strategy in which the subject
uncovered the target window, uncovered the workspace
window, went to the resource window, picked up a colored
block, and put the colored block in the workspace window.
Low-cost
Strategy
TRWb
53%
RWb
33%
TRTWb
5%
Total
5537

Control
Strategy
TRWb
49%
RWb
38%
TRTWb
7%
5496

High-cost
Strategy
TRWb
38%
RWb
58%
TWuRWb 1%
5752

Table 1 shows the three most common sequences used by
the subjects in the three conditions (as well as the
percentage of the total that these sequences represent). We

can see that the top 2 sequences (TRWb and RWb)
constituted almost 90% of all the sequences used2.
Although the two dominant strategies were the same, the
effect of information access cost on strategy used was
clearly seen. With increasing cost, the use of the TRWb
strategy decreased, while the use of RWb increased. This
change of strategy nicely indicates the shift of reliance from
external to internal memory. This is consistent with the
results on the use of target window described above. With
increasing cost of information access, subjects tended to
uncovered the target window less, spent more time per
uncovering (time that we presume was spent encoding more
information into internal memory), and used the pure
memory strategy (RWb) more.
Number of Use per Trial
3

Low-cost
Control

2.5

High-cost

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
TRWb

TRWbRWb

TRWbRWbRWb

Figure 5. Number of use of strategies per trial. T =
uncovering the target window, R = uncovering the resource
window and picked a colored block, Wb = putting the
colored block in the workspace window.
To further understand the strategy change across trials, we
looked at three combinations of the two dominant strategies.
We extracted the number of times subjects used either the
TRWb, TRWbRWb, or TRWbRWbRWb strategy3 in each
of the trials. This analysis is similar to that shown in Figure
4. It captures how often subjects placed 1, 2, or 3 blocks
following a single glance at the target window. A 3 x (3 x
30) ANOVA on conditions, strategies, and trials found no
significant main effect of condition (F (2 ,45) = 1.92, p =
.16, MSE = 16.0), nor trials (F (29, 1305) =. 835, p < .72,
MSE = 24.2). However, the main effect of sequence was
significant (F (2, 90) = 14.6, p < .0001, MSE = 19.8), as was
the interaction between sequence and condition (F (4, 90) =
2

Interestingly, TRTW, the dominant strategy described in
Ballard et al (1995), was not one of the dominant strategy in this
task. The difference might be that all windows in this task were
covered by gray boxes, and the lower-cost saccadic strategy
described in Ballard et al (1995) was not supported.
3
In our categorization, these categories were mutually
exclusive. Therefore, the run TRWRWRW was categorized as an
instance of the TRWRWRW strategy, but was not included in the
count for TRWRW or TRW.

10.9, p < .0001) (see Figure 5). No other interactions were
significant. Planned comparisons showed that all differences
between the three sequences were significant (p < .05).
The analysis further confirms the shift from the use of
external to internal memory with increasing information
access cost. The TRWb strategy, in contrast to the
TRWbRWb and TRWbRWbRWb strategies, allowed
subjects to acquire only the information necessary to copy
the next colored block from the target window (external
memory). Figure 5 shows that in the high-cost condition,
subjects used the TRWbRWbRWb significantly more than
the TRWb strategy. It suggests that subjects tended to
transfer more information from the target window (external
memory) to internal memory, and performed the task based
on the information retained in internal memory.
Errors and Comparisons
To test the predictions of errors from our rational
analysis, we looked at the way in which different strategies
affected the patterns of errors made by subjects. An error
could involve placing a block with the wrong color, placing
a block in the wrong position, or both. Only errors made
before the subjects clicked on the "Stop-Trial" button were
counted. A 3 x 30 ANOVA of the number of errors made
per trial on conditions and trials was conducted. There was a
significant main effect for conditions (F (2, 45) = 11.6, p
<.0001, MSE = 1.39), but not for trials (F (29, 1305) = 1.1, p
= . 33, MSE =. 75). The interaction between conditions and
trials was not significant (F (58, 1305) = 1.2, p = .10). The
row labeled “Errors” in Table 2 shows the mean number of
errors made by the subjects. The low error rates were not
surprising given the simplicity of the task. However, there
were significant differences between conditions. Planned
comparisons showed that subjects in the high-cost condition
made significantly more errors than the other two conditions
(p < .001 for low versus high, p < .0001 for control versus
high). This result supports our second prediction: that
increase in information access cost increases errors.
Table 2. Mean number of errors, errors uncorrected, and
comparison episodes per trial before the subjects thought
they were done (when they pressed the "Stop-Trial" button.)

Dependent
Variable
Errors
Uncorrected
Comparisons

Conditions (cell means)
LowControl
Highcost
cost
.41
.33
.68
.10
.08
.14
.57
.31
.17

To find out whether there were differences in the subjects'
ability to detect errors, we conducted a 3 x 30 ANOVA on
the number of uncorrected errors after the subjects clicked
on the "Stop-Trial" button by condition and trial. As
suggested by the middle row of Table 2, there was no
significant main effect on conditions (F (2, 45) = 1.26, p =
.29, MSE = .365). However, there was a significant main
effects of trial (F (29, 1305) = 1.54, p = .03, MSE = .173).
There was a significant downward linear trend on the
number of uncorrected errors across trials (p = .006).

The decrease of the number of uncorrected errors
(without any significant increase in the number of errors
made) suggested that with practice, subjects in the high-cost
condition became better at detecting and correcting their
errors. We therefore turned our focus on how often the
subjects compared the pattern in the workspace with that in
the target window. The comparisons between the two
windows not only served the function of error detection, but
could also let the subjects keep track of what blocks had or
had not been copied. As described before, this information
was another critical piece of information that had to be
remembered to do the task.
The number of comparison episodes was extracted. A
comparison episode started when the participant went from
the workspace to the target window (or vice versa) without
having a block selected. Any consecutive uncoverings of the
workspace and target window were counted as part of the
same comparison episode. An ANOVA of the number of
comparison episodes showed a significant main effect on
conditions (F (2, 45) = 6.3, p = .004, MSE = 3.17), with the
low-cost condition having significantly more comparison
episodes than the other two conditions (see the bottom row
of Table 2). The result again confirmed our prediction:
when the cost of information access is low, people prefer to
adopt a perceptual-motor strategy to memory strategy.
To summarize, the memory strategy adopted by subjects
in the high-cost condition seemed to be more error-prone
than the perceptual strategy in the low-cost condition.
However, in all conditions most errors were detected and
corrected. There was therefore no significant difference in
the number of uncorrected errors between conditions. The
differences in number of comparison episodes revealed
another aspect of the strategy difference. In the low-cost
condition, subjects made many more comparisons of the
workspace and the target window, further supporting the
hypothesis that they did not keep track of which blocks had
been copied. In contrast, the number of comparison episodes
in the high-cost condition was much lower, suggesting that
subjects stored the information in working memory,
reducing the reliance on the external environment. A second
function served by these comparisons might have been to
detect and correct errors. By relying on the external display,
errors could be corrected without much memorization. In
contrast, subjects in the high-cost condition relied more on
their memory to keep track of their task as well as to detect
and correct errors. It was also shown that over practice,
subjects in the high-cost condition did manage to reduce the
number of uncorrected errors.

Conclusions and Discussions
The results support two predictions derived from Anderson's
(1990) rational analysis framework. Given an assumed
constant expected gain, when the cost of accessing
information in-the-world increased, the cost of a perceptualmotor strategy becomes greater than the cost of a memory
strategy. Under such conditions, the optimal strategy is to

encode task-relevant information from the external
environment into working memory, thereby reducing
reliance on the external environment. The results indicate
that when the cost of accessing external information is high,
people invest more time storing information in their internal
environment and rely less on the external environment to do
the task. In contrast, when the cost of accessing external
information is low, people spent less time encoding and rely
more heavily on the external environment.
Our second prediction was upheld as well. In the highcost condition this switch to the memory strategy was made
despite its higher error rate. Indeed, the decrease in the
number of uncorrected errors indicates that with practice our
subjects became better at detecting and correcting errors.
This finding suggests subjects were optimizing the strategy
to reduce the overall effort required to do the task.
Under the rational analysis framework, cognition tends to
optimize performance by balancing costs and benefits in a
given information processing task. Our results show that the
cost of information access could induce a switch from
reliance on information in-the-world (perceptual-motor
strategy) to in-the-head (the memory strategy). We found
that although memory is a limited resource, there are
conditions under which people can use it to optimize
performance.

Acknowledgments
The work reported was supported by a grant from the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research AFOSR#F49620-97-10353 as well as by the National Science Foundation (IRI9618833).

References
Altmann, E. M., & Gray, W. D. (1999). Preparing to forget:
Memory and functional decay in serial attention.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Altmann, E. M., & Gray, W. D. (2000). Managing attention
by preparing to forget. Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society 44th Annual Meeting
(pp. ). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society.
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiére, C. (Eds.). (1998). Atomic
components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., & Pelz, J. B. (1995).
Memory representations in natural tasks. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 7(1), 66-80.
Card, S. K., Moran, T. P., & Newell, A. (1983). The
psychology of human-computer interaction. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
O'Regan, J. K. (1992). Solving the "real" mysteries of visual
perception: The world as an outside memory. Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 46(3), 461-488.

