UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Orientation Effects in Symmetry

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3j54d078

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Ferguson, Ronald W.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Orientation Effects in Symmetry Detection:
The Role of Visual Structure
Ronald W. Ferguson (r-ferguson@northwestern.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University
1890 Maple Avenue; Evanston, IL 60201, USA
Abstract
Symmetry detection is a key part of human perception. One
incompletely understood aspect of symmetry detection concerns orientation effects. The best-known orientation effect is
the preference for vertical symmetry, where symmetry around
a vertical axis is detected more quickly and accurately than
symmetry at other orientations. Current symmetry detection
models have difficulty explaining this effect. Using MAGI
(Ferguson, 1994), we show how orientation effects may be
caused by interactions between the perceived visual relations
and the current reference frame. As evidence for this
explanation, we simulate several orientation characteristics,
including the preference for vertical symmetry and Wiser’s
(1981) theory of "intrinsic axes". Finally, we successfully
simulate the results of a classic study by Palmer and
Hemenway (1978) which explores the relationship between
the preference for vertical symmetry, multiple symmetries,
and inexact symmetry. Collectively, these results show that
orientation effects may be due to characteristics of detected
visual relations rather than either exact point-to-point
equivalencies or the bilateral symmetry of the visual system.

Introduction
Symmetry detection is a core mechanism in perception,
shape recognition, and perceptual organization. Yet the
processes underlying symmetry detection are only partially
understood. Studies of symmetry detection have revealed
psychological characteristics more complex than previously
assumed even a few decades ago.
One such set of characteristics are orientation effects:
interactions between symmetry detection and the visual
reference frame. Orientation effects are interesting because
they separate human performance in judging symmetry from
symmetry’s geometric definition. In geometric terms,
symmetry is orientation-invariant, yet human symmetry
detection depends critically on a figure’s orientation. In
addition, under certain circumstances symmetric figures also

influence the visual reference frame.
Orientation effects can be placed into three broad
categories: the preference for vertical symmetry, the
preference for multiple symmetries, and the effect of
symmetry on a figure’s object-centered reference frame.
Preference for vertical symmetry. Bilateral symmetry
is more quickly and accurately detected when the symmetry
axis is vertical (Attneave & Olson, 1967; Bornstein &
Krinsky, 1985; Chipman & Mendelsohn, 1979; Corballis &
Roldan, 1975; Goldmeier, 1936/1972; Julesz, 1971; Mach,
1893/1986; Palmer & Hemenway, 1978). In most cases,
vertical symmetry is easier than horizontal symmetry, which
in turn is easier than diagonal symmetry.
A longstanding explanation for the preference for vertical
symmetry is that it depends on the human visual system’s
own vertically bilateral structure. In this framework,
originally suggested by Mach (1893/1986), human vision
provides better and faster results for symmetries aligned
with its own symmetric structure. Several visual subsystems
have been proposed as this effect's locus, from eye
placement (Mach, 1893/1986) to the corpus collosum
(Braitenberg, 1984; Herbert & Humphrey, 1996). However,
most of these explanations focus on the retina and structures
just beyond it (Corballis & Roldan, 1975; Jenkins, 1982;
Julesz, 1971). Thus, these explanations are known as
retinocentric models.
Retinocentric models, while theoretically elegant, fail to
explain a key result: vertical symmetry is still preferred
when the retina is misaligned with the symmetry axis. Rock
and Leaman (1963) showed that the preference for vertical
symmetry is still present when a figure is vertical with
respect to the gravitational reference frame, but the subject's
head is tilted 45° away from vertical.
Symmetry in figures with intrinsic axes. The preference
for vertical symmetry disappears or is greatly attenuated for

Figure 1: MAGI detects symmetry by aligning visual relations. Figure (a) shows a line drawing given to MAGI as a vector graphics file,
with its vector elements labeled. Figure (b) shows a subset of the figure’s visual relations (12 of 18 entities, 14 of 118 spatial relations)
generated for those visual elements. Dotted lines indicate mapping links produced by MAGI. Note that two line segments, L1 and L2,
map to themselves. Figure (c) indicates the full set of entity correspondences (using hash marks) and the axis produced by MAGI.

some kinds of figures. Figures with a good "intrinsic axis"
(Palmer, 1983; Wiser, 1981) apparently impose their own
reference frame, allowing recognition at any orientation.
Preference for multiple symmetries. Symmetry is also
judged more quickly and accurately when a figure contains
multiple symmetries (Royer, 1981; Wagemans, Van Gool, &
d’Ydewalle, 1991). The preference for multiple symmetries
is separate from the preference for vertical symmetry, and
can produce additive results (Humphrey & Humphrey, 1989;
Palmer & Hemenway, 1978).
Orientation effects pose significant challenges for
cognitive models of symmetry detection, which have
difficulty modeling interactions between symmetry detection
and the visual reference frame. Some symmetry detection
models, such as the so-called "brushfire" models (Blum &
Nagel, 1978; Brady, 1983), do not use the reference frame at
all. Other models use the reference frame in a limited sense
– for example, utilizing it to find horizontally-aligned dots to
link in symmetric dot patterns (Jenkins, 1983; Wagemans et
al., 1991). These latter models can partially explain the
preference for vertical symmetry by positing that some fixed
set of orientations are tried until symmetry detection
succeeds. At the same time, these models apply only to dot
patterns, and cannot easily be extended to orientation effects
found in more complex stimuli, such as polygons. More
problematic, however, is that these models cannot explain
how figures with good intrinsic axes eliminate the preference for vertical symmetry, nor why the order of preferences
is first vertical, then horizontal, then diagonal (instead, it is
typically assumed that this set of orientations results from
either natural selection or perceptual learning in a world rich
in vertically-symmetric objects). Finally, because these
models assume a fixed orientation for each symmetrydetection attempt, and require exact symmetry, they have
difficulty detecting even minor deviations from the assumed
set of orientations (e.g., symmetry at a 38° angle).
A clue to resolving this quandary may be found in recent
evidence that perceptual relations, such as connectivity
relations and boundary characteristics, play a role in
symmetry detection. Baylis and Driver (1994) provide
evidence that symmetry detection in polygons may depend
in part on curvature minima along figure boundaries.
Ferguson, Aminoff & Gentner (1996) showed that specific
qualitative differences, such as concavity or number-ofvertices mismatches, contributes to the speed and accuracy
of symmetry judgments. Wagemans' bootstrap model
(Wagemans et al., 1991) uses sets of conjoined "virtual
quadrilaterals" to add higher-order structure to symmetric
dot patterns, allowing the model to detect skewed symmetry.
If perceptual relations play a role in symmetry detection,
they may be linked to orientation effects. Some have
suggested (Goldmeier, 1936/1972; Rock, 1983) that the
preference for vertical symmetry may be rooted in the
phenomenological reversibility (or commutativity) of leftright spatial relations, which is not true of above-below
relations. In other words, the preference for vertical
symmetry is a product of how spatial relations, rather than
symmetry-detection processes, depend on visual orientation.
For our purposes, we term this the horizontal commutativity
conjecture.

In this paper, we use MAGI (Ferguson, 1994; in preparation), our model of symmetry detection, to show why and
how the horizontal commutativity conjecture may be true.
The resulting explanation avoids at least three problematic
assumptions of previous models: 1) that the symmetry
detection process must use a set of fixed orientations; 2) that
symmetry must be exact; or 3) that symmetry-detection is
retinocentric.
This paper is arranged as follows. First, we briefly
describe the MAGI model. Then, MAGI is used to explain
the preference for vertical symmetry and the effect for
intrinsic axes. We then perform an in-depth simulation of a
classic study of the orientation effects for multiple and near
symmetries (Palmer & Hemenway, 1978). We conclude by
discussing the implications of these results, the model’s
limitations, and possible future research.

The MAGI model of symmetry detection
The basis of the MAGI model (Figure 1) is that symmetry is
like analogy. Specifically, symmetry may use the same
cognitive processes found within other analogical reasoning
such as analogy, similarity and memory access. As a result,
symmetry may share the flexibility and domain-generality
found in these other kinds of analogical reasoning.
MAGI models symmetry detection within the framework
of structure mapping. MAGI creates a within-description
mapping using the constraints of Structure Mapping Theory
(Gentner, 1983) to align similar sets of relational structure.
In other forms of analogical reasoning, such as similarity
comparison and analogy, the mapping process aligns
relations in base and target descriptions. In MAGI’s
symmetry detection, mapping is performed over a single
relational description. MAGI also uses additional mapping
constraints to maximize the self-similarity of the mapped
portions.
1
For visual figures , MAGI works directly from a vectorbased line drawing. To obtain a description of the visual
relations in the drawing, MAGI uses GeoRep (Ferguson &
Forbus, 2000), a spatial representation engine. GeoRep
represents visual relations detected early in perception,
including element connectivity (such as corners and
intersections), parallel elements, horizontally- and verticallyoriented structure, and protrusions and indentations in the
figure boundary. MAGI then performs a self-similarity
mapping over this relational description (Figure 1 shows an
example of GeoRep's representation and MAGI's mapping).
MAGI’s algorithm (see Ferguson, 1994, in preparation) is
very similar to the Structure Mapping Engine (SME;
Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989; Forbus, Ferguson &
Gentner, 1994). MAGI's self-similarity mappings are created
using a local-to-global mapping process that enforces a set
of six mapping constraints. Four of these constraints are
adopted from SME: 1) the tiered identicality constraint,
which allows only expressions with identical predicates to
align; 2) the one-to-one mapping constraint; 3) the parallel
1

MAGI can also be used on non-visual stimuli, such as story
narratives (Ferguson, 1994) or diagrams containing conceptual as
well as visual regularity (Ferguson & Forbus, 1998). However,
here we concentrate on visual symmetry alone.

connectivity constraint, which mandates that any aligned
expression must also align its arguments; and 4) the
systematicity constraint, which prefers large interconnected
mappings with deep relational structure to smaller or
unconnected mappings.
MAGI’s final two constraints are specific to symmetry
detection. The limited self-matching constraint states that an
expression or entity may map to itself (i.e., self-match) only
when it is the argument of an expression that is not a selfmatch. In Figure 1, this allows entity L1 to map to itself,
because two separate mid-connect expressions involving L1
are aligned. The maximal individuation constraint encourages mappings that maximize the interconnectivity of each
of the two mapped parts, and minimize the interconnectivity
of the mapped parts with one another. In Figure 1, this
constraint distributes the mapped mid-connect expressions to
provide maximum entity overlap with other mapped
expressions, such as the mapped protrusion expressions.
These constraints, as enforced by MAGI, produce one or
more symmetry mappings. Each mapping contains a set of
aligned entities and expressions and a systematicity score.
In MAGI, as in SME, systematicity is measured using a
"trickle-down" structural evaluation mechanism (Forbus &
Gentner, 1989). This mechanism gives higher scores to
deeper expression matches and to matched entities with
many matched superexpressions. For MAGI, this score is an
approximate measure of "how symmetric" an object seems.
For example, visualize a square and the X-shaped figure
from Figure 1. Both figures have perfect geometric
symmetry, but to MAGI, the X-shaped figure will have
higher systematicity than the square because mapped
expressions in the former are deeper and more
interconnected than in the latter. Similar effects could be
found even if we controlled for equivalent figure size and
the number of segments.
A mapping also produces candidate inferences (as in
SME) by carrying over unmapped structure that intersects
mapped structure. Candidate inferences often indicate
qualitative differences between the sides of the figure.
Once MAGI has found a self-similarity mapping, it uses
the set of aligned entities to determine the axis. Using a
Hough transform voting algorithm (Duda & Hart, 1987),
MAGI produces either an axis or an object-centered
reference frame for the mapping.
The nature of analogical mapping provides MAGI with a
number of useful characteristics not found in other
symmetry models. MAGI’s symmetry detection is extremely

Figure 2: How orientation-dependent relations affect MAGI’s
symmetry mapping. Vertically-oriented relations in A and B
enforce different mappings, even though the figures are identical.
The preference for vertical symmetry can be overcome if there is
sufficient structure when orientation-dependent relations absent,
as in (C), redrawn from Wiser (1981).

robust in the face of minor asymmetries and distracters.
Symmetry mappings can also indicate qualitative differences
between otherwise symmetric figures by producing
candidate inferences. Finally, MAGI can link perceptual and
conceptual symmetries in diagrams (Ferguson & Forbus,
1998), showing how self-similarity is utilized in perceptual
reasoning tasks.

Modeling the preference for vertical symmetry
and intrinsic axes
Using the MAGI model, it is possible to test the horizontal
commutativity conjecture. We begin by assuming that some
visual relations are orientation-dependent (such as the above
relations highlighted in Figure 2-A). Along with having
orientation-dependent relations, we also can assume that
vertically-oriented visual relations are directed, while
horizontally-oriented relations are commutative. There is
substantial evidence of just this dichotomy in human visual
processing (Rock 1983). Humans often confuse left and
right, but seldom confuse up and down.
Now we can see how mapping relational structure affects
the produced mapping. Given (A), MAGI produces a
vertical symmetry mapping. The vertical mapping is due to
the alignment of many orientation-dependent visual
relations, including the above relations. When the figure is
rotated 45° (B) and then remapped, the set of orientationdependent relations changes with it, and this affects the
elements that MAGI aligns. Even though all the visual
elements have moved relative to (A), MAGI's mapping of
(B) is also vertical due to this new set of orientationdependent relations. In other words, MAGI exhibits a
preference for vertical symmetry.
Note that orientation-dependent visual relations do not
dictate the mapping MAGI produces. Orientation-dependent
relations are only part of the set of visual relations for any
given figure, and for that reason, figures with sufficient
visual structure can be mapped at many different
orientations.
This explains why some figures may have good intrinsic
axes that eliminate the preference for vertical symmetry.
Figure 2-C shows MAGI's mapping of one of Wiser's (1981)
example figures. Because the visual structure of this figure
is distinctive enough to produce a symmetry mapping
without orientation-dependent relations, this figure produces
an axis at almost any orientation.

How symmetry can adjust the frame of reference
This demonstration, however, only partially answers
questions about the nature of orientation effects. If this
model is correct, then how does the visual system detect
symmetry in figures that neither have a good intrinsic axis
nor are oriented vertically? Does the system have to try
many different orientations, either serially or in parallel?
No, it doesn't. Instead, MAGI can use the initial partial
mapping of a figure to find a potential new reference frame,
and then shift the frame of reference to obtain a new
representation of the figure. With this new representation, it
can then reconstruct the symmetry of the figure as if it was
presented in a vertical orientation.

Figure 3: How a partially-correct mapping may guide
reference frame re-orientation. The mapping for A,
produced with a gravitational reference frame, is partially
correct but contains errors (dotted lines) and has low
systematicity. Still, it suggests a new reference frame at
-45° degrees. When that new reference frame is adopted,
the richer relational description produces the correct
correspondences and has much greater systematicity.

Figure 4: The stimuli used in Simulation 1 (redrawn from
Palmer and Hemenway, 1978) arranged by symmetry type.
4

Mean latency in seconds

Figure 3 shows how this may occur. In the original figure
(A), the mapping created by MAGI is only partial, and the
resulting mapping has low systematicity and some incorrect
correspondences. This is because the figure has insufficient
visual structure to produce the correct mapping at this
orientation (i.e., it does not have a good intrinsic axis).
However, this partial mapping is sufficient to produce a
potential new orientation for the figure, based on the parts of
the mapping that do correspond. When the reference frame
for the figure is set at this new orientation (B), the figure can
be mapped as if it were at the vertical orientation, producing
a richer set of orientation-dependent relations, and an axis is
produced. In other words, the partial symmetry mapping
tells the system to "tilt its head," and when it does so, it is
rewarded by a set of visual relations that lead to a much
richer symmetry mapping.
Although we do not yet have a theory of what mapping
characteristics lead the viewer to re-orient the visual
reference frame given a partial mapping (it may depend on
several factors, including the task demands), clearly it is
possible for the viewer to shift the reference frame using
these clues. As a result, it is possible to see symmetry at an
angle without presuming that the symmetry detection
process must choose a set of orientations beforehand. One
possible characteristic allowing a reference frame shift
might be the systematicity of the initial mapping, a factor we
return to in the next section.

Quadruple
Double
Single
Near
Rotational

3
2.5
2
1.5
-45°

0°
45°
90°
Symmetry Orientation

Figure 5: Palmer & Hemenway Experiment 1 results.
Graph shows response time latency at four symmetry
orientations. Redrawn from Palmer & Hemenway.
-45°

0°

45°

90°

2
4

A Simulation in Depth

6
Score

We now show the results of a simulation of an experiment
(Palmer and Hemenway, 1978) testing both the preference
for vertical symmetry and the effect of multiple symmetries.
Palmer and Hemenway’s study used a set of 30 stimuli
(Figure 4). The figures are 16-gons, containing five different
symmetry types: single, double, and quadruple symmetry,
rotational symmetry, and near symmetry. These figures were
displayed at four different orientations: tilted left (-45°),
vertical (0°), tilted right (+45°), and horizontal (+90°). In the
first experiment, subjects had to judge whether the stimulus
was mirror symmetric (requiring negative responses for
rotational and near symmetry). Response latency and
accuracy were measured.

3.5

Quadruple
Double

8

Single

10

Near
Rotational

12
14
Symmetry orientation

Figure 6: Results of simulating Experiment 1 using
MAGI. Graph shows average systematicity score of each
figure’s best mapping (the Y-axis is inverted for easier
comparison to Figure 5). Aside from the rotational symmetry results, MAGI duplicates the experimental results,
with consistently higher systematicity scores for figures
more quickly detected by human subjects.

Palmer and Hemenway’s results (Figure 5) show a clear
preference for vertical symmetry, with vertical better than
horizontal, and horizontal better than diagonal (Figure 5
shows response latencies – accuracy results were similar).
An effect was also found for multiple symmetries, with
quadruple better than double, and double better than single
symmetry.
For our simulation, the study's 30 stimulus figures were
given to MAGI as line drawings. Each figure was presented
at up to four orientations, as in the original study. We then
used the systematicity score of MAGI's top mapping as a
measure of the strength of the relational symmetry.
The results from MAGI are shown in Figure 6. With the
exception of rotational symmetry, the results closely mirror
those of Palmer and Hemenway, with vertical symmetry
having the highest systematicity score, followed by
horizontal symmetry and diagonal symmetry. Notably, these
effects are reproduced separately for double, single, and near
symmetries, as in the original study. MAGI's results also
reproduce the effect for multiple symmetries, with quadruple
symmetry producing the highest systematicity scores,
followed by double symmetry, and then single and near
symmetries. These latter two symmetry types produce
roughly equal results, as in the original experiment.
The one difference between the two graphs are the results
for rotational symmetry. For both MAGI and humans,
rotational symmetry results varied only slightly with respect
to orientation. However, while rotational figures showed the
worst latencies for humans, the systematicity scores MAGI
produced are average relative to the other symmetry types.
One explanation for this difference, as noted in Palmer and
Hemenway’s analysis, is that in the original experiments
subjects were to accept only mirror-symmetric figures, and
thus had to reject rotationally symmetric figures. This means
that the high latencies in the original experiment may not be
due to a low sense of the figures' symmetry, but because
subjects' needed to avoid that sense to produce a negative
response. MAGI was not constrained to judge only mirror
symmetry, and so frequently found rotational mappings.
We briefly note a second result. In a second experiment,
Palmer and Hemenway showed subjects the same 30 figures
solely in the vertical orientation, meaning that subjects no
longer had to look for symmetry at multiple orientations.
This had the effect of greatly decreasing the average
response latencies (from a mean of 2626 ms. to 1111 ms.).
While accuracy and response time results for quadruple,
double, and single symmetry maintained their previous
ordering, the error rate for near symmetry shot up from 1.4%
to 16.7% from the first to the second experiment, an error
rate more than twice the rate for any other symmetry type,
while the error rate for rotational symmetry decreased.
The MAGI model suggests a possible explanation.
Because the experiment’s demand characteristics reduced
response time, and because only vertical symmetry was
used, it would no longer be necessary to consider partial
mappings as indicators of alternative symmetry orientations.
Simpler factors, such as the lack of candidate inferences
(indicating qualitative asymmetry) might suffice. This
strategy is not problematic for quadruple, double, or single
symmetries, since exact symmetries do not produce

candidate inferences. Nor is it a problem for rotational
symmetries, which always produce candidate inferences.
However, near-symmetric figures produce few or no
candidate inferences in MAGI. When MAGI was run on the
near-symmetric figures, each figure only produced a few
candidate inferences and one (in Figure 4's row E) produced
none. The relative scarcity of candidates inferences may
have made asymmetry detection difficult for near-symmetric
figures and lead to subjects' high error rate.

Conclusion
These results demonstrate that a structure-mapping model of
symmetry detection can concisely explain orientation effects
using a few simple assumptions: 1) that visual structure is at
least partially orientation-dependent; 2) symmetry detection
is performed by mapping visual structure; and 3) partial
mappings are used to find potential mappings and suggest
alternate frames of reference. Using this simple model, we
simulated the preference for vertical symmetry, showing that
the preference for vertical over horizontal symmetry, and for
both over diagonal symmetry, was not the result of a preestablished list of potential orientations, but the natural result
of a visual system where vertically-oriented relations are
phenomenological different than horizontally-oriented
relations (the horizontal commutativity conjecture).
Similarly, we showed that the preference for multiple
symmetries could be modeled with the same assumptions.
We showed the correctness of this model by running it on
the stimuli of Palmer & Hemenway (1978), which tested
both of these effects, and MAGI reproduced the same
general pattern of results. Finally, we showed why some
figures with good "intrinsic axes" (Palmer, 1983; Wiser,
1981) do not show the same preference for vertical
symmetry (an explanation currently beyond the capabilities
of other models of symmetry detection). This defined
conditions when the sense of symmetry is strong enough to
overcome effects of orientation. These collective results
suggest that a structure-mapping model of symmetry
detection, such as MAGI, could provide a better analysis of
a wide variety of symmetry-related phenomena.
There are several limitations with the current model,
however. Because the relational mapping depends on the
visual relations found in the figure, representation
assumptions can drastically change MAGI's results. In the
current study, we have attempted to minimize this effect by
using GeoRep's default representation engine, which builds a
set of relations based on the visual relations assumed to be
built by Ullman's universal visual routines (Ullman, 1984).
However, further research is needed to test the reliability of
these assumptions. MAGI’s dependence on spatial relations
leaves open the question of exactly when quantitative
differences (such as small differences in the angles of
corresponding corners) are detected. When such differences
exist, but these differences are not qualitative, MAGI does
not detect them. Other limitations of GeoRep and MAGI
precluded other possible simulations. Because GeoRep does
not have a model of grouping, it was not possible to model
orientation effects based on grouped items (Palmer, 1983).

This research also creates interesting new questions. The
effect for multiple symmetries bears closer analysis. Initial
results suggest that the effect is a result of the greater
number of visual relations found in figures with multiple
symmetries, as well as the greater systematicity of systems
with many similar subparts. However, this result should be
tested in another domain.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Cognitive Science and
Computer Science programs of the Office of Naval
Research, by DARPA’s High-Performance Knowledge
Bases initiative, and by the National Science Foundation
under the Learning and Intelligent Systems program. Sincere
thanks go to Dedre Gentner, Ken Forbus, Laura Allender,
Alex Aminoff, Steve Palmer and an anonymous reviewer for
useful feedback.

References
Attneave, F., & Olson, R. K. (1967). Discriminability of
stimuli varying in physical and retinal orientation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 74(2), 149-157.
Baylis, G. C., & Driver, J. (1994). Parallel computation of
symmetry but not repetition within single visual shapes.
Visual Cognition, 1, 377-400.
Blum, H., & Nagel, R. N. (1978). Shape description using
weighted symmetric axis features. Pattern Recognition, 10.
Bornstein, M. H., & Krinsky, S. J. (1985). Perception of
symmetry in infancy: The salience of vertical symmetry
and the perception of pattern wholes. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 39, 1-19.
Brady, M. (1983). Criteria for representation of shape. In J.
Beck, B. Hope, & A. Rosenfeld (Eds.), Human and
Machine Vision (pp. 39-84). New York: Academic Press.
Braitenberg, V. (1984). Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic
Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chipman, S. F., & Mendelsohn, M. J. (1979). Influence of
six types of visual structure on complexity judgments in
children and adults. JEP: HPP, 5, 365-378.
Corballis, M.C., & Roldan, C.E. (1975). Detection of
symmetry as a function of angular orientation. JEP:HPP,
1, 221-230.
Duda, R. O., & Hart, P. E. (1987). Use of the Hough
Transformation to detect lines and curves in pictures.
Communications of the ACM, 15(1), 11-15.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
Structure-Mapping Engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Ferguson, R. W. (1994). MAGI: Analogy-based encoding
using symmetry and regularity. Proceedings of 16th
Cognitive Science Conference. Atlanta, GA.
Ferguson, R. W. (in preparation). MAGI: A model of
symmetry and repetition detection. .
Ferguson, R. W., Aminoff, A., & Gentner, D. (1996).
Modeling qualitative differences in symmetry judgments,
Proceedings of 18th Cognitive Science Conference.
Ferguson, R. W., & Forbus, K. D. (1998). Telling
juxtapositions: Using repetition and alignable difference in
diagram understanding. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B.

Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in Analogy Research. Sofia,
Bulgaria: New Bulgarian University.
Ferguson, R. W., & Forbus, K. D. (2000). GeoRep: A
flexible tool for spatial representation of line drawings,
Proceedings of the 18th National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Austin, Texas: AAAI Press.
Incremental structure mapping. In Proceedings of 16th
Cognitive Science Conference. Atlanta, GA.
Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). Structural evaluation
of analogies: What counts? In Proceedings of 11th
Cognitive Science Conference.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Goldmeier, E. (1936/1972). Similarity in visually perceived
forms. Psychological Issues, 8(1), 14-133.
Herbert, A. M., & Humphrey, K. G. (1996). Bilateral
symmetry detection: Testing a 'callosal' hypothesis.
Perception, 25, 463-480.
Humphrey, G. K., & Humphrey, D. E. (1989). The role of
structure in infant visual pattern perception. Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 43(2), 165-182.
Jenkins, B. (1982). Redundancy in the perception of bilateral
symmetry in dot textures. Perception & Psychophysics,
32(2), 171-177.
Jenkins, B. (1983). Component processes in the perception
of bilaterally symmetric dot textures. Perception &
Psychophysics, 34(5), 171-177.
Julesz, B. (1971). Foundations of Cyclopean Perception.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mach, E. (1893/1986). On symmetry, In Popular Scientific
Lectures. LaSalle: Open Court Publishing.
Palmer, S. E. (1983). The psychology of perceptual
organization. In J. Beck, B. Hope, & A. Rosenfeld (Eds.),
Human and Machine Vision . New York: Academic Press.
Palmer, S. E., & Hemenway, K. (1978). Orientation and
symmetry: Effects of multiple, rotational, and near
symmetries. JEP:HPP, 4, 691-702.
Quinn, P. C. (1994). The categorization of above and below
spatial relations by young infants. Child Development, 65, 58-69.

Rock, I. (1983). The Logic of Perception. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Rock, I., & Leaman, R. (1963). An experimental analysis of
visual symmetry. Acta Psychologica, 21, 171-183.
Royer, F. L. (1981). Detection of symmetry. JEP:HPP, 7(6),
1186-1210.
Ullman, S. (1984). Visual routines. Cognition, 18(1-3), 97-159.
Wagemans, J., Van Gool, L., & d'Ydewalle, G. (1991).
Detection of symmetry in tachistoscopically presented dot
patterns. Perception & Psychophysics, 50, 413-427.
Wiser, M. (1981). The role of intrinsic axes in shape
recognition, Proceedings of 3rd Cognitive Science
Conference (pp. 184-186). Berkeley, CA.

