UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivation in Insight versus Incremental Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/581019r0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Wieth, Mareike
Burns, Bruce D.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivation in Insight versus Incremental Problem Solving
Mareike Wieth (wiethmar@msu.edu)
Bruce D. Burns (burnsbr@msu.edu)
Department of Psychology; Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1117 USA

Abstract
Previous studies have shown a correlation between
initial motivation and subsequent performance (e.g.
Vollmeyer, Rheinberg, & Burns, 1998). However, it it
is possible that this relationship is due to a third factor
such as general ability. To address this issue, our
participants completed insight as well as incremental
problems. These two types of problems have been
shown to differ both theoretically and empirically due to
differential underlying processes (e.g., Metcalfe &
Wiebe, 1987). Results showed that motivation (in
particular, interest) correlated with incremental problem
solving but not with insight problem solving. The
results were replicated with two different sets of
problems solved by different groups of participants.
Motivation was measured before solving the problems,
so the difference between these two types of problems
provides us with evidence that motivation is causal in
producing better problem solving performance. Further,
it suggests that when processes differ, motivational
effect on performance will differ.

Introduction
It has been difficult to demonstrate conclusively an effect of
motivation on problem solving. This is partly because the
difficulty of manipulating motivation reliably has forced
research designed to examine this issue to rely on
correlational studies. Studies such as Vollmeyer and
Rheinberg (1998) and Vollmeyer, Rheinberg, & Burns,
(1998) have shown a correlation between initial motivation
and performance in a complex problem solving task.
Although motivation is predictive of performance in these
studies, it could still be argued that the correlation is due to
a third factor. It is plausible that people with higher general
ability at problem solving may not only be better at this
task, but also be more highly motivated when faced with
such a task. So motivation may not be a causal factor.
In order to learn more from correlational studies of
motivation, a slightly different methodology is required. If
we give problem solvers qualitatively different problems to
solve and find that motivation has a different relationship
to performance on these different types of problems, then
we would have good evidence that it is not a general ability
factor that accounts for any relationship found between
motivation and problem solving performance. Two types of

problems that can have a similar form, but have been
shown to be qualitatively different, are insight and
incremental problems (e.g., Metcalfe & Wiebe, 1987). This
makes them good candidates for a methodology looking for
qualitatively different motivational influences on problem
solving. So in this study we compared the effect of
motivation on insight and incremental problem solving.

Motivation and Problem Solving
It has long been acknowledged that motivation is
important, for example, Simon (1967) emphasized the
importance of motivational and emotional influence on
cognition. However, for the most part motivation and its
relationship to cognitive processes has been largely ignored
by cognitive scientists. Investigating this influence has been
seen as unnecessary because differences in motivation have
been treated as background noise that that can be ignored
when investigating specific cognitive processes. Even
though the operation of Anderson's (1993) ACT-R depends
crucially on the goal of the actor and how likely they think
an action will be successful, he specifically rules out having
to consider the more general goals of the actor. Although
Anderson acknowledges the importance of wider goals, he
takes the stance that once the actor is committed to doing
something in a situation, the actor's more general
motivation is irrelevant.
Whether it is sustainable to routinely ignore motivation
and emotion when studying cognition is something that has
come into question. For example, Kuhl and Kazén (1999)
have shown that one of the most well-known of cognitive
phenomena − the Stroop effect − can be wiped out by
manipulating emotion. Recent research has also started to
address the relationship between motivation and cognition
(e.g., Kanfer & Ackerman, 1989; Lord & Levy, 1994;
Pokay & Blumenfeld, 1990; Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 1998;
Vollmeyer, et al., 1998). With respect to problem solving,
Vollmeyer and Rheinberg (1998) fitted their cognitivemotivational process model to a complex problem solving
task called Biology-lab. The cognitive-motivational process
model proposes an interaction between motivation and
cognition such that initial motivation affects the
motivational state during learning which in turn influences
strategy use and acquisition of knowledge. In Biology-lab
participants have to learn how to manipulate a complex
learning environment by controlling several inputs and
output variables. In particular, Vollmeyer & Rheinberg
have shown that participants with higher motivation were

more likely to use a systematic strategy for acquiring
knowledge and therefore performed better during the
knowledge application phase. The results of this study and
similar studies by Vollmeyer and colleagues using the
Biology-lab simulation indicate that motivation can
influence cognitive processes, such as strategy
systematicity, and therefore lead to differential knowledge
acquisition and performance.
Similarly, Pokay and Blumenfeld (1990) investigated the
effect of motivation on learning strategies and performance
on geometry proofs. In this study questionnaires assessing
motivation and learning strategies were given to high
school students in geometry classes at various points in the
semester. The results of this study indicated that various
motivational factors predicted strategy use, which in turn
influenced performance on geometry tests (especially
proofs) throughout the semester. This study provides
further evidence for an interaction between motivation and
cognition. These conclusions are consistent with other
researchers such as Locke and Latham (1990) that have
also argued that motivation affects performance via the
processes used in a particular task.

Insight versus Incremental Problems
Incremental problems require the solver to take a number of
incremental steps in order to solve the problem.
Incremental problems have also been referred to as analytic
(Schooler & Melcher, 1995) or “grind-out-the-solution”
problems since people can often solve these types of
problems by persisting at the task. It might take time to
reach the solution, but the solver has a good idea of how to
get there. In contrast, insight problems are those in which
the solver has a high probability of meeting an impasse, at
which point the solver does not know what to do next
(Schooler & Melcher, 1995). Insight problems are usually
solved by a “flash of illuminance” (Metcalfe & Wiebe,
1987), or by what has been referred to as an “Aha”
experience where the solution is suddenly obtained
(Schooler & Melcher, 1995).
Differences between these two types of problems have
been demonstrated empirically by studies comparing
performance on the two types. In a study by Metcalfe &
Wiebe (1987) participants were asked to rate how close
they thought they were to the solution every 15 seconds
while solving incremental and insight problems. The rating
results showed that problem solvers had a good idea when
they were close to the solution for incremental problems,
but were unable to perceive when they were close to a
solution for insight problems. Solutions for insight
problems came suddenly and with little awareness that the
solution was about to be found. Additionally, it was
discovered that participants were more successful at
predicting which incremental problems they could solve
than which insight problems they could solve. These results
indicate that there are distinct difference between
incremental and insight problems, which could be caused
by qualitative differences in underlying processes used to
solve these two problems (Metcalfe & Wiebe, 1987).
Weisberg (1992) has argued that the procedures used in the
experiments by Metcalfe & Wiebe (1987) are questionable.

However, it appears that he agrees with the notion that
there are different processes involved in solving insight and
incremental problems (Weisberg, 1995). Further evidence
that there are differences in the processes used to solve
these two types of problems has been provided by studies
that have had participants give verbal protocols while
solving both incremental and insight problems (Schooler &
Melcher, 1995; Schooler, Ohlsson, & Brooks, 1993).
Schooler et al. found that participants asked to verbalize
their problem solving strategies showed significantly
impaired performance on insight problems but not on
incremental problems. Additionally, it was found that
participants paused more and tended to have a harder time
articulating their thoughts while solving insight problems
compared to incremental problems. Furthermore, the nature
of the protocols also differed in that incremental problem
protocols contained more logic or means-ends analysis
statements than insight problems (Schooler & Melcher,
1995). These findings have been attributed to differences in
the processes used to solve these two types of problems.
Specifically, Schooler & Melcher and Schooler, et al.
argued that the impairments during insight problem solving
while verbalizing are due to the disruption of nonreportable
processes that are critical to solving insight problems but
are not necessary for solving incremental problems.
In an effort to better understand what these nonreportable
processes might be, Schooler and Melcher (1995) cite
unpublished data by Schooler, McCleod, Brooks, &
Melcher (1993) that examined the correlation between a
variety of ability measures (e.g., recognizing out of focus
pictures, finding remote associates) and success at solving
both incremental and insight problems. It was found that
the measures predicting performance on the two types of
problems were generally different. Anagrams and
categorization tasks correlated with incremental problem
solving, whereas the embedded figures and out of focus
pictures tasks correlated with insight problem solving.
These differential patterns of findings lend further support
that the two problems draw on qualitatively different
processes (Schooler et al.).
It has been suggested that these underlying differences
arise from the way we solve insight and incremental
problems. Insight problems require searching for an
appropriate way to represent the problem and are often
easily solved once the correct representation has been
found. On the other hand, representation is not the focus
for incremental problem solving, instead figuring out what
steps to take to reach the solution is often the focus (Kaplan
& Simon, 1990; Ohlsson 1984).
These empirical and theoretical differences in
incremental and insight problems lend themselves very well
to our aim: finding a differential influence of motivation on
incremental and insight problems.

Motivation Effects on Both Problem Types
How to get to the solution may be clear when solving
incremental problems, but following the required strategy
may require some effort and persistence. Vollmeyer and
Rheinberg (1998) found that motivation influenced

performance via the use of a good strategy. They suggested
that motivation keeps people persisting with the good
strategy instead of trying to find some less effortful
shortcut. Similarly Sweller (1988) has explained poor
problem solving performance as due to the cognitive load
imposed by effortful strategies such as means-ends analysis.
Based on this we predicted that motivation would influence
incremental problem solving. However, not all aspects of
motivation may equally relate to performance. Schiefele
(1996) argues that interest in the task should be particularly
highly related to performance. Therefore, we focused
particularly on this aspect of motivation.
In order to argue that any relationship that we may find
between problem solving and motivation is not due to some
third factor, we wanted to show that motivation does not
just correlate with everything. From the above discussion, it
appears that insight problems should provide this contrast.
As mentioned before, the process of solving insight
problems differs from that for incremental problem solving.
It is process that Vollmeyer and Rheinberg (1998) and
Locke and Latham (1990) focus on. In particular,
Vollmeyer and Rheinberg believe motivation influences
performance by encouraging participants to persist with a
good strategy, yet for insight problems there is no good
strategy to follow or to fail to persist with. Persistence may
even be detrimental due to the creation of Einstellung
effects (Luchins, 1942). Incubation, instead, has been found
to be effective for solving insight problems. (Silveira,
1971). (Experienced problem solvers may learn heuristic
strategies for insight problem solving, but our participants
were not such experts.) The work reviewed above on
insight problem solving suggests there is no conscious
strategy to be followed in insight problem solving, so we
predicted that there would be no relationship between
motivation and insight problem solving.
The discovery of such a contrast between insight and
incremental problem solving would argue that motivation
plays a causal role in how well people solve problems,
especially if motivation was measured before the task
began. Evidence for this contrast would be finding a higher
correlation between motivation and incremental problem
solving than between motivation and insight problem
solving. However neither of these correlations would be
expected to be high given that ability rather than
motivation should be the best predictor of problem solving
performance.
A Study

Method
Participants. Two hundred and ninety-two Michigan State
University students participated in this experiment for
course credit.
Materials. Participant’s initial motivation was assessed
using the Questionnaire of Current Motivation (QCM,
Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 1998). This motivation
questionnaire consists of 37 items which have been shown
to measure four independent factors of motivation:

Challenge (“This task is a real challenge for me”),
confidence in Success (“I think I am up to the difficulty of
the task”), Fear of failure (“I am a little bit worried”), and
Interest (“I would work on this task even in my free time”).
The QCM is designed to measure motivation for a specific
task (originally the Biology- lab task of Vollmeyer, Burns,
& Holyoak, 1996), so some items had to be modified to fit
this problem solving task. However, none of the items used
to measure the four factors had to be modified and a check
of the psychometric qualities of the questionnaire found the
same factor structure (see Rheinberg, Vollmeyer, & Burns,
under review).
Two separate sets of problems were created, each
consisting of one insight problem and two incremental
problems. The problems were randomly selected from
problems previously studied by Metcalfe & Wiebe (1987)
and Schooler, et al. (1993). The actual problems used in the
two sets are presented in the Appendix.
Each problem also included a state motivation
questionnaire consisting of five questions (see Vollmeyer &
Rheinberg, 1998) in order to assess participants motivation
towards solving each given problem.
Procedure. Participants solved their set of problems in the
middle of a 45-50 minute group testing session composed
of short unrelated tasks. Group size ranged from five to ten
individuals. At the beginning of the session participants
were asked to complete the QCM, which was then followed
by one of the two sets of three problems (two incremental
and one insight). Within each set, the three problems were
given in a random order. When solving the set of problems
participants were asked to first read the problem, then
answer the five questions pertaining to the problem (which
measured state motivation), re-read the problem, and then
solve it. We did not restrict the time that participants were
given to solve each problem, but they were aware that they
would be given more tasks. Upon completion of the
problem set participants went on to complete a series of
unrelated tasks.

Results
Overall performance. The incremental and insight
problems were scored on a dichotomous right or wrong
scale. To derive a subject's incremental score, the result for
the two incremental problems was averaged together.
Participants did more poorly than we expected on some of
the six problems. For Problem Set One participants on
average solved 1.52 of the 2 incremental problems correctly
but only 16 percent solved the insight problem. For
Problem Set Two participants on average solved 0.70 of the
2 incremental problems and 16 percent solved the insight
problem. Note that unlike some other studies of insight
problem solving (e.g., Schooler, et al., 1993) participants
were not given another chance to attempt the problem if
they handed in an incorrect solution.
We tested for any order effects on the problems as each
set of three problems was presented in one of six possible
orders. We found no evidence in either problem set that the
order in which participants solved the problems affected

their performance: Problem Set One F(5, 146) = 1.35, p =
.25; Problem Set Two F(5, 133) = 0.98, p = .43.
Table 1: Correlations of the motivation factors with
incremental and insight problem scores, and z-score test of
the difference between the two correlations.
Problem Set
One (n=152)
Interest

Incremental

Insight

z-score

.255 **

.000

Challenge

.143 *

-.006

Fear of Failure

.061

-.026

Success

.097

-.011

Problem Set
Two (N=141)
Interest

Incremental

Insight

2.16
p = .030
1.23
p = .22
.076
p = .96
.89
p = .37
z-score

.240 **

-.011

Challenge

.204 *

Fear of Failure

-.039

Success

.169*

2.26
p = .024
-.003
1.85
p = .064
.060
-.87
p = .38
-.092
2.33
p = .020
*p<.05 **p<.01

Initial Motivation. As measured by the QCM, participants
in both problem sets had reasonably high motivation. The
means for the four motivation factors for participants in
Problem Set One were as follows: Interest M = 4.02 (SD =
1.07), Challenge M = 4.41 (SD = 0.88), Success M = 5.19
(SD = 0.92), and Fear of failure M = 2.66 (SD = 0.88). For
Problem Set Two the means were: Interest M = 4.02 (SD =
1.05), Challenge M = 4.36 (SD = 0.93), Success M = 5.36
(SD = 0.83), Fear of failure M = 2.65 (SD = 1.02). The two
groups did not differ on any of these motivation scales (all
p > .10). Both groups thought the task moderately
interesting and challenging, did not fear failure, and
thought they would succeed.
The incremental problem solving scores and the insight
problem solving scores were correlated with the four
motivational factors of the QCM (Fear of failure,
Challenge, Interest, and Success). These correlations are
presented in Table 1. For both sets of problems it was found
that both Interest and Challenge correlated significantly
with incremental problem solving but not with insight
problem solving. For each motivation factor we used a zscore conversion (see Olkin, 1967) to test the difference
between the correlations of that factor with incremental and
insight scores. Only for Interest was the correlation with
incremental scores significantly higher than the correlation
with insight scores, in both sets. Success correlated
significantly with incremental problem solving only for set
two, this finding was not replicated with set one. Fear of

failure did not significantly correlate with either
incremental or insight problem solving for either set of
problems. The difference between correlations for Success
was significant for Problem Set Two, but we did not
replicate this result with the other set. These findings show
that motivation, in particular interest, consistently
correlated with incremental problem solving but not insight
problem solving.
State Motivation. In order to assess if participant’s state
motivation for each problem influenced problem solving,
the three critical motivation questions presented on each of
the problem sheets were averaged to create a state
motivational score (see Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 1998). The
three critical items were: “This task will be fun”, “I’m sure
I will find the correct solution”, and “It is clear to me how
to proceed”. Participants' motivation during the task was
moderate (see Table 2). Each state motivation score was
correlated with its corresponding problem. As Table 2
shows, only one correlation was found to be significant. In
Problem Set One, one incremental problem correlated
significantly with its state motivation, r(141) =.263, p <
.01. All other correlations were found not to be
significantly different from zero. Overall these findings
indicate that motivation for each problem was not
correlated with performance, regardless of problem type.
Table 2: Correlations of state motivation with each specific
problem, together with the percent of subject correctly
answering that problem and its mean state motivation
(standard deviation in parenthesis).
Problem Set
One

Percent
correct
63%

Mean (SD)
of state
motivation
4.55 (1.23)

State
motivation
correlation
.263 **

Incremental
Problem 1
Incremental
Problem 2

89%

4.85 (1.18)

.098

Insight
Problem

16%

4.15 (1.01)

.060

Problem Set
Two

Percent
correct

Incremental
Problem 1

14%

Mean (SD)
of state
motivation
4.33 (1.23)

State
motivation
correlation
.057

Incremental
Problem 2

55%

4.11 (1.37)

.058

Insight
Problem

16%

4.00 (1.11)

.100

**p<.01

Conclusions
This study achieved our aim of demonstrating a differential
relationship between motivation and different types of
problems. We not only showed that motivation correlates
with one type of problem solving, but that it does not
correlate with another type. Thus we supported the claim
that motivation affects problem solving, and made it hard
to argue that such correlations are simply due to some
general ability factor. Consistent with the suggestion of
Vollmeyer and Rheinberg (1998) and Locke and Latham
(1990), motivation only affected problems for which there
was a process to be helped or to be disrupted.
The critical motivation factor was Interest, as predicted
by previous research (Schiefele, 1996). Interest correlated
significantly with incremental problem solving scores. This
correlation was significantly higher than the correlation
between motivation and insight problem solving scores.
Note that although we only report a single study here, in
effect the two groups represent a replication of this result.
Given that the two groups of participants did different
problems sets with differing degrees of success, there
appears to be some generality to our findings.
Although the amount of variance in performance
explained by motivation is statistically significant, it is
small. This does not equate to saying that the influence of
motivation on cognition must be correspondingly small.
The measures we used were inherently noisy. The QCM is
only a pencil-and-paper test of motivation and whether
someone solves a particular problem on a particular day is a
product of many factors. Further it should be noted that
these sorts of problems are often considered to be stable
tests of intelligence, so to find motivation influences on
even these types of problems is particularly interesting. In
future work we will measure ability so as to determine how
much of the remaining variance in performance is
accounted for by motivation once the variance due to ability
has been removed.
We also measured participant’s state motivation for each
problem they solved. Out of the two problem sets we found
only one problem, an incremental problem to be
significantly correlated with its state motivation. Whereas
this accords with our findings for initial motivation, it was
not found consistently; therefore we cannot draw any
conclusions. It is possible that the five-question state
motivation measure was not sensitive enough or was just
not appropriate for this type of task. The state motivation
measure is also hard to interpret because it may not only
anticipate the problem about to be solved, but also be a
reaction to performance on the previous problems. Unlike
initial motivation, which is measured before participants
solve any of the problems, the direction of any causal arrow
would be harder to determine for the state motivation
questionnaire.
The main aim of this study was to find a differential
effect of motivation on different types of problems, but as
well as this we found a much more specific effect (on
Interest) as we predicted we would. However, consistent
with the idea that motivation affects performance via the
mediating processes, we would have to concede that under
appropriate conditions motivation may help insight

problem solving. Our conditions may have been
particularly conducive to producing a motivation effect on
incremental problem solving, but not insight problem
solving. By not restricting time, we provided a way in
which persistence could help incremental problem solving
as the participant did not have to worry about how long it
took to get to the solution. Not giving a time limit may have
reduced the opportunity for persistence (due to motivation)
to affect insight problem solving, as the participant could
simple decide that there was no chance to get any further
with the problem and just hand it to the experimenter. It is
plausible, however, that giving a specific time period for
solving problems might actually encourage motivated
participants to persist with looking for a solution to insight
problems. Therefore, in a situation such as this, motivation
might correlate with insight problem solving and not
necessarily with incremental problem solving. Note that
this in no way weaken our primary aim, demonstrating a
motivational effect on problem solving, as these arguments
are predicated on the assumption that motivation affects the
process of solving problems. The exact patterns of effects
on problems solving under different conditions, is a matter
for future research.
This was a preliminary study, so further research will be
necessary to determine the exact nature of the different
effects of motivation on insight and incremental problems.
One potential problem with this study was that the insight
problems used had a low rate of solution, therefore it would
be useful to conduct future research on easier problems.
Future research will also need to test our assumption that
intellectual ability helps both insight and incremental
problem solving. In this study, we assumed that ability
affects insight and incremental problem solving equally.
This assumption was critical to our argument that
motivation helped problem solving rather than any
relationship being due to a third-factor, such as ability.
Implications. The findings of this study, although
somewhat preliminary, have several implications. They
show that motivation can influence problem solving, and by
extension other cognitive tasks. A practical implication of
this is that cognitive scientists should be aware that
different tasks might be influenced by motivation in
different ways. These possible influences of motivation
need, therefore, to be taken into account when designing
studies and experiments, otherwise effects may be found
simply due to influences of motivation. Most importantly
the finding that insight and incremental problems are
influenced differently by motivation can be used as a
stepping stone to further disentangle motivation and its
relationship to cognition.
References
Anderson J. R. (1993). Rules of mind. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Kanfer, R. & Ackerman, P.L. (1989). Motivation and
cognitive abilities: An integrative/aptitude-treatment
interaction approach to skill acquisition. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 74, 657-690.
Kaplan, C. A., & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374-419.
Kuhl, J., & Kazén, M. (1999). Volitional facilitation of

difficult intentions: Joint activation of intention memory
and positive affect removes Stroop interference. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 382-399.
Lord, R. G., & Levy, P. E. (1994). Moving from cognition
to action: A control theory perspective. Applied
Psychology: An International Review, 43, 335-398.
Locke, E.A. & Latham, G.P. (1990). A theory of goal
setting and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Luchins, A. S. (1942). Mechanization in problem solving.
Psychological Monograph, 54, No. 248.
Metcalfe, J., & Wiebe, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
noninsight problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 15,
238-246.
Ohlsson, S. (1984). Restructuring revisited: I. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 24, 65-78.
Olkin, J. (1967). Correlation revisited. In J. C. Stanley
(Ed.), Improving experimental design and statistical
analysis (pp. 102-128). Chicago: Rand McNalley.
Pokay, P., & Blumenfeld, P.C. (1990). Predicting
achievement early and late in the semester: The role of
motivation and use of learning strategies. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82, 41-50.
Rheinberg, F., Vollmeyer, R. & Burns, B.D. (under
review). FAM: Ein Fragebogen zur Erfassung aktueller
Motivation in Lern- und Leistungssituationen [QCM: A
questionnaire to assess current motivation in learning
situations].
Schiefele, U. (1996). Motivation und Lernen mit Texten
[Motivation and text learning ]. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Simon, H. A. (1967). Motivational and emotional controls
of cognition. Psychological Review, 74. 29-39.
Silveira, J. (1971). Incubation: The effect of interruption
timing and length on problem solution and quality of
problem processing. Unpublished doctoral thesis.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving:
Effects of learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285.
Schooler, J. W., & Melcher, J. (1995). The ineffability of
insight. In S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, & R. A. Finke
(Eds.). The Creative Cognition Approach. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993).
Thoughts beyond words: When language overshadows
insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
122, 166-183.
Vollmeyer, R., Burns, B.D., & Holyoak, K.J. (1996). The
impact of goal specificity on strategy use and the
acquisition of problem structure. Cognitive Science, 20,
75-100.
Vollmeyer, R. & Rheinberg, F. (1998). Motivationale
Einflüsse auf Erwerb und Anwendung von Wissen in
einem computersimulierten System [Motivational
influences on the acquisition and application of
knowledge in a simulated system]. Zeitschrift für
Pädagogische Psychologie, 12, 11-23.
Vollmeyer, R., Rheinberg, F., & Burns, B.D. (1998). Goals,
strategies, and motivation. In M.A. Gernsbacher & S.J.
Derry (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 10901095). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Weisberg, R. W. (1992). Metacognition and insight during
problem solving: Comment on Metcalfe. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 426-432.
Weisberg, R. W. (1995). Prolegomena to theories of insight
in problem solving: A taxonomy of problems. In S. M.
Smith, T. B. Ward, & R. A. Finke (Eds.). The Creative
Cognition Approach. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Appendix
Problem Set One (order was random)
Incremental Problem 1:
Three cards from an ordinary deck are lying on a table, face
down. The following information is known about those
three cards (all the information refers to the same three
cards):
To the left of the Queen, there is a Jack.
To the left of a Spade, there is a Diamond.
To the right of a Heart, there is a King.
To the right of a King, there is a Spade.
Can you assign the proper suit to each picture card?
Incremental Problem 2:
Next week I am going to have lunch with my friend, visit
the new art gallery, go to the Social Security office, and
have my teeth checked at the dentist. My friend cannot
meet me on Wednesday; the Social Security office is closed
weekends; the dentist has office hours only on Tuesday,
Friday, and Saturday; the art gallery is closed Tuesday,
Thursday, and weekends. On which day can I do everything
I have planned?
Insight Problem:
A woman has 4 pieces of chain. Each piece is made up of 3
links. She wants to join the pieces into a single closed loop
of chain. To open a link costs 2 cents and to close a link
costs 3 cents. She only has 15 cents. How does she do it?
Problem Set Two (order was random)
Incremental Problem 1:
The police were convinced that Alan, Ben, Chris, or Dan
had committed a crime. Each of the suspects made a
statement, but only one of the statements was true:
Alan said, “I didn’t do it.”
Ben said, “Alan is lying.”
Chris said, “Ben is lying.”
Dan said, “Ben did it.”
Who is telling the truth? Who committed the crime?
Incremental Problem 2:
If the puzzle you solved before you solved this one was
harder than the puzzle you solved after you solved the
puzzle you solved before you solved this one, was the
puzzle you solved before you solved this one harder than
this one?
Insight Problem:
A dealer in antique coins got an offer to buy a beautiful
bronze coin. The coin had an emperor’s head on one side
and the date 544 B.C. stamped on the other. The dealer
examined the coin, but instead of buying it, he called the
police. Why?

