UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Neighborhood and Position Effects Interact in Naming Latency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6nn5364b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Milostan, Jeanne C.
Cottrell, Garrison W.
Ferreira, Victor

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Neighborhood and Position Effects Interact in Naming Latency
Jeanne C. Milostan (JMILOSTA @ CS . UCSD . EDU) Victor Ferreira (FERREIRA @ PSY. UCSD . EDU)
Garrison W. Cottrell (GARY @ CS . UCSD . EDU)
Department of Psychology
Computer Science and Engineering Department 0114
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Filler
Nonword
Irregular
Regular
Difference

1

Position
2

of
3

Irregular
4

5

554
502
52

542
516
26

530
518
12

529
523
6

537
525
12

Exception
Irregular
Regular
Difference
Avg. Diff.

545
500
45
48.5

524
503
21
23.5

528
503
25
18.5

526
515
11
8.5

528
524
4
8

Abstract
Naming latency studies have recently shown a position-ofirregularity effect (words with early irregularities seem slowed
compared to those with late irregularities), for which DualRoute models of reading can account. Milostan & Cottrell
(1998) showed that the initial studies contained a confound
between irregularity position and friend/enemy ratio, and that
the statistical confound could be captured by connectionist networks which then show the supposed position effect. This paper presents work to disentangle the position/regularity confound through a subject study and additional connectionist explorations. The latency data show that, once friend/enemy ratios are controlled for, the supposed position effect is driven
entirely by high-enemy words in the first position. Further,
connectionist network simulations show that network error at
the first phoneme position only is a better match for naming
latency, while overall network error produces a better match to
subject error counts.

Introduction
A major component of the task of learning to read is the development of a mapping from orthography to phonology. In
a complete model of reading, message understanding must
play a role, but many psycholinguistic phenomena can be explained in the context of this simple mapping task. A difficulty in learning this mapping is that in a language such
as English, the mapping is quasiregular (Plaut et al., 1996);
there are a wide range of exceptions to the general rules.
As with nearly all psychological phenomena, more frequent
stimuli are processed faster, leading to shorter naming latencies. The regularity of mapping interacts with this variable,
a robust finding that is well-explained by connectionist accounts (Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989; Taraban and McClelland, 1987).
In this paper we continue consideration of a recent effect
that seems difficult to account for in terms of the standard parallel network models. Coltheart & Rastle (1994) have shown
that the amount of delay experienced in naming an exception
word is related to the phonemic position of the irregularity in
pronunciation. Specifically, the earlier the exception occurs
in the word, the longer the latency to the onset of pronouncing
the word. Table 1, adapted from (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994)
shows the response latencies to two-syllable words by normal
subjects. There is a clear left-to-right ranking of the latencies
compared to controls in the last row of the Table. Coltheart et
al. claim this delay ranking cannot be achieved by standard
connectionist models. Earlier work (Milostan and Cottrell,
1998) showed that the origin of the effect seen in the Coltheart study lies in a statistical regularity of English, related to

Table 1: Naming Latency vs. Irregularity Position

the number of “friends” and “enemies” of the pronunciation
within the word’s neighborhood. 1 The human subject study
and network simulations presented in this paper attempt to
tease apart the effects of phoneme position and neighborhood
ratio.

Background
Computational modeling of the reading task has been approached from a number of different perspectives. Advocates
of a dual-route model of oral reading claim that two separate
routes, one lexical (a lexicon, often hypothesized to be an
associative network) and one rule-based, are required to account for certain phenomena in reaction times and nonword
pronunciation seen in human subjects (Coltheart et al., 1993).
Connectionist modelers claim that the same phenomena can
be captured in a single-route model which learns simply by
exposure to a representative dataset (Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989).
In the Dual-Route Cascade model (DRC) (Coltheart et al.,
1993), the lexical route is implemented as an Interactive Activation (McClelland and Rumelhart, 1981) system, while
the non-lexical route is implemented by a set of graphemephoneme correspondence (GPC) rules learned from a dataset.
Input at the letter identification layer is activated in a left-toright sequential fashion to simulate the reading direction of
English, and fed simultaneously to the two pathways in the
1
Friends are words with the same pronunciations for the ambiguous letter-to-sound correspondence; enemies are words with different pronunciations.

Experiment
Intuition suggests that, since English is read from left to right,
left-to-right phenomena such as the serial position effect
might be seen, independent of statistical confounds. However, as with all assumptions, such effects must be verified
through careful testing, and the source of such effects must
be carefully delineated within the model hypothesized for the
system at hand.

61 phoneme units

100 hidden units

105 grapheme units

Figure 1: Single Syllable Ortho-to-Phono Network
100

Latency difference (Except - Control)

model. Activation from both the GPC route and the lexicon
route then begins to interact at the output (phoneme) level,
starting with the phonemes at the beginning of the word. If
the GPC and the lexicon agree on pronunciation, the correct
phonemes will be activated quickly. For words with irregular pronunciation, the lexicon and GPC routes will activate
different phonemes: the GPC route will try to activate the
regular pronunciation while the lexical route will activate the
irregular (correct) pronunciation. Inhibitory links between alternate phoneme pronunciations will slow down the rise in activation, causing words with inconsistencies to be pronounced
more slowly than regular words. This slowing will not occur,
however, when an irregularity appears late in a word since the
lexicon will try to activate all of a word’s phonemes as soon
as the word’s lexical node becomes active. If an irregularity is
late in a word, the correct pronunciation will begin to be activated before the GPC route is able to vote against it. Hence
late irregularities will not be as affected by the conflicting information. This result is validated by simulations with the
one-syllable DRC model (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994).
Several connectionist systems have been developed to
model the orthography to phonology process (Seidenberg and
McClelland, 1989; Plaut et al., 1996). These connectionist
models provide evidence that the task, with accompanying
phenomena, can be learned through a single mechanism. In
particular, Plaut et al. (henceforth PMSP) develop a recurrent
network which duplicates the naming latencies appropriate to
their data set, consisting of approximately 3000 one-syllable
English words (monosyllabic words with frequency greater
than zero in the Kuçera & Francis corpus (Kuçera and Francis, 1967)). Naming latencies are computed based on time-tosettle for the recurrent network, and based on mean squared
error (MSE) for a feed-forward model used in some simulations. The structure of the feed-forward network is shown
in Figure 1. In addition to duplicating frequency and regularity interactions displayed in previous subject work, this
model also performs appropriately in providing pronunciation of pronounceable nonwords. This provides an improvement over, and a validation of, previous work with a strictly
feed-forward network (Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989).
(Milostan and Cottrell, 1998) then showed that the serial position effect proposed by Coltheart & Rastle could be accounted for by a statistical regularity in English, as measured
by the Enemy Ratio (# of enemies in a word’s neighborhood divided by the total size of the word’s neighborhood).
(Milostan and Cottrell, 1998) showed that, for the words used
in (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994), words with earlier irregularities had higher enemy ratios, and that the parallel connectionist model of PMSP, exposed to the same statistical regularities, also shows the same left-to-right effect that (Coltheart
and Rastle, 1994) claimed it would not.

80

60
no enemies
many enemies
40

20

0
0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

Figure 2: Hypothetical Position-Only Effect
In a serial system such as the DRC, which by design processes input orthography from left to right, any observed leftto-right irregularity effect is a direct result of the GPC operation. On the other hand, for a parallel model such as the
PMSP system, which produces the output phonology all at
once, effects of irregularity are driven by neighborhood enemy/friend measures, and serial effects should disappear once
these enemy ratios are controlled.
The serial position effect seen by Coltheart & Rastle could
be the result of a confound between the position of the irregularity and the statistics of English. Earlier positions appear
to have more irregularities. It would be productive, then, to
retest the Coltheart & Rastle hypothesis, this time controlling
for amount of consistency. If the serial position effect does
hold regardless of the enemy ratio of the test words, an effect
similar to that shown in Figure 2 would be expected. If, however, the effect is due to enemy ratio alone, the results should
be similar to that of Figure 3. The subject experiment and network simulation presented here are an attempt to adjudicate
between these options, and stimuli will vary in both position
of irregularity, and in enemy ratio, in order to determine the
source of the effects.

Difficulties of GPC rules
One of the major discrepancies between the PMSP work and
DRC model is the latter’s assumption of the existence of a
pronunciation rule system. This rule system defines whether
a word is regular or not. Thus, all irregular stimuli chosen
for experiments on the DRC model are chosen according to
the GPC rules. Experiments which attempt to refute the DRC
model at any level must also take these rules into consideration when choosing stimuli.
Ideally, the same words that the DRC system uses should

Latency difference (Except - Control)

100

Enemy Ratio
High
Low

80

60
no enemies
many enemies

Position
Front
aunt
earl

Back
plaid
fluke

Table 2: Sample Experiment Words

40

20

0
0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

vowel for coda consonants, and the following vowel for
onset consonants. As expected, consonant irregularities are
by far the minority, and are limited to ‘CH’, ‘TH’, ‘G’, ‘C’,
‘Q’, and the silent instantiations such as ‘T’ and ‘H’.

Figure 3: Hypothetical Enemy-Ratio-Only Effect

Methods
Subjects

be addressed. Thus, irregular words for this experiment were
identified using the Australian GPC used in the DRC system,
and the Australian pronunciations from the MRC database,
from which the GPC rules were initially derived. Neighborhood Enemy Ratios were also calculated using the MRC pronunciations. American English would then be used only for
identifying errors in subjects’ pronunciations.
A program was written implementing the GPC rules of the
DRC system as listed in (Rastle and Coltheart, 1999). A
word was considered irregular if the pronunciation generated
by the rules did not match the pronunciation provided by the
MRC database. From the list of identified exception words,
homographs where one generated pronunciation was correct
were excluded (/wind/ vs. /wInd/), as were Australian words
with spellings not commonly used in the United States (gaol).
Also excluded were words marked as irregular by the GPC
rule which states that word-final /s/ is always converted to /z/.
This rule causes all words ending in -ace or -ice (face, mice)
to be considered irregular.
Overall, the words which were identified by this procedure using the Australian English were also found to be irregular through a similar procedure using the rules of American English pronunciation from (Venezky, 1970). The details
of that investigation are reported with a companion study in
(Milostan et al., 2000).

Neighborhoods
Neighborhoods are defined using an extension of the (Taraban and McClelland, 1987) neighborhood rules described in
(Milostan and Cottrell, 1998), summarized for single syllable
words here:
Consonant neighborhoods consist of orthographic clusters
which correspond to the same location in the word. For
one-syllable words, this results in 2 consonant cluster locations: onset and coda.
Each vowel group is considered within the context of its
coda. In order for a word to be in the neighborhood of a
test word, it must have the same vowel group (‘E’ is considered separately from ‘EE’) and be followed by the same
consonant cluster ending that syllable. As an example, the
‘OO’ neighborhood in ‘BOOK’ are all those words ending
in ‘OOK’, with the first syllable coda containing only ‘K’.
Consonant cluster neighborhoods include the preceding

Subjects were 23 undergraduate psychology students from
University of California San Diego. All subjects had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and were native NorthAmerican-English speakers. They were given course credit
for their participation.

Materials
Sixty-four words with irregular grapheme-to-phoneme correspondences (according to the GPC rules of the DRC model)
were chosen. Each target was uninflected and monosyllabic,
and had between 3 to 6 letters with Kuçera-Francis frequency
between zero and twenty-two.
The chosen words had an irregular grapheme-to-phoneme
correspondence in either the first (“front”) or third (“back”)
phoneme position, and were divided into 2 lists on that basis. Each list was further divided into two sublists, based on
whether the word had only friends in the neighborhood based
on the regularity (Enemy Ratio
) or mostly enemies at that location (Enemy Ratio
).
Since a word’s neighborhood by our measure includes itself,
words with a neighborhood size of one (“loners”) were excluded from consideration. These words correspond to Colheart’s categorization of “irregular consistent”.
Of the eligible words, the front-enemy condition had only
16 candidate words. Each of the other three conditions were
randomly pruned down to size 16 in order to balance the conditions. The resulting average word frequency did not differ
significantly between conditions (
). Each irregular word was then matched
with a regular control word. Control words were matched to
their irregular partners based on initial phoneme (since different phonemes take longer to trigger the microphone) and
number of letters. The controls were also in the zero to 22
Kuçera-Francis frequency range.
An example test word from each of the four conditions is
shown in Table 2.

Results
Of the original 25 subjects, data from 2 were unusable (in one
case the latency data were accidentally deleted; in the other
case the audio recording did not function so errors could not
be scored). For the remaining 23 data sets, latencies associated with voice key failures were discarded; if the stimulus was either a test word or a control the associated (control or test) word was similarly disregarded (13 pairs total

Latency difference (Except - Control)

100

80

60
no enemies
many enemies
40

20

0
0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

Figure 4: Naming Latency Results overall

Average Number of errors

6

4

no enemies
many enemies

2

driven by the words with high enemy ratios (see Figure 4).
First-position-irregular words with high numbers of enemies
in their neighborhood take longer to name than similar words
with friends only. This effect has mostly disappeared for
those words with third position grapheme-phoneme irregularities.
This makes sense from a cascaded information processing
point of view (McClelland, 1979), since it is possible that any
(potential) errors late in a word can be resolved by the time
the third phoneme is ready to be produced. This difference in
time delays can be considered an effect of the temporal nature
of the speech process, and the time available to make online
corrections. Words with later irregularities have, by definition, regular grapheme-phoneme correspondences at the beginning. The subject can begin pronouncing those phonemes
immediately, even if she must then make accommodations
later. Thus, the initial phoneme in an irregular (high enemy
ratio) word may be produced with the same latency as a completely regular word, while the phoneme at the irregular mapping itself may actually be delayed internal to the word. However, there is currently no way of measuring the latencies of
each internal phoneme using only the voice key.

Feed-Forward Network Performance
0
0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

Figure 5: Error Count Results overall
over all subjects). Latencies for all nonword fillers were also
discarded. Words which were pronounced incorrectly, along
with the associated match, were removed for separate error
analysis.
Naming latency differences were then calculated by subtracting the control word latency from the associated test
word latency. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was then performed on these values. Words in the high enemy ratio
condition had significantly greater latency differences than
the words in the friend condition (
), and there was a significant interaction between enemy ratio and position of irregularity (
). Latency differences for first and third position irregularities, combining both enemy ratio conditions, approached
but did not reach significance (
).
The latency data is shown in Figure 4.
Subjects made a total of 22 errors on control words, and
248 errors on irregular test words. Control words are not
considered in the error analysis. Subjects made significantly
more errors for front position irregulars than for back position irregulars (
), and
more errors for high-enemy words than for low-enemy words
(
). Position and enemy ratio also had a significant interaction in number of errors made
(
). These error data are shown
in Figure 5.

Discussion
From the data collected in this experiment, there is a slight effect of irregularity position, but this appears to be completely

The feed-forward network of PMSP does not contain a temporal component. Since all phonemes are calculated simultaneously, the irregularity position may not play a part in the
latencies calculated from the network as these are actually a
measure of the difference between the correct target pronunciation and the network’s actual output across the word. Thus,
the feed-forward pronunciation network should be affected by
enemy ratio alone, as those words with many contradictory
spelling-sound mappings will receive less total reinforcement
for the correct mapping.
Five feed-forward connectionist networks were trained on
3015 single syllable words as described in (Plaut et al., 1996;
Milostan and Cottrell, 1998). This data set is the 2998 words
used in PMSP plus 17 additional words used in the current
subject experiment. These words were not included in the
PMSP data set as they are of frequency rating zero.
Naming latency was then calculated for each test word by
using the sum squared error at the output layer, producing the
results shown in Figure 6. Unexpectedly, it appears that the
back position irregulars take longer to name than the front irregulars, regardless of enemy ratio. Remember, however, that
naming latency in these feed-forward networks is a measure
of error, not of time directly. The representation used for the
output layer is a sparse coding of the output phonemes. Of
the 62 units, only a small number will be on for any particular word. Thus, the network is exposed to a training set where
the majority of the output units are off most of the time. These
networks learn how to turn off units very well, and thus there
will be less discrepancy between the target and actual output
which should be off and is, than for a target which should
be on and the related output unit which is actually on. This
means that, everything else being equal, training pairs with
more units on in the target will inherently produce more error
than for those with fewer on targets.
As an example, consider a hypothetical network with 10
output units, and compare the results of two targets, one of

4

no enemies
many enemies
2

1

0
0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

Figure 6: Network Sum Squared Error

which has one unit on and the other of which has two units
on. Since the “off” units receive more training, assume that
any units off in the target have an activation of 0.1 in the
actual network during testing, while the on-units are activated at 0.8. Both of the hypothetical training sets accurately produce the intended output, but in the case where
the target has one unit on the network shows an error of
, while the target with 2 units on
has an error of
. This discrepancy becomes more exaggerated as the number of off-units
increases. Thus, if there is a systematic difference in the expected number of on-units among the conditions, those targets with more on-units may be unduly penalized. Examination of the output targets for the various test categories reveals
that indeed, those in the back position conditions have more
on-units than the front position targets, as shown in Figure 7.
This means that the words in the back position systematically
have one more phoneme than the front-position test words.
In parallel connectionist models, output error is associated
with naming latency under the assumption that the more error the output shows, the longer it takes for the system to
then converge on a veridical representation for a further stage
which will begin the actual production of the speech signal. If
the output for each of the ON-bits in the representation can be
cleaned up in parallel, then the time required before the next
stage may begin is more a measure of the average amount of
time required to make the cleanup. Thus, the average ON-bit
error provides a more realistic measure of naming latency.
To correct for the bias in number of bits on between firstand third-position words, the total output error for each word
was divided by the number of ON-units in that word’s output representation. These results are shown in Figure 8.
As in the human data, the networks show a significant effect of enemy ratio (
) and
a significant interaction between enemy ratio and position
(
). Unlike the human subjects, however, the networks also show a significant effect of
position (
). Again, this appears to be mostly driven by the high enemy ratio words. This
is actually a bit surprising since the networks produce output
in parallel, and thus would not have any time to “correct”
for later-position errors. The network results instead reflect
the finding that English words are more consistent in endings
than they are in onsets (Treiman et al., 1995).

Number of Phonemes ON in representation (Exception Words Only)

3

5

4

3
no enemies
many enemies
2

1

0
0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

Figure 7: Number of Units ON in Output Representation

PSS div Phonemes ON in representation (Exception Words Only)

PSS (Exception Words Only)

5

1.08

1.06
no enemies
many enemies
1.04

1.02

0

1

2

3

4

Phoneme Irregularity Position

Figure 8: Network Error / Number of Phonemes ON

