UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Organising Principles in Lexical Representation: Evidence form Polish

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04c982zn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Reid, Agnieszka
Marslen-Wilson, William

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Organising Principles in Lexical Representation: Evidence from Polish
Agnieszka Reid (agnieszka.reid@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
William Marslen-Wilson (william.marslen-wilson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge CB2 2EF, UK.
Abstract
Cross-linguistic research into the structure of the mental lexicon potentially allows us to deconfound factors which are
language specific from factors which are cross-linguistically
universal. In a series of three experiments we provide preliminary evidence for the structure of the Polish lexicon,
which belongs to the Slavonic language family. As in English, semantic compositionality plays a crucial role, so that
semantically compositional, morphologically complex words
are stored in a combinatorial fashion, and semantically
opaque words seem to be represented as full forms. At the
same time, clear evidence is found for priming between derivational and inflectional affixes, and for interference effects
between suffixed words competing for the same underlying
stem. Overall the data support a combinatorial and decompositional approach to lexical representation.

Introduction
To begin to discover the organising principles underlying
the representation and processing of lexical knowledge, it is
necessary to conduct comparable research programmes
across a variety of different languages. In the studies reported here, we take as a starting point a body of research
on English (Marslen-Wilson, Tyler, Waksler & Older,
1994), and ask whether the general properties that seem to
emerge for English can be found to operate for Polish, a
language with a much more complex and developed morphological system.
Two kinds of claim are made for English. The first is that
underlying representations of morphologically complex
forms, both derivational and inflectional, are fundamentally
decompositional and combinatorial in nature. Evidence for
this came from three main sources. Marslen-Wilson et al.
(1994) report extensive priming, in an immediate crossmodal repetition priming task, between suffixed and prefixed words sharing the same stem. At the same time, they
also report the phenomenon of suffix-suffix interference,
where semantically transparent pairs such as government governor do not prime, despite sharing the same stem.
Marslen-Wilson et al. (1994) interpreted this as evidence for
competition between different affixes for attachment to the
same underlying stem. Thirdly, and perhaps most compellingly, Marslen-Wilson, Ford, Older & Zhou (1996)
demonstrate strong priming between derivational affixes, as
in pairs like toughness/darkness and rearrange/rethink.
Affixes like '-ness' or 're-' appear to be isolable and independent structures in the mental lexicon, participating in a

dynamic and combinatorial manner in the representation of
many different words.
The second important claim is that, cutting across this
evidence for decompositional morphemically based representation, the further factor of semantic transparency plays a
crucial role in determining the representation of morphologically complex words. Marslen-Wilson et al. (1994)
found that semantically transparent morphologically complex words, such as darkness-dark prime each other, but
that morphologically related, semantically opaque pairs,
such department - depart, do not, indicating that words such
as department are stored as full forms. Marslen-Wilson et
al. (1994) made the argument that this reflects choices made
during the language acquisition process, where the language
learner rejects a decompositional analysis of department (as
depart + ment) on the grounds that this delivers the incorrect
semantics.

Cross-linguistic research
The broader status of these claims about the structure of
lexical representation – as fundamentally decompositional
but conditioned by semantic factors – remains hard to interpret unless comparable bodies of research, using parallel
techniques, are conducted across a typologically contrasting
sample of the world’s languages. Research of this type is
only now starting to emerge, and is already suggesting illuminating contrasts with the patterns proposed for English.
A salient example is the contrasting importance of semantic factors in Semitic languages, such as Hebrew and
Arabic, as opposed to English. Hebrew and Arabic are characterised by non-linear morphological processes which
operate on roots and word patterns. The most striking feature of this morphological system is that morphemes are not
combined linearly, but a root, which usually consists of
three consonants, is interleaved in a discontinuous manner
with a word pattern, to create the phonetic surface form.
Deutsch & Frost (1998) demonstrated that in Hebrew,
words which are morphologically but not semantically related, prime each other strongly, in contrast to the findings
on English. More recently Boudelaa & Marslen-Wilson
(2000) demonstrate comparable findings for Arabic, using
both cross-modal and masked priming tasks, and finding
equally strong priming between prime target pairs sharing
the same roots, irrespective of semantic transparency.
The finding that semantic transparency is a crucial factor
in the structure of the English mental lexicon, but seems to
play no role in the morphological decomposition of Semitic
words, is hard to interpret on its own, because of the many

ways in which languages like Hebrew and Arabic contrast
with a language like English. One of the goals of the research reported below is to add another typologically distinct data point to these contrasts, asking for Polish not only
whether there is comparable evidence here for decompositional representation, but also whether semantic factors play
a critical role in determining whether or not complex forms
are represented in decompositional format.

Research on Polish
A striking characteristic of Polish, a member of the Slavonic
language family, is the richness of its morphological systems. Almost every word in Polish exists within a very rich
paradigm, declensional for nouns, adjectives, numerals and
pronouns or conjugational for verbs. The derivational morphology is comparable to English, being based on concatenative processes of prefixation and suffixation, but includes
a number of qualitatively very different affixes, for instance
verbal aspectual prefixes, aspectual-derivational prefixes
and diminutival suffixes. Also, as far as derivational suffixes are concerned, they are considerably more numerous.
Polish permits the formation of morphologically very complex words, such as secondary imperfectives described
below, which allows a challenging test of claims about
combinatorial representation and access.

Experiment 1
The main goals of the first experiment we report here were
to investigate morphological phenomena that are absent in
English, as well as to investigate parallel phenomena in the
two languages. To do this we used the cross-modal immediate lexical decision task (Marslen-Wilson et al. 1994). In
this task subjects hear an auditory prime, at the offset of
which, they immediately see a visual target (for 500 ms)
and have to decide, by pressing an appropriate button,
whether a target word is a real word or a non-word.
Taking advantage of the range of qualitatively different
affixes in Polish, we probed their representation in pairs of
semantically transparent words, which share the same affixes. The stimuli included (a) 24 pairs of verbs which share
the same aspectual prefix, e.g. sNRU]\VWDü ‘to benefit, Perfective’ - sWUDFLá\ ‘they lost, Perfective’; (b) 22 verbs which
share the same aspectual-derivational prefix, for instance:
naJU]Dü ‘to heat up, Perfective’ - naNURLáD ‘she cut, Perfective’; (c) 18 nouns which share the same diminutive suffix,
e.g. kotek ‘a little cat’ - ogródek ‘a little garden’ and (d) 24
nouns which have the same derivational suffix, e. g. kucharz
‘a cook’ - SLáNarz ‘a footballer’. Also, having in mind the
difference in findings on English and Hebrew/Arabic regarding words which are morphologically related, but semantically opaque, we included (e) 22 pairs, such as
MDáRZLHF ‘juniper’  MDáRZ\ ‘futile’, as a test of whether semantically opaque words prime each other. It seemed plausible that these pairs would prime in a language such as
Polish, where the dynamics of morphological processing are
much stronger than in English. We will refer to them as
[+Morph, - Sem]. We also included a condition (f) 20 pairs
which share the same stem, e.g., szycie ‘sewing’ - szyü ‘to
sew’. Because many studies document a robust effect of

stem priming, this condition served as a test of the procedure
in our experiment. Finally, we included (g) 20 semantically
related pairs, e.g., kokos ‘coconut’ - banan ‘banana’, which
also served as a test of the experimental procedure. Many
experiments on English found semantic priming in the
cross-modal priming. We will refer to them as [-Morph,
+Sem]. In addition, to investigate whether any observed
priming in affix conditions was due to pure phonological
overlap, we included two control conditions where the
stimuli were phonologically but not morphologically or
semantically related: (h) 18 words with phonological overlap at the onset, e.g. numer ‘a number’ - nuda ‘boredom’
and (i) 18 with overlap at the word offset, e.g. haáDV ‘noise’
- szaáDV ‘a shelter’.

Results
6 subjects from version 1 and 4 subjects from version 2
were discarded from the analysis, because of high error
percentage on real words (equal to or above 15%) or/and
slow mean reaction times to real words (equal to or above
1000 ms). A total of 20 subjects per version was entered
into the analysis. All subjects were in their twenties, and
were native Polish speakers living and studying in Poland. 7
items were removed from the analysis: 3 because of high
error percentage (equal to or above 30% on both versions or
equal to or above 40% on one version) and 4 because of
homophony. Every reaction time was inversely transformed
in order to reduce the influence of outliers. The inversely
transformed data were analysed in a Repeated Measures
ANOVA separately for items (F2) and for subjects (F1). See
Figure 1 for details of the descriptive statistics.
First the overall repeated measures ANOVA with Prime
(related, unrelated) and Condition (1-9) was run. There was
a main effect of Prime, indicating that RTs were faster for
targets when preceded by a related prime than an unrelated
prime, F2(1,163)=22.62, p<0.001; F1(1, 38)=37.32,
p<0.001. The main effect of Condition was significant, F2
(8, 163)=17.82, p<0.001; F1(8, 304) = 162.89, p< 0.001.
However, there was also a significant two-way interaction
of Condition x Prime F2(8,163) = 4.49, p<0.001; F1(8, 304)
=7.45, p<0.001.
The finding that there was 18 ms of priming on average
in all the affix conditions treated as a group was explored
further in an ANOVA. The results showed that there was a
main effect of Prime, F2(1, 75)=12.06, p< 0.001, F1(1,
38)=11.77, p< 0.001. The main effect of Condition was also
significant, F2(3, 75)=19.54, p<0.001, F1(3, 114)=209.88,
p< 0.001, with no interaction between Condition x Prime,
F2(3,75)=0.14, p>0.05, F1(3,114)=0.37, p>0.05. This result
indicates that there was a facilitatory effect of Prime in all
affix conditions treated as a group.
We then conducted an analysis of simple effects of Prime
on each level of Condition in the remaining Conditions. The
results show no facilitatory priming for [+Morph,-Sem]
pairs, F2(1,20)=0.56, p>0.05; F1(1,38)=0.72, p>0.05. There
was no priming for either of the Phonological Overlap conditions: Phonological Overlap at the Word Onset,
F2(1,16)=0.05, p>0.05, F1(1,38)=0.62, p>0.05 and Phonological Overlap at the Word Offset F2(1,16)=2.15,
p>0.05, F1(1,38)=3.98, p>0.05. On the other hand, there

was clear priming in the Stem Condition F2(1,18)=25.0,
p<0.001, F1(1,38)=53.43, p<0.001 and in Semantically, but
not Morphologically Related Pairs F2(1,18)=13.36, p<0.01,
F1(1,38)=22.10, p<0.001.

3ULPLQJ HIIHFWV LQ $IIL[HV


3ULPLQJ LQ PV









$VSHFW



$VSHFW
0HDQLQJ

'HULYDWLRQDO

'LPLQXWLYH

$IIL[ &RQGLWLRQV

Experiment 2

3ULPLQJ LQ RWKHU &RQGLWLRQV




3ULPLQJ LQ PV








32RQVHW

32RIIVHW

6WHP

>6HP 
0RUSK@

does not determine the representation of morphologically
complex words.
The combinatorial storage of affixes in the Polish mental
lexicon is also supported by evidence on a Polish Wernicke’s aphasic patient (Ulatowska and Sadowska, 1988). In
tests of production, the patient occasionally made mistakes
involving derivational morphology. When asked to produce
a word denoting a little plate, she produced WDOH*ek, using an
existing, but incorrect diminutival suffix, instead of saying
taOH*yk. When verbal aspectual morphology is considered,
the patient produced an incorrect form, such as zVLZLDá,
instead of oVLZLDá ‘he got grey’, substituting a correct aspectual prefix ‘o-’ with an incorrect one ‘z-‘ for this verb.
Although the origin of these errors may be partially conditioned by phonological deficits in the patient’s language
output system, it seems to be hard to account for these errors only in these terms. The errors include an incorrect
combination of existing morphemes, rather than a combination of non-existing units. Hence, we take this as a further
evidence in support for the combinatorial storage of words
in the Polish mental lexicon.

>6HP
0RUSK@


2WKHU &RQGLWLRQV

Figure 1. Priming effects for Experiment 1.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show clear priming in all the
Affix conditions treated as a group as well as in the Stem
condition. The absence of priming in the two phonological
overlap conditions indicates that the priming obtained in the
affix conditions cannot be attributed to simple phonological
overlap. The results show that affixes and stems are isolable
and independent structures in the Polish mental lexicon.
Polish affixes, although qualitatively different from English
affixes, seem to be stored in a combinatorial manner. On the
other hand, the evidence shows that morphologically related, semantically opaque words do not prime each other,
indicating that they are stored as full forms. This indicates
that the factor of semantic compositionality determines the
representation of morphologically complex words in Polish.
This is in line with the findings on English, but is in contrast
with Hebrew and Arabic, where semantic compositionality

The findings on affix priming in Polish reported in experiment 1 left us with two further questions. Firstly, does the
combinatorial representation of affixed words also hold for
much more complex forms? Secondly, will we get more
reliable priming, in comparison to the relatively weak
priming in the four individual affix conditions in Experiment 1, if two affixes are shared by the prime and target?
Highly polymorphemic, semantically compositional
words, such as secondary imperfectives, which occur in
Polish, are a particular challenge for the combinatorial view
of the mental lexicon. On one hand their complex structure
would make them potentially more difficult to parse in
comprehension and assemble in production if they are represented as a combination of morphemes, rather than as full
forms. On the other hand, the intuition of native speakers of
Polish is that they can process highly polymorphemic forms
with the same efficiency as the less complex forms. More
generally, for productive complex morphological forms, it
is generally accepted that simple learning of each complex
form is not a plausible language acquisition procedure (e.g.,
Hankamer, 1989).
We used (a) 30 pairs of secondary imperfectives, which
shared the same prefix and suffix, e.g roz-pakow-ywaáHP
(prime) ‘to unwrap, 1st person sing., masculine, past tense,
secondary imperf.’ and UR]ZDáNRZywaü (target) ‘to flatten
something using, a rolling-pin, secondary imperf.’. These
words consisted of a derivational prefix , e.g. ‘roz-‘, a secondary imperfective suffix ‘-ywa-‘  SDVW WHQVH PRUSKHPH µá¶
SULPH RQO\ DQG D PRUSKHPH ‘-em’ (prime only), which
denotes the 3rd person singular, masculine. To ensure an
appropriate paradigm-check we also included (b) 24 standard stem priming pairs, P\O ‘I think’ - P\OHü ‘to
think’; and (c) 24 semantically related, but morphologically
unrelated pairs, e.g. dom ‘a house’ - JDUD* ‘a garage’, to
dissociate the morphological and semantic effects.
Because we wished to avoid possible confounds with semantic priming, we used here a different task. This was an

auditory-auditory priming experiment with 12 items intervening between prime word and target. At these long lags, it
is generally found that semantic priming drops away
whereas morphological priming does not (Marslen-Wilson
& Tyler, 1998).

Results
10 subjects were discarded from the analysis according to
the same criteria as in experiment 1. Data from 23 (version
1) and 24 (version 2) participants were entered into the
analysis. One item had to be discarded from the analysis,
because of high error percentage on one version. See Figure
2 for the details on the descriptive statistics.

3ULPLQJ HIIHFWV LQ H[SHULPHQW 

3ULPLQJ LQ PV










$IIL[HV
6KDUHG

6WHP

>6HP 
0RUSK@

&RQGLWLRQV

Figure 2. Priming effects for Experiment 2
The reaction time data were prepared for the analysis as
described in experiment 1. The overall ANOVA revealed
that the main effect of Prime was significant, F2(1,71)=
16.006, p<0.001, F1(1,45)=507.888, p<0.001. The main
effect of Condition was also significant, F2(2,71)=20.426,
p<0.001, F1(2,90)= 81.308, p<0.001. The two-way interaction of Prime and Condition was not significant in the items
analysis, F2(2,71)=2.004, p>0.05, but it was significant in
the subject analysis, F1(2, 90)=72.625, p<0.001.
We then carried out an analysis of simple effects of Prime
on every level of Condition. There was clear priming in the
Shared Affixes Condition; F2(1,28)=4.8, p<0.05, F1(1,45
)=7.58, p<0.01. The results for the paradigm-check conditions were straight-forward: as predicted there was significant priming for the Stem Priming Condition F2(1, 22)
=15.48 , p<0.01; F1 (1,45)=10.98, p<0.01 and there was no
priming in the Semantically Related, but Morphologically
Unrelated Condition: F2(1,21)=1.01, p>0.05; F1
(1,45)=0.249, p>0.05.

Discussion
Firstly, the results show reliable priming for secondary imperfectives, e.g. roz-pakow-ywaáHP, which indicates that
they are in fact represented in a combinatorial fashion, de-

spite their morphological complexity. Secondly, it appears
that, when two affixes are repeated in prime and target, we
obtain a more robust priming effect, of the magnitude of
stem priming, in comparison with the relatively weak
priming in the affix conditions in experiment 1. This is
consistent with claims for combinatorial underlying processing mechanisms, comparable to those claimed for English, and matching the claims for somewhat different forms
of underlying combinatorial systems in the nonconcatenative morphologies of Hebrew and Arabic.

Experiment 3
One of the main pieces of evidence in support of the combinatorial approach to the English mental lexicon comes from
the finding that semantically transparent pairs which share
the same stem and have different derivational suffixes do
not prime each other. This finding has been replicated many
times in English, since the original report in MarslenWilson et al. (1994). For instance Marslen-Wilson & Zhou
(1999) show that pairs which exhibit allomorphy, e. g.,
sincere-ly & sincer-ity as well as non-allomorphic pairs,
e.g., excit-able & excite-ment do not prime each other either
in a cross-modal priming task or in an auditory-auditory
lexical decision task with 0 or 8 intervening lags. The results at 8 intervening lags established that the suffix interference effect is robust and can be elicited under conditions
where morphological but not semantic factors are likely to
be responsible.
Because we found evidence for the combinatorial storage
of morphologically complex, semantically compositional
words in Polish, we wanted to test whether we would find
convergent evidence from suffix interference, tested in a
language system where suffixation is one of the main derivational processes.
The stimuli included (a) 32 derived - derived words which
shared the same stem, but had different derivational suffixes.
Half of the stimuli were deverbal derivatives, e.g. pis-anie
‘writing’ - pis-arz ‘a writer’. The other half were denominal
derivatives, e.g. balon-owy ‘balloon like, adj.’ - balon-ik ‘a
little balloon’, SR1 = 8.1, SD = 0.5; (b) 32 inflected - derived pairs which shared the same stem. Half of the stimuli
had an inflected verb as a prime and a deverbal derivative as
a target e.g. SLVDáD ‘to write, 3rd person, sing., feminine,
past tense’ - pis-arz ‘a writer’. The other half had an inflected noun as a prime and a denominal derivative as a
target, e.g. balon-em ‘balloon, instrumental - balon-ik ‘a
little balloon’, SR = 8.4, SD = 0.4; (c) 24 stem priming
pairs, as before e.g., P\O ‘I think’, P\OHü ‘to think’
were included as a paradigm check, SR = 8.2, SD = 0.2.

1

SR denotes a mean score (across 10 participants) on a Semantic Relatedness pre-test, where native speakers of Polish judged on
a 9- point scale (where 9 is the highest possible score), to what
degree a given pair of words is semantically related. We use these
scores as a measure of Semantic Transparency between a prime
and target, which is highly correlated with semantic compositionality.

there was a strong priming in Stem Condition,
F2(1,20)=15.24, p<0.01, F1(1,85)=19.874, p<0.001 and that
there was no significant priming for [+Sem, -Morph] Condition, F2(1,20)=3.9, p>0.05, F1(1, 85)=1.821, p>0.05.

3ULPLQJ LQ H[SHULPHQW 


3ULPLQJ LQ PV



Discussion







'HULY
'HULY

,QIO
'HULY

6WHP

>6HP 
0RUSK@

&RQGLWLRQV

Figure 3. Priming effects for Experiment 3
Both words in the stem condition shared the same stem, the
prime had an inflectional ending, denoting person, tense and
number, whereas the target was an infinitive and had an
infinitival marker µü¶ and (d) 24 [- Morph, +Sem] pairs,
included to dissociate the morphological and semantic effects, SR = 8.0, SD = 1. In order to ensure the most rigorous
comparison between conditions 1 and 2, the same target was
used in both conditions. Experimental items were assigned
to 4 versions, so that the same target was preceded by one
of the two related primes or one of the two unrelated
primes, with one combination of a prime and a target per
version. Because we were mainly interested in the morphological effects, we again used an auditory-auditory priming,
lexical decision experiment with 12 intervening items to
dissociate the morphological from the semantic effects.

Results
10 participants were rejected on the same criteria as in experiment 1. A total of 89 participants: 22 (version 1), 24
(version 2), 21 (version 3) and 22 (version 4) were entered
into an analysis. No experimental items were removed. See
Figure 3 for the details of the descriptive statistics.
The overall repeated measures ANOVA analysis with
Prime (related, unrelated) and Condition (1-4) revealed that
the main effect of Prime was significant F2(1,96)=22.2,
p<0.001, F1(1,85)=32.48, p<0.001. The main effect of
Condition was not significant in the item analysis F2(3,
96)=0.537, p>0.05, but it was significant in the subject
analysis F1 (3, 255)=6.776, p< 0.001. A two-way interaction of Prime and Condition was significant, F2 (1,3)=2.9,
p<0.05, F1(3, 255)=2.71, p<0.05.
The simple effects analysis was conducted to investigate
effect of Prime at each level of Condition. The analysis
showed that there was no significant priming in DerivedDerived Condition, F2(1,28)=1.35, p>0.05, F1(1,
85)=0.548, p>0.05, nor in Inflected-Derived Condition,
F2(1,28)=3.615, p>0.05, F1(1,85)=2.702, p>0.05. The remaining analyses on the individual conditions revealed that

The results are clear. There is no priming in DerivedDerived Condition nor in Inflected-Derived Condition while
there is robust priming for the Stem Condition and no
priming for [-Morph,+Sem] pairs. The findings for the latter
two conditions have been replicated in many of our experiments (e.g. experiment 2) and are in line with the predictions.
Not finding priming for semantically transparent suffixed
words which share the same stem, but have different derivational suffixes indicates that there must be an inhibitory
process between the suffixes. Hearing pis-anie ‘writing’, as
a prime inhibits the combination of the root pis- with another suffix, e.g. ‘-arz‘, hence the recognition of the target
pis-arz ‘a writer’ is slowed, even though the root ‘pis-‘ is
active. This finding parallels the findings reported for English (Marslen-Wilson et al. 1994).
Interestingly, the results also suggest that there is suffix
interference in Inflected-Derived Condition between inflectional and derivational suffixes which are attached to the
same stem in semantically compositional pairs. It is hard to
see how this could be the case if both types of suffix were
not represented in the lexicon.
Most influential linguistic models of word formation in
generative grammar assume that inflections are not represented lexically, but they are added by syntactic rules which
are outside the mental lexicon. This is supported by data
from the lexical decision experiments on English, but not by
the findings on Polish. One plausible source of the difference between the findings for Polish and English comes
from the characteristics of the Polish inflectional system,
which in contrast to English is extremely rich and carries a
lot of very complex information. The findings (although
from a different paradigm) on Italian (Miceli & Caramazza
1988) which is a morphologically rich language, similarly
to findings on Polish support the claim that the inflectional
suffixes are stored in the mental lexicon.
The suffix-suffix interference leaves, at the current stage,
at least one unresolved issue. All the inflectional suffixes of
the primes for deverbal targets in Inflected-Derived Condird
tion were 3 person singular, masculine or feminine, past
tense. In our previous experiments, we found priming for
pairs which shared the same stem and where prime had a
derivational suffix whereas the target had an infinitival
ending - µü¶. The question which arises is: what is special
about the infinitival suffix that it does not cause interference
with a derivational suffix? One possible explanation is that
the infinitival ending does not have the same linguistic
status as the inflectional suffixes, which carry a lot of information, e.g. person, number, gender, tense, etc. An issue
which has to be resolved in our future research is whether
suffix interference occurs for two inflectional suffixes. This
will provide a more stringent test of the representation of
the Polish inflectional morphemes in the lexicon.

General Discussion
We have reported the findings on the Polish mental lexicon
in a series of three experiments, in an attempt to examine
the organising principles affecting the structure of the mental lexicon of a morphologically complex language from the
Slavonic family. In the first experiment we concentrated on
probing the representation of morphologically complex
words, which included affixes which are qualitatively different from English. The findings indicted that affixes are
represented in a combinatorial fashion. Secondly, the results
show that semantic compositionality is an important factor
in determining the lexical representation in the Polish mental lexicon. In the second experiment we confirmed that a
combinatorial representation also holds for words with a
much more morphologically complex structure, such as the
secondary imperfectives, at the same time confirming the
existence of strong priming between derivational and inflectional affixes. Finally, in the third experiment we addressed the issue of suffix interference in Polish, finding
clear evidenced for interference in derived-derived pairs as
well as in inflected-derived pairs. This is further evidence
for underlying combinatorial representations and processes.
In summary, the overall picture which has emerged as a
result of our investigation of the Polish mental lexicon is
that, Polish, similar to English and Hebrew is characterised
by a combinatorial mental lexicon. However, different factors which condition the structure of the mental lexicon
have different ‘weightings’ in Polish as in comparison with
Hebrew and English. The factor of semantic compositionality is crucial in determining the structure of the representation of words in Polish, similarly to English, but in contrast
with Hebrew (and Arabic). On the other hand, the factor of
the type of inflectional morpheme is important in the structure of the Polish lexicon, in that both types of inflectional
morphemes verbal and nominal seem to be represented in
the Polish lexicon. This contrasts with English, where neither verbal nor nominal inflections seem to be represented
as lexical processing structures.

Acknowledgements
The research reported here is supported in part by an ESRC
research studentship to A. Reid, and in part by the UK
Medical Research Council. We would like to thank K.
Kowalik, M. 6PRF]\VND and B. Szymanek for very helpful
comments made during the selection of the stimuli. We also
would like to thank P. Brzuski who kindly provided the
facilities in Poland to run our experiments.

References
Boudelaa, S., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2000). On The
Use of Word Pattern Morphemes in Modern Standard
Arabic. The Fourteenth Annual Symposium on Arabic
Linguistics. The University of California at Berkeley.
Deutsch, A., & Frost, R. (1998). Verbs and nouns are organized and accessed differently in the mental lexicon:
evidence from Hebrew. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition. 24, 12381255.

Hankamer, J. (1989). Morphological parsing and the lexicon. In Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (Ed.), Lexical representation and process. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miceli, G., & Caramazza, A. (1988). Dissociation of inflectional and derivational morphology. Brain and language
35, 24-65.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., Ford, M., Older, L., & Zhou, X.
(1996). The combinatorial lexicon: priming derivational
affixes. Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 223-227). La Jola, California, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Tyler, L. K. (1998). Rules, representations, and the English past tense. Trends in Cognitive Science 2, 419-463.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., Tyler, L., Waksler, R., & Older, L.
(1994). Morphology and meaning in the English mental
lexicon. Psychological Review 101, 3-33.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Zhou, X. (1999) Abstractness,
allomorphy, and lexical architecture. Language and Cognitive Processes, 14, 321-352.
Ulatowska, H., K., & Sadowska, M. (1988). Features of
agrammatism in Polish - a case study. Journal of Neurolinguistics 3, 77-88.

