UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Point-Light Displays Illuminate the Abstract Nature of Children's Motion Verb
Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dp2p6wz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Liu, Jing
Golinkoff, Roberta M.
Piper, Kim
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Point-Light Displays Illuminate the Abstract Nature of
Children's Motion Verb Representations
Jing Liu (jingliu@udel.edu)
Roberta M. Golinkoff (roberta@udel.edu)
Kim Piper (kimpiper@udel.edu)
School of Education, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
He Len Chung (hlchung@astro.ocis.temple.edu)
Kathy Hirsh-Pasek (khirshpa@nimbus.ocis.temple.edu)
Christopher H. Ramey (rameychb@aol.com)
Department of Psychology, Temple University, 1801 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19122

Bennett I. Bertenthal (bbertent@dura.spc.uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5801 South Ellis Ave., Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract
The present studies explored children's representations of
motion verbs first, in an elicited production study using pointlight displays (lights attached to the joints of the human body)
and then in a language comprehension task using the
Intermodal Preferential Looking Paradigm (IPLP). Results
indicated that children indeed ascribe meanings to the
portrayals of actions in point-light displays. When children
could not spontaneously produce the actual verb for an action,
they used either a more specific or a more general familiar
verb that was considered appropriate by adults. These
findings suggest that even by the age of 3, children's
representations of the actions that verbs label are amazingly
abstract. This is the first set of studies to probe the nature of
children’s verb representations under circumstances where
the portrayal of the action is stripped of an apparent agent, a
location, instruments, or in some cases, the objects ordinarily
required in transitive actions (e.g., a shovel in shoveling).
Using point-light displays provides the field with a
methodological tool for exploring the components of verb
representation in both children and adults and for
investigating children's verb acquisition.

Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to take a closer look at verb
representations and to examine the question of how 3-yearolds, who already know many verbs, extend familiar verbs
to novel events depicted in point-light displays. To extend a
verb to a point-light action, children must activate their
action representations and map the patterns of light
sequences to their verb representations. The use of pointlight stimuli provides a stringent test of children's motion
verb representations due to the removal of context.
Considering that the semantic structure of verbs provides
a kind of conceptual frame for constructing larger linguistic
units such as phrases and sentences, verb learning is of
central importance for young language learners. Since
motion words are among children's first words (e.g., Bloom,
1993; Smith & Sachs, 1990), two essential questions are

whether children can successfully form word-action
mappings and how they extend an action verb.
Research has found that infants are keenly aware of
movement and can use movement to individuate objects and
actions (Sharon & Wynn, 1997; Spelke, Katz, Purcell,
Ehrlich, 1994). There is also evidence that 18-month-olds
can distinguish the causal actions of push and pull and map
novel words to these actions after limited exposure to the
word-action pairs (Casasola & Cohen, in press). However,
it is not clear what perceptual cues children use to form
word-action mappings and how they decontextualize the use
of verbs to successfully extend verb labels to the actions
they witness. For example, how do children understand that
the word “jump” refers to a category of jumping motions
that include different kinds of jumps made by the same actor
(e.g., Elmo jumping off tables and chairs), and the same
action performed by different actors (e.g., Elmo or Lala
jumping off the chair)?
One line of research suggests that children use lexical
principles to narrow down the possible meanings of words
(Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994). According to
Golinkoff, Mervis, Hirsh-Pasek, Frawley, and Parillo
(1995), lexical principles guide children to learn not only
object nouns but also action verbs. For example, the
“principle of extendibility” posits that nouns not only label
the original exemplar but a category of objects of "like
kind." When transferred to the acquisition of action verbs,
this principle states that an action verb, like a label learned
for an object, can be extended to more than just the original
action. Yet, what is the basis for verb extension?
Golinkoff et al. (1995) suggested that shape, or the overall
motion configuration of the action, may provide a basis for
children's verb extension. The shape of an action can be
primarily affected by the path of motion (horizontal vs.
vertical such as walking versus jumping), the involvement
of arms and/or legs, and the type of instruments, if any,
involved in the action. With respect to nouns, shape
provides important information about the function and
categorical membership of an object and serves as an

important basis for object noun extension (Landau, Smith,
& Jones, 1998). It is quite likely that, when no other
information is accessible, the shape of an action will provide
defining information about the event, as “many verbs of
motion have … a typical appearance, a physiognomy”
(Marconi, p. 159). This typical appearance of action may
represent what Pinker (1989) labeled the “shape” of an
event, and provide the basis of children’s verb extension. In
fact, certain semantic factors such as MANNER, PATH, and
CONVEYANCE, seem to be embedded in the "shape" of an
event (Talmy, 1985). By attending to the overall shape or
configuration of an action, children may ignore the context
details of the individual event and construe the semantic
invariant that a verb encodes. This would result in a more
abstract and flexible representation of the action to which a
particular verb can be mapped. For example, while the
particular individual or object is not necessarily a part of the
meaning of the verb FALL, the so-called shape of
downward trajectory does represent the core, typical
appearance of the action “falling.”
The claim that shape serves as an important basis for verb
extension is in accord with Gibson’s (1966) view that in
perceiving events we detect the “invariants” that persist
from one event to another of the same type. The overall
configuration of an action may be an invariant of the event.
This claim is equally in line with Mandler (1992) who
argues that events are stored as "image schemas" or
"dynamic analog representations" abstracted from children’s
interpretations of the spatial relations between objects.
These meaningful image schemas help reduce the infinitely
varying perceptual displays into a limited number of
meaningful concepts that can be described by words.
Here we argue that children may use the “shape” of an
action that loosely represents the invariant cues from one
action to another as a basis for verb extension. It should be
noted, however, that in using terms such as “invariant,” we
are not assuming that the representations themselves are
fixed and rigid. On the contrary, we posit that the shape of
an action is a prototypical representation that is flexible
enough to include actions that are similar to, but do not
exactly match the original exemplar in terms of, say, the
agent and location.
Point-light displays were first used to study adults' event
perception and biomechanical motion by attaching small
lights to the head and main joints of an individual’s body
and filming the person performing different actions against
a dark background (Johansson, 1973). Because point-light
displays are deprived of detailed contextual information
such as the agent and location of an event, the information
about an action given in such displays is expressed in the
overall shapes of the light sequences. Previous studies
using these moving light displays with infants and adults
demonstrate the significance of prior knowledge in the
perception of biomechanical point-light images (Bertenthal,
1993).
For example, while 5-month-old infants can
discriminate between a point-light walker shown in an

upright versus upside-down orientation, 3-month-olds do
not demonstrate this sensitivity (Bertenthal, 1993). Thus,
whether children can identify the actions depicted in pointlight displays based on their previous experience provides a
strong test of the hypothesis that toddlers use abstract,
shape-based event representations to extend familiar motion
verb labels. Research has found that 3-year-olds use many
motion verbs, we therefore first investigated 3-year-olds'
ability to identify point-light depictions of human actions.

Experiment 1
This study explored 3-year-olds' ability to spontaneously
produce a label for an action depicted in point-light
displays. Since children do not encounter point-light
displays in everyday life, to successfully complete this task,
children must perceive the patterns of lights as meaningful
action sequences, activate their verb representations for
these actions, and ascribe meanings to these point-light
sequences.

Method
Participants
Thirty-eight children participated in the study. The final
sample had 29 children, 16 boys and 13 girls, mean age = 3
years 7 months. Nine children were excluded from the data
because 3 failed to produce a description for more than 3 of
the actions and 6 either refused to talk to did not finish the
study.
Stimulus Videotapes Biomechanical displays of motion
verbs were created by videotaping a person in action with
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) affixed to the major joints of
the body (ankles, knees, hips, wrists, elbows, shoulders).
These displays consisted only of a collection of white dots
moving across a black screen. Figure 1 provides an
example of a person walking, translated into frozen still
images of point lights.

Figure 1: Canonical Point-light Walker

Each of the 8 actions was performed continuously for 3
seconds and repeated 4 times so that each action was

displayed for 12 seconds, followed by 5-second blank tape
(Table 1). The actions were randomly ordered into two
different sequences. To familiarize subjects with point-light
displays, a point-light depicted cat walking from right to left
on the screen was presented first.

Procedure
The child sat on the parent's lap in front of a 32" TV. The
parent was told not to say anything. Then the experimenter
told the child they were about to see a fun videotape and
would be asked to tell what they saw. After the cat display,
the experimenter paused the VCR and prompted the child
three times for a label for the action. If the child only
produced an object label, such as "a cat" or "a doggie," the
experimenter would probe again, "What was the cat/doggie
doing?" If the child produced an unrelated answer such as
"dots" or "snow," the experimenter would label the cat for
the child and encourage the child to label the action. If the
child did not produce an action label after being probed
twice, the experimenter would produce the label, "Was the
cat walking?" The same procedure was then repeated for
each of the human actions except that the experimenter did
NOT produce any description for the human action. If the
child failed to produce a description for a human action after
being probed twice, the experimenter went on to the next
action. The experimenter made neutral comments as a
response.
Table 1: Descriptions of the Actions in Point-light Displays
____________________________________________________

*Walking : Person walking.
*Dancing: Person twisting in place.
Shoveling : Person bending at the waist and standing
back up (without moving legs) as if shoveling snow.
Picking flowers: Person bending at the waist and
standing back up (without moving legs) as if picking up
flowers from the ground and then putting them back in a
handheld basket.
*Rolling: Person performing a somersault.
*Running: Person running.
*Skipping: Person skipping.
*Hopping: Person hopping on one foot.
* Person moves diagonally from top left corner to bottom
right corner across the screen.
Data coding Children's productions were divided into two
groups: relevant vs. irrelevant. Words or phrases that did
not indicate any motion were considered irrelevant, such as
"have no feet." The rest were considered relevant. A group
of college students (n = 15) were asked to rank the
appropriateness of each relevant response on a 1-7 Likert
scale after seeing each action in the point-light displays in
the same way as children did.
Children produced a total of 110 different descriptions for
the 8 actions. After eliminating 7 irrelevant answers and

combining 25 relevant answers by ignoring verb objects
(i.e., "picking up snowballs" and "picking up stuff" were
considered the same), there were 78 responses left. Each
action had a range of 4-15 responses from children. These
were listed on the ranking sheet.
To examine the
consistency of adults' ranking, 77 responses were used as
foils for each other (the response "moving" was excluded as
too general). The foils were distributed in ranking sheet for
each action such that if adults were consistent in their
ranking, these foils would receive on average lower
rankings than the non-foils. The proportion of actual
responses and foils for each action was 1:1, resulting in a
total number of 154 responses for the 8 actions on the
ranking sheet.
Table 2. Number of Children Who Gave Highly
Appropriate Responses (standard deviation in parentheses)
________________________________________________
Action
# of Children1 Mean Rating Mean Rating
/Total2
(>=5)3
(all responses)
rolling

10 / 25

6.33 (.70)

3.87 (2.00)

dancing

15 / 28

6.91 (.57)

3.17 (2.14)

picking flowers 10 / 25

6.41 (.68)

4.31 (2.22)

running

18 / 27

6.74 (.07)

4.65 (2.56)

walking

26 / 29

6.97 (.28)

4.77 (2.63)

hopping

16 / 27

6.78 (.70)

4.10 (2.42)

skipping

6 / 25

6.74 (.42)

3.46 (1.72)

shoveling

3 / 19

5.80 (.58)

2.69 (2.13)

1. Number of children who gave highly appropriate responses.
2. Total number of children who gave responses. Note that some
children did not give responses for some actions.
3. Average rating for the highly appropriately responses.

Results
Overall, most children produced labels for all actions after
one prompt. Adults’ rating for children's actual responses
(M = 3.80, SD = 2.10) were significantly lower than for the
foils (M = 1.45, SD = .84), F (1, 155) = 84, p < .001. Based
on the adults’ ratings, on average children's responses for
most of the actions were considered appropriate (Table 2).
Furthermore, 58% of children’s responses were considered
very appropriate (M = 6.73, SD = .58. All ratings greater
than or equal to 5 were considered very appropriate). There
was a significant correlation between the number of children
who produced highly appropriate responses and adults’
appropriateness rating of those responses, r = .36, p = .001,
suggesting that the more appropriate a response was, the
more children gave that response.
However, few
appropriate answers were given for the actions SKIPPING

and SHOVELING. Ten children were unable to produce a
label for SHOVELING and 4 failed to produce a label for
SKIPPING. The majority of others described SHOVELING
as “dancing” or “exercising;” and SKIPPING as “running,”
“jumping” and “walking.”

Discussion
Findings of this study suggest that 3-year-olds can indeed
perceive the abstract images depicted in point-light displays
as meaningful actions based on the patterns of light
sequences.
Overall, 77% of the children produced
responses for all actions. Given that these children had
never been exposed to point-light displays, they must access
abstract verb representations in order to identify these
contextually bare actions. However, omission of objects in
point-light displays might have increased the difficulty of
identifying actions involving instruments, such as
SHOVELING. In addition, some children's descriptions of
SKIPPING overlapped with their description of WALKING
and RUNNING, the overall shape of which are similar but
for the differences in the movement of arms and legs. This
interestingly indicates children's reliance on the overall
configurations of these actions. Perhaps this problem, too,
was caused by the nature of spontaneous production, a
demanding task. Additional data of action labeling from 5
adults (100% correct) suggest that correct verbs can be
produced for these abstract point-light displays. If children
indeed possess abstract, shape-based verb representations
and point-light displays can capture the properties of these
actions, children should be able to map a familiar verb to
these actions in a less demanding task.

Experiment 2
The purpose of this study was to determine whether 3-yearold children could correctly extend familiar verbs to actions
depicted in point-light displays in a comprehension task.

Method
Participants
Children’s comprehension of at least 7 out of the 8 action
verbs was confirmed with parents on phone calls. Out of
the final sample of 32 subjects (44 were tested), 15 did not
understand “skipping” and 3 did not understand
“shoveling.” The age selected for testing was determined
empirically from these phone. The final sample had 19 boys
and 13 girls, age range from 2;11 to 3;2, mean age = 3;1.
Stimulus videotapes Two separate tapes were created,
each containing half of the actions, paired in length and
number of frames. The pairs of actions were created such
that the lights appearing in the displays were balanced for
size, number, brightness, and movement to ensure that each
pair of actions was equally salient to children (Table 3). A
female speaker recorded the linguistic stimuli in infant-

directed speech for all trials, as well as between the trials, on
one track of the videotape.

Procedure
Children were tested in the Intermodal Preferential Looking
Paradigm (Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996). The child sat
on the parent's lap in front of two 19" TV monitors. The
videotapes were played in complete synchrony,
accompanied by the linguistic stimuli which emanated from
the center of the two monitors.
Familiarization trial The study began with a brief, 6second trial during which a point-light display of a cat
walking across the screen appeared simultaneously on both
monitors for 6 seconds. The cat and its action (i.e., “See the
cat walking!”) were labeled to give children some
familiarity with interpreting the contents of these motionspecified stimuli.
Salience trials Two salience trials followed during which a
pair of actions appeared simultaneously on both screens, one
action on the left monitor and another on the right. Salience
trials had three purposes: First, they showed children that
contrasting events could appear on both screens at the same
time. Second, they were used to calculate stimulus salience.
Finally, they provided exposure to the names of the actions
without telling children which screen either action was on,
e.g., “Hey, one is walking and one is dancing!” Thus,
children were directed to watch both screens.
Test trials Two test trials followed to see if the child could
distinguish between the displays and successfully choose
the action that matched the linguistic stimulus. Now the
child was exhorted to watch the screen containing the
labeled verb, e.g., “Look at dancing! See dancing?” The
target action appeared on the same screen side for both test
trials in a block, the same side as the two preceding salience
trials.
Intertrial intervals Each trial was separated by a 3-second
intertrial interval during which both screens went blank. A
red light mounted centrally between the two televisions lit
up during this time to attract children’s attention to the
center, off the screens. This practice ensured that children
would not just remain on one screen for long periods of
time, but would have to choose which screen to look at for
each trial. The appropriate linguistic stimulus for the trial to
follow was first heard during the intertrial interval, so that
prior to each test trial, the child was directed to find the
matching screen (e.g., “Can you find dancing?”).
Apparatus and Data Coding All equipment – except for
the two 19" color monitors – was shielded from the child’s
view. The videotapes were shown on 3/4” video decks. A 1
KHz tone was recorded for the duration of each trial on the

second, inaudible channel of the videotape and was “read”
by a specially designed tone decoder which functioned in
two ways: 1) it turned the centrally-mounted red light on
during the intertrial intervals, and off during the trials; and
2) it signalled the beginning and end of each trial to the
computer (a PC computer).
Dependent and Counterbalanced Variables
The
dependent variable was the mean visual fixation time to the
named action (the match) versus to the foil (the non-match)
during each pair of the test trials. For each test trial, visual
fixation time was collected starting during the intertrial
interval from the point at which a child watched the center
light for .3 seconds or more. Coding began during the
intertrial interval because if a child failed to reach the .3
second intertrial interval criterion on a trial, that trial was
not included in the data analysis (this occurred on only 5
trials, or 2% of the time). When a child missed a trial, his or
her overall visual fixation mean to the match and non-match
across the remaining test trials was substituted in that cell.
Thus, each child contributed 8 data points to the analysis:
the mean visual fixation time to the match and to the nonmatch for each of 4 pairs of test trials.
Four factors relating to order of stimulus presentation
were counterbalanced across subjects: 1) the number of
matches on a screen side; 2) the order of the matches; 3) the
order of the two actions mentioned during the salience trial;
and 4) the member of a verb pair labeled as the match.

in the IPLP. These results provided evidence that the
combination of point-light displays and IPLP could be a
powerful and sensitive tool to investigate children’s motion
verb representations.
Table 3 Mean visual fixation times (in seconds)
to the four stimulus pairs during salience and test trials
(M = Match; NM = Non-match)
Verb pairs*

Salience Trials
M (SD)

Test Trials**
M (SD)

NM (SD)
2.74 (1.46)
2.82 (1.55)

NM (SD)
3.67 (2.29)
2.22 (1.20)

Picking flowers 2.49 (1.15)
vs. Shoveling
2.84 (1.29)

3.31(1.69)
2.37 (1.50)

Running
vs. Rolling

2.39 (1.05)
2.71 (1.18)

3.40 (1.87)
2.17 (1.37)

Skipping
vs. Hopping

2.73 (1.49)
2.53 (1.46)

3.16 (1.56)
2.05 (1.71)

Walking
vs. Dancing

*The verb requested in each pair (i.e. match) was
counterbalanced.
** The match was watched more than the non-match for all
test trials, p < .05.

Results
Comparison of mean visual fixation times during the
salience trials in the three-way mixed ANOVA (sex (2) X
verb pair (4) X match versus non-match (2)) suggested that
there were no a priori preferences for one action or another
in any pair (Table 3). However, a significant difference
was found between the mean visual fixation time to the
match (M = 3.36, SD = 1.85) vs. the nonmatch (M = 2.29,
SD = 1.44) during the test trials, F (1,3) = 48.81, p < .01.
This effect was carried by the vast majority of children. Out
of 32 subjects, 29 or 91% had mean visual fixation times in
favor of the match for all of the four verb pairs.

Discussion
When the motion-specified point-light images were
presented in the IPLP (Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996),
children who were 6 months younger than those in
Experiment 1 demonstrated extension of all familiar verbs
by watching the screen that matched the requested verb
more than the nonmatch screen. Apparently, children could
attend to the differences between the actions depicted in
point-light displays in a comprehension task. Children
could even map verbs to actions with which they were not
familiar, such as SKIPPING. Perhaps their recognition of
the unfamiliar verb was due to their successful mapping of a
familiar verb to a familiar action presented as a comparison

General Discussion
The purpose of these studies was to determine whether 3year-olds could correctly extend familiar verbs to actions
depicted in point-light displays. Experiment 1 found a
majority of 3-year-olds could accurately identify the actions
depicted in point-light displays. When children could not
produce an accurate label for the point-light actions, they
often used familiar verbs for actions that had similar overall
shape to the target action. More than half of children's
responses (58%) were considered very appropriate by
adults. Experiment 2 found that children who had just
turned 3 could recognize all of the actions in the Intermodal
Preferential Looking Paradigm (Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff,
1996), suggesting that the overall shape of an action could
be a reliable basis for motion verb extension.
This is the first set of studies to suggest that young
children can identify dynamic, complex events depicted in
point-light displays and extend familiar verbs to the actions
embedded in these events. Previous research focused on
infants’ discrimination of familiar and unfamiliar
biomechanical images (Bertenthal, 1993), and adults’
recognition of the familiarity and gender of a point-light
walker (Kozlowski & Cutting, 1977). No work, however,
had assessed the utility of these displays with young

children, let alone combining the stimuli with a language
task. Point-light displays, which permit the use of dynamic
events and contain so little contextual information, could
serve as a critical tool to probe children’s verb
representations. Since the only available information in
such abstract images was the “shape” of events, or an
action’s overall motion configuration, children's success in
identifying these actions suggests that shape may be an
important component of children’s motion verb
representations that guides motion verb extension.
We are not implying that children rely only on shape for
motion verb extension.
However, without disputing
children’s use of other complex verb learning processes
(e.g., syntactic analysis), we underscore the flexibility of
children’s motion verb representations and the
demonstration of their productive reliance on shape as one
cue for the extension and categorization of motion verbs.
It is also important to note not all verb types can be
illustrated through point-light displays. Verbs such as “see”
or “think,” for example, cannot be easily depicted through
movie sequences, while motion verbs are ideal.
Nonetheless, since motion verbs are generally among the
first verbs acquired, future research employing these images
may help uncover how early verb categories develop.
Given that these contextually deprived displays can make
contact with motion representations held by infants as
young as 5 months, and that the children in this study could
map a verb correctly to one of two choices, it appears that
these stimuli could be used with older infants and children
as well. Investigators could examine at what point young
language learners are able to attach verb labels to these
abstract images, and more specifically, when “shape”
becomes a meaningful cue for extending novel verbs and
forming motion verb categories. These types of research
efforts can bring the critical study of verbs to the
foreground, and help advance the understanding of
fundamental verb learning processes that have for too long
been neglected.

References
Bertenthal, B. I. (1993). Perception of biomechanical
motions: Intrinsic image and knowledge-based
constraints. In C. Granud (Ed.), Carnegie symposium on
cognition: Visual perception and cognition in infancy (pp.
175-214). Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum.
Bloom, L. (1993). The transition from infancy to language:
Acquiring the power of expression. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Casasola, M. & Cohen, L. B. (in press). Infants’ association
of linguistic labels with causal actions. Developmental
Psychology.
Gibson, J.J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual
systems. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin.Gibson, J.J.
(1979). The ecological approach to visual perception.
Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin.

Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C. B., Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for lexical principles.
Journal of Child Language, 21, 125-155.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Mervis, C. B., Frawley,
W. B., & Parillo, M. (1995). Lexical principles can be
extended to the acquisition of verbs. In M. Tomasello &
W. E. Merriman (Eds.), Beyond the names for things:
Young children’s acquisition of verbs (pp. 185-221).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Inc.
Golinkoff, R. M., Jacquet, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K.,
Nandakumar, R. (1996). Lexical principles underlie verb
learning. Child Development, 67, 3101-3110.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (1996). The origins of
grammar: Evidence from early language comprehension.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological
motion and a model for its analysis. Perception and
Psychophysics, 14, 201-211.
Kowzlowski, L. T., & Cutting, J. E. (1977). Recognizing
the sex of a walker from a dynamic point-light display.
Perception and Psychophysics, 21, 575-580.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. (1998). Object
perception and object naming in early development.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 19-24.
Mandler, J.M. (1992). The foundations of conceptual
thought in infancy. Cognitive Development, 7, 273-285.
Marconi, D. (1997). Lexical competence. Campbridge, MIT
Press.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition: The
acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Sharon, T. & Wynn, K. (1997). Individuation of actions
from continuous motion. Psychological Science, 9, 357362.
Smith, C.A., & Sachs, J. (1990). Cognition and the verb
lexicon in early lexical development. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 11, 409-424.
Soken, N.H. & Pick, A.D. (1992). Intermodal perception of
happy and angry expressive behaviors by seven-monthold infants. Child Development, 63, 787-795.
Spelke, E.S., Katz, G., Purcell, S.E., & Ehrlich, S.M.
(1994). Early knowledge of object motion: Continuity and
inertia. Cognition, 51, 131-176.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure and lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description: Vol. III. Grammatical
categories and the lexicon. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

