UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Practices of Questioning and Explaining in Learning to Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3k2791g9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Greeno, James G.
Sommerfeld, Melissa C.
Wiebe, Muffie

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Practices of Questioning and Explaining in Learning to Model
James G. Greeno (greeno@csli.stanford.edu)
School of Education, Stanford University
485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford CA 94305 USA

Melissa C. Sommerfeld (msomme@leland.stanford.edu)
Cognition and Learning Laboratory, Stanford University
CERAS 105 Stanford CA 94305 USA

Muffie Wiebe (wiebe@leland.stanford.edu)
Cognition and Learning Laboratory, Stanford University
CERAS 105 Stanford CA 94305 USA
Abstract

modeling unit. We present two episodes in which the group's
problem solving involved mistaken assumptions. In one
episode the group identified and corrected the mistake, but
in the other they did not. In this paper we illustrate how a
mistake was recognized and resolved, and how that differed
from more common instances in which mistakes are not
corrected. Implications for cognitive theory and for the
design of learning environments are discussed.

Conceptual learning in mathematics involves more than
getting to the right answer. Recent efforts in math education
reform have focused on having students work in groups on
open-ended projects that are based in realistic contexts. We
extend previous analyses with hypotheses about conceptual
and interactional aspects of understanding and solving
problems by groups. The conceptual hypothesis focuses on
integration of information in the group’s situation model and
its problem model. The interactional hypotheses involve
patterns of interaction that make it easy or hard for the group
to open up a discussion o f assumptions in its reasoning, and
that make the group accountable to a wider audience for
explaining relations between the situations and mathematical
operations involved in their solutions. Regarding educational
practice, these findings highlight a way in which student
groups must coordinate their conceptual and interactional
work to arrive at satisfactory solutions to the problems posed.
The present study suggests the importance of students in
these environments not only connecting the contextual
situation and the attending mathematics, but also
reconsidering the situation in light of their new mathematical
understanding (bringing the mathematics back into play in
their understanding of the situation). Interactional patterns in
a group make this relatively easier or harder, and this must be
accounted for in implementing new curricula and conducting
teacher education.

An Interactional Aspect of Reasoning
The interactional aspect of activity that we focus on involves
explanatory practices. We develop our analysis using the
schema of conversational contributions provided by Clark
and Schaefer (1989) and adapted for analyzing discourse in
problem solving by Greeno and Engle (1995). In this
schema, each contribution to the process of understanding
and solving a problem includes a presentation of information
or action and an acceptance, resulting in grounding the
contribution in the participants' mutual understanding.
In much ordinary discourse, explanations occur mainly
when someone questions or disagrees with something that
someone else says or does (McLaughlin, Cocy & Reed,
1992). In Clark and Schaefer’s scheme, occasions for
explanation often arise when one participant presents some
information and another other participant responds with a
question, a challenge, or an alternative. When this happens,
the group can take up the question, challenge, or the
suggested alternatives. This "taking up" involves a kind of
negotiation in which the question or challenge may be
resolved, one of the alternatives may be chosen, or the group
may leave the issue with the understanding that their
uncertainty or disagreement remains. In such a negotiation,
explanations may occur frequently between group members.
The discourse patterns of different groups or of groups
in different situations vary in how open they are to
presenting and considering questions, challenges, or
alternatives. A presentation provides a possible continuation
of a trajectory in the activity. A question, challenge, or
alternative proposal presents a potential diversion from that
trajectory, and the resolution may bring about a change in
the group’s direction. It is reasonable—perhaps necessary—
for groups to maintain some level of inertia in their
interactions in order to enable them to function productively.
The amount of that inertia can vary depending on which
participant has the floor. It is easier to challenge and

Introduction
When a group works together on a problem involving
mathematics, how does that work get done? How does the
group arrive at its understanding of the problem on which
they are working? How do they go about conducting the
work? What happens when someone questions what
another member of the group is doing or proposing to do?
The person questioned may offer an explanation that
justifies the claim or action. Alternatively, the group might
collectively take up the question, and construct a new
understanding. Or the question could be ignored,
deflected, or dismissed.
When students are involved in solving open-ended
mathematics problems without one correct answer, it’s not
immediately obvious when an error has been made. So
when a mistake is recognized by a member of a group, how
does that happen? This paper reports results from an
analysis of a student group engaged in a mathematical

1

hypothesized that difficulty in forming a model of a situation
and coordinating that situation with a problem model is a
significant impediment to students' success in learning
algebra. They designed an interactive computer system that
supports students' construction of algebra problem situations
and makes relations needed for the problem model salient.
Use of this program facilitated students' problem solving and
learning.

question some participants than others, and some
participants are more likely than others to discuss an issue
rather than to forge ahead, ignoring the intrusion, or to
simply give a justificatory explanation.
Mathematics educators such as Lampert (e.g., 1990)
and Cobb (e.g., Cobb Yackel & Wood, 1992) have
emphasized the importance of students' developing practices
of explanatory discourse that support valid reasoning and
understanding in mathematics. Cobb and Yackel (1996)
distinguished between social norms, sociomathematical
norms, and mathematical practices in the activity patterns of
mathematics classrooms. Social norms, or participation
structures (Erickson, 1986; Lampert, 1990), include the
extent to which participants expect each other to provide
explanations and conduct their conversations so that it is
easy to present questions, challenges, or alternative
proposals and have them taken up. Sociomathematical
norms include what counts as acceptable and valued
mathematical explanation. Mathematical practices include
methods that are established as acceptable without need for
explanation.

Learning Environment
The curriculum materials in this study came from the Middle
school Mathematics through Applications Project (MMAP),
which was organized as a design experiment (Brown, 1992;
Collins, 1992). The design team, housed at the Institute for
Research on Learning at Stanford, included teachers and
curriculum developers as well as cognitive science
researchers. The team developed a middle-school
mathematics curriculum in which students work in groups to
solve extensive design problems using mathematics
(Goldman, Moschkovich, & MMAP, 1995). Students work
in interactive learning environments that are middle-school
aged versions of design work in architecture, population
biology, cryptography, or cartography. The purpose of the
curriculum is to have students use math to address problems
situated in non-mathematical contexts, often with the
assistance of computer applications.
The data we analyzed come from an 8th grade MMAP
classroom in the San Francisco Bay Area. They were
collected by Rogers Hall and his colleagues (Hall, 1999;
Hall, this volume). In the approximately 30-day unit we
discuss, called Guppies, students created mathematical
models of biological population growth. For their study,
Hall and colleagues had collaborated with the teacher in
designing a revision of the unit that had been taught and
observed earlier. This revision included further emphasis
on how to construct mathematical models of population
growth and about the exponential functions that underlie
them. In addition, they included more explicit attention to
the relation between assumptions about guppies’
reproduction and parameters of the mathematical model.
Our analysis in this paper focuses on one group of students
(Manuel, Lisa, Kera & Ned) whose improvement on
pre/post assessments placed them about midway in learning
of the focus groups videotaped by Hall.

A Conceptual Aspect of Reasoning
The conceptual activity that we focus on involves the
coordination of cognitive resources from different
conceptual domains in activities of reasoning. Like
heterogeneous reasoning (e.g., Stenning & Sommerfeld, this
volume), the cognitive process that we consider involves
reasoning that is informed by different kinds of information
sources. In heterogeneous reasoning, the sources are
different representations (e.g., a diagram and a set of logical
formulas). In the reasoning that we observed, the
information sources were from different conceptual
domains—one primarily involving ecology and the other
primarily involving mathematics.
In professional practices that use mathematics, such as
architecture or scientific research (e.g., Hall & Stevens,
1996), the integration of information drawn from
mathematics and another domain is often seamless; often
one cannot be understood without the other. This ubiquitous,
implicit coordination of mathematics with another
conceptual domain informs professionals' evaluations of
their work, including identification of mistakes.
In school problem solving, the coordination of
mathematics with other domains is often more problematic.
In a study of primary-grade students solving word arithmetic
problems, Kintsch and Greeno (1985) hypothesized two
forms of understanding that they called situation models
(following Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978), and problem models.
According to this hypothesis, solving a mathematical
problem includes understanding properties and relations of
objects and events in the problem (the situation model), and
using that information to construct an understanding in
mathematical terms (the problem model). The problem
model is often supported by material representations such as
equations, which aid students in carrying out appropriate
mathematical procedures. Nathan, Kintsch, & Young (1992)

Analysis
We examine two episodes from a videotape record of one
student group. These episodes were chosen because each of
them included a proposal for a move in the problem space
that was incorrect. However, in one case the group
identified the error and corrected it, while in the other the
group did not identify the error, but instead proceeded using
a flawed piece of information. We explain this difference
between the successful episode and the unsuccessful one
with two hypotheses about collaborative understanding and
problem solving in interaction.

2

would have four babies during each breeding season, and
that the mice would reproduce eight times in four years.
They were asked to show their solutions, which the students
did by drawing a graph that depicted the size of the mouse
population after each breeding season. Manuel had proposed
that the vertical axis would need to extend to 340 mice.
When questioned by Lisa and Kera, he explained this
conclusion by repeating the mathematical procedures he
used: there would be 40 mice born each season, resulting in
320 births, which would be added to the initial 20. When
they began to construct the graph, the following exchange
occurred:

First, we hypothesize that the interaction of the group
included a kind of threshold for taking up questions,
challenges, and alternative proposals that could change the
course of activity. Specifically, we hypothesize that
detection of a misalignment between the group's situation
model and its problem model could occur by a participant's
questioning of an operation that was proposed or performed.
Both episodes began with an operation initiated by one
participant. In the first episode, another participant
presented a new interpretation of the situation (which we
hypothesize was based on her understanding of the situation
model), which illustrated that the current operation was
incorrect. In the second episode this participant questioned
the initiated operation and expressed a lack of understanding
of it. The first of these episodes resulted in the group
changing their mathematical approach to accurately reflect
their new understanding. In the second episode, the group
did not change the operation it was carrying out. We
hypothesize, then, that at least in these two cases, presenting
a persuasive interpretation based on a situation model was
sufficient to bring about a change, while merely expressing
uncertainty and lack of understanding of the operation was
not.
Second, we hypothesize that in both episodes the initial
error involved an inadequate alignment between what the
participants understood about the world of guppies (their
situation model) and the mathematics (their problem
model). That is, the students either did not attend to all the
relevant details in the text of the problem when formulating
their situation model, or they did not attend to all of the
details of the situation model when formulating the problem
model. This is consistent with the findings of Nathan,
Kintsch & Young (1992), who suggested that when
numbers are abstracted from their context, it is possible for
students to perform operations that aren’t faithful to the
situations they are meant to represent (cf Hall et al., 1989).
However, such mistakes can be recognized when the
context the math is supposed to represent is considered,
often using a simulation of some type. In the first episode
such a simulation occurred, which led to a
reconceptualization of both the problem and situation
models. In the second episode however, the problem and
situation models were not integrated, and the mistake was
not recognized. It is important to note that we do not
believe that situation models and problem models are static
states, but that they ideally develop in coordination with
each other in a recursive process. We suggest that although
mathematics problems can be completed successfully
without coordination of problem and situation models,
integration of the two can highlight when mistakes have
been made, leading to more successful problem solving.

180 Manuel: SO there’s sixty… so let’s see the first season
is over here [making a mark on the graph]
185 Lisa: Wait a minute
186 M: and then sixty plus… is going to be a hundred
189 L: Wait a minute, it’s forty, and then it’s like [put
pencil down and placed fingertips together] OK. It’s forty,
right?… And then you have to pair those up [pressed palms
of hands together] and then they have kids [spread the
palms of her hands apart]
195 Kera: pair the196 M: oh yeah [laughing]
202 K: …my gosh, that’s a lot of nasty mice.
Manuel’s participation at the beginning of this episode was
consistent with the group’s usual pattern, in which Manuel
initiated actions and responded to questions by explaining
why his proposals were satisfactory. Lisa indicated a
question (“Wait a minute”) then, when Manuel proposed
adding 40 to the first data point to infer the next data point,
Lisa took the floor, capturing attention with a gesture along
with her speech, presenting a reasoned explanation for a
different operation that would take account of the 40 mice
that were in the population after the first season when they
calculated the number born in the second season.
As the students began to graph their results, Lisa realized
that the ending population had been miscalculated, and she
interrupted the trajectory of the group with a suggestion that
was recognized, acknowledged and finally implemented.
Lisa’s suggestion (line 189) recalled the context of the
problem—how mice reproduce—which enabled the
students to evaluate the mathematical model they were
creating. The linear model that they had previously created
had made sense to all three of the members until Lisa
simulated a model of the situation they were supposed to be
addressing. Thinking about the population growth in those
terms enabled her to recognize the error of adding the same
number of newborn mice every season. This served to relate
the problem model back to the situation model, as the
students were forced to think incrementally about the
growth of their population.
We interpret this conceptually as follows. First, Manuel's
proposal that there would be 320 births involved applying a
familiar schema of mathematical practice. A process that
increases a quantity may do so by producing a constant
quantity during each of several intervals. Inferences about

Episode 1 - Pretest
Our first episode comes from the pretest in which the
students were trying to answer the question: “Given an
initial population of twenty mice who reproduce every
season, how large will the population be at the end of two
years?” The students had decided that each mouse couple

3

501 L: yeah, I know, but how many… of the guppies are
four percent?
503 M: we don’t know, we’ll let that mechanical thing work
and tell us
505 L: wait, are you answering assumption506 M: let’s just try it out.

this kind of process can be made using a schema with three
variables: an amount per unit, a number of units, and a total
amount. We hypothesize that Manuel applied this schema,
using the number of mice the group had calculated for the
first year as the amount per unit (births per season) and the
number of seasons as the number of units. When Manuel
specified and represented 60 as the number mice after the
first season, Lisa related this to a situation model in which
the number of births in each season depends on the number
of mice in the population that season. In that model, the
number of births during the second season had to be
calculated by considering how many mouse couples there
were during the second season. This contradicted Manuel's
method and required a change in the problem model, one in
which there was a separate calculation of the number of
births for each season, rather than a single calculation of the
total number of births during eight seasons

The group was working on a worksheet for calculating a
value of the birth rate to enter into the computer model. The
worksheet included four steps. First, the students made
assumptions about the gender and age distribution of an
initial population of ten guppies. Second, they were to
calculate the total number of guppy fry that would be born
according to data provided about the number of fry per
female of each age in the population. Third, they were to
apply a percentage of infant mortality, due to the fact that
about 95% of newborn guppies are eaten by their mothers.
Fourth, they were to calculate an effective birth rate by
dividing the number of surviving fry by 10, the size of the
initial population, and converting this to a percentage.
Manuel proposed that the survival rate (which he
incorrectly remembered as 4% instead of 5%) could be
entered in the computer model as the birth rate. Lisa
questioned this, (“how many … of the guppies are four per
cent?) but Manuel did not take up the question.
We interpret this episode using a hypothesis about a
problem model that was based on an incomplete use of a
situation model. The computer program and the worksheet
required an entry labeled "birth rate," intended to be
expressed as a percentage of the population in the previous
season. The group understood that the value of this
parameter should reflect the loss of most of the guppies that
had been born. The percentage of surviving guppy fry —
4% — fit these specifications, and Manuel proposed to use
that as the birth rate. Lisa's questions about this operation
were analogous to the challenge she presented in Episode 1.
The correct value should have taken into account the
number or percentage of guppy fry born in relation to the
previous total population, and then take 5% of that (or 4%,
on Manuel's misremembered figure). If Lisa's questions had
specified the neglected quantity in this case, as she did in
Episode 1, she might have succeeded in having her
alternative taken up and considered.
In this interaction, Lisa’s question was not sufficient to
force the group to recognize the mathematical error they had
made. In the earlier episode, Lisa stopped the group with a
suggestion that simulated the situation model they were
supposed to be working from, enabling the group to identify
an error in their mathematical reasoning. In this case, Lisa
attempted to stop the trajectory of the group without either
making a specific suggestion about the relation of the
problem model to the situation model, or proposing a new
situation model. The other members of the group were not
forced to think differently about what they are saying, and
consequently, no change was made.

Episode 2 - Birthrate worksheet
Our second example is more typical of the type of error
recognition that we observed in this group. This episode
comes from the middle of the unit. Students were trying to
create their own model of guppy population growth. They
were told that a population of ten guppies would be coming
from Venezuela, and the students’ task was to determine
how large a tank they would need to hold the guppy
population at the end of two years. In order to solve the
problem the students needed to determine the specific
composition of their original ten guppies (gender and age)
and tabulate their birth rate- a complex equation that used
multiple variables (see also Stenning & Sommerfeld, this
volume).
The interaction in this episode was different than the
first episode: although in this group ideas and questions
were almost always acknowledged and attended to, one
member’s suggestion did not always serve to stop or change
the trajectory of the group. In this episode Manuel
proposed a “shortcut” through the mathematics of a
worksheet (line 444). Apparently realizing that this
suggestion did not fit into the expectations of the worksheet,
Lisa questioned Manuel many times and attempted to stop
the group. In this case however, Lisa’s interjections (lines
451, 497, 501 and 505) did not successfully redirect the
group.
444 M: …If four percent of the frys survive, why don’t we
just forget about the fry survival and just put that amount
for the, for how much are born.
447 L: ‘cause the number born are not how much survived.
448 M: Yes. Yes, the ones who survive are the ones we
count, not the ones who are dead, because we don’t make
room for the ones that are dead.
451 L: …I’m kinda confused
462 M: …why don’t we just put four percent on the
guppies’ birth, because that’s how many are going to
survive.
497 L: but what’s that four percent?
498 K: the ones that survive

4

Comparison

between situation model and problem model and back again
are subject to further study. From an educational
standpoint, it seems that it is important to do more than
provide students with a contextual situation from which
they can extrapolate a problem model. Another important
step is for students to connect the numbers back to the
situation model, for it is all too easy to get lost in the
abstract world of numbers and forget about their meanings.
(See also, Stenning and Sommerfeld, this volume.)
Links between a situation model and a problem model
could also be accomplished through the use of material
representations. In this unit the students are given
worksheets and a computer program in an effort to help
them understand the components of making a model, and to
guide their understanding of how math can work to create
that model. In its current state, the MMAP technology
presents a problem model in the form of a network of
problem quantities. However, it does not have provisions to
facilitate relating the math back to a situation model. One
way that the technology might be changed is to present a
mathematical representation (as it currently does) alongside
a simulation of the components that are taking place.
Simulations of that sort might serve to create more links
from the problem model back to the situation model,
forcing students to think situationally about the math they
are producing, making it more likely that they will notice
their own mistakes if the simulation doesn’t work as they
expected.
Still another way to increase students' attention to links
between situation models and problem models would be to
develop a socio-mathematical norm (Cobb & Yackel, 1996)
in which students expect to be accountable for explanations
that justify mathematical operations and representations in
terms of properties and relations of quantities in situations.
Additionally, interactional patterns create thresholds for
questioning, which affect how a suggestion is taken up or
explained. Although in this group the students seemed to
feel that a mutual understanding was important in order to
proceed, oftentimes that understanding was not a consensus.
One potential way that such a pattern may be altered is
through the larger classroom learning practices, including
aspects of reasoning and explaining for which students are
accountable to each other and to the teacher. Accountability
is provided through discourse activities at different levels,
as Hall and Rubin (1998) discussed in their analysis of
Magdalene Lampert’s teaching. Lampert had an explicit
policy that any member of a group could be called on to
provide an explanation for any of the group’s results. This
policy made each group of students accountable for
achieving mutual understanding so that the individual
members could satisfy the expectation that they would be
able to understand the group’s results.
Introducing this order of accountability into classroom
practices can serve the conceptual linking as well. It is
necessary to include some sort of provision for making sure
that students understand that finding the “correct”
mathematical answer is only part of their responsibility.
They also should be responsible for relating what they

We chose these two episodes because they present a useful
contrast for thinking about group problem solving. In both
episodes, the group was working along a mathematically
incorrect path, and one student questioned that path; but in
one case the group corrected itself, and in the other it did
not. Specifically, both episodes began with a proposal by
one student (Manuel), which involved a mathematical
shortcut. These shortcuts appear to have made some sense
to the other students in the group, but neither proposal
would have led to a successful solution to the problem at
hand. What factors may have been involved in the first
episode becoming a successful problem solving effort,
while the second did not?
We hypothesize that the principal conceptual difference
between these two interactions lay in the students relating
the situation model and the problem model. The curriculum
was designed so that students necessarily developed a
situation model about guppies, and used that situation
model to construct their mathematical problem model.
When they constructed problem models that neglected
significant aspects of the situations, incorrect assumptions
and conclusions could be easily missed.
The patterns of interaction between the two episodes
also differed. In this group, one student (Manuel)
consistently took the function of directing the process,
initiating and performing operations. Two other students
(Lisa and Kera) frequently asked questions or expressed
uncertainty. Generally Manuel responded to these by
justifying the operation he had initiated or performed. In the
first episode (the pretest problem), Lisa not only questioned
Manuel’s line of thinking, she presented a definite
alternative to Manuel’s operation. It appears that this met
the threshold required for Manuel and Kera to attend to
Lisa’s idea and to accept it. In the second episode (the
birthrate worksheet), Lisa questioned Manuel’s shortcut and
referred to a critical property of the situation. But,
apparently, raising a question rather than proposing an
alternative was insufficient to meet the threshold needed to
open up a negotiation of how they should proceed.

Discussion
The hypotheses arising from analysis of these two episodes
point to potential contributions both in fundamental
cognitive science and the design of learning environments.
First, consistent with Nathan, Kintsch, and Young
(1992), we see that students working on contextual
problems get into conceptual difficulty when they do not
adequately align their situation model with their domainspecific problem model. However, we extend that finding
to suggest that for problem solving in real-world contexts it
is also important to realign the problem model to the
situation model, checking for sensibility in the integrated
understanding of the context-mathematics relationship. In
this way the problem and situation models develop in
coordination with each other and are constantly changing in
response to one another. The details of this mapping

5

found back to the model that they were trying to create and
to share that information with their peers. In another
example involving FCL classrooms (Brown and Campione,
1994), at the end of a unit students are made accountable for
what they have learned by sharing their findings with the
rest of their class. Therefore, assumptions that are made
throughout the unit need to be accounted for and explained.
In the course of doing the birthrate sheet, Manuel made
many assumptions about the number of guppies, their
survival rate, and how that affected the birth rate. If the
group had felt some accountability to a “larger audience,”
that is, if they had to present their findings to the class and
explain the elements of their model, they might have been
less likely to take logical leaps without trying to understand
how they related to the model being created.

(pp. 591-596). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Hall, R. (1999, Sept. 30). Case studies of math at work:
Exploring design-oriented mathematical practices in
school and work settings. Final report to the National
Science Foundation.
Hall, R., Kibler, D., Wenger, E., & Truxaw, C. (1989).
Exploring the episodic structure of algebra story problem
solving. Cognition and Instruction, 6, 223-283.
Hall, R., & Rubin, A.. (1998). There's five little notches in
here: Dilemmas in teaching and learning the conventional
structure of rate. In J. G. Greeno & S. V. Goldman
(Eds.), Thinking practices in mathematics and science
learning (pp. 189-235). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (1996). Teaching/learning events in
the workplace: a comparative analysis of their
organizational and interactional structure. In Proceedings
of the Eighteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 160-165). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Kintsch, W., & Greeno, J. G. (1985). Understanding and
solving word arithmetic problems. Psychological Review,
92, 163-182.
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological
Review, 85, 363-394.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question
and the solution is not the answer. Mathematical
knowing and teaching. American Education Research
Journal, 27, 29-63.
McLaughlin, M. L., Cody, M. J., & Reed, S. J. (Eds.),
Explaining one’s self to others: Reason-giving in a
social context. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Nathan, M. J., Kintsch, W., & Young, E. (1992). A theory
of algebra-word-problem comprehension and its
implications for the design of learning environments.
Cognition and Instruction, 9, 329-389.
Voigt, J. (1995). Thematic patterns of interaction and
sociomathematical norms. In P. Cobb and H.
Bauersfield, (eds.), The emergence of mathematic
meaning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgements
This research was conducted under a grant from the Spencer
Foundation. We are very grateful to Rogers Hall and his
associates, Anthony Torralba and Susan John, in the Math at
Work research group at UC Berkeley for sharing the
videotapes with us. Ongoing conversations with them
continue to inform these analyses. We also thank Randi
Engle, Keith Stenning, and Rogers Hall for their comments
and assistance on this paper.

References
Aczel, A. D. (1996). Fermat's last theorem. New York:
Dell.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and
methodological challenges in creating complex
interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.Cobb, P.,
Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992). Interaction and learning
in mathematics classroom situations. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 23, 99-122.
Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1996). Constructivist, emergent,
and sociocultural perspectives in the context of
developmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31,
175-190.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In
E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
educational technology (pp. 15-22). Berlin: Springer.
Goldman, S., Moschkovich, J., The Middle-school
Mathematics through Applications Project Team
(1995). In J. L. Schnase & E. L. Cunnius (Eds.),
Proceedings of CSCL '95: The First International
Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative
Learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greeno, J. G., & Engle, R. (1995) Combining analyses of
cognitive processes, meanings, and social participation:
Understanding symbolic representations. In J. D. Moore
& J. Fain (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society

6

