UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschool Children's Use of Category Information to Interpret Negations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6b844354

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Morris, Bradley J.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1

Preschool Children’s Use of Category Information to Interpret Negations
Bradley J. Morris (bmorris@andrew.cmu.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ABSTRACT
Two experiments examined 4 and 5 year old
children’s use of semantic category to interpret negations. In an
‘I Spy’ game, children were given a hint in the form of a
negation then instructed to select a referent in a forced-choice
procedure. Children used category information to infer that the
referent was semantically related (near-neighbor) rather than
semantically unrelated (far-neighbor) to the negated item,
though both were logically correct choices. The results suggest
that one type of ‘pragmatic interpretation’ children use for
understanding negations is semantic relatedness that reduces the
scope and indeterminacy of negations.

An important question in the development of
reasoning and communication is how children develop an
understanding of logical connectives such as AND, OR,
and NOT. Logical connectives are unique problems in
language acquisition since they do not directly refer to an
object or action but are relational in nature. Negations are
particularly vexing since a negation “has no referent…and
is inherently indeterminate,” (Pea, 1980, p. 156) referring
to the absence of an object or set of objects. Negations
pose a unique problem in reasoning since they do not
specify a clear referent. For example, the statement
‘Flipper is not a fish’ does not indicate what ‘Flipper’ is;
only what it is not.
A negation is a simple syntactic marker for
changing the truth-value of an affirmed statement
(Johnson-Laird, 1983). Previous research on
understanding negations indicates that processing a
negation involves two cognitive operations: creating a
representation of an item, then inhibiting this
representation (Johnson-Laird, 1983; MacDonald & Just,
1989).
The ‘classical’ interpretation of a negation is that
it refers to anything outside of a designated set equally
(Horn, 1989). In a classical interpretation of the previous
example, ‘Flipper’ might refer to a whale, a human, or a
car. A classical interpretation of negations presents two
main difficulties in communication and reasoning: a)
scope, or the limit to the objects or set of objects to which
the negation refers and b) indeterminacy of reference, or
determining to what a negation refers.
Negations are interpreted classically in formal
reasoning- -i.e.; a negation includes all objects except
those that have been negated (Horn, 1989). However,
cognition is bounded; that is, people consider only a small
number of possibilities at any time. Thus, since cognition
is bounded, people do not consider all possibilities for a
negation since this would create a problem set far too

large to be cognitively tractable. Thus, to make operations
tractable, children (and adults) must reduce the number of
possible solution states, though they are capable of
considering more than one possibility (Horobin &
Acredolo, 1989). Therefore, either the number of states is
reduced randomly or there is a process of determining
which states are to be maintained. Such a heuristic must
operate within young children’s knowledge of negations.
In problem solving, an understanding of logical
connectives is necessary to establish the mapping between
evidence and form in order to draw a correct conclusion.
An understanding of logical connectives is crucial to
performance on logic problems. However no current
theory gives a principled explanation of how syntactic and
semantic information influences their interpretation
(Johnson-Laird, 1983).

Young children’s knowledge of negation
By the end of preschool, children have some
understanding of negations. Children are capable of
assigning truth-values for negations (Kim, 1985). For
example, when shown a banana and told that the object is
not an apple, children are capable of judging the statement
as true. Children are also sensitive to syntactic markers
and how these markers limit the scope of negations (De
Boysson-Bardies, 1977; Rumaine, 1988). For example,
children understand that negations refer to particular parts
of speech (e.g., noun phrases) due to the position in a
sentence. Finally, children have several functional uses
for negations such as denying a request (“do you want
some juice?” “No”) or expressing disappearance (“No
juice” when glass is empty) (Bloom, 1970; Pea, 1980).
One question that remains is how children infer a
referent for a negation. That is, given a negated noun
phrase, syntax alone is insufficient for determining a
referent because all ‘nouns’ could be equally plausible.
Another strategy seems necessary inferring a referent.
Previous research suggests that children may use
linguistic and non-linguistic cues to help them resolve
problems of indeterminate reference (Oaksford &
Stenning, 1992).
One such cue may be provided by semantic
categories. A well-documented finding in developmental
research is that young children have the capacity for
category-based reasoning because “members of object
categories…share deep, underlying commonalties”
(Waxman et al., 1997, p. 1074). This category-based
information can be used for induction in which the

2
properties of one entity are extended to another on the
basis of similarity.

Semantic Category and Memory
Previous research has also indicated that there is
a reciprocal relationship between semantic categories and
the structure of memory (Brainerd, Reyna, & Kneer,
1995; Ackerman, 1997). Encoding and recall of items in
memory are related to semantic category because
accessing an item tends to activate items within the same
category more strongly than functionally related items
(Brainerd, Reyna, & Kneer, 1995). Category-based
information may also function as context, making similar
items more salient, aiding retrieval because the process of
categorization itself may form associations between
concepts (Ackerman, 1997).
Category information may also interfere with
retrieval. In the False Recognition Paradigm when
similar items are activated increases in errors are directly
related to the level of similarity between the distracter and
the negated item (Brainerd, Reyna, & Kneer, 1995).
Further, negating an item does not seem to reduce the
salience of related items. Activation levels of similar
items were increased when a target item was negated;
even when the items themselves were contextually
suppressed (MacDonald & Just, 1989).
To summarize, understanding negations involves
a combination of syntactic and semantic/pragmatic
processes. Syntax determines the part of speech that a
negation modifies (e.g., noun phrase) providing a limit on
the scope of a negation. Semantic understanding of
negations is a two-step cognitive operation in which an
item is represented, then inhibited. When the represented
items are accessed in working memory, they activate
similar items (i.e., other category members). Because
activated items are inhibited in negations, then it is
possible that category information guides induction of
possible referents by providing a contextual ‘frame’ in
which pragmatic inferences can be drawn. Thus, negating
an item may provide a cue to the range of items to which
a negation refers by providing context.
There is indirect evidence that category
information may provide context for interpreting a
negation. First, in a study examining conditional
reasoning, phonological cues focused reasoners on
intended contrasts (Oaksford & Stenning, 1992). For
example, in the sentence Tim did not travel from Chicago
to Pittsburgh by car, if one stresses the word c a r
participants tended to infer probabilities of the mode of
transportation Tim used mediated by the knowledge of the
trip (i.e., plane, train).
A second example is taken from an early study
of young children’s understanding of negation. In a series
of class-inclusion experiments, children were given a
collection of objects that could be classified on various

dimensions such as shape or color and given instructions
(phrased as negations) to sort these objects on one
dimensions (e.g., things that are NOT green) (Inhelder &
Piaget, 1964). The results indicated that 5-9 year old
children did not sort objects using class-inclusion rules
(e.g., failing to understand the hierarchical inclusion of
‘blue triangles’ within the class of ‘triangles’). A closer
examination of the data indicates that a prominent error
pattern was to sort objects on one dimension (e.g., shape).
For example, when told to select objects that were ‘NOT
red circles,’ children would often select only red triangles,
ignoring other possible responses (such as other circles or
non-red triangles). Perhaps ‘circle’ guided participants to
infer that they should focus on a shape-based set of
objects. A final example is drawn from a semi-structured
interview in which a child implicitly states how such
category-based inferences are useful for interpreting
negations (from Inhelder & Piaget, 1964, p. 141):
Piaget: “And is it more correct to say that a cow
isn’t a bird, or that a house isn’t. Or are both
equally correct?”
Ros:
“It’s a little ridiculous to say that a
house isn’t a bird.”
Piaget: “And a cow?”
Ros:
“Well, it is an animal!”
There seem to be three possibilities for how
young children might use category information to
interpret negations. The first is that they simply do not use
this information. However, if children do use this
information, then there are (at least) two possibilities that
reflect contrary pragmatic interpretations. One
interpretation infers that the referent is something like the
negated item. This would result in a ‘near-neighbor’
inference in which children would look for something
within the same category as the negated item. A second
interpretation infers that the referent is something unlike
the negated item. This would result in a ‘far-neighbor’
inference in which children would infer that the referent is
something outside the category of the referent. Using
category information may help reduce the number of
possibilities corresponding to a negation by providing a
framework for evaluating which items may be relevant- either items that are closely related to the negated item
(near-neighbor) or items that are unrelated to the negated
item (far-neighbor). Using the category information to
infer either type of relationship between the negated item
and the referent demonstrates a structured understanding
of pragmatics and an attempt to infer the meaning of the
speaker.
The present study examines two questions. First,
do young children use category information to infer a
probable referent for a negation? If children do not use
category information then the number of far-neighbor and
near-neighbor choices should not differ from chance.

3
Second, if children use category information, do they
infer that the referent is something like the negated item
(near-neighbor) or something unlike the negated item
(far-neighbor)? If the number of choices differs from
chance, then this tendency reflects one of two
possibilities. Above chance selection of near-neighbor
items suggests that the child inferred that referent is
something like the negated item. An above chance
selection of far-neighbor items suggests that the child
inferred that the referent is unlike the negated item.
Two experiments were conducted to examine
young children’s use of category-based inferences to
induce the referent of a negation. A forced-choice
paradigm was used for all experiments in which
participants were presented with three objects: a negated
item and two choices. Children were instructed that they
were playing an “I Spy” game. Children were given a hint
as to what the experimenter was “spying” phrased as a
negation. They were then asked to infer the referent of the
negated item by making a choice between the objects and
placing it into a basket. The objects represented logically
correct choices but differed only in the degree of
relatedness to the negated object.
Three semantic categories were used for both
experiments: animals, vehicles, and foods. Three objects
were chosen from each category. Three factors were
examined in the series of experiments: the impact of the
familiarity of the objects, the number of near-neighbor
choices, and the reference set.
In Experiment 1, the experimenter provided three
familiar objects from each category and presented a ‘hint’
in the form of a negation. Children were then asked to
choose between two objects: one from within the same
category of the negated item and one from a different
category. Experiment 2 used the same design as
Experiment 1 but used objects that were unfamiliar yet
fell into the categories.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants
The participants were twenty-one 4-year-olds
and 20 5-year-old children from two preschool
classrooms. Children ranged in age from 4.1 to 5.5 years
(25 girls, 16 boys). Most children were from middle class,
white families. Children were selected on the basis of
receipt of parental permission.

Materials
A total of nine objects were used. The objects
were chosen to represent three semantic categories: foodsapple, banana, orange; animals- dog, cat, bunny; vehiclescar, plane, boat. The objects were chosen as familiar

based on rankings taken from the MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventory (CDI) that
established each object as being in receptive vocabulary
before year 2 (Fenson et al., 1994). Each object was
similar in size. All children named each object
spontaneously.

Procedure
The procedure was a forced-choice selection task
framed as an “I spy” game in which children were
presented three objects: two within the same semantic
category and one outside the semantic category. Children
were told to guess to which object the experimenter was
referring and to place that object in a basket. The child
was told “What I spy is NOT (emphasized) the (negated
object)” and asked to place one object in the basket. Each
child was tested individually in a quiet room and took
approximately 10 minutes. There were two phases: a
warm-up and an experimental phase. The warm-up phase
consisted of three questions intended to familiarize each
participant with the game and to check understanding of
basic negations.

Warm-up
The warm-up phase began by asking participant
to name all objects and to correct any mistakes. Most
participants named each object correctly and all correctly
named the object set before warm-up tasks began. The
same objects were used in the warm-up and experimental
phases. Participants were then presented with three warmup questions to learn the rules of the ‘I spy’ game. All
children demonstrated an understanding of negations by
not choosing target object on three of three trials and
continued into the experimental phase.

Experimental Phase
Once the child was familiarized with the
procedure, each array was presented and the child was
told “What I spy is NOT the x” and instructed to place
one object in the basket. Once the question was asked, eye
contact with the participant and materials was avoided
until after the selected object was placed in the basket in
order to minimize nonverbal cues. The negated object
(A1) always was one of two within the same category.
The two possible choices included one from within the
semantic category of the negated object (A2) and one
from outside the semantic category of the negated object
(B1). A total of nine trials were performed in which each
object was negated only once and appeared in two other
arrays, once as a near-neighbor choice and once as an farneighbor choice. The placement of the negated object and
possible referents was systematically varied. Order of

4
presentation was counterbalanced. All participants
completed all nine trials.

Coding
Responses were coded in one of two categories:
within the same category as the negated item (near
neighbor) or outside the category of the negated item (farneighbor). Children could pick one or two objects per
trial. If one object was chosen, then it was coded as either
within the same category or outside the category of the
negated object

Results
Children’s choices were examined two ways:
across-individuals and within-individuals. Acrossindividual analyses examined overall response trends
while within-individual analyses examined patterns of
responses for consistency across the experiment.
Responses were coded in one of two categories: nearneighbor or far-neighbor. Preliminary analyses indicated
no gender or age differences thus were combined for
further analysis.

Across-Individual Results
Seventy-one percent of choices were within the
category of the negated object leaving twenty-nine
percent outside the category. A confidence interval test
was conducted to compare whether children’s item
selection was at a level different than would be expected
if they were choosing items randomly. Seventy-one
percent of item choices were within the category of the
negated item leaving twenty-nine percent of choices
outside the category of the negated item. The selection
pattern was significantly different than would be expected
by chance (p< .01, confidence interval 66-75%). This
indicates that children selected items from within the
same category as the negated item at an above chance
level.

Within-Individual Responses
In order to evaluate the consistency of individual
participants, a within-individual analysis was performed.
A participant was coded as adhering to a pattern if they
used the same selection pattern on seven of nine trials.
Seven of nine trials represent an above chance pattern of
responses whose conditional probability was less than .10.
Twenty-eight children were coded as using a consistent
response pattern and of these participants, 23 used a nearneighbor selection pattern while 5 used a far-neighbor
pattern.

Discussion

The results indicated that young children
demonstrated a preference for choosing an object from
within the same category as the referent for a negation
(though both choices were logically equal). For example,
given an apple and a boat and asked “What I spy is NOT
a banana”, children overwhelmingly selected the apple.
Individual analysis revealed a large number of children
responded consistently across tasks, primarily using a
near-neighbor strategy, in which a near-neighbor object
was chosen 7 of 9 times. No age-related differences were
found between the 4 and 5 year olds.
These findings suggest that children are sensitive
to the semantic information provided in a negation as
providing a context for pragmatic interpretation. This
information was used most frequently to infer a nearneighbor relationship between the item negated and the
referent. Thus, inferring that ‘not a cat’ is a dog was more
frequent than inferring that ‘not a cat’ referred to a car. It
is also plausible that this same marker may indicate that
the object is outside of the category of the referent, as
demonstrated by the five children who made such an
interpretation. However both are clearly category based
inference patterns.
Although the results of the study are clear their
interpretation could be limited by the familiarity of the
materials. Perhaps with familiar objects there are thematic
relationships (e.g., dogs and cats are often in the same
house) along with the taxonomic relationships, and these
additional links increased near-neighbor choices. Thus, a
second study was designed to examine the influence of
less familiar materials to eliminate the possibility that
labels and thematic relations may have influenced the
results.

Experiment 2
In order to address the familiarity bias that may
have influenced the results of Experiment 1, Experiment 2
extended the same procedure and categories of
Experiment 1 using unfamiliar stimuli. A similar
procedure was utilized using novel materials (yet within
the same semantic categories as Experiment 1) to reduce
the possibility that the familiarity of materials might be
influencing the results. A second procedural change was
introduced to reduce the focus on familiar labels: only
naming the target object only during the experimental
phase.

Methods
Participants
The participants were 21 4 and
children from two preschool classrooms
preschool than in Experiment 1. Children
from 4.4 to 5.3 years (22 girls, 20 boys).

21 5-year-old
in a different
ranged in age
Most children

5
were from middle class, white families. Children were
selected on the basis of receipt of parental permission.

Materials
Nine objects were chosen as unfamiliar, within
the same three semantic categories as Experiment 1: foodeggplant, zucchini, cabbage; animals- lynx, tapir, gazelle;
vehicles- diving bell, seacopter, hovercraft. Each object
was similar in size.

Procedure
The basic procedure was similar to Experiment
1. The procedure was slightly different in that only the
target objects were named. This procedure was used to
reduce the emphasis on labels. Responses were coded as
in Experiment 1.

Results
Across-Individual Results
Preliminary analyses indicated no significant
differences between four and five-year-olds and the two
ages were combined for further analysis. A confidence
interval test was conducted to compare whether children’s
item selection was at a level different than would be
expected if they were choosing items randomly. Seventy
percent of choices were within the category of the negated
item and thirty percent of choices outside the category of
the negated item. The number of within-category
selections was above chance (p< .01, confidence interval
64-76%).

Within-Individual Responses
As in Experiment 1, a participant was coded as
adhering to a pattern if the same selection pattern was
used on seven of nine trials. Twenty-two of 42
participants used a near-neighbor selection pattern on at
least 7 of 9 trials.

Discussion
Experiment 2 was conducted to replicate the
findings of Experiment 1 and examined the possibility
that the results of Experiment 1 may have been influenced
by the familiarity of the materials. As in Experiment 1
almost all children chose only one object per trial and this
object was most often (66%) within the same taxonomic
category as the target. Once again there was considerable
individual consistency, with 22 children choosing the
near-neighbor objects at least 7 of 9 trials. One interesting
difference from the previous experiment was that no child
consistently chose the far-neighbor object.

These data suggest that when given a choice
among unfamiliar objects as the referent of a negation,
there is a tendency to choose an object from the same
taxonomic category. Thus, the semantic information in a
negation provides one clue as to how the negation might
be interpreted.

General Discussion
The findings indicated that most children used
category information to interpret negations and they used
this information to infer that a referent was related to the
item negated rather than unrelated. The findings suggest
that children tend to make these inferences regardless of
whether objects are familiar or unfamiliar.
The first research question investigated the
possibility that children used category information to infer
the intended referent of a negation. Children selected
items at levels above chance; that is, they demonstrated a
preference for one type of item, presumably due to
category information.
The second research question examined the type
of selection preference. There were two possibilities for a
selection preference: selecting items within the category
of the negated item (near-neighbor) or selecting items
outside the category of the negated item (far-neighbor).
The two patterns involve different assumptions about the
pragmatics of negation. A near-neighbor pattern uses
category information to find an item similar to the
negated item. For example, NOT CAT would mean DOG
(rather than CAR) since both are animals. A far-neighbor
pattern uses category information to find an item
unrelated to the negated item. Using the previous
example, NOT CAT would mean CAR (rather than
DOG). The results clearly demonstrated that children
selected an object from within the same category as the
negated item. Individual analyses indicated that children’s
near-neighbor selection patterns were quite consistent
across the problem set with roughly half of the children
selecting near-neighbor items on at least 7 of 9 trials.
The findings suggest that semantic information
may help reduce the scope and indeterminacy of
negations by providing a contextual ‘frame’ for pragmatic
inference. That is, choosing to negate an item may
provide a cue to its interpretation: by choosing to negate
item x, some property of item x may be relevant to
understanding the referent. For example, the sentence
‘Whiskers is not a cat’ provides a clue that there is
something about this object (cat) that is relevant to figure
out what ‘Whiskers’ is- otherwise another object might
have been negated. For example, we would probably be
more surprised if ‘Whiskers’ was a book than if
‘Whiskers’ was a hamster since a near-neighbor
interpretation favors the latter. Thus, the pragmatics of a
near-neighbor interpretation may reduce the search for

6
possible referents to items within the category of the
negated item (e.g., other pets). This strategy can be
formalized using a simple inference rule: given NOT X,
then search for items within the category of X as possible
referents. Thus, this inference rule combined with
semantic category information may provide a powerful
tool for inferring the referent for a negation.
The findings suggest a principled explanation of
interpreting negations. Since the structure of categories
and memory are well established by previous research
(Brainerd, Reyna, & Kneer, 1995; Ackerman, 1997), all
that is required is a simple pragmatic rule easily derived
from experience in which a negation indicates a nearneighbor relationship between the negated item and
referent. These findings suggest that the semantic
information from negations may provide one source of
information with which one reduces the scope and
indeterminacy of negations, thus reducing the number of
possibilities while maintaining information. A nearneighbor relationship may be common in young
children’s language environments in word acquisition.
For example, when children overextend labels onto
unfamiliar objects (e.g., labeling a CAT a DOG) adults
often implicitly utilize a near-neighbor negation in
correcting the error (“No, that is not a dog, it is a cat).
Finally, these findings may provide one
explanation for the interaction between pragmatics and
deviations from normative reasoning lacking in current
theories of logical development. Understanding children’s
interpretations of negations is important since children
and adults do not appear to use classical logical reasoning
(Johnson-Laird, 1983; Sharpe et al., 1996). That is,
children and adults rarely solve logical problems as a
trained logician would solve them. As noted earlier,
current theories of logical development rely on
pragmatics to explain performance, yet do not provide
explanations of how pragmatics is achieved. Therefore,
understanding how pragmatics influences reasoning
solutions and strategies is useful for understanding
performance and how to improve performance through
instruction. This study provides evidence for one type of
pragmatic interpretation- a near-neighbor interpretation of
negations in which the category of the negated item
provides context that guide item selection to an item
within the same category.

References
Ackerman, B.P. (1997). The role of setting
information in children’s memory retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 65, 238-260.
Bloom, L. (1970. Language development: Form
and function in emerging grammars. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Brainerd, C.J., Reyna, V.F., & Kneer, R. (1995).
False-recognition revbersal: When similarity is
distinctive. Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 157185.
De Boysson-Bardies, B. (1977). On children’s
interpretations of negation. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 23, 117-127.
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, J.S., Bates, E.,
Thal, D.J., & Pethick, S.J. (1994). Variability in Early
Communicative Development. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 59(5, Serial No.242).
Horobin, K., & Acredolo, C. (1989). The impact
of probability judgments on reasoning about multiple
possibilities. Child Development, 60, 183-200.
Horn, L. R. (1989). A Natural History of
Negation. University of Chicago Press:
Chicago.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1964). The early
growth of logic in the child. New York: Norton.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Press.
Kim, K.J. (1985). Development of the concept of
truth-fucntional negation. Developmental Psychology, 21
(3), 462-472.
MacDonald, M. & Just, M. (1989). Changes in
activation levels with negation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 4568.
Oaksford, M., & Stenning, K. (1992). Reasoning
with conditionals containing negated constituents. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 835-854.
Pea, R. D. (1980). The development of negation
in early child language. In D. Olson (Ed.)., The Social
Foundations of Language and Thought (pp. 156-186).
New York: Norton.
Sharpe, D., Eakin, L., Saragovi, C., &
Macnamara, J. (1996). Resolving apparent contradictions:
adult’s and preschoolers’ ability to cope with nonclassical negation. Journal of Child Language, 23, 675691.
Rumain, B. (1988). Syntactics of interpretation
of negation: A developmental study. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 45, 119-140.
Waxman, S.R., Lynch, E.D., Casey, K.L., &
Baer, L. (1997). Setters and samoyeds: The emergence of
subordinate level categories as a basis for inductive
inference in preschool- age children. Developmental
Psychology, 33 (6), 1074-1090.

