UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Problem Representation in Experts and Novices: Part 2. Underlying Processing Mechanisms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pn0300c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.
Yarlas, Aaron S.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Problem Representation in Experts and Novices: Part 2. Underlying Processing
Mechanisms
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
School of Teaching & Learning and Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Aaron S. Yarlas (yarlas.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science and School of Teaching & Learning, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Abstract
It has been well established that experts and novices focus on
different aspects of problems, with novices focusing more on
surface features rather than on deep principled features of a
problem. What is less clear are the mechanisms that underlie
these differences in construal of problem representation. The
current study, which uses an ‘old/new’ recognition procedure,
examines expert and novice representation of arithmetic
equations in which the deep relational properties (i.e., principles of commutativity and associativity) were well known to
both groups. Results indicate that both novices and experts
encode both surface and principled features in the same serial
manner, with surface features preceding principled features
for both. At the same time, only for novices and not for experts, surface features compete with deep features, thus requiring additional resources to inhibit this attentional competition.

Introduction
Mental representation is a central component of several fundamental cognitive processes, including categorization, reasoning, decision making, and problem solving. For example,
the way an entity is categorized depends on the content of an
organism’s mental representation regarding this entity and
the similarity of this representation to a composite representation stored in memory (Estes, 1994; Nosofsky, 1988).
In addition, the way people reason from propositions and
what they infer from these propositions depends on the
manner in which these propositions are mentally represented
(Byrne, 1989; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Johnson-Laird,
Legrenzi, Girotto, Legrenzi, & Caverni, 1999). Finally, the
content of a mental representation determines the approaches and strategies people use when they attempt to
solve problems (Kaplan & Simon, 1990; Larkin & Simon,
1987; Newell & Simon, 1972). Of course, the content of
mental representation may depend on knowledge of the conceptual and relational structure of the domain, and transformational procedures and algorithms (Anderson, 1982; 1990;
Case & Okamoto, 1996; Gelman & Meck, 1986, 1992; Hiebert & Lefevre, 1986; Rittle-Johnson & Alibali, 1999). For
example, the problem " Bill has eight marbles and Jill has
six times more" would be represented as "8 x 6 = ?", only if

the person has knowledge of and can abstract basic multiplication algorithms.
As noted above, there is a distinction between the content
of a mental representation (or what is represented) and the
process of construing this content (or what is attended to,
encoded, and stored). The process of construing mental representations remains largely unknown, and is the focus of
this paper. However, there are several important regularities
that have been established with respect to the content of
mental representation that are important for the study of the
process of construing of mental representation.
In Part 1 of this paper (Yarlas & Sloutsky, 2000) and
elsewhere (Yarlas & Sloutsky, 1999), we describe a large
body of literature indicating that in problem solving, reasoning, learning and transfer, and problem categorization,
novices and experts construe representations that differ in
their content. In particular, novices tend to focus on surface
features of the problem, whereas experts tend to focus on
deep relational features (e.g., Chase & Simon, 1973; Chi,
Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Larkin, 1983; Simon & Simon, 1978;
Yarlas & Sloutsky, 1999). These effects have been demonstrated across a variety of knowledge-rich and knowledgelean domains.
However, in spite of these well-established expert-novice
differences, it remains unclear what accounts for these differences. Do differences occur because experts have knowledge of deep relational properties and novices do not? Do
they occur because novices are less intelligent or younger
than experts are, and they cannot grasp deep relational properties? Do experts and novices differ in processes underlying
the construal of a problem representation? Or do differences
stem from a combination of these factors?
In Part 1 of this paper (Yarlas & Sloutsky, 2000), we focused on expert-novice differences in the content of mental
representations. It was demonstrated that when tasks are
sufficiently simple and deep relational properties are well
known, neither differences in knowledge, intelligence, nor
development can fully account for the observed differences
between novices and experts. In a series of experiments designed to distinguish among these possibilities, tasks were
constructed that included principles of arithmetic familiar to
novices, and surface features that were completely superfluous with respect to deep relational features. In particular,

they asked participants varying in age and degree of expertise to sort mathematical equations that could have common
surface elements (e.g., commonality of numbers or the same
number of constituent addends in the equation) or common
deep mathematical principles (e.g., commutativity or associativity). Results indicated that only mathematics experts
consistently focused on principles, whereas novices, regardless of age and intelligence, focused mostly on surface
features. However, elimination of surface features led to
substantial increase in focusing on principles. Interestingly,
the reintroduction of surface features reduced participants’
focus on principles to their original low levels. These and
other manipulations allowed us to argue that differences
between novices and experts stem from differences in processes underlying the construal of a problem representation.
However, if novices have knowledge of the principles in
question yet still fail to represent them, then several questions arise about processes underlying problem representations in novices and experts. Do novices initially encode
both deep and surface features, but later discard the deep
relational properties, or do they simply fail to encode the
deep relational properties? And what are the processing
mechanisms underlying problem representations in experts:
do experts encode and discard surface features, or do they
ignore these features from the very beginning?
To answer these questions, we used an ‘old/new’ recognition paradigm in the current experiment. This paradigm affords the creation of a set of foils, such that patterns of hits
and false alarms point to which aspects of problems have
been encoded and committed to memory and which aspects
have been left out. In the study phase, participants were presented with a set of arithmetic equations. These equations all
utilized a principled property, either associativity or commutativity. The former states that for addition, subtraction,
and multiplication, constituent parts can be decomposed and
recombined in different ways (e.g., a + b = [a – c + c] + b).
The latter states that the order of elements is irrelevant for
addition and multiplication (e.g., a + b + c = b + c+ a). In
addition, these equations all used consistent levels of two
surface elements: all equations used numbers ranging between 1 and 9, and all used either 5 or 6 numbers in the
equation. In the recognition phase of the experiment, in addition to ‘old’ items, four combinations of ‘new’ equations
were presented as foils. Half of these foils, which we refer to
as ‘feature +’ foils, maintained the same levels of surface
features as used in the learning phase (i.e., numbers ranging
between 1 and 9, and either 5 or 6 numbers in the equation),
while the other half of the foils, which we refer to as ‘feature
-’ foils, violated these categories (i.e., numbers greater than
9, and either 4 or 7 numbers in the equation). Also, half of
the foils, which we refer to as ‘principle +’ foils, maintained
the use of one of the two principled properties, while the
other half, which we refer to as ‘principle -’ foils, did not
use any principled properties in the equation. The two levels
of the two kinds of properties (feature being either + or -,
and principles being either + or -) were fully-crossed, thus
creating four combinations of foils: feature + /principle +
(F+/P+), feature + /principle - (F+/P-), feature -/principle +
(F-/P+), and feature -/principle - (F-/P-). For example, for
the equation 5 + 3 + 6 = 3 + 6 + 5 in the study phase, the

following foils were presented in the recognition phase: (1)
5 + 3 + 6 = 3 + 6 + 5 (Old), (2) 7 + 4 + 2 = 4 + 2 + 7
(F+/P+), (3) 5 + 3 + 6 = 3 + 4 + 7 (F+/P-), (4) 11 + 9 = 9 +
11 (F-/P+), and (5) 14 + 7 = 9 + 12 (F-/P-).
The goal of this paper is to elucidate processes underlying
problem representations in novices and experts. In this article, we consider and test a number of possible processing
models for both novices and experts, which are summarized
in Table 1.
Table 1: Summary of considered processing models
Novice Model 1
Novice Model 2

Expert Model 1
Expert Model 2

Expert Model 3

Encode only surface features with no
encoding of deep structural features
Encode both surface and deep structural features; attentional competition
between surface and structural features, with surface features winning
Encode only deep structural features
with no encoding of surface features
Encode both deep structural and surface features; attentional competition
between structural and surface features, with structural features winning
Encode both deep structural and surface features; no attentional competition

For this task, if novices encode only surface features and
not relational features, they should rapidly respond "Old"
when surface features are present and they should rapidly
respond "New" when surface features are absent (Novice
model 1). Similarly, if experts encode only principles and
not surface features, they should rapidly respond "Old"
when principles are present and they should rapidly respond
"New" when principles are absent. If either group encodes
both principles and features, they should exhibit more complex patterns of responses (Expert model 1).
There is preliminary evidence (Yarlas & Sloutsky, 1999)
that novices do encode both surface and deep features, but
discard the latter in the course of attentional competition
(Novice model 2). However, while processing mechanisms
underlying problem representations in novices require further clarifications, these mechanisms in experts remain unclear. One possibility is that experts start construing problem
representations from deep rather than from surface (Expert
model 2). An alternative possibility is that experts construe
representations in a manner similar to that of novices, except
that there is no attentional competition in experts (Expert
model 3). Of course, it is also possible that experts construe
representations in a parallel manner, in which case their response latencies should exhibit small or no differences
across the foils.
The alternative response patterns derived from the models
summarized in Table 1 are presented in Table 2. These predictions are based on the following two assumptions: (1)
both experts and novices process properties of problems in a
serial manner and (2) each additional step in processing
leads to increase in latencies. Both assumptions were previously corroborated using this task with novices (Yarlas &

Table 2: Patterns of responses and latencies predicted by alternative models for novices and experts

Models of responses
Novices Model 1 (Response type)
Novices Model 1 (Latency)
Novices Model 2 (Response type)
Novices Model 2 (Latency)
Experts Model 1 (Response type)
Experts Model 1 (Latency)
Experts Model 2 (Response type)
Experts Model 2 (Latency)
Experts Model 3 (Response type)
Experts Model 3 (Latency)

Old targets
OLD
Fast
OLD
Slow
OLD
Fast
OLD
Slow
OLD
Slow

Sloutsky, 1999). Because of these assumptions, the parallel
processing model is absent from Table 1; however we do not
discount the possibility of parallel processing in experts.
Note that predictions presented in Table 2 are qualitative, in
that they do not specify accuracy or latency across the conditions, but rather point to (a) patterns of recognition responses and (b) directions of differences in latencies.
Note that the tables have two critical components. First, in
novices, responses to F+/P- foils afford either corroboration
or elimination of Model 1 for novices (see Table 1), whereas
in experts, responses to F-/P+ foils afford corroboration or
elimination of Model 1 for experts (see Table 1). Second,
within experts and novices, patterns of differences in latencies afford the selection of the more plausible model as well
as the description of specific processing components. Specifically, latencies in experts’ responses to F+/P- items will
allow for discriminating between Model 2 and Model 3 for
experts. In short, patterns presented in the table should allow
us to distinguish between processing models in novices and
experts presented in Table 1.

Method
Participants
Two samples, representing novices and experts, were used
in this study. The novice group included twenty-three undergraduates in an introductory psychology course at the
Ohio State University who participated for partial course
credit. This sample had an average age of 19.2 years (SD =
0.9 years), with 12 women and 11 men. The expert group
included twelve graduate students in the Mathematics Department at the same university who participated for a payment of twenty dollars. This sample had an average age of
27.6 years (SD = 5.8 years), with 3 women and 9 men.

Materials and Procedure
The materials and procedures used in this study were
identical for participants in both the novice and expert samples. All participants were run individually with stimuli presented by a personal computer using SuperLab software
(Cedrus Corporation, 1999).
The experiment consisted of three phases: the study phase,
the distraction phase, and the recognition phase. In the study

Foil Types and Patterns of Responses
F+/P+
F+/PF-/P+
OLD
OLD
NEW
Fast
Fast
Fast
OLD
NEW
NEW
Slow
Very Slow
Fast
OLD
NEW
OLD
Fast
Fast
Fast
OLD
NEW
NEW
Slow
Fast
Slow
OLD
NEW
NEW
Slow
Slow
Fast

F-/PNEW
Fast
NEW
Fast
NEW
Fast
NEW
Fast
NEW
Fast

phase, participants were presented with thirty arithmetic
equations, which they had been instructed to memorize. All
thirty equations used addition, used numbers ranging from 1
to 9, contained either 5 or 6 numbers, and
used either the associative or commutative principle (half for
each). Each equation was centered and presented in dark
type on a white screen for ten seconds, with a two-second
interval between each, during which only the white background was seen. The order of equations was randomized
across participants.
A distraction phase followed the study phase for the purpose of clearing participants’ short-term memory. For the
distraction task, participants were presented with ninety letters, for which they had been instructed to indicate whether
the letter was a vowel or a consonant. This phase took approximately three minutes.
Following the distraction phase was the recognition phase.
Participants were told that they would be presented with a
number of arithmetic equations, some of which had been
presented to them earlier and some of which had not been
presented earlier, and that they were to decide whether each
equation was ‘old’ or ‘new’. There were a total of sixty
equations presented in the recognition phase. The order of
equations presented in this phase was randomized across
participants. There were five categories of foils, with twelve
exemplars for each category. Recall that these foils included:
(1) Old targets that had been presented earlier in the learning
phase, (2) F+/P+ equations, which used similar surface features and used either the commutativity or associativity principle as in the original equations, (3) F+/P- equations, which
used similar surface features as the original equations but
did not use either the commutativity or associativity principle, (4) F-/P+ equations, which used surface features different from those used in the original equations but used either
the commutativity or associativity principle, and (4) F-/Pequations, which used surface features different from those
used in the original equations and did not use either the
commutativity or associativity principle.

Results and Discussion
In this section, we will first discuss the accuracy of recognition and latencies of responses for novices, and then for
experts. For each group, we will first examine overall accu-

racy of response to the foils (i.e., correct acceptance of Old
targets and correct rejection of all foils). We will then compare participants' "Old" responses and latencies across the
foil types. Note that for all foils except F+/P+, we compared
latencies for correct responses only. Because we expected a
large number of false alarms for F+/P+ foils, for these foils,
latencies for both correct and incorrect responses were used
in the analyses.
Novices exhibited high overall accuracy for most of the
foils, correctly accepting Old targets and correctly rejecting
F-/P+, F-/P-, and F+/P- foils. They mostly false alarmed,
however, on F+/P+ foils. The latter finding is expected because F+/P+ foils were categorically indistinguishable from
Old targets, since both surface features and principled features present in Old targets were also present in F+/P+ foils.
More specifically, results indicate that accuracy rates (i.e.,
hits for Old Targets and correct rejections for the other foils)
for F+/P- (M = 0.69, SD = 0.35), F-/P- (M = 0.93, SD =
0.20), F-/P+ (M = 0.97, SD = 0.16), and Old targets (M =
0.84, SD = 0.15) were significantly higher than chance (all
ts(22) > 9.4, ps<.001), whereas for F+/P+ (M = 0.36, SD =
0.26) accuracy was significantly lower than chance, t(22) = 6.4, p < . 001. These results indicate that these participants
took the task seriously and were providing rather accurate
responses.
Percentages of "Old" responses and latencies for novices
are presented in Figure 1. A one-way repeated measures
ANOVA points to significant differences among foils for
novices (F (4, 88) = 53.9, MSE = 542.7, p < .0001. Pairedsamples t-tests indicated the following the following direction in the proportion of "Old" responses: Old targets >
F+/P+ > F+/P- > F-/P+ = F-/P-, all ts(22) > 3, all Bonferroni
adjusted ps < .05 for differences.
Novices' latencies to different foils are also presented in
Figure 1. These measures were also subjected to a one-way
repeated measures ANOVA. The analysis indicates significant differences among the foils, F (4, 76) = 15.48, p < .001.
Planned comparisons revealed that F+/P- latencies were
significantly higher than those for Old targets, t(20) = 3.4, p
< .005, whereas latencies of F-/P- and F-/P+ foils were significantly lower than those of the Old targets, ts(21) > 3.5,
ps< .005.
These data allow us to rule out Model 1 presented in Table 1
-- novices did not base their responses solely on the presence
or absence of surface features. When surface features were
absent (F-/P- and F-/P+ foils) participants produced fast and
accurate "New" responses; however, when surface features
were present, novices did not always produce "Old" answers. Rather, novices' responses were mediated by the
presence or absence of principled features. In particular,
when both surface and principled features were present (Old
targets and F+/P+ foils) novices generally responded "Old".
These responses were slower than those for F-/P- and F-/P+
foils. Finally, when surface features were present but principles were absent (F+/P- foils), participants in general accurately rejected these foils, but latencies for these correct rejections were significantly higher than latencies for Old targets. These findings support the notion of the attentional
competition between the two types of features (see Table 1,
Novice model 2), pointing to a relative difficulty for partici-

pants to inhibit the salient surface feature and reject the foil.
Of course, these data raise an interesting question of whether
or not experts would also exhibit attentional competition
between deep relational and surface features.

Figure 1. Proportion of novices’ “Old” responses and
response times (in milliseconds) across foil types in the
recognition phase.
Similarly to novices, experts exhibited high overall accuracy for most of the foils, correctly accepting Old targets
and correctly rejecting F-/P+, F-/P-, and F+/P- foils. They
too mostly false alarmed, however, on F+/P+ foils. More
specifically, accuracy rates (i.e., hits for Old Targets and
correct rejections for the other foils) for F+/P- (M = 0.96,

SD = 0.06), F-/P- (M = 1.00, SD = 0.00), F-/P+ (M = 0.98,
SD = 0.04), and Old targets (M = 0.90, SD = 0.05) were
significantly higher than chance (all ts(11) > 58, ps<.001),
whereas for F+/P+ (M = 0.15, SD = 0.09) accuracy was significantly lower than chance, t(11) = - 5.1, p < . 001. These
results indicate that experts also took the task seriously and
provided rather accurate responses.
Percentages of "Old" responses and latencies for experts
are presented in Figure 2. A one-way repeated measures
ANOVA points to significant differences among foils for
experts (F (4, 44) = 768.5, MSE = 34.2, p < .0001. Pairedsamples t-tests indicated the following the following direction in the proportion of "Old" responses: Old targets =
F+/P+ > F+/P- = F-/P+ = F-/P-, all ts(22) > 23, all Bonfer-

roni adjusted ps < .0001 for differences.
Figure 2. Proportion of experts’ “Old” responses and
response times (in milliseconds) across foil types in the
recognition phase.

Experts' latencies to different foils are also presented in
Figure 2. These measures were also subjected to a one-way
repeated measures ANOVA. The analysis indicates significant differences among the foils, F (4, 44) = 18.60, p < .001.
Planned comparison revealed that, in contrast to novices,
F+/P- latencies for experts were not significantly different
from those for Old targets, t(11) = 0.2, p = .85, but that latencies for F-/P- and F-/P+ foils were again significantly
lower than those of the Old targets, ts(11) > 4, ps< .005.
The analysis of hits and false alarms allows us to eliminate Model 1 of expert responses presented in Table 1. Indeed, according to this model, experts should have responded "New' when principles were absent, and respond
"Old" when principles were present. However, the F-/P+
foils almost invariable generated "New" responses, thus
eliminating Model 1. Similarly, the analysis of latencies
affords the elimination of Model 2. Recall that according to
this model, experts should have more rapidly answered
"New" when the principle was absent than when the feature
was absent. However, the observed findings are consistent
with Model 3 and not with Model 2, given that F-P+ foils
were rejected faster than F+P- foils. Therefore, results of the
experiment support Model 2 for novices and Model 3 for
experts.
These findings point to important processing similarities
and differences in experts and novices. First, both experts
and novices exhibited serial processing. In addition, when
construing problem representations, both experts and novices encode features first. At the same time, only novices
experience competition between salient surface features and
less salient deep principles. For the majority of novices, well
known deep principles end up winning the competition;
however, the competition takes time and effort. At the same
time, experts represent both deep and surface features of the
problem and do not experience such attentional competition.
Recall that the experiment employed a very simple recognition task. In more resource demanding tasks, such as categorization, reasoning, or problem solving, deep relational features in novices may lose attentional competition to salient
surface features. This loss would manifest itself in novices'
tendency to focus on surface feature, while ignoring deep
relational features (Chase & Simon, 1973; Chi, Feltovich, &
Glaser, 1981; Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Larkin, 1983; Simon & Simon, 1978; Yarlas &
Sloutsky, 1999).
The results have several potential implications. First, they
lead to a better understanding of expertise, indicating that
expert-novice differences persist even with most simple
tasks (it is reasonable to expect that more complex tasks
would result in more dramatic expert-novice differences).
Second, the results have important educational implications,
suggesting that salient surface features may deter rather than
promote learning.

Conclusion
The reported findings indicate that even when a task is
very simple, experts and novices construct problem representations differently. While both experts and novices encode deep as well as surface features of the problem, only

for novices and not for experts, surface features compete
with deep features, thus requiring additional resources to
inhibit this attentional competition. These findings may or
may not hold for less familiar deep principles or more complicated tasks. However, these results allow us to conclude
that even when a task is very simple and deep principles are
well known, experts and novices differ in processes underlying the construal of problem representations.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by a grant from James
S. McDonnell Foundation to the first author.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369-406.
Anderson, J.R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Byrne, R. M. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with conditionals. Cognition. 31(1), 61-83.
Case, R., & Okamoto, Y. (1996). The role of central conceptual structures in the development of children's
thought.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. G., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Estes, W. K. (1994). Classification and cognition. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Gelman, R., & Meck, E. (1986). The notion of principle:
The case of counting. In J. Hiebert (Ed.), Conceptual and
procedural knowledge: The case of mathematics.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gelman, R., & Meck, E. (1992). Early principles aid initial
but not later conceptions of number. In J. Bideaud, C.
Meljac & J. Fischer (Eds.), Pathways to number: Children's developing numerical abilities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Hiebert, J., & Levevre, P. (1986). Conceptual and procedural knowledge in mathematics: An introductory analysis. In J. Hiebert (Ed.), Conceptual and procedural
knowledge: The case of mathematics. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, M.
S., & Caverni, J.-P. (1999). Naive probability: A mental
model theory of extensional reasoning. Psychological Review, 106, 62-88.
Kaplan, C. A., & Simon, H.A. (1990). In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374-419.

Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Larkin, J. (1983). The role of problem representation in
physics. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11, 65-99.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1988). Similarity, frequency, and category
representations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 14, 54-65.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, N J: Prentice-Hall.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999). Conceptual and
procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one lead to
the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(1),
175-189.
Simon, D. P., & Simon, H. A. (1978). Individual differences
in solving physics problems. In R. S. Siegler, (Ed), Children's thinking: What develops? Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Yarlas, A. S., & Sloutsky, V. M. (1999). Representation of
arithmetic principles by novices: Knowledge or attention?
Manuscript under review.
Yarlas, A. S., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2000). Problem representation in experts and novices: Part 1. Differences in the
content of representation. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

