UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prosodic Choice: Effects of Speaker Awareness and Referential Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3949t83h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Snedeker, Jesse
Gleitman, Lila
Felberbaum, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

CogSci2000

3

Prosodic Choice: Effects of Speaker Awareness and Referential Context
Jesse Snedeker (jessned@psych.upenn.edu),
Lila Gleitman (gleitman@ psych.upenn.edu),
Michaal Felberbaum (felberbm@sas.upenn.edu),
Nicora Placa (nicorap@sas.upenn.edu),
John Trueswell (trueswel@ psych.upenn.edu)
Institute for Research in Cognitive Science; 3401 Walnut Street, Suite 400A
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
These experiments were designed to discover whether untrained
speakers produce prosodic cues that are sufficient to allow listeners to interpret ambiguous PP-attachments. A referential
communication task was used to elicit productions of ambiguous sentences and determine whether listeners could use prosodic cues to correctly interpret these ambiguities in context. In
Experiment 1, the referential context supported both potential
interpretations of the ambiguity. Acoustic analyses indicated
that Speakers produced potentially informative prosodic cues.
Listeners' responses to the ambiguous sentences strongly reflected the demonstration the Speaker had seen, indicating that
they were able to use this information. However, postexperiment interviews revealed that Speakers were aware of the
ambiguous situations. Experiment 2 manipulated Speaker
awareness by altering the Speaker’s referential context to support only the intended meaning, and by making the resolution of
the ambiguity a between subjects variable. Although Listeners’
contexts were unchanged from Experiment 1, Listeners now
showed no sensitivity to the Speakers’ intended meaning.
Acoustic analysis indicated that the strong prosodic cues provided in Experiment 1 were absent in Experiment 2. The experiments suggest that informative prosodic cues depend upon
speakers' knowledge of the situation: speakers provide prosodic
cues when needed; listeners use these prosodic cues when present.

Introduction
One of the current challenges for research on prosody and
syntactic ambiguity is to bring together what we know
about the listener with what we know about the speaker. In
doing so, we can begin to understand whether the prosodic
cues that are available in speech can influence a listener’s
interpretation. The research reported here attempts to address this challenge by examining how a speaker uses prosody in the face of ambiguity and whether an accompanying
listener is able to interpret the speaker’s intended meaning.
We will propose from this research that prosodic cues in
adult-to-adult speech often depend upon the speakers’
knowledge of the referential context. In particular, the
choice to provide helpful prosodic cues depends upon
whether or not the referential situation furnishes other cues
that could help resolve the ambiguity.
Prior research on prosody and syntactic ambiguity has focused almost exclusively on either the speaker or the listener, and only rarely on the interaction between the two.

This division of labor has led to important advances in our
understanding of prosody; we know a fair amount about
what listeners can do with prosodic cues, and what prosodic
cues speakers can produce.
Numerous language comprehension studies have demonstrated that prosodic manipulations of the linguistic input
can influence comprehenders' on-line and off-line decisions
about syntactic ambiguity (for reviews see, Warren, 1996;
Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999). These studies have used a wide
variety of experimental techniques, including cross-modal
naming, lexical decision, word monitoring, and sentence
judgments, and have found effects of prosody on the interpretation of a variety of temporary and global ambiguities.
Likewise, studies of language production have found that
the prosody of an utterance often reflects its syntactic structure (Cooper & Paccia-Cooper, 1980). Moreover, informed
speakers can mark different meanings of an ambiguous
string through prosodic grouping (Lehiste, 1976; Allbritton
et al., 1996). These studies suggest that speakers of a language share knowledge about prosodic cues to syntax, and
can use this information in decisions about production.
Curiously, most comprehension and production studies
have relied upon distorted and/or artificial manipulations of
prosodic information. In comprehension studies prosody is
typically manipulated by splicing silent pauses into speech
to indicate clause boundaries, manipulating synthesized
speech, or asking trained speakers to produce particular
prosodic variants of an utterance. Production studies have
relied upon data from trained speakers, such as radio announcers, who have been explicitly instructed to contrast
the alternate interpretations of an ambiguous sentence. Notably, few studies of prosody and syntax have examined
how untrained listeners respond to the speech of untrained
speakers in contexts in which the participants are attempting
to communicate about a shared situation.
In naturally occurring speech, syntactic structure is only a
weak predictor of prosodic variation (for review see Fernald
& McRoberts, 1996) This is because prosodic patterns are
affected by many other factors, including the length and
stress pattern of words, speech rate and discourse factors
such as contrastive stress (Selkirk, 1984). Unsurprisingly, a
number of researchers have found that naïve speakers produce less consistent prosodic cues for syntactic disambiguation than the informed speakers typically used in comprehension experiments (Lehiste, 1973; Wales & Toner, 1979;

CogSci2000

Allbritton, McKoon, & Ratcliffe, 1996). In the most relevant of these studies, Allbritton et al. (1996) compared
situations in which speakers were uninformed or explicitly
informed about potential ambiguities. In the uninformed
case, untrained speakers (undergraduate students) and professional speakers (radio announcers) were asked to read
paragraphs containing globally ambiguous sentences (e.g.,
“They rose early in May”) which had been disambiguated
by the prior context. In the informed case, radio announcers
were provided with the same globally ambiguous sentences
without a disambiguating context, both of the meanings
were explained to the speaker, and he/she was asked to read
the sentence twice, to convey each of these meanings.
Recordings of these utterances were played for a separate
group of subjects who were given both meanings and asked
to identify the one that the speaker was attempting to convey. The findings from this judgment task revealed, in the
words of the authors, that “most speakers trained or not, did
not produce prosodically disambiguated utterances for most
sentences. Trained, professional speakers reliably produced
appropriate disambiguating prosody only when they were
shown the two meanings of the sentence side by side and
were explicitly asked to pronounce the sentence twice.”
There are three plausible explanations of the Allbritton et
al. findings, each of which has different implications for the
role of prosody in syntactic ambiguity resolution. First, it is
possible, as the authors claim, that speakers only produce
reliable cues when instructed to do so. However, this would
suggest that prosodic cues to structure are rare in natural
speech, raising questions about how listeners become sensitive to these cues. Second, the results could be interpreted
as evidence that speakers only produce reliable cues when
the surrounding context does not disambiguate the utterance. In the Allbritton et al. study, experimental naïveté and
contextual constraint were confounded. Perhaps, as Lieberman (1967) suggested, speakers don’t bother to divide up an
utterance into informative prosodic chunks if other cues are
present to disambiguate structure. Finally, it is possible that
speakers do not produce reliable prosodic cues when reading connected text, regardless of whether that text provides
a disambiguating context.
Recently, Schafer, Speer, Warren & White (1999) have
presented data which challenges the Albritton findings.
They elicited prosodic variants of temporary and global
ambiguities from uninstructed subjects by having them play
a game that used a set of scripted commands. These utterances were submitted to acoustic and phonological analyses
and a judgement task parallel to that conducted by Allbritton et al. (1996). In all three analyses Schafer and colleagues found evidence that speakers produced consistent
prosodic cues to the intended structure. They attribute the
divergent findings to differences in the tasks that were used,
suggesting that the subjects in the earlier study were reading
and had no clear communicative intentions.
The current paper attempts to explore the role of prosodic
cues in language production and comprehension. In particular, we examine the situations under which untrained speakers can produce reliable prosodic cues that will allow listeners to resolve attachment ambiguities. The critical sentences are ones that contain globally ambiguous preposi-

4

tional phrase attachments, such as “Tap the frog with the
flower”. Out of context, the phrase “with the flower” can
be taken as Instrument (VP-Attachment) indicating what to
use for the tapping, or the phrase can be taken as a Modifier
(NP-attachment) indicating which frog to tap.
These experiments were conducted using a referential
communication task, in which a Speaker and a Listener
were separated by a divider, allowing for only verbal communication between the two participants. Under discussion
in these studies was the movement of objects, with Speaker
attempting to have the Listener perform actions upon an
identical set of objects on the other side of the screen. This
situation provided two advantages of over other common
tasks. First, the referential context was highly salient, and
was defined by the set of objects in front of the speaker and
listener. Memory considerations for referential factors (e.g.,
what a speaker remembers about a story) are not relevant in
such a task since the reference world is co-present with the
production task. Second, the separation of the Listener and
Speaker allowed us to manipulate independently the referential context of the Speaker and the Listener, allowing us
to disentangle referential affects on the task of production
and the task of comprehension.
In Experiment 1, we examined the use of prosodic cues
when the referential context of the Speaker supported either
meaning of the target sentence. In Experiment 2, we examined prosodic cues when the referential context of the
Speaker strongly supported the intended meaning of the
utterance. If prosodic choice is affected by Speaker’s
knowledge of the referential context, we would expect to
see decreased use of helpful cues when the referential context provides other cues to disambiguate the utterance. If on
the other hand, knowledge of the referential context is not
relevant, we would expect similar performance across the
two experiments.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Thirty-two pairs of participants from the University of Pennsylvania community volunteered for the experiment. They received extra course credit or were paid
for their participation. In each pair, one participant played
the role of Speaker and the other played the role of Listener.
All Speakers were female whereas half the Listeners were
male and half were female. All participants were native
speakers of English.
Procedure During the experiment, the Speaker and Listener
sat on opposite sides of a vertical screen. On each trial they
were given identical bags containing toys, which they laid
out on the trays in front of them. As the Speaker and Listener removed toys from their bags, the Experimenter introduced each toy using indefinite noun phrases (e.g., This bag
contains a dog, a fan…).
Next, the Experimenter showed the Speaker a demonstration of the target action. This action could not be seen by
the Listener. The Speaker then received a card containing a

CogSci2000

written sentence describing this action. Speakers memorized the sentence and returned the card to the Experimenter. After seeing a second demonstration, the Speaker
produced the sentence. The Listener responded by attempting to perform the correct action with his or her own set of
toys. Speakers were told that the primary goal of the experiment was to say each sentence in such a way as to get
the Listener to perform the same action on the other side of
the screen. Each Listener was told that her job was to perform the action that she believed had been demonstrated to
the Speaker.
During the course of the experiment, interaction between
the Speaker and the Listener was limited. Once the Speaker
produced the sentence, the Listener could not ask for any
clarification. Listeners’ actions were videotaped and the
Speakers’ utterances were audiotaped. After the study was
completed the Listener and Speaker were separated and
each was interviewed to assess their awareness of the experimental manipulation and the ambiguity in the critical
items.

5

Coding The videotapes of Listeners’ actions were edited to
include only the actions on the sixteen target trials, and all
audio was removed. Coders, who were blind to the condition of each trial, judged whether the Listener made an Instrument response (performed the target action using the
Target Instrument or the miniature instrument).

Results
Listener’s Actions The percent of Instrument responses in
each of the four conditions is presented in Figure 1. Listeners’ actions in response to the ambiguous instructions were
affected by the action demonstrated to the Speaker
(F1(1,16) = 63.42, p < .001; F2(1,12) = 77.31, p < .001).
When an Instrument action had been demonstrated to the
Speaker, Listeners produced an Instrument action 66% of
the time. When a Modifier action had been demonstrated,
Listeners produced an Instrument action only 24% of the
time.
100%

1a. Tap the frog with the flower. (Amb, Inst)
Action involves the unmarked frog and the instrument.
1b. Tap the frog with the flower. (Amb, Mod)
Action involves the marked frog and not the instrument.
1c. Tap the frog by using the flower. (Unamb, Inst)
Action involves the unmarked frog and the instrument.
1d. Tap the frog that has the flower. (Unamb, Mod)
Action involves the marked frog and not the instrument.
Four presentation lists were constructed so that each of
the 16 target trials appeared in only one of the four possible
conditions on a given list but appeared in each of the conditions across lists (resulting in four target trials in each
condition per subject pair). The target trials were
interspersed with thirty distractor trials. Four additional
lists were generated by reversing the order of trials in each
list.

90%
Percent Instrument Responses

Stimuli On critical trials, the target sentence contained an
ambiguous Prepositional Phrase attachment, as in (1a) and
(1b) below. Identical bags of objects were given to both
participants. On each trial the bag contained: 1) a Target
Instrument, a full scale object that could be used to carry out
the action (e.g., a large flower); 2) a Marked Animal, a
stuffed animal carrying a small replica of the instrument
(e.g., a frog holding a little flower); 3) an Unmarked Animal
(e.g., an empty-handed frog ); and 4) two unrelated objects
(e.g., a giraffe in pajamas and a lego block). The set of toys
supported both interpretations of the ambiguous sentence by
providing a potential direct object (plain frog) and instrument (large flower) for the VP-attachment and a potential
direct object for the NP-attachment (frog holding flower).
The Experimenter demonstrated one of two possible actions: an Instrument action (e.g., the Experimenter picked
up the large flower and tapped the plain frog) or a Modifier
action (e.g., using her hand, the Experimenter tapped the
frog that had the small flower).
Ambiguous sentences
were compared with unambiguous sentences (1c and 1d).

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Unambiguous
Instrument Demo

Ambiguous
Modifier Demo

Figure 1: Experiment 1 Listener’s Actions
Also, as expected, unambiguous instructions (the left-hand
portion of Figure 1) resulted in extremely accurate performance by Listeners. The interaction between Ambiguity and
Demonstration Type was reliable (F1(1,16) = 81.91, p <
.001; F2(1,12) = 113.71, p < .001). As can be seen in the
figure, this interaction arose because Listeners were more
accurate at reproducing the demonstrated action when the
utterance was syntactically Unambiguous than when it was
Ambiguous. This pattern suggests that the prosodic cues
produced by Speakers were highly informative to Listeners,
but not as informative as unambiguous sentences.
Speaker’s Prosody To verify that our Listeners were gleaning this information from prosodic cues provided by the
Speaker, we conducted acoustic analyses of the ambiguous
target sentences. The audio recordings were digitized and a

CogSci2000

6

speech waveform display was generated for each target utterance. Coders, who were blind to the condition, measured
the duration of the Verb Composite (verb plus the postverbal pause, if any) and the Noun Composite (the direct object
noun plus the following pause, if any). The onset or offset
of a word was initially estimated by using visual information from the speech waveform display. This estimate was
revised by listening to gated regions of the waveform.

of the Listeners reported being aware of the ambiguity. As
mentioned earlier, Allbritton and colleagues (1996) found
that ambiguity awareness affected radio announcers’ ability
to generate useful prosody. Although our participants were
not trained radio announcers, we thought it necessary to
explore if ambiguity awareness, and more generally knowledge of the referential situation, were influencing the kinds
of prosodic choices made by our Speakers.

Experiment 2

900

In this experiment, we attempted to decrease Speaker
awareness of ambiguity. This was accomplished by making
two changes to the previous experiment. First, we altered
the Speakers’ referential context, so that only the intended
meaning of the ambiguous phrase was supported. This was
done in hopes that the alternate interpretation would not be
considered by the Speakers if it was not suggested by the
context itself. Second, we made the type of Demonstration
a between subjects variable.
All other aspects of Experiment 2 were the same as Experiment 1. It is especially important to note that the Listeners’ context was the same as that used in Experiment 1.
And, as in Experiment 1, participants were told in advance
that on each trial the Speaker and Listener would receive an
identical set of toys. However, in Experiment 2 this was a
deception, to be explained at the end of the study.

Duration in milliseconds

800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Verb Composite
Instrument Demo

Noun Composite
Modifier Demo

Figure 2: Experiment 1, Mean Durations from Speakers’
Utterances
As Figure 2 suggests there is a reliable and substantial effect of demonstration on the mean duration of both the Verb
Composite (F1(1,24) = 12.92, p < .001; F2(1,12) = 50.59, p
< .001) and Noun Composite (F1(1,24) = 52.71, p < .001;
F2(1,12) = 290.42, p < .001). When Speakers saw Instrument Demonstrations, they tended to lengthen the direct
object noun and they paused between the noun that the
with-phrase on 68% of the trials. This prosodic pattern suggests that the major phrase boundary is located between the
direct object and the prepositional phrase and is thus consistent with a verb-phrase attachment of the prepositional
phrase (instrument interpretation) but not with a nounphrase attachment (modifier interpretation). In contrast,
when Speakers saw Modifier Demonstrations, they tended
to lengthen the verb and paused after the verb 40% of the
time. This prosodic pattern suggests that the major phrase
boundary is located between the verb and the direct object
noun phrase and is more consistent with a noun-phrase attachment.
Ambiguity Awareness Listeners’ actions in response to
ambiguous instructions suggest that prosodic cues were a
highly effective but imperfect means of syntactic disambiguation. However the results of the postexperimental interviews raised some concerns about the generality of these
findings. 97% of the Speakers in our experiment and 91%

Methods
Participants Thirty-two pairs of participants from the University of Pennsylvania community received extra course
credit or were paid for their participation. All Speakers were
female, 17 of the Listeners were male. All participants were
native speakers of English and none had participated in Experiment 1. Two additional pairs of subjects participated but
were not included in the analyses because of experimenter
error (1) or failure to follow instructions (1).
Procedure The procedure was the same as Experiment 1
except that the contents of the bags were not listed aloud, to
prevent the subjects from discovering that their bags contained different sets of objects. Instead a card listing the
objects was included in each bag and the participants were
told to check the contents of the bags against the card to
insure that all of the toys were present.
Stimuli The stimuli and experimental design were the same
as in Experiment 1, with the following exceptions. When
the Experimenter performed an Instrument Demonstration,
the Speaker’s bag of toys did not include a Marked animal
(e.g., the frog holding the flower) but instead included a
second unrelated animal (e.g., an elephant wearing a hat).
Hence, a modifier interpretation of the with-phrase should
be less available to the Speaker. When the Experimenter
performed a Modifier Demonstration, the Speaker’s bag of
toys did not include the Target Instrument (e.g., the large
flower) but instead included a second unrelated object (e.g.,
a leaf). Hence, the Instrument interpretation of the withphrase should be less available to Speakers in this context.

CogSci2000

7

Results
Ambiguity Awareness Listeners in Experiment 2, like
those in Experiment 1, usually reported that they were
aware of the ambiguity. This is to be expected, given that
the same referential contexts were presented to Listeners in
both experiments, and it suggests that the between-subjects
design does not, by itself, affect ambiguity awareness.
Speaker awareness of ambiguity did change across experiments. In particular, only one speaker in the Instrument
condition (6%) reported being aware of the ambiguity. Interestingly, and in contrast, nine of the Speakers in the
Modifier condition, or 56%, reported being aware of the
ambiguity. This pattern was unexpected; we were hoping
that few if any of the Speakers would be aware of the ambiguity. This difference may be related to the fact that Modifier attachments are dispreferred by readers, especially with
action verbs (Spivey-Knowlton & Sedivy, 1994). Conflicts
between lexical and referential cues in the Modifier condition may brought the ambiguity into awareness. As we shall
100%

Percent Instrument Responses

90%
80%
70%
60%

Figure 3: Listeners’ Responses to the Ambiguous Sentences in Experiments 1 & 2
see, this unexpected result is serendipitous, because it allows us to compare the performance of the Listeners who
heard utterances from aware and unaware Speakers.
Listener’s Performance The percent of Instrument responses for each conditions of Experiment 2 appear on the
right hand side of Figure 3. Listeners in Experiment 2 were
clearly unaffected by the type of Demonstration performed
by the (F1(1,24) < 1, p > .3; F2(1,12) = 1.88, p > .3), suggesting that Speakers were not effective in helping Listeners
resolve the ambiguity. To compare performance in the ambiguous conditions of Experiments 1 and 2, ANOVAs were
conducted on the percent correct for items and subjects with
Experiment as a between subjects and within items factor.
Unsurprisingly, Listeners in Experiment 1 performed significantly better than those in Experiment 2 (F1(1,62) =
11.76, p < .001; F2(1,14) = 19.91, p < .001).
Speaker’s Prosody The audiotapes were digitized and
coded in the manner described above. As Figure 4 suggests,
there was no reliable effect of condition on the duration of
the Verb Composite (F1(1,24) < 1, p > .6; F2(1,12) = 1.69,
p >.2). The effect of condition on the Noun Composite was
not significant in the subjects analysis (F1(1,24) = 1.66, p >
.2) and was small but reliable in the items analysis
(F2(1,12) = 7.71, p < .05).
Figure 4: Experiment 2, Mean Durations from Speakers’
900
800
Duration in milliseconds

In addition, we excluded the unambiguous conditions in
this experiment, because these sentences had been uniformly interpreted and coded correctly in Experiment 1. To
equalize the number of ambiguous sentences that subjects
received in each experiment, we divided the 16 critical sentences into two lists. The items on each list appeared in a
pseudo-random order embedded in the same twenty-four
distractor trials. In addition, reverse-order lists were generated.
Finally, the type of Demonstration was manipulated between subjects. In the Instrument Condition, all target items
were ambiguous and involved an Instrument demonstration
(and an Instrument context for the Speakers). In the Modifier Condition, all target items were ambiguous and involved a Modifier demonstration (and a Modifier context
for the Speakers).

700
600
500
400
300
200

50%

100

40%

0

30%

Verb Composite

20%

Instrument Demo

10%

Noun Composite
Modifier Demo

Utterances

0%
Exp 1 (ambiguous)

Instrument Demo

Exp 2

Modifier Demo

General Discussion
When the Speakers’ context strongly supported the intended
meaning of an ambiguous utterance, Listeners showed complete insensitivity to the intended meaning of the utterance.
This stands in contrast to Experiment 1, where Listeners had

CogSci2000

the same referential context, but were highly sensitive to the
intended meaning. There are two possible explanations to
these findings. First, the findings may be attributable to
Speakers’ awareness of the ambiguity (Allbritton et al,
1996). Speakers in Experiment 1 were almost always aware
of the ambiguous sentences while those in Experiment 2
were usually unaware. Second, the findings may be due to
the change in the referential context of the Speakers. In the
first experiment, Speakers were given a context that supported either meaning of the ambiguous sentence, whereas
in Experiment 2 Speakers were provided with a context that
supported only the relevant interpretation. Perhaps speakers
only produce informative prosody when the context doesn’t
disambiguate the sentence for them (Lieberman, 1967).
Because a subset of the subjects reported being aware of
the ambiguity in the Modifier condition, we can test if ambiguity awareness per se is driving the results of Experiment
2. Ten additional subject pairs were tested to gather sufficient data for this comparison. We found no reliable differences between responses to aware speakers and those to
unaware speakers (F1(1,23) < 1, p > .8; F2(1,15) < 1, p >
.9). When the referential context disambiguated the sentence, awareness of the potential for ambiguity did not lead
speakers to provide adequate prosodic cues.
The substantial difference in performance across the studies and the absence of an effect of awareness within Experiment 2, suggest that referential context itself is critical
in determining whether speakers will produce strong prosodic cues. In Experiment 1, the Speaker’s referential context supported both interpretations of the “with” phrase and
thus the sentence was, in the absence of prosodic cues, ambiguous in context. Under these conditions, Speakers produced prosodic cues that were not only consistent with the
intended structure but also inconsistent with the competing
interpretation. Listener’s were able to use these cues to determine the intended meaning, albeit imperfectly. In Experiment 2, the Speaker’s referential context supported only
the relevant interpretation, disambiguating the sentence and
making strong prosodic cues unnecessary. Listeners, who
did not have access to this disambiguating referential context, were able to find nothing in the Speakers’ prosody to
guide them. These data, therefore, support Lieberman’s
hypothesis that speakers only produce informative prosody
when the context doesn’t do the work for them.
This conclusion and these results appear to conflict with
those of Schafer and colleagues who find that untrained,
uninformed speakers produce consistent prosodic cues regardless of whether the context of the utterance provides
disambiguating information (1999). To add to the confusion
the tasks appear to be quite similar: both experiments use
variants of the referential communication task and ask
speakers to produced scripted, memorized commands to
achieve concrete results. The two experiments, however
varied in several critical respects. First, in the Schafer study,
there is a higher degree of uncertainty about the listener’s
referential context. The speaker knows both that the listener
has information about the context that the speaker lacks and
that the listener’s context will change as the experiment
progresses. Second, the participants are given the set of
commands, which contains both interpretations of the ambi-

8

guity, at the beginning of the study and are exposed to situations in which each meanings is applicable. Thus it seems
likely that these speakers were aware of the globally ambiguous sentences and believed that there was the potential
for referential ambiguity.
In this paper, we have suggested that a speaker’s knowledge of the referential situation affects her ability to disambiguate otherwise ambiguous utterances. In particular, we
propose that when a speaker recognizes that an utterance is
ambiguous in context, she will disambiguate it by making
prosodic choices that are consistent with the relevant interpretation and inconsistent with the alternatives.

Acknowledgments
We thank Lisa Levine, Sarah Brown-Schmidt and Jared
Novick for their assistance, input and patience. This work
was supported by National Institute for Health Grant 1-R01HD3750707-01 and a National Science Foundation Center
Grant to the University of Pennsylvania Institute for Research in Cognitive Science.

References
Albritton, D., McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1996). Reliability
of prosodic cues for resolving syntactic smbiguity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 714-735.
Cooper, W.E. & Paccia-Cooper J. (1980). Syntax and
Speech. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Fernald, A. & McRoberts, G. (1996). Prosodic bootstrapping: A critical analysis of the argument and the evidence.
In J. Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds), Signal to Syntax Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lehiste, I. (1973). Phonetic disambiguation of syntactic
smbiguity. Glossa, 7, 102-122.
Lieberman, P. (1967). Intonation, perception and language.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Kjelgaard. M. & Speer, S. (1999). Prosodic facilitation and
interference in the resolution of temporary syntactic closure ambiguity. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
153-194.
Schafer, A., Speer, S., Warren, P., & White, D. (1999). Intonational disambiguation in sentence production and
comprehension. Paper presented at the Twelfth Annual
CUNY Conference on Sentence Processing, New York,
NY, March 1999.
Selkirk, E.O. (1984). Phonology and syntax: The relation
between sound and structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Spivey-Knowlton, M. & Sedivy, J. (1995) Resolving attachment ambiguities with multiple constraints. Cognition, 55, 227-267.
Wales, R. & Toner, H. (1979). Intonation and ambiguity. In
W.E. Cooper and E.C.T. Walker (Eds.), Sentence Processing: Psycholinguistic studies presented to Merrill
Garrett. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Warren, P (1996). Prosody and parsing: An introduction.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 11, 1-16.

