UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reasoning from shared structure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mh9t5h0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Blok, Sergey Victor
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reasoning from shared structure
Sergey Victor Blok (s-blok@northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner(gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Illinois
Abstract
Two experiments contrasted the predictions of the similarity-coverage model of category-based induction with
those of a structure-based account. We focused on the
two theories’ ability to account for the paradoxical fact
that both monotonicities (increases in argument
strength with the addition of premises) and nonmonotonicities (decreases in argument strength with
addition of premises) occur in human reasoning. The
results are mainly in accord with the structure-based
account and are inconsistent with the similaritycoverage account.

Introduction
Monotonicity and Induction
Humans routinely make inductive inferences, and the
principles that guide these inferences have received a
great deal of empirical attention (López, 1995; McDonald, Samuels & Rispoli, 1996; Osherson, Smith, Wilkie
López & Shafir, 1990; Sloman, 1993). One principle that
has both intuitive and empirical support is monotonicity –
the principle that confidence in an inductive inference
should increase with the number of supporting premises.
For example, Osherson et al. showed that adults preferred
Argument B over Argument A.
A.

All FOXES have sesamoid bones,
All PIGS have sesamoid bones,
Therefore, all GORILLAS have sesamoid bones

B.

All FOXES have sesamoid bones,
All PIGS have sesamoid bones,
All WOLVES have sesamoid bones
Therefore, all GORILLAS have sesamoid bones.

However, robust nonmonotonicities have also been
documented. Osherson et al.’s participants chose Argument C over D.
C.

All FLIES have sesamoid bones,
Therefore, all BEES have sesamoid bones.

Sloman (1993) and McDonald et al. (1996) have also
documented nonmonotonic responding in adults. Even
more strikingly, Lopez, Gelman, Gutheil & Smith (1992)
showed nonmonotonicity effects very early in development; in fact, nonmonotonicity effects were reliably obtained earlier than monotonicity effects. People appear to
believe that more premises make for a stronger argument,
except when more premises make for a weaker argument.
How can we reconcile these apparently contradictory
phenomena?

Similarity-Coverage Model
A pioneering theory of argument strength is the Similarity-coverage model (SCM) of Osherson et al. (1990).
The two components of SCM are similarity -- the extent
of feature overlap between premise and conclusion categories -- and coverage -- the average similarity of the
premises and the instances of the lowest level taxonomic
category that includes both the premises and the conclusion. The similarity-coverage model predicts monotonicity when the additional premise is a member of the same
lowest level superordinate category as the initial premises
and the conclusion. It predicts nonmonotonicity when the
additional premise is not a member of the lowest level
superordinate category. Thus nonmonotonicity can be
seen as a kind of dilution effect, as illustrated by Osherson et al’s (1990) data in (1) and (2), respectively.
(1) a. ROBINS, SPARROWS / SEAGULLS >
b. ROBINS / SEAGULLS1
(2) a. ROBINS, RABBITS / SEAGULLS <
b. ROBINS / SEAGULLS
Argument (1) is monotonic; adding the extra premise
SPARROW in (1a) adds an additional piece of premise
support without diluting the category coverage, because it
fits within the lowest-level category (BIRDS) that applies
in the single premise case (1b). In contrast, the additional
premise RABBITS in (2a) raises the lowest-level common
category to ANIMALS, thus diluting the category coverage. Thus the SCM can successfully predict some instances of monotonicity.
1

D.

All FLIES have sesamoid bones,
All ORANGUTANGS have sesamoid bones,
Therefore, all BEES have sesamoid bones.

Research in this area typically uses so called “blank” or
opaque properties – such as ‘has sesamoid bones’ to ensure that
belief in the conclusion is derived from the premise statements,
rather than from prior beliefs about the truth of the conclusion.
We will omit property names from further examples.

Structure-Based Induction
We propose a structure-based induction approach that
uses structural overlap instead of overall similarity or
feature overlap to predict argument strength. Our model is
very different from the previous theories in that we explicitly assume that the evaluation of argument strength is
accomplished by a process of aligning the representations
of the premise(s) and the conclusion.
Specifically, we assume that the perceived strength of
an induction from premise to conclusion depends on the
goodness3 of the common schema. For the one-premise
case, this idea is closely related to similarity in Osherson
et al.’s account and with feature overlap in Sloman’s account. But when there are multiple premises, we postulate a premise comparison process whereby a common
schema is derived from the premises. This schema is then
aligned with the representation of the conclusion statement.
This variant of the progressive alignment hypothesis
(Kotovsky and Gentner, 1996; Kuehne, Gentner & Forbus, 2000; Kuehne, Forbus, Gentner & Quinn, 2000)
states that carrying out a comparison involves alignment
of structured representations (e.g. Gentner & Markman,
1997).
There is evidence that structure-mapping theory captures some important aspects of inductive reasoning. Wu
and Gentner (1998) told participants that a conclusion had
attribute a1. They were also told that two different premise
kinds P1 and P2 also had a1. Participants were then given
the option of inferring an attribute form P2 that was causally connected to a1 or an attribute from P1 that was not
causally connected to a1. Results indicated that people
strongly preferred to reason from a causal base (P2) over
an attribute base (P1). See Clement & Gentner (1996) and
Lassaline (1996) for related findings.
The SBI view makes several specific predictions. First,
it predicts that monotonicity (in at least the weak sense)
2

Monotonicity can be interpreted in the strong sense of increasing monotonicity or in the weaker sense of non-decreasing
monotonicity. Note that even the latter, weaker sense is violated
by these examples.
3
We will use the term goodness of the common schema as a
shorthand for structural evaluation; it depends on the size and
depth of the common schema.

will result when the additional premise is alignable with
the other premises and the conclusion. Second, conversely, nonmonotonicity should result when the additional premise is not alignable with the premises (even if
it is alignable on other grounds with the conclusion).
These two assertions predict the monotonicity of argument (1) and the nonmonotonicity of (2). A further point
is that the predictions of the SBI model do not rely on
taxonomic category structure. Neither monotonicity nor
nonmonotonicity are influenced by whether the additional
premise belongs to the lowest common category that includes the premises and the conclusion. Thus SBI explains Sloman’s example (3) above by noting that the
goodness of alignment between the premise
CROCODILE and the conclusion ALLIGATOR is diminished by first aligning
CROCODILE
with
KINGSNAKE.
The third prediction of SBI is that the properties inferred depend on the particular aligned schema. That is,
people base their inferences (even about nominally blank
properties) on the specific alignment between premises
and conclusion, and not on a general sense of similarity.
Because the quality of the premise-conclusion alignment
determines both the specific properties people are willing
to infer and the argument strength, we expect a strong
association between these two (see Heit & Rubinstein,
1994, for a related proposal).

Experiment 1. Two vs. three premises
In this experiment, we varied category coverage and
alignability in order to contrast the predictions of the
similarity-coverage model and the structure-based approach. We used five variants of each argument: a twopremise item plus four kinds of additional premises that
were added to make three-premise arguments (Table 1).
Table 1. Sample base two-premise item and the additional
premise in the four variant conditions in Experiment 1.
ROBINS, EAGLES, ... / BATS
Coverage
Alignment

However, as Sloman (1993) noted, there are other instances of nonmonotonicity that are not explainable by
dilution of category coverage. His participants found (3b)
to be stronger than (3a).
(3) a. CROCODILE, KINGSNAKE / ALLIGATOR
b. CROCODILE / ALLIGATOR
Even though the lowest level taxonomic category
(REPTILE) does not change across these arguments,
nonmonotonicity2 is observed. Sloman acknowledges,
however, that his own feature-based induction theory is
also unable to explain nonmonotonicities.

C+
A+ SEAGULLS
A–

DOGS

C–
AIRPLANES
TV’s

The premises and the conclusion of the two-premise arguments shared a common relational schema, such as
flight or underwater habitat. The three-premise arguments
were constructed by adding an additional premise to the
two-premise arguments. There were four types of additional premises, constructed according to a 2x2 design of
alignability with the two-premise schema and category
coverage – i.e., whether the additional premise belonged
to the lowest level category spanning the two premises

and the conclusion (hereinafter abbreviated spanning
category).
For example, given the two-premise argument ROBIN,
EAGLE / BAT, the aligned schema presumably involves
flight and the spanning category is ANIMAL. The four
kinds of additional premises are as follows:
1.

2.

3.

4.

A+C+ type: Alignable with the 2-premise schema
(High Alignment) and a member of the lowest-level
spanning category (High Coverage).
e.g., ROBINS, EAGLES, SEAGULLS / BATS
A–C+ type: Not alignable with the 2–premise schema
(Low Alignment), but a member of the spanning category (High Coverage). 4
e.g., ROBINS, EAGLES, DOGS / BATS
A+C– type: Alignable with the 2–premise schema
(High Alignment), but not a member of the spanning
category (Low Coverage).
e.g., ROBINS, EAGLES, AIRPLANES / BATS
A–C– type: Not alignable with the 2–premise schema
(Low Alignment), nor a member of the spanning category (Low Coverage).
e.g., ROBINS, EAGLES, TV’S / BATS

relative to the two-premise arguments. The similaritycoverage model predicts monotonicity for high coverage
types (A+C+ and A–C+), and nonmonotonicity for low
coverage types (A+C– and A–C–).
Table 2. Summary of predictions of the two models
Theory
Prediction
SCM
A+C–, A–C– ≤ 2P ≤ A+C+, A–C+
SBI
A–C+, A–C– ≤ 2P ≤ A+C+, A+C–
Another line of prediction concerns the subjects’
guesses about the blank properties. According to the
structure-based view, the same process of structuremapping that gives rise to the goodness of the common
schema also gives rise to its specific content. Thus we
predict (1) people’s confidence in their property guesses
will increase with their subjective argument strength; (2)
the uniformity of property guesses will increase with their
subjective argument strength; and (3) both the confidence
and the uniformity of property guesses will be greater for
alignable types than for non-alignable types.

Results

Method

Predictions
Table 2 summarizes the predictions of the two models.
The structure-based induction model predicts monotonicity for alignable types (A+C+ and A+C–) and nonmonotonicity for non-alignable types (A–C+ and A–C–),
4

The extra premise for the A-C+ type always belonged to the
same superordinate as the conclusion. This had the effect of
giving the A-C+ type the highest relative coverage of any of the
3-premise arguments, as defined by the similarity-coverage
model. Importantly, the A-C+ type had higher coverage than the
A+C+ type, providing a very strong test of the alignment model
against the coverage model.

three-premise arguments

4.5
strength rating

37 Northwestern University undergraduates were presented with 40 inductive arguments, one at a time on a
computer, and asked to rate them according to “how well
the conclusion follows from the premises.” There were
eight sets, each with five argument types (8 two-premise
arguments plus 4 x 8 = 32 three-premise arguments).
For example,
Fact:
All ROBINS have property F.
All EAGLES have property F.
Therefore,
All BATS have property F.
After rating all the arguments, participants were given a
printed packet with the forty arguments they had just
rated and were asked to write down their best guess about
the property associated with each argument. They were
also given the option of skipping any items for which no
property had come to mind.

3.8

3.7

3.0

3.4

2.3

two-premise

A+C+

A-C+

A+C-

A-C-

4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
argument type

Figure 1. Argument strength ratings for five argument
types in Experiment 1 (error bars are 95% confidence
intervals).
Argument Strength Ratings.5 Figure 1 shows the mean
ratings across items. As predicted by the structure-based
account, monotonicity (in the weak, though not the strong
form) held when the additional premise was alignable.
That is, there were no significant differences in judged
strength between two-premise arguments (M = 3.81; SD =
1.31) and either the A+C+ type (M = 3.70; SD = 1.28) or
the A+C– type (M = 3.44 ; SD = 1.25) , t(36) = 1.46 , p >
.008, t(36) = 2.49 , p > .008 respectively. Also as predicted, nonmonotonicity held when the additional premise
was nonalignable. Arguments of the A–C+ type (M =
5

We performed six planned comparisons on the mean argument
strength for each subject within a type, setting the two-tailed Bonferroni
corrected alpha value at 0.008.

2.97; SD = 1.15) and the A–C– type (M = 2.32; SD =
1.14) were rated reliably lower than two-premise arguments, t(36) = 4.34, p < .008, t(36) = 5.96 , p < .008,
respectively.
There were no significant differences based on category
coverage. In the crucial comparison of the two models,
we found that A+C– arguments were rated reliably
stronger than the A–C+ type, t(36) = 3.01, p < .008, suggesting that alignability, not category coverage, best predicts the effects of adding a third premise to a twopremise argument.
Property Guesses. To test the relation between argument strength and likelihood of listing a property (confidence), we scored the listings on whether a participant
chose to guess a property. There were 1241 guesses and
439 (26% of the total) “no guess” responses. The highest
proportion of guesses was elicited by the two-premise and
the A+C+ argument types (94% and 90%, respectively).
The A+C– argument type also elicited a high proportion
of guesses (85%). The A–C+ and A–C– types elicited
substantially fewer property guesses (65% and 36%, respectively). Overall, the proportion of property guesses
closely mirrored the argument strength ratings, r = .82, p
< 0.0001.
To test our predictions concerning property uniformity,
we rated the content of the property guesses. When subjects were presented with alignable arguments (i.e., twopremise, A+C+ or A+C– types), subjects almost unanimously provided guesses specific to the hypothesized
common schema. When presented with a non-alignable
argument, subjects tended to provide general and haphazard guesses and tended to disagree about the nature of the
blank property. To test this intuition, we asked two naive
raters to score the property listings on the basis of coherence. Confirming our hypothesis, alignable arguments
elicited highly focused patterns of property guesses, while
non-alignable ones displayed little agreement between
subjects, as observed by our independent raters. Mean
coherence rating across the forty different arguments were
correlated with argument strength at r = 0.599, p <
0.0001.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 largely bear out the predictions of the structure-based induction model. The effect of
adding a premise to a two-premise argument depends
entirely on whether the third premise is alignable with the
schema that holds in the two-premise argument. If the
third premise is alignable, the argument strength remains
constant; if the third premise is nonalignable, the argument strength decreases. The predictions of the similaritycoverage model were not borne out for either monotonicity or nonmonotonicity. The SCM predicts monotonicity
if the third premise belongs to the lowest-level spanning
category of the two-premise argument; and nonmonotonicity when the third premise forces an increase in
the level of the spanning category. Neither prediction
held.

The most direct contrast between the models is to compare A–C+ items (low alignability but high coverage)
with A+C– items (high alignability but low coverage).
Participants found the A–C+ premise sets to be a far
weaker inductive base than A+C–, with its specific
schema. For example, argument (4a) was weaker than
(4b):
(4a) ROBINS, EAGLES, DOGS / BATS
(4b) ROBINS, EAGLES
/ BATS
Thus increasing in the number of premises even while
holding coverage constant can result in nonmonotonicity
if the alignment is diminished. Indeed, (4c) is judged
stronger than (4a), despite clearly having poorer coverage
(4c) ROBINS, EAGLES, AIRPLANES / BATS
In short, our nonmonotonicity findings support the
claims of the structure-based framework over those of the
coverage model.
The property guess findings were also consistent with
the predictions of the structure-based framework. There
was a strong connection between considering an argument
strong and having a clear idea of what property was being
inferred. This observation is consistent with our claim that
the process at work here is an alignment process that results in a specific common schema.
Overall the results are encouraging. However, one point
requires discussion. We found evidence of nondecreasing
monotonicity but not of increasing monotonicity. There
was no increase in argument strength for any argument
type. This contrasts with Osherson et al.’s (1990) report
that strength increased from two- to three-premise arguments. We suspect much of the difference stems from the
fact that, whereas we used a single-argument rating task,
Osherson et al. used a choice task. Comparing arguments
to choose the stronger could have led to heightened contrast between the two- and three-premise arguments.
Structure-mapping does not predict a steady increase in
argument strength as additional premises are added.6
However, it does predict an increase when going from
one-premise to two-or-more-premise arguments (always
provided the added premise(s) are alignable), because
alignment highlights the common structure (Gentner &
Wolff, 2000). To test this prediction, we asked subjects
to rate single-premise arguments matched to the multipremise arguments used in Experiment 1. This will allow
us to compare (albeit across experiments) the strength of
one-premise vs. three-premise arguments.
A second motivation for Experiment 2 was to rule out a
possible confound, namely, that the gain in strength for
the additional premises was simply due to an increase in
overall similarity (or feature overlap, on Sloman’s (1993)
account) brought about by the additional premise, rather
than by interactions among the premises as claimed by the
structural account.
6

This is because progressive alignment cannot increase the
size of the common schema. Thus if increases in argument
strength do occur when, say, 11 premises are increased to 12, the
explanation must lie with other factors beyond alignment.

Experiment 2. Single-premise arguments
Participants evaluated single-premise arguments. For
each argument, the premise was the additional premise
used in Experiment 1. For example, for the BATS item in
Table 1, the four arguments tested in Experiment 2 were
(A+C+)′7 SEAGULLS / BATS
(A–C+)′ DOGS / BATS
(A+C–)′ AIRPLANES / BATS
(A–C–)′ TELEVISIONS / BATS
The first question is whether, as predicted by structuremapping, single-premise arguments will be weaker than
their three-premise alignable counterparts in Experiment
1. The second question is whether the relative strengths of
the three-premise arguments in Experiment 1 are mirrored
by the strengths of the corresponding single premises
(Thus undermining our premise-comparison account.)

1-premise
3-premise

4.5
4.0

strength rating

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5

Method
1.0

16 Northwestern University undergraduates saw 32 single-premise arguments (8 items x 4 types) and rated them
for strength. The procedure was identical to that in Experiment 1, except that the arguments were given in
printed form, rather than on a computer.

Results
We contrasted the mean argument strengths by argument type between Experiments 1 and 2.8 Figure 2 presents the mean strength ratings across argument types.
As predicted by structural framework, among alignable
types, there was a reliable advantage for three-premise
over one-premise arguments (a difference of 1.28, t (51) =
3.90, p < 0.001). For non-alignable types, this difference
was 0.53, t (51) = 1.84, p > 0.05, n.s. Also, as predicted,
planned comparisons within alignable types revealed reliable differences between the three-premise A+C+ (M =
3.70, SD = 1.28) and the single-premise (A+C+)′ types (M
= 2.49, SD = 0.88), t(51) = 3.43, p < 0.005. A reliable
contrast was also observed between the three-premise
A+C– (M =3.44, SD = 1.25) and the single-premise
(A+C–)′ type (M = 2.08, SD = 0.85), t(51) = 3.95, p <
0.001.
Planned contrasts for the non-alignable types revealed a
non-reliable difference between the three-premise A–C+
type (M = 2.97; SD = 1.15) and the single-premise (A–
C+)′ type (M = 2.85; SD = 1.22), t(51) =0.34, p > .70, n.s.
So far, the results are consistent with the structural account. However, a reliable difference was also observed
between the three-premise A–C– type (M = 2.32; SD =
1.14) and the single-premise (A–C–)′ type (M = 1.38; SD
= 0.54), t(51) = 3.15, p < 0.005. This result is not predicted by the structural account.
7

We will refer to single-premise versions arguments by adding a prime to the three-premise symbol: e.g., (A+C+)′.
8
Because the sample sizes across the two experiments were
not equal, we also performed a set of more conservative nonparametric analyses, which revealed the same pattern.

A+C+

A-C+

A+C-

A-C-

argument type

Figure 2. Argument strength ratings for four argument types in Experiment 2 and Experiment 1 (Error
bars are 95% confidence intervals).
Turning to the second question, we found that the pattern of strength among single-premise arguments could
not account for the three-premise results in Experiment 1.
Indeed, the mean strength in the one-premise arguments
was significantly higher for the nonalignable premises
than for the corresponding alignable premises.9 This is the
opposite direction from what happened in Experiment 1,
where there was an alignability advantage for the threepremise versions of these arguments. This means that the
alignability advantage in Experiment 1 cannot result simply from independently accruing similarity or feature
overlap across the premises.

Discussion
Our hypothesis that alignable three-premise arguments
would exhibit strong monotonicity relative to their singlepremise counterparts was supported. For both of the
alignable types (A+C+ and A+C–), three-premise arguments received higher ratings than their respective singlepremise counterparts.

9

That is, the mean strength of (A-C+)′ arguments was significantly higher than for (A+C+)′ arguments (M = 2.87, SD = 1.21;
M = 2.49; SD = 0.85, respectively, t(16) = 2.665, p < 0.025. (AC+)′ arguments were also rated reliably higher than the (A+C-)′
arguments (M = 2.05; SD = 0.83), t(16) = 3.407, p < 0.025.

General Discussion and Conclusion
These experiments offer support for the structure-based
model of induction. The alignment approach predicts both
nonmonotonicities and monotonicities accurately. When
the additional premises are alignable, argument strength
increases between one- and multiple premises, and is
weak-monotonic from two- to three- premises. Strong
monotonicity holds for alignable added premises.
Osherson et al’s (1990) similarity-coverage model predicts monotonicity except when the additional premise
forces a taxonomically higher spanning category. But the
results of Experiment 1 showed nonmonotonicity even
when category coverage was constant, as well as weak
monotonicity despite a decrease in coverage. Across the
board, (weak) monotonicity was observed between twoand three-premise cases for just those cases where the
additional premise was alignable. The pattern in Experiment 2 was similar: With one exception, monotonicity
between one- and three-premise arguments was observed
only for alignable arguments.
Further evidence that argument strength judgments involve thinking about the specific relational schema, as
opposed to overall similarity, comes from the property
listings in Experiment 1. When given alignable third
premises, subjects not only rated the arguments as strong,
they also had clear opinions on what “Property P” might
have been, and those guesses were highly uniform. These
findings are consistent with there being a specific schema
that emerged from the alignment.
What is the broader significance of these findings?
First, premise comparison process must be a part of argument strength models. We have documented both (A)
and (B) occurring simultaneously:
(A) P1, P2, P3 / C > P1, P2, P4 / C
[Exp. 1]
(B) P3 / C
<
P4 / C
[Exp. 2],
Since the same premises are added to both sides in going from B to A, this reversal cannot be explained in
terms of accruing overall similarity or total feature overlap. It requires an explanation in terms of premise interactivity. People are not integrating individual premiseconclusion argument strengths (e.g. “P1/C + P2/C +
P3/C”) but aligning premises to determine what aspects of
the premises as a set are relevant to the argument.
The evidence for premise interactivity presented here
poses a challenge to the feature-based induction theory
(Sloman, 1993). As an important theoretical alternative to
the coverage model, the feature-based theory assumes that
instead of computing category coverage, people are assessing total feature overlap between the premises and the
conclusion. Monotonicity is predicted because the addition of a premise must either increase total feature overlap
or maintain it. The addition of a premise can never decrease total feature overlap, so nonmonotonicities cannot
be predicted. The systematic nonmonotonicities we have
observed, as well as the evidence of premise interactivity,
are inconsistent with the current formulation of the feature-based induction model.
Sloman (1993) has suggested an extension to the feature-based model -- a premise comparison mechanism
that weighs common features of the premises more heav-

ily than unique attributes. This might allow the featurebased model to predict some nonmonotonicities. However, it is unclear which common features of the premises
will be weighted over others. An important forte of the
structure-based model is that it constrains similarity by
treating matching attributes that play similar roles in their
respective concepts as more similar than matching attributes that do not (Medin, Goldstone & Gentner, 1993).
Thus, inductive inferences are appropriately constrained.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation and the Office of Naval Research. We thank
Ken Kurtz, Sven Kuehne, Jeff Loewenstein and Kathleen
Braun for their assistance at all stages of this project. We
are also grateful to an anonymous reviewer for helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist,
52, 45-56.
Heit, E., & Rubinstein, J. (1994). Similarity and property
effects in inductive reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20(2),
1-12.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity. Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Kuehne, S.E., Forbus, K.D., Gentner, D. & Quinn, B.
(2000). SEQL- Category learning as incremental abstraction using structure mapping. Proceedings of the
22nd meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Kuehne, S.E., Gentner, D. & Forbus, K.D. (2000). Modeling infant learning via symbolic structural alignment.
Proceedings of the 22nd meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Lassaline, M. E. (1996). Structural alignment in induction
and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(3), 754-770.
Lopez, A., Gelman, S. A., Gutheil, G., Smith, E.E., 1992.
The development of category-based induction. Child
Development 63, 1070-1090
McDonald J., Samuels M. & Rispoli J. (1996). A hypothesis-assessment model of categorical argument
strength, Cognition, 59, 199-217
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Wu, M., & Gentner, D. (1998). Structure in categorybased induction. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 11541158.

