UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Resource-adaptive Selection of Strategies in Learning from Worked-Out Examples

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0s58p1kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Gerjets, Peter
Scheiter, Katharina
Tack, Werner H.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Resource-adaptive Selection of Strategies in Learning from Worked-Out Examples
Peter Gerjets, Katharina Scheiter & Werner H. Tack
Collaborative Research Center 378: Resource-Adaptive Cognitive Processes
University of the Saarland
D-66041 Saarbruecken/Germany
{pgerjet, katharis, tack}@cops.uni-sb.de
Abstract
Most tasks can be pursued by using different strategies (Logan,
1985; Reder & Schunn, 1998). In this paper we focus on strategies
of learning from worked-out examples. Within a resource-oriented
framework these different strategies can be classified according to
their costs and benefits. These features may determine which strategy will be selected for accomplishing a task in situations with
certain resource limitations. We investigate specific hypotheses
about strategic adaptations to resource limitations (e.g., time pressure or lack of prior knowledge) within a hypertext-based learning
environment. A comparison of the strategy selection of good and
poor learners is used to assess the degree of subjects’ resource
adaptivity. Ideas for modeling resource-adaptive selection of
strategies within the ACT-R architecture are discussed.

Resource-Adaptive Selection of Strategies
According to Reder and Schunn (1998) individual performance differences in learning and problem-solving tasks may
not only depend on the variability of cognitive parameters
(e.g. speed of processing, working-memory capacity) or on
interindividual differences in the availability of strategies
for solving the same task. Instead subjects may differ with
regard to their ability of shifting strategies as a consequence
of changes in task demands or other situational parameters.
Therefore, the adaptive selection of strategies should be of
major importance for success in learning and problem solving. Theoretically, associative approaches explain strategy
selection as a reaction to cues related to certain strategies
(cf. Reder & Schunn, 1998). On the contrary, rational approaches assume that subjects choose strategies according
to their costs and benefits in terms of resource demands and
expected utility (cf. Payne, Bettman & Johnson, 1993;
Logan, 1985). In our paper we prefer a rational approach
which is based on a wide conception of resources comprising all internal and external means that are useful or necessary for solving a specific task. We focus on internal resources like prior knowledge and external resources like
learning time and external information. The costs of adopting a specific strategy increase with its resource demands.
Besides differences in costs, strategies may additionally
differ with respect to their benefits (e.g., effectiveness in
solving the task at hand, success in solving subsequent
tasks, acquisition of different kinds of knowledge).
To describe processes of strategy selection within a resource-based framework two different types of resource
adaptivity have to be distinguished: (a) On the one hand
evolution may have forced cognitive systems to generally
employ resource-adapted strategies, i.e. strategies that do
not lead to optimal task performance but that are compatible
with the usual limitations of processing resources. According to this assumption resource-adapted behavior will be
even displayed in situations with relatively high resource
availability. A well known theoretical approach to resource-

adapted behavior that may be applied to strategy selection is
the concept of satisficing (Simon, 1990). According to this
concept bounded rational agents do not select the most effective strategy for solving a task but rather set a specific
aspiration level (probably associated with the value of the
respective goal) and select a strategy that exceeds it. (b) On
the other hand cognitive systems may be resource-adapting
in that the strategies employed to pursue a certain task are
additionally constrained by the configuration of resources
currently available for the agent. If resources like knowledge, time or external information are restricted, strategies
should be adopted that are less demanding with respect to
these resources. These strategic shifts may compensate for
performance impairments expectable without such adaptations. Severe limitations of specific resources or certain
combinations of resource limitations may prove impossible
to compensate. Taken together it can be postulated that
subjects generally choose satisficing strategies even when
no strong resource limitations are present. Additionally they
should adapt to specific limitations by choosing strategies
that are more frugal with respect to these limited resources.
Therefore, our main aim is to determine whether subjects
working under certain resource limitations employ the same
strategies as subjects without such limitations or whether
they adapt to these limitations in a useful way.

Learning from Worked-Out Examples
In our empirical work we are specifically interested in
strategies of learning from worked-out examples from the
domain of probability word problems. Worked-out examples are instances of a certain problem type together with a
detailed solution. They facilitate the learning of abstract
procedures for later problem solving (Cummins, 1992; Catrambone, 1998) and the solving of novel problems by analogy (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Reed, 1999). Prerequisites for
the use of examples for knowledge acquisition and application are the generation of suitable example representations
and the initiation of appropriate cognitive processes working on these representations. For our purposes strategies of
learning from worked-out examples can be described on two
dimensions: rare versus frequent use of examples and brief
versus extensive use of examples. Van Lehn and Jones
(1993) found that better learners preferred a rare use of examples and tried to solve training problems on their own.
While good learners only inspected examples for getting
specific information, poor learners referred back to examples as often as possible.
Beyond differences in the frequency of example use learners can use examples more or less extensively depending on
the degree of example elaboration during learning. These
elaborations may comprise the abstract deep structure of an
example problem, the subgoal structure of its solution (Ca-

trambone, 1998), or the similarities and differences of the
example compared to other examples from the same problem type (Cummins, 1992). Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann &
Glaser (1989) found that learners who elaborated examples
during study substantially differed in their performance
from learners that didn’t elaborate on example problems.
According to Chandler and Sweller (1991, p. 294) these
results “indicate the importance to learning of an ability to
properly process worked examples”. Therefore, strategy
selection in learning from worked-out examples may have a
major influence on the quality of knowledge acquired.

Hypotheses
Based on the underlying theoretical framework we derived
five experimental hypotheses about resource-limitations in
learning from worked-out examples and about adaptive
strategy selection: (a) Learning may be impaired if relevant
resources like learning time, prior knowledge or external
information are severely limited. (b) Different resource
limitations may not act additively but interact with each
other if more than one resource is limited. Therefore, different combinations of resource-limitations may result in different patterns of performance impairments. (c) Strategy
shifts may help compensate for performance impairments
associated with certain resource configurations, though
some combinations of resource limitations may prove impossible to compensate by strategic choices. Hence, good
and poor learners may differ in strategic variables under
some but not under all resource configurations. (d) It can be
expected that subjects select faster but less accurate processing strategies if learning time is limited. In the case of
limited prior knowledge or external information, subjects
may select less information-demanding strategies even if
these strategies involve time-consuming inferences. (e) The
dimensions rare - frequent use of examples and brief - extensive use of examples should be useful to characterize
strategies for learning from worked-out examples and to
describe relevant strategy shifts.
To investigate these hypotheses we conducted a series of
three experiments in which subjects’ had to work on a
learning and problem-solving task from the domain of probability word problems. We developed a hypertext system to
serve as experimental environment that allowed us to log
subjects’ strategic decisions in great detail. With regard to
our hypotheses a question of central importance is whether
possible strategic differences between experimental conditions can be interpreted as adaptive. To answer this question
we employed the method of contrasting strategic differences
between experimental conditions with strategic differences
between good and poor learners within experimental conditions. This approach allows us to decide whether subjects
who learn under a specific configuration of resource limitations change their behavior in a direction that can be identified as useful given this configuration of resources.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants The subjects were 46 students of the University of the Saarland (UdS), Germany who either participated
for course credit or payment. Average age was 24.5 years.

Materials and procedure In the hypertext environment a
short introduction to the domain of combinatorics was presented and subjects were instructed to solve a number of
probability word problems following a self-paced learning
phase. In the learning phase of the experiment subjects
could retrieve abstract explanations of six solution principles from the domain of combinatorics (with their associated formula) by clicking on the respective links in the
navigation bar. In the test phase the instructional information of the learning phase was no longer available. Three
test problems were presented on the screen and one of the
test problems had to be selected to begin with. In this experiment no worked-out examples were included because in
the first step we wanted to study performance and strategy
selection in learning with purely abstract information.
Design and dependent measures As independent variables
time pressure and prior knowledge were manipulated by
implementing three different learning conditions. In the
baseline condition with high resource availability subjects
possessed relatively high domain-specific prior knowledge
and were instructed to take as much time as needed to understand the solution principles and then to begin with the
test phase by clicking on the respective link. In the condition with low prior knowledge learning time was likewise
unlimited, but subjects were rather unfamiliar with the domain of combinatorics. In the condition with low learning
time we restricted the learning time of subjects with high
prior knowledge to seven minutes (i.e., about two thirds of
the mean learning duration in the condition without limitations). To induce time pressure subjects were informed that
they would only be granted two thirds of the time usually
needed for the learning phase. When the learning time (visible for the subjects on a digital clock) expired, the first page
of the problem solving phase was automatically presented
on the screen and subjects were instructed to begin working
on the test problems. During problem solving there were no
time limits. In the test phase the subjects had to mark the
appropriate solution principle and the values of two variables for each of the three test problems in a multiple-choice
form available in the hypertext environment. No calculations had to be made. One error was assigned for each
wrong answer. Problem-solving time as well as total learning time, mean reading time per abstract page presented and
frequency of retrieving abstract information pages were
recorded by using logfiles. Following the test phase subjects
had to pass a knowledge test with ten multiple-choice questions related to abstract concepts from the domain of combinatorics. One error was assigned for each wrong answer.
Similar conceptual questions were posed as a pretest at the
beginning of the experiment to control for domain-specific
prior knowledge. Additionally, we registered subjects’ last
math grade as a general measure of mathematical ability
which ranged from grade one (best) to grade six (worst).

Results and Discussion
First we investigated whether the three learning conditions
differ with regard to performance and strategy measures.
For this reason, we used the baseline condition with high
resource availability as a point of reference and contrasted
its data with the two other conditions (see table 1).

Table 1: Means and significance of differences
Learning without

A: Low prior

worked-out examples

knowledge

B: Base-

C: Low

Significance

line

learn. time

of Difference

Problem-solving errors 52.3 %

32.5 %

42.1 %

A >> B << C

Knowledge-test errors

8.9 %

17.1 %

A >> B = C

35.4 %

Math grade

2.2

2.1

1.7

A = B = C

Pretest errors

65.8 %

32.2 %

30.2 %

A >> B = C
A = B > C

Frequency / abst. info.

22

24

15

Mean time / abst. info.

84 sec.

69 sec.

31 sec.

A = B >> C

Total learning time

823 sec.

722 sec.

397 sec.

A = B >> C

Problem solving time

782 sec.

726 sec.

759 sec.

A = B = C

Note: >>: p ≤ .05; >: p ≤ .10;

=: p > .10

(p-values result from one-tailed t-tests)

A comparison with the low-prior-knowledge condition (A
versus B) reveals strong differences in problem-solving errors and knowledge-test errors while there are no differences with regard to strategic measures. This may imply that
subjects with low prior knowledge don’t try to compensate
for their performance impairments by increasing problemsolving time or learning time if only abstract information
about the solution principles is available in the learning environment. Comparing the baseline condition with the lowlearning-time condition (B versus C) yields similar differences in problem-solving errors while there are no differences with regard to knowledge-test errors. In addition, both
conditions differ with respect to strategic measures. Compared to subjects in the baseline condition subjects under
time pressure retrieve abstract information pages less frequently and spend less time on each abstract information
page. This change in strategic behavior is not obligatory as
subjects could as well have reacted to time pressure by only
reducing the mean time reading abstract information but not
the retrieval frequency (as they do in experiment 2).
In a second step we evaluated the adaptivity of strategy
shifts in experiment 1 by comparing good and poor learners
within the experimental conditions with regard to the strategy measures listed in table 1 (post-hoc median splits according to problem-solving performance). To rule out the
hypothesis that differences between good and poor learners
are caused by differences in prior knowledge or math grade
we inserted these variables as covariates in the statistical
comparison of good and poor learners. The respective
analyses of covariance reveal that there are no differences
with regard to strategy measures distinguishing between
good and poor learners. This implies that subjects’ strategic
options (modifying the frequency or intensity of processing
abstract information) are unsuitable for improving problemsolving in the conditions with purely abstract information.
Accordingly, efficiency impairments caused by restrictions
in either prior knowledge or learning time cannot be easily
compensated by strategic shifts in this experiment. Therefore, no resource-adaptive processes of strategy selection
could be evidenced here. We conducted experiment 2 to
investigate whether strategies of information processing are
of greater importance in example-based learning.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants and materials The subjects were 46 students
of the UdS who either participated for course credit or pay-

ment. Average age was 24.5 years. In experiment 2 the hypertext environment was supplemented by a single workedout example per solution principle.
Design and dependent measures The same three learning
conditions as in experiment 1 were implemented. Time
pressure was induced analogously to experiment 1 by restricting learning time to nine minutes. The learning environment was augmented by a single worked-out example for
each solution principle. These examples as well as the abstract information of the learning phase were no longer
available in the test phase. Dependent measures were problem-solving errors, knowledge-test errors, domain-specific
prior knowledge, last math grade, mean reading time per
example provided, frequency of example retrieval (number
of clicks), mean reading time per abstract information page,
frequency of abstract information retrieval (number of
clicks), total learning time, and problem-solving time.

Results and Discussion
Compared to the baseline condition with high resource
availability subjects in the low-prior-knowledge condition
show substantial performance impairments in problem
solving and in the knowledge test (see A versus B in table
2). Furthermore, there are significant differences with regard to strategic measures between the two experimental
groups. Subjects with low prior knowledge spend more time
on learning and especially show an increased frequency of
retrieving abstract information as well as an increased mean
time reading these pages. There are, however, no differences concerning the use of examples between the two
groups. Comparing the baseline condition with the lowlearning-time condition (B versus C) yields similar differences in problem-solving errors and knowledge-test errors.
With respect to strategic measures, subjects in the lowlearning-time condition retrieve examples less frequently
and spend less time reading examples and abstract information. Interestingly, subjects under time pressure retrieve abstract information more often than baseline subjects.
Table 2: Means and significance of differences
Learning with one

A: Low prior

B: Base-

C: Low

worked-out example

knowledge

line

learn. time

Significance
of Difference

Problem-solving errors

55.4 %

32.0 %

54.5 %

A >> B << C
A >> B < C

Knowledge-test errors

36.8 %

13.1 %

20.9 %

Math grade

2.6

1.9

2.0

A > B = C

Pretest errors

66.1 %

33.3 %

32.3 %

A >> B = C

Frequency / example

8

7

3

A = B >> C

Mean time / example

56 sec.

44 sec.

14 sec.

A = B >> C

Frequency / abst. info.

22

13

16

A >> B < C

Mean time / abst. info.

62 sec.

45 sec.

37 sec.

A >> B > C

Total learning time

1047 sec.

809 sec.

516 sec.

A > B >> C

Problem solving time

600 sec.

606 sec.

571 sec.

A = B = C

Note: >>: p ≤ .05; >: p ≤ .10;

=: p > .10

(p-values result from one-tailed t-tests)

A comparison of good and poor learners within the experimental conditions reveals the following strategic differences: In the baseline condition good learners spend more
time reading examples than poor learners. In the low-priorknowledge condition there are no strategic differences between good and poor learners. This implies that the performance in this condition may not easily be improved by

strategic shifts. Nevertheless, subjects with low prior
knowledge try to improve their performance by learning
longer (increased frequency and time reading abstract information). This shift, however, only increases costs in
terms of time investment but doesn’t yield any benefits in
terms of performance. Therefore, subjects in this condition
don’t behave resource-adaptive.
In the low-learning-time condition good learners invest
more time reading examples than do poor learners. In the
light of this finding, it can be recommended that subjects
under time pressure should save time by reducing time for
abstract information processing without simultaneously confining the processing of examples. As the data in table 2
reveal, subjects under time pressure do not follow this recommendation towards resource-adaptive behavior. They
only show a slight reduction in the mean reading time per
abstract information page while there is a substantial decrease in the mean time reading examples. The respective
interaction is significant and indicates that no resourceadaptive strategy shift took place. To conclude, performance
impairments due to lacking prior knowledge cannot be
compensated by selecting different strategies. Therefore,
subjects’ attempts to improve performance are in vain. On
the other hand, performance impairments due to time pressure may be compensated by focussing on example information. Unfortunately, subjects do not shift their strategies
in this direction. Therefore, no resource-adaptive strategy
selection could be found in experiment 2.
We finally compared all six conditions from experiment 1
and 2. Contrasting the two conditions with low prior knowledge doesn’t reveal any decrease in problem-solving errors
due to the provision of examples. However, subjects in the
one-example condition need less time for problem solving
which indicates a slight increase in overall efficiency. A
similar pattern of results can be found for the two baseline
conditions. Unexpectedly, subjects in the low-learning-time
condition deteriorate significantly with regard to problemsolving errors when provided with one example. Their
problem-solving time is decreased analogously to the two
other resource conditions. The respective interaction between time pressure (with/ without) and example availability (with/ without) with regard to problem-solving errors is
significant.
To sum up, in our experimental setting learning with examples doesn’t seem to be more effective than learning with
only abstract information. At least the mere provision of
instructional examples is obviously not sufficient to improve
learning. Rather, the availability of examples must be accompanied by an extensive example-processing. As the differences between good and poor learners in the baseline
condition and in the low-learning-time condition reveal this
is crucial to performance. Furthermore, we found first support for the assumption that different kinds of resources may
interact with regard to their effects on learning and problem
solving. The augmentation of abstract information with one
worked-out example slightly improves problem solving
(i.e., reduces problem-solving time) if prior knowledge is
restricted while it can have detrimental effects on problemsolving errors in the case of time limitation. In order to test
whether these effects can also be observed when providing
more than one example we conducted a third experiment.

Experiment 3
Method
Participants and materials The subjects were 43 students
of the UdS who either participated for course credit or payment. Average age was 24.7 years. In experiment 3 the hypertext environment was supplemented by three worked-out
examples of varying complexity to illustrate the application
of each solution principle to different problem situations.
Design and dependent measures The same three conditions as in experiment 1 and 2 were used in this experiment.
Time pressure was induced by allowing 13 minutes for
learning in the time-limited condition. Dependent measures
were the same as in experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
Compared to the baseline condition with high resource
availability subjects in the low-prior-knowledge condition
again show an increase in both types of error rates (see table
3, A versus B). With regard to strategic measures, subjects
with low prior knowledge spend less time reading examples
but simultaneously show an increase in time reading abstract information. Their time for problem solving is slightly
decreased. Surprisingly, the comparison between the baseline condition and the low-learning-time condition (B versus
C) shows that time pressure does not lead to impairments in
problem solving like it did in experiment 1 and 2. There are,
however, differences in knowledge-test errors as expected.
Concerning strategic measures, subjects under time pressure
spend less mean time reading examples and retrieve examples less frequently.
Table 3: Means and significance of differences
Learning with three

A: Low prior

B: Base-

C: Low

worked-out examples

knowledge

line

learn. time

Significance
of Difference

Problem-solving errors

50.3 %

32.5 %

28.9 %

A >> B = C
A >> B < C

Knowledge-test errors

33.7 %

13.6 %

22.0 %

Math grade

2.8

2.0

2.5

A >> B = C

Pretest errors

59.6 %

29.4 %

35.6 %

A >> B = C

Frequency / example

13

17

7

A = B >> C

Mean time / example

25 sec.

32 sec.

9 sec.

A < B >> C

Frequency / abst. info.

28

23

21

A = B = C

Mean time / abst. info.

71 sec.

49 sec.

54 sec.

A > B = C

Total learning time

1179 sec.

1153 sec.

751 sec.

A = B >> C

Problem solving time

522 sec.

640 sec.

753 sec.

A < B = C

Note: >>: p ≤ .05; >: p ≤ .10;

=: p > .10

(p-values result from one-tailed t-tests)

Comparing good and poor learners within the baseline condition shows that good learners spend more time on learning
(especially on abstract information pages) and more time on
problem solving. In the low-prior-knowledge condition
good learners’ frequency of retrieving examples and of retrieving abstract information is increased as well as their
mean time reading example pages. Hence, it would be resource-adaptive in this condition to study abstract information and example information more intensively and in a
well-balanced way. However, subjects with low prior
knowledge even show a reduced mean time reading examples compared to subjects in the baseline condition. Furthermore, there is a significant cross-interaction between
prior-knowledge (with/ without) and retrieval frequency of

different instructional material (examples/ abstract information). This interaction shows that low-prior-knowledge subjects focus on the retrieval of abstract information instead of
handling examples and abstract information in a wellbalanced way. In the low-learning-time condition good
learners show an increased frequency of retrieving abstract
information and examples. Thus a useful recommendation
to subjects working under time constraint could be to retrieve example information and abstract information in a
well-balanced way. A significant cross-interaction between
time pressure (with/ without) and retrieval frequency of different instructional material (examples/ abstract information) reveals that subjects under time pressure focus on the
retrieval of abstract information instead of handling examples and abstract information in a well-balanced way. Their
behavior can thus not be classified as resource-adaptive.
However, this is the only condition in which time pressure
does not lead to significant performance impairments. This
unexpected finding can be explained by considering that
subjects more or less ignored the examples provided and
therefore could spend the same amount of time in processing abstract information as subjects without time pressure
and without instructional examples (i.e., baseline condition
in experiment 1). Accordingly, their performance is comparable to that condition.
Contrasting the results from experiment 2 and 3 reveals
that subjects with three examples learning in the baseline
condition and in the low-prior-knowledge condition do not
perform any better than the respective subjects in the oneexample conditions. As explained before, improvements
under time pressure are presumably not attributable to the
provision of three examples but rather to the fact that subjects ignore the examples to save time for processing abstract information. The augmentation of instructional resources to three examples therefore does not prove as beneficial as could be expected when considering theories of
learning by analogy (Gick & Holyoak, 1983) or theories of
learning from worked-out examples (Cummins, 1992;
Quilici & Mayer, 1996). At least the mere provision of three
examples is obviously not sufficient to improve learning.
Rather, the provision of multiple examples must be accompanied by a balanced processing of example information
and of abstract information in order to acquire the relevant
knowledge for problem solving. As the differences between
good and poor learners in each of the three-example conditions reveal this is crucial to performance. Contrary to subjects learning with one example who profit most from
studying the example intensively subjects learning with
three examples should equally focus on abstract information. This finding fits theoretical assumptions about schema
abstraction and the acquisition of transferable knowledge
according to which it is necessary to compare different examples with respect to relevant abstract properties to induce
theoretical concepts that may be applicable to analogous
problems (Cummins, 1992).

General Discussion
Contrary to our first hypothesis (a) we found that limitations
of relevant resources are not always associated with performance impairments and accordingly that the provision of

relevant resources is not always associated with performance improvements. E.g., the provision of additional instructional information doesn’t always improve problemsolving. It can even lead to impairments if subjects are
overwhelmed by information selection and integration. This
interpretation is in line with the fact that subjects with low
learning time suffer from the provision of one example and
that they resign from the processing of examples when provided with three examples. Furthermore, as postulated in
our second hypothesis (b) effects of resource limitations are
not always additive, but may even be cross-interacting. For
example, the augmentation of instructional resources by
worked-out examples is slightly beneficial for subjects with
low prior knowledge (decreased problem-solving time),
while it can even have harmful effects for subjects with low
learning time (increased problem-solving errors). Contrary
to our third hypothesis (c) no cases of resource-adaptive
strategy shifts could be identified. There are no patterns of
differences between experimental conditions that can be
classified as adaptive with respect to differences between
good and poor learners within these experimental conditions. Our fourth hypothesis (d) stating that subjects with
limited learning time should select faster but less accurate
example processing strategies was confirmed in experiment
2 and 3. Contrary to our expectations, subjects with low
prior knowledge do not adopt more time-consuming strategies of example processing. Finally, as predicted in the fifth
hypothesis (e), the dimensions brief versus extensive use
(time per example provided) and rare versus frequent use
(frequency of example retrieval) are important dimensions
for describing strategies of learning from worked-out examples. This can be inferred from the differences between
good and poor learners and between experimental conditions with respect to these variables.
In conclusion, our experiments show that strategic options
to improve one’s learning performance become the more
numerous the more instructional material is provided. At the
same time it could be demonstrated that one has to make use
of these strategic options, i.e., adopt adequate strategies in
order to benefit from this additional information.

Cognitive Modeling Approach
In the next step we intend to develop a more detailed model
of resource limitations and their influences on processes of
strategy selection. Within a cognitive science framework
high-level processes of executive control like strategy selection in learning and problem-solving may be best modeled by means of cognitive architectures that are designed as
comprehensive theories of human cognitive abilities. As a
theoretical basis for the cognitive modeling of strategy selection in learning from worked-out examples we will refer
to the ACT-R architecture (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) that
is based on a rational analysis approach compatible with our
framework of resource-adaptive strategy selection. If one
defines strategies for performing tasks as sets of procedures
or operations that may be adopted in order to implement a
certain goal, strategies can be easily represented in ACT-R
by sets of productions that are sufficient to solve a task successfully. Based on this representation, two mechanisms of

action control can be distinguished in ACT-R that are useful
in modeling strategy selection.
On the one hand, processing in ACT-R is controlled by the
currently active goal. Productions referring to other than the
current goal cannot be selected for execution. Strategy selection by setting strategy-specific subgoals can be interpreted as a choice process that is based on discrete symbolic
knowledge and may be useful to model more deliberate aspects of strategy selection. Accordingly, goal setting implies
that the accomplishment of the current task is interrupted for
a period of meta-level decision making.
On the other hand, control in ACT-R is determined by the
mechanism of conflict resolution that selects one of the conflicting productions that are compatible with the current
goal for the next processing step. Strategy selection based
on conflict resolution may be described as a subsymbolic
process embedded within the fundamental mechanisms of
the architecture. Conflict resolution is assumed to be an
automatic process that is not consciously accessible and
accordingly is initiated without changes in the current goal
of information processing. ACT-R’S mechanism for conflict
resolution is based on an estimation of the expected gain E
of the conflicting productions. For every feasible production
i the value of E is determined by the formula E = P G - C
with P being the expected probability of goal achievement
when using i, G being the goal value, and C being the expected costs of goal achievement when using i. Within this
framework the resource limitations studied in our experiments can be modeled as follows.
Time pressure In ACT-R the goal value G is operationalized by the maximum amount of time that may be invested
for goal achievement. Costs of goal achievement C are
likewise measured by the time needed for goal accomplishment. Based on these conventions the mechanism of conflict
resolution inherently produces a speed-accuracy trade-off
depending on the available time. Time pressure will result in
a decrease of G, leading to a lower weight of success probability and a higher weight of processing costs in production
selection. As a result, less effective but at the same time less
costly strategies will be selected for task accomplishment.
Thus ACT-R enables the modeling of subjects’ adaptation to
limitations in time resources by automatic strategy shifts.
Lack of prior knowledge Limitations in domain-specific
knowledge can be represented as gaps in declarative knowledge, i.e., the appropriate conceptual apparatus to encode
the instructional material. In ACT-R these limitations can be
best represented by missing chunk-types (representing concepts). Thus gaps in prior knowledge cannot be compensated automatically. Rather a deliberative setting of a specific learning goal may be necessary to first initiate activities to acquire the required conceptual knowledge.
Limited external information If external information necessary for the execution of the production with the highest
expected gain in the conflict set is lacking this production is
automatically abandoned in ACT-R and a production with
less expected gain is selected that matches the currently
available information. Thus a task can be handled successfully as long as there are productions available whose information demands are satisfied by the current external in-

formation. Augmenting external information beyond these
minimal requirements will improve performance if this information can be encoded correctly and if there are productions available that properly use this information within the
time available. To model the interaction between time limitations and example availability with regard to problemsolving errors we assume that subjects under time pressure
may lack the necessary time to process example information
properly. This may explain why the provision of one
worked-out example is harmful for low-learning-time subjects while subjects with sufficient learning time don’t show
any efficiency impairments.

Acknowledgements
We thank Simon Albers, Tina Schorr, Julia Schuh, Markus
Werkle and the German Research Foundation for their support.

References
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Catrambone, R. (1998). The subgoal learning model: Creating better examples so that students can solve novel
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
127, 355-376.
Chandler, P. & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory and
the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 8,
293-332.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P. & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study and
use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Cummins, D. D. (1992). Role of analogical reasoning in the
induction of problem categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 11031124.
Gick, M. L. & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Logan, G. D. (1985). Executive control of thought and action. Acta Psychologica, 60, 193-210.
Payne, J., Bettman, J. R. & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive decision maker. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Quilici, J. L. & Mayer, R. E. (1996). Role of examples in
how students learn to categorize statistics word problems.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 144-161.
Reder, L. M. & Schunn, D. (1998). Bringing together the
psychometric and strategy worlds: Predicting adaptivity in
a dynamic task. In D. Gopher & A. Koriat (Eds), Cognitive regulation of performance (Attention and performance XVII). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reed, S. K. (1999). Word problems. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants of human behavior. Annual
Review of Psychology, 41, 1-19.
VanLehn, K. & Jones, R. M. (1993). Better learners use
analogical problem solving sparingly. In P. E. Utgoff
(Ed.), Machine Learning: Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Conference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

