UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Retrospective Effects in Human Causality Judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60z3g35z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Pelley, M.E. Le
Cutler, D.L.
McLaren, I.P.L.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

CogSci2000

1

Retrospective Effects in Human Causality Judgment
M.E. Le Pelley (mel22@hermes.cam.ac.uk)
D.L. Cutler (dlc29@hermes.cam.ac.uk)
I.P.L. McLaren (iplm2@cus.cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Site
Cambridge CB2 3EB, England
Abstract
The phenomenon of retrospective revaluation has been a
challenge to many associative learning theories as it involves a change in the associative strength of a cue o n
trials on which that cue is absent. The present experiment combines several retrospective learning contingencies in a single, within-subjects experiment, allowing for valid comparisons between contingencies. One of
the most popular models of retrospective revaluation,
Dickinson & Burke’s (1996) modification of Wagner’s
(1981) SOP theory, fails to explain the full pattern of results. A connectionist model that explains retrospective
revaluation in terms of changes in retrievability in memory, rather than as new learning about absent cues, i s
shown to provide a better account of the results.

Introduction
Perhaps the biggest challenge to traditional theories of
associative learning in recent years has come from studies
of retrospective effects in cue competition. Such effects
have overturned the central tenet of many of the most influential learning theories (e.g. Rescorla & Wagner, 1972;
Wagner, 1981) – that only cues present on a given trial
may engage the learning process.
Consider a typical retrospective revaluation study, as
shown in Table 1. Stage 1 involves training of the cue
compounds AB and CD to predict some outcome. In Stage
2 one of the cues (the competing cue) from each compound is selected for either further training (in what is
known as the backward blocking condition) or extinction
(unovershadowing). The typical result of such studies is
that, following stage 2 training, when the cues that have
not received any further training in stage 2 (the target cues)
are tested, D is now rated as a better predictor of the outcome than B. Thus the perceived predictive validity of a
cue can be altered after initial compound training with that
cue, either by training the other cue of the compound pair
as a valid predictor of the outcome (as in backward blocking) or by extinguishing it (as in unovershadowing). The
inference from this is that the associative strength of the
target cue representation (B or D above) to outcome representation association can change on trials in which that
cue is not presented (A+ and C-).
Retrospective revaluation has now been reliably demonstrated in a number of experiments with humans, using
causal judgments of a cue→outcome relationship as indicators of the strength of the association between their representations (e.g. Chapman, 1991; Dickinson & Burke,

1996; Shanks, 1985). We will consider in some detail here
one of the more popular theories of associative learning;
Wagner’s (1981) SOP model, and Dickinson & Burke’s
(1998) modification allowing it to explain retrospective
effects.
SOP proposes that stimuli are represented by nodes in
an associative memory that are composed of a number of
elements. These elements can be in one of three states at
any instant; one inactive state (I) and two active states (A1
and A2). Presentation of a stimulus excites the elements
representing that stimulus into A1. These elements then
decay back to I via A2. Exciting a node via an associative
connection, however, causes a transition from I directly to
A2. Changes in the associative connection between two
nodes depend on temporal overlap of the states of their
elements. Whenever the elements of two nodes are in A1,
there is an increment in the excitatory strength between
them. When the elements for one node are in A1 and those
of another are in A2, there is an increment in the strength
of an inhibitory connection. Critically, SOP states that
only cue elements in A1 will engage the learning process
(i.e. learning will only accrue to cues that are physically
present on a trial). Hence, as there can be no learning
about absent cues, SOP is unable to explain the results of
retrospective revaluation studies.
Dickinson & Burke (1996) proposed a modification to
SOP to allow it to explain retrospective revaluation (Table
2). They suggested that CS elements in A2 could engage
learning, with an increment in excitatory strength whenever there was an overlap in activation states (be this in
A1 or in A2) and an increment in inhibitory strength
whenever elements were in different states. Thus they
specified the sign with which learning occurs to be a
symmetrical function of elemental activation states.
Consider now the contingencies shown in Table 1. During the first stage both target and competing cues, and the
US, are presented, and so all will have elements in A1.
Hence target and competing cue elements will form excitatory connections to US elements, and within-compound
associations will form between target and competing cues.
In the unovershadowing contingency cue C is now presented, and will retrieve D elements into A2 via the
within-compound link. The US will also have elements in
Table 2: Modified SOP.

Table 1: A typical retrospective revaluation design.
Condition
Backward Blocking
Unovershadowing

Stage 1
AB+
CD+

Stage 2
A+
C-

Test
B?
D?

CS
Element

A1
A2

US Element
A1
A2
E
I
I
E

E : Excitatory connection strengthened
I : Inhibitory connection strengthened

CogSci2000

A2 (retrieved via the C→US connection). As both D and
the US have elements in the A2 state, modified SOP predicts an increment in the excitatory strength between
them. Hence D’s rating is predicted to increase as a result
of the C- trials, even though it is absent.
The case for the backward blocking contingency is less
clear. Presentation of A in stage 2 will retrieve B elements
into A2. The outcome is presented, so some of its elements will be in A1, but it is also predicted by virtue of
the A→US connection, so it will also have elements in
A2 (these elements cannot go straight from A2 to A1
when the US is presented; they must pass through the I
state first). Thus any inhibitory A2-A1 learning between B
and the US will be offset to some extent by excitatory A2A2 learning. Whether the model predicts a net increase or
decrease in the rating of B depends on which of the processes engaged by congruent and incongruent elemental
states is stronger.
The overall result, though, is that after training D will
be rated higher than B. According to modified SOP, then,
the driving force behind retrospective revaluation is
unovershadowing; backward blocking has a smaller role.
This is supported by Larkin, Aitken & Dickinson (1998),
who tried to measure the effects of unovershadowing and
backward blocking separately by comparing each to a control contingency, EF+ X+ (for which neither target cue
nor competing cue is trained in Stage 2). As predicted by
modified SOP, they found evidence for a significant effect
of unovershadowing, but the evidence for backward blocking was weaker and fell short of significance.
Backward blocking and unovershadowing are not the
only retrospective effects that have been found in human
causal learning. It has long been known that following
A+, AB- training, B will typically become established as
an inhibitor of the US, able to counteract the excitatory
potential of A. Chapman (1991) reversed this procedure, to
give an AB-, A+ design. This procedure was sufficient to
establish B as an inhibitor of the US (i.e. it received a
lower rating on test than C or D from a CD-, X- control
contingency). The inhibitory properties of B must have
been assumed in retrospect, as A was only established as a
good predictor of the US following AB- trials.
Note that the phenomenon of backward-conditioned inhibition is in line with the predictions of modified SOP.
During the first stage a within-compound association is
learnt between A and B. A then retrieves B elements into
A2 in stage 2. The outcome is presented, and so has elements in A1. The resulting A2-A1 activity will result in
formation of an inhibitory link between B and the US.
Thus modified SOP is well equipped to deal with some
of the major findings of retrospective learning studies with
humans. In the present experiment we use these retrospective effects as a benchmark from which to provide a more
critical assessment of the mechanism for retrospective
revaluation proposed by modified SOP.
The design of the experiment is shown in Table 3. We
used an allergy prediction paradigm, as employed by Dickinson & Burke (1996) and Larkin et al. (1998). Participants play the role of a food allergist trying to judge the
likelihood that various foods will cause an allergic reaction
in a hypothetical patient (Mr. X). The foods, then, constitute the cues, and the allergic reaction is the outcome.
Following training, subjects rated how strongly each of
the foods predicted the occurrence of an allergic reaction.

2

Table 3: Design of the experiment.
Condition
B. Block
Unover
L,A&D Control
PR Control
BCI
BCI Control 1
BCI Control 2
BB Pre-exp
BB Pre-exp Control 1
BB Pre-exp Control 2
Fillers

Pre-exp

Cond 1
AB+
CD+
EF+
HI+
JKLMNO-

QR
ST
UV

Cond 2
A+
CG+
H+/HJ+
LPQ+
S-

WX-

These ratings were taken as a measure of the associative
strength of a connection from cue to outcome.
We also follow Dickinson & Burke (1996) and Larkin et
al. (1998) in using a large number of cues. This creates a
large memory load, hopefully preventing subjects from
basing their ratings on inferences made from explicit episodic memories of the various trial types. Instead subjects
should have to rely on associative processes to provide an
“automatic” measure of the causal efficacy of each cue.
The first two rows of Table 3 (B. Block and Unover) are
the contingencies of a standard retrospective revaluation
experiment, as shown in Table 1. Retrospective revaluation is demonstrated if D is rated higher than B on test.
The “L,A&D” contingency is a control of the kind used
by Larkin et al. (1998). Following compound training in
Cond 1, neither cue is presented in Cond 2, and so no revaluation will occur. Thus backward blocking and unovershadowing can be assessed independently relative to this
control. Backward blocking would be evidenced by a lower
rating of B than E or F; unovershadowing by a higher
rating of D than E or F.
The “PR Control” is a second control that might allow
us to dissect out the effects of backward blocking and
unovershadowing. Following compound training in Cond
1, the competing cue receives partial reinforcement. Thus
there are an equal number of H+ and H- trials. Suppose
that unovershadowing is much stronger than backward
blocking. On each H- trial in stage 2 there would be an
unovershadowing effect, with I’s association to the US
becoming stronger. On each H+ trial there would be little
effect, as backward blocking is weak. The contingency
becomes, in effect, HI+ H-, i.e. unovershadowing, and so
we expect I’s rating to be similar to D (from an actual
CD+ C- contingency). The opposite would be true if
backward blocking were stronger than unovershadowing.
In general, the PR Control target cue will receive a rating
closer to the target cue of the retrospective revaluation
contingency having the stronger effect.
The next three rows show a backward-conditioned inhibition contingency and two controls respectively. As described earlier, backward-conditioned inhibition will be
demonstrated if K is rated lower on test than M (from
Control 1) and N or O (from Control 2).
“BB Pre-exp” is short for backward blocking preexposure. This involves compound pre-exposure during
the first stage (cf. compound training for backward blocking), followed by excitatory training of the competing cue
in Cond 2. Modified SOP predicts that unovershadowing
will have a larger effect than backward blocking in retrospective revaluation, because in a backward blocking con-

CogSci2000

3

tingency the US is strongly predicted in the second stage,
such that it has elements in A2. The excitatory A2-A2
learning then offsets the effect of inhibitory A2-A1 learning. As a result of using compound pre-exposure in the
“BB Pre-exp” contingency, though, the US will not be
expected on Cond 2 trials. Hence when it is presented all
of its elements should be free to enter A1. R will be retrieved into A2 by Q via the Q–R association developed
during pre-exposure. The resulting A2-A1 overlap should
produce strong inhibitory conditioning. Modified SOP
thus makes the clear prediction that R will be rated lower
than T (from Control 1) and U or V (from Control 2).
The Filler trial was used so that there were an equal
number of positive and negative trials during Cond 1.

Method
Participants Twenty-four Cambridge University students
(14 female, 10 male; age 19-23) took part in the experiment.
Apparatus The experiment was run on a Power PC Macintosh with a 14" monitor.
The foods used were: Oranges, Tomato, Cheese, Lobster,
Rice, Peaches, Banana, Grapes, Yoghurt, Melon, Broccoli,
Aubergine, Eggs, Potatoes, Carrots, Lentils, Sardines, Gammon, Dates, Mushrooms, Raspberries, Jam, Onion, Steak.
These foods were randomly assigned to the letters A to X i n
the experimental design for each subject.

Percent "Allergic Reaction" Responses

Procedure At the start of the experiment each subject was
given a sheet of instructions presenting the “allergy prediction” cover story for the experiment. They were told that i n
the first block they would be looking over records of foods
eaten at the clinic by Mr. X, but would not be told whether or
not allergic reactions occurred, while in the second and third
blocks they would be asked to make predictions based on the
foods eaten. They were also told that at the end of the experi100
AB+
CD+
EF+
HI+
JKLMNOWX-

80
60
40
20
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Percent "Allergic Reaction" Responses

Trial Set

100
A+
CG+
H+/J+
LPQ+
S-

80
60
40
20
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Trial Set

Figure 1. Acquisition of discriminations in (A) Stage 1
and (B) Stage 2.

ment they would be asked to rate each of the foods according
to how strongly it predicted allergic reactions.
On each pre-exposure trial, the words “Meal [meal number]
contains the following foods:” followed by the two foods
appeared on the screen. Subjects were then cued to enter the
initial two letters of each of the foods. This was to ensure that
they paid attention to the pairings of foods when no allergy
prediction was required. There were three trial types in this
stage: the order of trials was randomized over each set of three
with the constraint that there were no immediate repetitions
across sets. Participants saw each pair of foods eight times i n
this stage. The order of presentation on the screen
(first/second) within each compound pair was randomized.
The same message appeared on the screen on Cond 1 and
Cond 2 trials. However, now the subjects were asked to predict
whether or not eating the foods would cause Mr. X to have an
allergic reaction,
using the “x” and “.” keys
(counterbalanced). The screen then cleared, and immediate
feedback was provided. On positive trials the message
“ALLERGIC REACTION!” appeared on the screen; on negative
trials the message “No Reaction” appeared. If an incorrect
prediction was made, the computer beeped. There was an explicit break between Cond 1 and Cond 2, when subjects were
told that they would now see a new set of meals, some of
which contained foods they had seen earlier and some of
which didn’t. There were eight trial types in Cond 1, and nine
in Cond 2.The order of trials was randomized over each set of
eight or nine. Participants saw each meal eight times in Cond
1 and Cond 2. Four of the eight H trials in Cond 2 were positive, and the other four were negative, in random order.
In the final rating stage subjects were asked to rate their
opinions of the effect of eating each of the foods on a scale
from -10 to +10. They were to use +10 if the food was very
likely to cause an allergic reaction in Mr. X, -10 if eating the
food was very likely to prevent the occurrence of allergic reactions which other foods were capable of causing, and 0 if eating the food had no effect on Mr. X (i.e. it neither caused nor
prevented allergic reactions).
All of the foods seen in training were then presented in random order for rating. For clarification, participants also had
access to a card on which the instructions on how to use the
rating scale were printed. Once a food had been rated it disappeared from the screen and the next appeared, so that participants could not revise their opinions upon seeing later foods.

Results
Figure 1 illustrates the percentage of trials on which subjects thought an allergic reaction would be caused by the
food(s) shown in each of the 8 trial sets of Cond 1 and 2.
Subjects’ responses were clearly appropriate to the relevant
underlying contingencies by the end of each stage, with all
of the positive trial types eliciting more “Allergic Reaction” responses, negative trial types receiving more “No
Reaction” responses, and the H+/H- trials receiving about
50% positive and negative responses.
Of more interest are the ratings of the causal efficacy of
each of the foods. The mean rating given to each of the 24
foods is shown in Figure 2. A one-way, repeated measures
ANOVA was carried out on these ratings as a preliminary
to assessing the effects of interest by means of planned
comparisons. There was a significant main effect of food
[F(23,529) = 22.46, p < 0.001]. Retrospective revaluation
was seen, in that the target cue of the backward blocking
contingency (B) was rated significantly lower than that of
the unovershadowing contingency (D) [F(1,23) = 7.24, p
< 0.01]. Hence it appears that our experimental paradigm
is sensitive to changes in the perceived causal efficacy of
cues on trials on which those cues are not present.

CogSci2000

10
8
6

Rating

4
2
0
-2

A B C D E FG H IJ K L M N O P Q R S T U VW X

-4
-6
-8
-10

Figure 2. Mean ratings given to the 24 foods.
The result for the L,A&D Control contingency is given
by the average of cues E and F, which are equivalent. This
does not differ significantly from B or D [F(1,23)=2.78
and 1.23 respectively, ps > 0.05]. Given this failure to
reach significance, our results neither confirm nor contradict those of Larkin et al. (1998).
We now turn to the results of the PR Control contingency. The rating of the target cue from this contingency
(I) is very similar to that of the backward blocking contingency, but quite different from that of the unovershadowing contingency. This is supported statistically: B and I do
not differ significantly [F < 1], whereas the difference between D and I is highly significant [F(1,23) = 7.44, p <
0.01]. It was stated earlier that the rating of the target cue
of the PR Control contingency should be more similar to
the target cue of whichever retrospective revaluation process (backward blocking or unovershadowing) is stronger.
Hence, given that the rating of I is more similar to B than
D, the PR Control contingency indicates that backward
blocking is a stronger process than unovershadowing.
We also have evidence for backward-conditioned inhibition in this experiment. Cue K is rated lower than its
equivalents in the two control contingencies (M, and the
average of N and O, none of which differs significantly
from each of the others). These differences are significant
[F(1,23) = 7.45, p < 0.01 and F(1,23) = 6.98, p < 0.01
respectively]. There is no evidence for any retrospective
learning in the BB Pre-exp contingency, however. The
target cue of this contingency is R. The two controls here
are T and the average of U and V (none of which differ
from one another). In the former case, the means are identical; in the latter the difference is not significant [F < 1].

Discussion
Looking at the results above, we can see that modified
SOP is successful in explaining some aspects of this experiment (the occurrence of retrospective revaluation and
backward-conditioned inhibition). However, it also has
important failures.
The fact that the PR Control indicates a stronger role of
backward blocking than unovershadowing in this experiment is a great problem for modified SOP. It implies that
the simplistic approach taken to the associative processes
occurring in these contingencies is insufficient to provide
a full account of human behaviour with respect to learning
about absent cues, as the model predicts that unovershadowing will be more influential than backward blocking.

4

Note that this result also argues against subjects’ using
a rational, Bayesian approach to the contingencies seen.
According to this idea, subjects would integrate the information experienced in the two stages to derive the most
likely cause of the US. For example, A- trials following
AB+ trials (unovershadowing) indicate that it must have
been B that caused the US on the AB+ trials. Hence B’s
rating will increase as a result of A- trials. Less information is given by A+ trials following AB+, though: B
could still be a cause of the US on AB+ trials. Hence this
rational approach predicts that unovershadowing will be
stronger than backward blocking, whereas the results of
the PR Control indicate the opposite.
In addition, modified SOP predicts a large difference between the target cue of the BB Pre-exp group and its controls, but no difference is seen. The BB Pre-exp contingency should be the situation in which the inhibitory A2A1 process, proposed to underlie backward blocking,
should be most prominent, and yet no effect was seen.
This is particularly noticeable as the BCI contingency,
which on the surface appears very similar, did show an
effect. The failure to find an effect in one of the two contingencies is hard to reconcile with modified SOP.
In summary, then, it seems that modified SOP is able
to explain the existence of retrospective revaluation and
associated phenomena, but that the mechanics of the explanation offered do not agree with our empirical findings.
We now offer an alternative class of model which seems
better able to cover the known facts with respect to human
studies of retrospective revaluation.

APECS: A model of associative learning
It is possible to explain the results of the above experiments using a version of McLaren’s (1993) APECS
model. The mechanics for learning in APECS are similar
to standard backpropagation (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986), but differ in that once the weights appropriate to a mapping have developed, the learning represented
in those weights is protected. This is achieved by reducing
the learning rate parameters for the hidden unit carrying the
mapping. The effect is to “freeze” the weights to and from
a certain configural unit at the value they hold immediately following experience of that configuration. Crucially, this freezing of weights to and from a hidden unit
occurs only if that hidden unit has a negative error value,
i.e. if it is part of a mapping that predicts an incorrect
outcome for the current input. This reduces the interference
arising as a result of subsequent experience of similar (but
not identical) input patterns. Indeed APECS was originally
designed as a solution to the problem of catastrophic interference in learning (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).
Specifically, APECS has different learning rate parameters for input–hidden and bias–hidden connections. The
former are frozen to prevent interference; the latter remain
high. Hence extinction (suppression of inappropriate responses) is achieved by an increase in the negative bias on
the hidden unit carrying the inappropriate mapping, rather
than by reduction of weights (which would cause the
original mapping to be lost from the network). Given
appropriate input cues, the negative bias on the hidden
unit can be overcome and the original mapping retrieved.
In addition, in our instantiation of APECS each different
pattern of stimulation is represented by its own hidden
unit, similar to Pearce (1987).

CogSci2000

Consider what happens in the network on AB+ training.
It will learn a mapping from A and B input units to the
US output unit, mediated by a hidden unit that can be
thought of as representing the configuration of A and B
(ABhidden). On each AB+ trial the excitatory connections to
and from ABhidden will grow stronger. Now consider the
gap between AB+ trials, when no inputs are presented.
According to the logistic activation function employed
with APECS, when no inputs are presented the hidden
units will have an activation of 0.5 (see Rumelhart et al.,
1986). This activation will feed along the ABhidden→US
connection learnt on the preceding trial, and activate the
US unit. This is obviously inappropriate when no inputs
are presented. The US unit will take on a negative error,
which is propagated back to ABhidden. As explained earlier,
a negative error means that the weights to and from the
hidden unit are frozen. In order to suppress the expression
of the US on gaps between the AB+ trials, the ABhidden
unit will therefore develop a negative bias.
In a backward blocking contingency we now train on
A+ trials. As explained above, in this instantiation of
APECS, each different input→output mapping is assigned
a new hidden unit. Hence a new unit is recruited to carry
the A+ mapping. As the previous excitatory connection
from A to the US (via the AB configural unit) is still useful in reducing the output error (i.e. there is a positive
output error on A+ trials, which is propagated back to the
ABhidden unit), the learning rate for the A→ABhidden→US
connections will also remain high. Given the negative
bias on the ABhidden unit, and the fact that training was
with A and B in stage 1, A alone will not succeed in fully
activating the US at the start of A+ training. Hence the
connections from A to both hidden layer units, and from
the hidden layer units to the US node, will strengthen.
Now, when no stimuli are applied (during inter-trial interval) the hidden units will deliver some positive activation to the output unit. Thus the Ahidden unit will assume a
negative bias. More importantly, the negative bias on the
ABhidden unit will also become increasingly negative to
counter the extra positive activation feeding to the US.
What now happens when B is presented on test? B will
provide ABhidden with positive activation, but this may not
effectively counter the unit’s large negative bias, and hence
the US will receive little activation. This, of course, assumes that ABhidden’s gain in negative bias outweighs the
strengthened ABhidden→US connection. This is guaranteed,
as the two bias changes must together counter the increased A→hidden and hidden→US weights of both routes
to the US, whereas only the increased ABhidden→US connection will facilitate B’s ability to retrieve the US.
Hence APECS is able to explain backward blocking: as
a result of A+ trials following AB+ training, B becomes
less able to retrieve the US. Note that, unlike modified
SOP, this is not as a result of new learning about B (the
B→hidden connection is unchanged on A+ trials), but
rather as a result of changes in the retrievability of a
previously-learnt association.
Consider now the A- trials of the second stage of an
unovershadowing contingency. Once again a new hidden
unit is recruited to carry this mapping. In this case,
however, the ABhidden unit is not reused: it carries an
inappropriate excitatory mapping and so will have a
negative error. Hence its weights are frozen, and it takes
on an increased negative bias. In addition, an inhibitory
mapping from A to US will develop via the Ahidden unit in

5

order to counter the positive activation flowing to the US
via the original mapping.
Between A- trials, when no inputs are presented, the US
will receive excess negative input as a result of this new,
unsuppressed inhibitory mapping. The network counters
this problem in two ways. One is for the Ahidden unit to
develop a negative bias. The other is for the negative bias
on the ABhidden unit to reduce, allowing through more
positive activation.
The upshot of the decrease in negative bias on the
ABhidden unit is that presentation on B will now excite the
US more effectively than following initial AB+ training:
this is the standard unovershadowing effect.
Thus the features of APECS that prevent it from suffering from catastrophic interference also allow it to explain
retrospective revaluation. Indeed, a backward blocking contingency can be seen as an interference design, where two
different pathways (via Ahidden and ABhidden) compete to
activate the same outcome. Hence A+ trials interfere with
memory of the AB+ mapping, causing this pathway to be
suppressed. In unovershadowing the situation is reversed:
the two pathways have opposite outcomes (AB+ and A-),
and so on A- trials the AB+ pathway need not be suppressed, and can even become stronger to counter the influence of the new negative pathway.
On performing initial simulations of retrospective revaluation using APECS it was found that unovershadowing consistently showed a larger effect than backward
blocking. This sits well with the results of Larkin et al.’s
(1998) study. But how then could this model explain the
PR Control, which indicates that backward blocking has
the greater effect?
The answer lies in the nature of the AB+ A+/A- design
used. It was mentioned earlier that each new input→output
mapping recruits a new hidden unit. Hence the occurrence
of A+ and A- trials in stage 2 will lead to the recruitment
of two new hidden units, one carrying an excitatory mapping, the other an inhibitory mapping. Thus there are now
two excitatory pathways to the US (via the ABhidden and
A+hidden units) as opposed to only one inhibitory pathway
(via the A-hidden). This means that any influence of the
inhibitory pathway on each excitatory pathway (i.e.
unovershadowing) will be relatively slight, as the effect is
shared between, and countered by, both excitatory pathways. The effect of one excitatory pathway on the other
(backward blocking), though, is relatively unaffected, as it
is still a one versus one situation. Hence backward blocking is relatively preserved in this contingency, whereas
unovershadowing is greatly reduced.
Figure 3 shows simulation results for the retrospective
revaluation contingencies of our experiment, along with
the empirical results. The simulation results are the average of 24 simulations run with APECS, each representing
one subject, with exactly the same trial order as experienced by the real subjects. Each trial involved 1000 learning cycles. A hidden unit is defined as being “active” when
it receives positive activation from the input layer. Thus if
cue A is presented to the network, any hidden unit representing a configuration that includes cue A will be active.
Activity extends into the period immediately following
each trial, when no inputs are presented (again for 1000
learning cycles). The learning rate parameters for input–
hidden and hidden–output units are both 0.85 when a hidden unit is active and has a positive error, and 0.001 when
it is not. The parameter for bias–hidden changes is 0.25

CogSci2000

6
BCI
(K)

6

Empirical
Simulated

5

0.9

BCI Cont 1
(M)

BCI Cont 2
(N/O)

0.0

1.00

-0.5

0.90

Output Activation
(arbitrary units)

0.8

-1.0

0.6

-1.5

0.60

-2.0

0.50

-2.5

0.40

0.5
0.4

2

0.3

1
0

Rating

3

0.80

0.7

0.70

0.30

0.2

-3.0

0.1

-3.5

Empirical
Simulated

0

B. Block
(B)

Unover
(D)

L,A&D Cont
(E/F)

PR Cont
(I)

Figure 3. Empirical and simulated data for the
retrospective revaluation contingencies.
when a hidden unit is active, 0.001 when it is not. Thus
we make the reasonable assumption that changes due to
learning take place faster than changes in memory, i.e.
learning represents rapid acquisition, and memory represents a more gradual decline in retrievability.
What predictions does APECS make for other contingencies used in our experiment? Easiest to understand is
the BB Pre-exp contingency. On the pre-exposure trials,
there is no error on the output unit (whether or not the
outcome occurs is not known). Given that it is output
error that drives learning in error-correcting networks, this
lack of error means that there is no drive to form associations. Hence the cues involved in these trials remain unconnected to the US following pre-exposure. As these cues
have no connections to the output, their associative status
cannot change on any subsequent trials on which they are
not presented, and so no differences will be seen amongst
these groups (as observed empirically).
The situation is slightly more complex for the BCI contingency. Typically a context in which outcomes occur
will become a weak excitor of the outcome itself. Thus
cues presented on negative trials in this context will become weak inhibitors in order to overcome this excitation
(demonstrated by the negative ratings given to cues W and
X). Hence J and K will develop an inhibitory link to the
US via a JKhidden unit. This unit will take on a slight
negative bias to prevent its expression when no inputs are
presented. The network is now presented with J+ trials. A
new hidden unit will be recruited to carry this excitatory
mapping. There will be a slight increase in the negative
bias on the JKhidden unit, but given that the inhibitory influence of this pathway is slight, the drive to suppress it
will also be slight. On the gap between J+ trials, the US
will receive excess positive input. One way to decrease
this is for the Jhidden unit to develop a negative bias to
suppress the excitatory mapping just learnt. A second way
to reduce the activation of the US is to decrease the suppression of the JKhidden unit, allowing more activity to
flow through the inhibitory pathway. This release in suppression between trials (driven by the strong excitatory
pathway) more than compensates for the increase in suppression on J+ trials (driven by the weak inhibitory pathway), and so overall the suppression of the JKhidden unit
(which carries the inhibitory mapping) decreases over J+
trials. Hence the ability of K to retrieve the US decreases
as a result of J+ training following JK- trials: backwardconditioned inhibition is seen.
This is again confirmed by simulation. Figure 4 shows
the results for the relevant contingencies from the simulation of this experiment described above.

Output Activation
(arbitrary units)

4
Rating

1

-4.0

0.20
0.10
0.00

Figure 4. Empirical and simulated data for the backwardconditioned inhibition contingencies.
In conclusion then, it seems that modified SOP is able
to explain certain retrospective effects in human causality
learning on a coarse scale, but that the explanation offered
for these effects (novel learning about absent cues following retrieval via within-compound associations) does not
stand up to closer scrutiny. A memory-based explanation,
with retrospective effects manifest as changes in retrievability rather than new learning about absent cues,
shows better agreement with empirical data, and may
prove a more fruitful approach for future investigation.

References
Chapman, G. B. (1991). Trial-order affects cue interaction i n
contingency judgement. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 17, 837-854.
Dickinson, A., & Burke, J. (1996). Within-compound associations mediate the retrospective revaluation of causality
judgements. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49B, 60-80.
Larkin, M. J. W., Aitken, M. R. F., & Dickinson, A. (1998).
Retrospective revaluation of causal judgements under positive and negative contingencies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24, 13311352.
McCloskey, M., & Cohen, N. J. (1989). Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning
problem. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 24,
109-166.
McLaren, I. P. L. (1993). APECS: A solution to the sequential
learning problem. Proceedings of the XVth Annual Convention of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 717-722).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pearce, J. M. (1987). A model for stimulus generalization i n
Pavlovian conditioning. Psychological Review, 94, (6173).
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and non-reinforcement. In A.H. Black &
W.F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current research and theory (pp. 64-99). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986).
Learning internal representations by error propagation. In
D.E. Rumelhart, J.L. McLelland & the PDP Research Group
(Eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing (Vol. 1, pp. 318362). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shanks, D. R. (1985). Forward and backward blocking in human contingency judgements. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 37B, 1-21.
Wagner, A. R. (1981). SOP: A model of automatic memory
processing in animal behaviour. In N.E. Spear & R.R.
Miller (Eds.), Information processing in animals: Memory
mechanisms (pp. 5-47). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.

