UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Searching for Alternatives in Spatial Reasoning: Local Transformations and Beyond

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0f03w09v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Rauh, Reinhold
Hagen, Cornelius
Schlieder, Christoph
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Searching for Alternatives in Spatial Reasoning: Local Transformations and Beyond
Reinhold Rauh1 (REINHOLD@COGNITION.IIG.UNI-FREIBURG.DE)
Cornelius Hagen1 (HAGEN@COGNITION.IIG.UNI-FREIBURG.DE)
Christoph Schlieder2
(CS@INFORMATIK.UNI-BREMEN.DE)
1
Gerhard Strube
(STRUBE@COGNITION.IIG.UNI-FREIBURG.DE)
Markus Knauff1
(KNAUFF@COGNITION.IIG.UNI-FREIBURG.DE)
1

Center for Cognitive Science, Institute of Computer Science and Social Research, University of Freiburg
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany
2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen
P. O. Box 330440, 28334 Bremen, Germany
Abstract

Searching for alternative solutions of an indeterminate reasoning task is an important and necessary step in order to draw
certain inferences as in the case of deduction. To elucidate the
underlying mental representations and processes of the search
for alternatives in spatial reasoning, an experiment was conducted that used specific material stemming from AI research
of Qualitative Spatial Reasoning. The results showed that
searching for alternative solutions can be best explained as a
revision process starting with an initial mental model of the
premises. Proceeding from one solution to an alternative is
apparently achieved by local transformation. Interestingly,
local transformations have a "logic of their own": They can
lead to systematic errors of omission and to errors of commission.

Spatial Reasoning and Mental Models
Dealing with spatial problems is a frequent and important
challenge in everyday as well as in professional life. It
occurs across various fields like spatial navigation or spatial
configuration and design. In this paper, we will concentrate
on a special sort of spatial problem solving, namely reasoning based on spatial relational descriptions. This type of reasoning can be investigated with recourse to several
background theories of thinking developed in cognitive psychology. According to previous research in spatial reasoning
(Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989; Evans, Newstead, & Byrne,
1993) and according to our own previous findings (Knauff,
Rauh, & Schlieder, 1995; Knauff, Rauh, Schlieder, & Strube,
1998; Rauh & Schlieder, 1997) the most promising and most
successful framework is the theory of mental models.

Mental Model Theory as Framework
The core assumption of the mental model theory (JohnsonLaird, 1983; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991) states that when
we reason we build an integrated representation of the situation that the premises describe. This integrated representation—the mental model—is in certain aspects analogous to
the state of affairs and, as a consequence, lacks the information whether relationships are explicitly mentioned in the

premises and or are implicitly determined by the representational format.
A further consequence of the assumption of integrated representation becomes evident when certain kinds of inferences have to be drawn. Take deductive inference for
example: To test whether a contingent relationship in the initial mental model is necessarily true, the reasoner has to test
all the alternative models of the premises. If a contradictory
example is found, the putative conclusion will be rejected; if
not it will be accepted as a valid conclusion.
The search for alternative models takes place during what
we call the phase of model variation. It seems to be a deliberate mental process so fragile that it causes many systematic
reasoning errors. There are errors of omission, i.e. inferences
that could have been validly drawn, and there are errors of
commission, i.e. inferences that are not justified by the premises.
Therefore, model variation has attracted much attention,
but little is empirically known about how the mental search
for alternative models is accomplished by the human process
of reasoning. For a precise investigation of the model variation phase, there is the need for relational material with a
rich inherent structure and unambiguous semantics.

Spatial Reasoning with Interval Relations
Traditional investigations of spatial reasoning used relations
like left-of, right-of, in front of, and behind. As argued elsewhere (Knauff et al., 1998), these spatial relations have no
clear semantics. Therefore, studies of reasoning using these
spatial relations are problematic because it is unclear
whether the results obtained can be attributed to the inference processes, or are due to the ambiguity of these relations.
To remedy this situation, we use Allen’s (1983) set of 13
qualitative interval relations that enables one-dimensional
spatial reasoning. These relations have clear geometric
semantics based on the bounding points of the intervals, i.e.
their starting points and ending points. They also have the
property of being jointly exhaustive and pairwise disjoint
(JEPD)—a property that also reduces the risk of misinterpre-

tations. In Table 1, we shortly introduce these relations
together with verbalizations that we use in our experiments.
Table 1: The 13 qualitative interval relations, associated
natural language expressions, and a graphical example
(adapted and augmented according to Allen, 1983).

Relation
symbol

Natural language
description

X<Y

X lies to the left of Y

XmY

X touches Y at the left

XoY

X overlaps Y from the left

XsY

X lies left-justified in Y

XdY

X is completely in Y

XfY

X lies right-justified in Y

X=Y

X equals Y

X fi Y

X contains Y right-justified

X di Y

X surrounds Y

X si Y

X contains Y left-justified

X oi Y

X overlaps Y from the right

X mi Y

X touches Y at the right

X>Y

X lies to the right of Y

Graphical
example

With these relations, reasoning tasks known as three-term
series problems can be constructed. One example is "X overlaps Y from the left. Y surrounds Z." The example also shows
that there are many three-term series problems generated
from these relations that have more than one solution. To be
precise, there are 42 three-term series problems that have
three solutions, 24 that have five solutions, 3 that have nine,
and another 3 that have thirteen solutions. We utilize this
property in order to construct indeterminate three-term series
problems to investigate precisely the phase of model variation. In the next section, we will present a more formal analysis of these tasks. From this analysis and the revealed
properties of the different tasks, hypotheses can be derived
that we will test in a model variation experiment.

A Formal Framework for Model Variation
In principle, there are two ways to construct alternative models of the premises. The first consists of repeating the complete construction of alternative models one after another
(model iteration). We will examine the more plausible varia-

tion strategy that consists of generating alternative models by
locally transforming the initial model (see also Schlieder,
1998), i.e. the first model constructed during model variation
(model revision).
In this view, any sequence of models M0, M1, ..., Mn corresponds to a sequence of transformations T1, T2, ..., Tn, where
the output model Mi of Ti is the input model of Ti+1. The set
{M0, ..., Mn} is ordered by the sequence T1, T2,..., Tn.
Since models of a three-term-series problem are completely determined by only one relation, namely the one
between X and Z, we can treat models and relations equivalently. Seen this way, a transformation is a transition from
one relation r1 to another relation r2, or, in short, r1 → r2.

Conceptual Neighborhoods
Freksa (1992) introduced the notion of conceptual neighborhood between interval relations. Formally, the three conceptual neighborhoods are defined by the graphs in Figure 1.
Two relations are neighbors iff they are connected by an
edge of the corresponding graph.

s
d

<

<

<

m

m

m

o
=

f

oi

s

fi
di
si

d

o
=

f

oi

s

fi
di
si

d

o

fi
di

=
f

oi

mi

mi

mi

>

>

>

A-Type

B-Type

C-Type

si

Figure 1: Freksa’s (1992) conceptual neighborhoods.
The common generic principle underlying the three types of
neighborhood reads as follows: Interval relations r1 and r2
are said to be conceptual neighbors if a model of intervals X
and Y satisfying X r1 Y can be continuously transformed
into a model of intervals X’ and Y’ satisfying X’ r2 Y’ such
that during the transformation no model arises in which a
relation different from r1 and r2 holds (see Schlieder &
Hagen, in press). Their peculiarities arise from different
transformation processes. The A-neighborhood is based on a
transformation that can be described as the movement of one
single bounding point of one interval whereas the B-neighborhood relies on the movement of a complete interval of
fixed length. The transformation defining the C-neighborhood consists of keeping the center of the changing interval
fixed and varying its length. The types of transformations
defining the A(B,C)-neighborhoods will be called A(B,C)transformations.

Local Transformations: Steps between A-Neighbors
An examination of sequences of A-transformations revealed
a need to formally refine the conceptual framework. In order
to describe the model revision process adequately the definition has to include the movement of bounding points and its
direction. An A-transformation between intervals X and Y
does not specify the moving bounding point since it can
always be accomplished in two ways by movements of a
suitable bounding point: Either by moving one bounding
point of interval X in one direction or one of Y in the opposite direction (see Table 2). An A-transformation with specified moving point p will be called a step (of bounding point p
in direction d).
Table 2: The relation of A-transformations and steps.

A-transformation

step right

step left

<→m

EX

SY

m→o

EX

SY

o → fi

EX

EY

fi → di

EX

EY

di → si

SX

SY

si → oi

SX

SY

oi → mi

SX

EY

mi → >

SX

EY

o→s

SX

SY

s→d

SX

SY

d→f

EX

EY

f → oi

EX

EY

s→=

EX

EY

=→f

SX

SY

= → si

EX

EY

fi → =

SX

SY

Note that tracking sequences of interval relations does not
permit the direct observation of steps. Step-sequences, i.e.
sequences of steps that refer to the same point p moving in
constant direction d, can explain errors of omission or commission that cannot be explained on the level of A-transformations. In order to show this, we need one more definition.
A step-sequence S1, ..., Sn is extendible at the beginning (or
the end) iff there exists a step S0 (or Sn+1) such that S0, S1,
..., Sn (or S1, ..., Sn, Sn+1) is a step-sequence. If it is extendible at the beginning or at the end it is (totally) extendible.

Errors of Omission and Errors of Commission. Our general assumption about the implications of this formalism for
the traversal of solution sets is as follows: Moving along a
step-sequence, i.e. keeping the moving point and its direction
constant, is easier to process than changing them or even performing a non-A-transformation.
Therefore, errors of omission should be observed more
frequently if the end of a step-sequence is reached but the
solution set is not completely traversed. Errors of commission, in turn, should occur more frequently with non-solutions which are a continuation of a step-sequence.

Hypotheses
In the following we present hypotheses specifying the implications of the above considerations in more detail. They can
easily be verified consulting Table 2 and Figure 2, which displays solution sets of all three-term series problems with
multiple models.
3-Model-Tasks

3-1

3-2

3-3

3-4

5-2

5-3

3-6

3-7

3-8

9- and 13-Model-Tasks

5-Model-Tasks

5-1

3-5

5-4

9-1

13-1

Figure 2: The solution sets of three-term-series problems with
multiple models. The valid relations are represented as points
at corresponding positions of Figure 1.
3-Model-Tasks. The relations determining the solution set of
a 3-model-task can be ordered in two ways by sequences of
A-transformations (e.g. for (3-1): <→m→o or o→m→<).
Each of these sequences can be accomplished in two ways as
step-sequence (e.g. <→m→o by steps to the right of the ending point EX of interval X or by steps to the left of the starting
point SY of Y). One of these sequences is extendible except
for the solution sets (3-7) and (3-8) where all sequences are
non-extendible. There are two interesting hypotheses concerning 3-model tasks: (1) 3-model-tasks having extendible
solution sequences are prone to errors of commission, and (2)
3-model-tasks with solution sets (3-7) and (3-8) have significantly less errors of commission than the other 3-modeltasks.
5-Model-Tasks. The solution set of a 5-model-task can be
ordered in two ways by sequences of A-transformations.
Each of these sequences can be accomplished in two ways, as
step-sequence that is non-extendible, or as a sequence S1, S2,
S3, S4, where S1, S2 and S3, S4 are non-extendible stepsequences, having the same direction but referring to different

bounding points of the same interval. Accordingly, we can
formulate the hypothesis, that errors of omission will most
frequently occur between step 2 and step 3.
9-Model-Tasks and 13-Model-Tasks. The solution set of a
9-model-task or of a 13-model-task can be ordered in multiple ways by sequences of A-transformations. Each of them
fall into several step-sequences, including necessary changes
of direction between them. So we expect a decreased number
of correct and complete solution sequences for these tasks.

Experiment on Model Variation
Participants
24 students (12 female, 12 male) of the University of
Freiburg were paid for participation.

Materials
The material consisted of the 72 indeterminate three-term
series problems that can be constructed by the 12 interval
relations, if the trivial "=" relation is omitted. In each threeterm series problem the spatial relationship between a red
and a green interval is described in the first premise, and the
relationship between the green interval and a blue one is
given in the second premise.

Procedure
The computer-assisted experiment was divided into three
phases. During the definition phase participants were given
the verbalizations of the interval relations together with an
explanation of the semantics with respect to the ordering of
starting points and ending points. Additionally, a pictorial
example was displayed.
During the learning phase, participants read sentences
describing the relation between a red and a blue interval. For
each sentence they had to specify the relationship of the two
intervals graphically by clicking the mouse in rectangular
regions on the screen. After having confirmed the final
choices, the participant got feedback about the accuracy of
the configuration. If the configuration did not match the relation, additional information about the correct answer was
given, i.e. a verbal description of the ordering of start points
and end points. Learning trials were blocked with 13 sentences using the interval relations. If one relation was
answered correctly in three consecutive blocks, the learning
criterion for this relation was accomplished. As soon as the
learning criterion was reached for all relations, the learning
phase stopped.
During the inference phase, participants were given 3
practice trials, and then received the 72 indeterminate threeterm series problems. After self-paced reading of the premises, the premises vanished, and the participants were
asked to generate all possible relationships between the red
and the blue interval. By clicking the mouse they specified

the spatial relationships analogous to the interval-specifying
procedure in the learning phase. After finishing the configuration, participants could either continue specifying other
solutions, or stop working on the present task and go to the
next three-term series problem.
We recorded premise processing times, drawing times,
and, of course, the sequence of solutions by pixel coordinates and by interval relations.

Results
In the following, data analyses are applied to the constructed
solution sequences. Since all participants passed the learning
phase successfully, all data collected in the inference phase
were included in the statistical analyses.
First, we tested the hypothesis that solution sequences followed the principles of conceptual neighborhood. All transitions in the solution sequences were analyzed for the
existence of A-, B-, and C-transformations. We found that
the significant majority of the transitions (3145 of 4462 [=
70.48%]) conformed to A-transformations. Transitions conformed to B- or C-transformations in 64.95% or 64.34% of
all the cases, respectively. The three values are rather similar,
since most transitions are consistent with all three types of
conceptual neighborhood. Only transitions involving the "="
relation discriminate between different types of conceptual
neighborhood (see Figure 1). Therefore, we performed an
analysis for these transitions and found the frequencies listed
in Table 3.
Table 3: Number of "="-transitions conforming to different
types of conceptual neighborhood.

Absolute

Percent

A-transformation

296

75.13%

B-transformation

49

12.44%

C-transformation

22

5.58%

Other

27

6.85%

Total

394

100%

We obtained the results in Table 4 by exclusively analyzing
correct and complete solution sequences of 3-, 5-, 9-, and 13model tasks.
The interesting fact is the nearly monotonic decrease of the
number of correct and complete solution sequences in
dependence of the number of models. Besides, it is noteworthy that correct and complete sequences of the 9- and 13model problems (i) are rarely observed (as predicted by our
hypothesis), and (ii) that none of these sequences conformed
perfectly to any of the neighborhood transformations. We
will return to the latter point below.

Table 4: Number of correct and complete solution sequences

Percent

A-Transf.

3-model-tasks

52.88%
(533 of 1008)

75.61%
(403 of 533)

5-model-tasks

34.20%
(197 of 576)

86.29%
(170 of 197)

9-model-tasks

13.89%
(10 of 72)

0%
(0 of 10)

13-model-tasks

16.67%
(12 of 72)

0%
(0 of 12)

Total

43.52%

73.27%

Errors of omission. To test for the hypothesis of systematic
errors of omission between step 2 and step 3, we looked at the
solution generated last in the whole solution sequence for all
5-model-tasks. In Table 5 the results for the six 5-model-tasks
with solution set (5-2) (see Figure 2) are listed. As stated
above, we expected an increasing number of solution
sequences terminating after the second step, i.e. for relation o.
Table 5: Frequencies of relations as last solution for 5-model
tasks with solution set (5-2).

di

fi

o

m

<

10

7

22

8

87

7.46%

5.22%

16.42%

5.97%

64.93%

As Table 5 shows, there are indeed many solution sequences
terminating with the relation o (22 of 134). This pattern of
results was also obtained for the 5-model-tasks with the
other three solution sets. The result confirms our predictions
of systematic errors of omission between steps 2 and 3.
Errors of commission. According to our predictions of systematic errors of commission, the 3-model-tasks with solution sets (3-1) to (3-6) were analyzed for transitions from
relation o (oi) followed by an erroneous one. The number of
such transitions was 57. It turned out that 26 of them were
steps with the o (oi) relation as precursor. Given that there are
at least 8 other erroneous relations that are not A-transformations of o (oi), this shows that the transition from a correct
solution to an erroneous one is about three times more probable if the erroneous solution is the next step in the stepsequence. The result corroborates our hypothesis of systematic errors of commission. Additionally, the 3-model-tasks
with solution sets (3-7) and (3-8) had 13.5 commission errors
on the average, much less than the 72.0 commission errors
that could be observed on the average for the 3-model tasks
with solution sets (3-1) to (3-6).

Strategies for 9- and 13-Model-Tasks. As shown in Table 4
none of the correct and complete solution sequences of the 9model-tasks and the 13-model-tasks conformed perfectly to
any of the conceptual neighborhood transformations. In an
exploratory data analysis, we identified two classes of strategies for navigating through the solution set that guided the
successful search for alternatives in solving 9- and 13-modeltasks.
Constant-Direction-Strategies. The first class of strategies
consists of three sequences of A-transformations following
one after another. The two transformations joining them are
not A-transformations, but jumps in the graph of the Aneighborhood. (see the diagram in Figure 3)
As the pseudo code description in Figure 3 shows this
strategy can be accomplished in a simple way: All steps refer
to points of the same interval and proceed with the same
direction. For each step the other bounding point of the interval is tested if a step leads to a valid model, and the information determining this model is stored if necessary. The jumps
occur only if proceeding within a step-sequence is not possible. Then the stored information is retrieved again to construct the corresponding model to begin the next stepsequence.
The success of this kind of strategy depends highly on the
choice of the initial model since the moving direction is constant and an omitted model will never be reached.

Choose an initial model;
Choose an interval (with bounding points p and q) that is part
of the relation between the first and the third interval;
Choose p and direction d such that step(p, d) possible;
while step(p, d) or step(q, d) possible
begin
if step(p, d) possible then
begin
if M empty and step(q, d) possible then
Store info identifying the result of step(q, d) in M;
step(p, d);
end
else
begin
if M not empty then
Continue with the model
identified by M;
else if step(q, d) possible then
step(q, d);
end
end

Figure 3: Constant-Direction strategies as pseudo code and a
diagram of a possible path in the Freksa-graph. Details of the
algorithm are specified only as far as necessary; step(p, d)
represents a step-transformation of p in direction d, M information identifying a model.

Symmetry-Strategies. The second class of strategies is based
on the use of symmetric transformations mapping relations
to their inverses (transposition-symmetry). Their limitations
and strengths concerning the traversal of the solution set
arise from the fact that the solution sets of 9- and 13-model
tasks fall into several disjointed subsets that are closed in
relation to symmetry-transformations. An extended version
involves additional reorientation-symmetry. This type of
symmetry can be described as reflection of the graphical
example in Table 1 at the vertical axis. All relations are symmetrical to themselves with respect to reorientation except
the pairs f-s and fi-si. In place of the closed subsets {f, fi} and
{s, si} their union now forms a closed subset.
For the traversal of the solution set of a 13-model-task following the extended type of strategy this implies that at least
5 non-symmetric transformations (out of a total of 12 necessary transformations) are needed to traverse all relations. A
9-model-task needs at least 3 non-symmetric transformations
(out of a total of 8). The type of strategy that relies only on
transposition requires one more non-symmetric transformation. Especially for 13-model-tasks we cannot expect complete solutions without an additional guiding principle.
Furthermore, errors in finding a closed subset will lead to
omitting it completely. On the other hand due to the cyclic
structure of a closed subset, its traversal is insensitive to the
first relation established.

General Discussion
In summary, the presented results corroborate the assumption that searching for alternatives is based on a model revision process proceeding from an initial model to alternatives
by local transformations. We demonstrated and specified this
for one-dimensional spatial reasoning, where local transformations appear as movements of a point along a stepsequence. Additionally, we were able to show that local
transformations have a logic of their own: They can systematically suppress certain inferences on the one hand, but, on
the other hand, lead to false ones. Again, we specified these
conditions with the help of our relational material, and thus
were able to predict errors of omission and errors of commission precisely. This point is also very important for augmenting our existing cognitive modeling of mental model
construction with an empirically adequate revision process.
With respect to psychological theories of reasoning, our
results are pretty much in accordance with the mental model
theory. In particular, the decline of number of correct and
complete solution sequences with the number of models corresponds well with mental model theory assumption that the
difficulty of a reasoning task is dependent on the number of
models. Likewise, the notion of local transformation only
makes sense with recourse to analog representations, e.g.
mental models. Therefore, our data also present a new challenge for other theories of reasoning.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the German National
Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft;
DFG project MeMoSpace under contract no. Str 301/5-1 to
Gerhard Strube, Christoph Schlieder, and Reinhold Rauh).
We would like to thank Goran Sunjka for his extensive help
in implementing the computer-aided experiment, Katrin
Balke for running the experiment, and Rebecca Ellis and
Patrick Mueller for proof reading an earlier draft.

References
Allen, J. F. (1983). Maintaining knowledge about temporal
intervals. Communications of the ACM, 26, 832-843.
Byrne, R. M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Spatial reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564-575.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993).
Human reasoning. The psychology of deduction. Hove
(UK): Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Freksa, C. (1992). Temporal reasoning based on semi-intervals. Artificial Intelligence, 54, 199-227.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove(UK): Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A cognitive
assessment of Allen's calculus. Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Mental models in spatial reasoning. In C. Freksa, C. Habel,
& K. F. Wender (Eds.), Spatial cognition. An interdisciplinary approach to representing and processing spatial
knowledge (pp. 267-291). Berlin: Springer.
Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1997). Symmetries of model construction in spatial relational inference. In Proceedings of
the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 638-643). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Schlieder, C. (1998). Diagrammatic transformation processes
on two-dimensional relational maps. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 9, 45-59.
Schlieder, C., & Hagen, C. (in press). Interactive layout generation with a diagrammatic constraint language. In C.
Freksa, C. Habel, & K. F. Wender (Eds.), Spatial cognition
II. Berlin: Springer.

