UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sex, Syntax, and Semantics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jt9w8zf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Schmidt, Lauren A.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1

Sex, Syntax, and Semantics
Lera Boroditsky (lera@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology; Jordan Hall, Bldg 420
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Lauren A. Schmidt (lschmidt@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology; Jordan Hall, Bldg 420
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA
Abstract
Many languages have a grammatical gender system whereby
all nouns are assigned a gender (most commonly feminine,
masculine, or neuter). Two studies examined whether (1) the
assignment of genders to nouns is truly arbitrary (as has been
claimed), and (2) whether the grammatical genders assigned
to nouns have semantic consequences. In the first study,
English speakers’ intuitions about the genders of animals (but
not artifacts) were found to correlate with the grammatical
genders assigned to the names of these objects in Spanish and
German. These findings suggest that the assignment of genders to nouns is not entirely arbitrary but may to some extent
reflect the perceived masculine or feminine properties of the
nouns’ referents. Results of the second study suggested that
people’s ideas about the genders of objects are strongly influenced by the grammatical genders assigned to these objects in
their native language. Spanish and German speakers’ memory for object--name pairs (e.g., apple--Patricia) was better
for pairs where the gender of the proper name was congruent
with the grammatical gender of the object name (in their native language), than when the two genders were incongruent.
This was true even though both groups performed the task in
English. These results suggest that grammatical gender may
not be as arbitrary or as purely grammatical as was previously
thought.

Introduction
Does the language you speak shape the way you understand the world? Linguists, philosophers, anthropologists,
and psychologists have long been interested in this question.
This interest has been fueled in large part by the observation
that different languages talk about the world differently.
However, despite the interest and controversy, definitive
answers are scarce. This paper briefly reviews the empirical
history of this question and describes two new studies that
demonstrate both the role of semantic constraints in shaping
language, and the role of language in shaping habitual
thought.
The doctrine of Linguistic Determinism—the idea that
thought is determined by language—is most commonly associated with the writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. Whorf
proposed that in so far as languages differ, their speakers too
may differ in how they perceive and act in objectively
similar situations (Whorf, 1956). What has been called the
strong Whorfian view—the idea that thought and action are
entirely determined by language—has long been abandoned
in the field. Particularly effective in undermining the strong

view was work showing striking similarity in color memory
despite wide variation in color language (Heider, 1972; but
see Lucy & Shweder, 1979; Kay & Kempton, 1984).
Although the strong linguistic determinism view seems
untenable, many weaker but still interesting formulations
can be entertained. Several lines of research that have
looked at domains other than color, have found crosslinguistic differences in thought. Unlike English speakers,
speakers of classifier languages like Yucatec Mayan and
Japanese were found to attend to the substance of an object
more so than to its shape, and were also more likely to extend novel labels based on the substance than on the shape
of a given example (e.g., Imai & Gentner, 1997; Lucy,
1992). When asked to reconstruct an array of objects,
speakers of Tzeltal (a Mayan language that relies primarily
on an absolute framework for describing spatial relations)
were likely to preserve the positions of objects with respect
to cardinal directions (so that the Northern-most object was
still the Northern-most), while English speakers (who rely
heavily on relative spatial descriptions) tended to preserve
the objects’ positions relative to themselves (so that the leftmost object was still left-most) (Levinson, 1996).
Studies of conceptions of time have also revealed crosslinguistic differences (Boroditsky, 1999). English and
Mandarin speakers talk about time differentlyEnglish
speakers predominantly talk about time as if it were horizontal, while Mandarin speakers commonly use both horizontal and vertical metaphors to talk about time. This difference between the two languages is reflected in the way
their speakers think about time. A collection of studies
showed that Mandarin speakers tend to think about time
vertically even when they are thinking for English (Mandarin speakers were faster to confirm that March comes earlier
than April if they had just seen a vertical array of objects
than if they had just seen a horizontal array, and the reverse
was true for English speakers). Another study showed that
the extent to which Mandarin-English bilinguals think about
time vertically is related to how old they were when they
first began to learn English. In another experiment native
English speakers were taught to talk about time using vertical spatial terms in a way similar to Mandarin. On a subsequent test, this group of English speakers showed the same
bias to think about time vertically as was observed with
Mandarin speakers. This last result suggests two things: (1)
language is a powerful tool in shaping thought, and (2)
one’s native language plays a role in shaping habitual

2

thought (how we tend to think about time, for example) but
does not completely determine thought in the strong Whorfian sense.
There is an interesting discrepancy between these later
findings, and those on color perception. Why would there
be such strong evidence for universality in color perception,
but quite the opposite for spatial relations or thinking about
time? One possibility is that language is most powerful in
influencing thought for more abstract domains, that is, ones
not so reliant on sensory experience (Boroditsky, 1999).
This paper considers an extreme point along this concreteabstract continuumthe influence of grammatical gender
on the way people think about inanimate objects. We will
first characterize the ways in which people’s ideas about the
genders of objects may be similar across cultures, and then
go on to explore whether there may also be systematic language-driven differences in how people conceive of objects.

Grammatical Gender
Forks and frying pans do not (by virtue of being inanimate) have a biological gender. The perceptual information
available for most objects does not provide conclusive evidence as to their genderconclusive gender information is
only available in language (and only in those languages that
have grammatical gender). The present paper examines
whether (1) there are any correspondences in the assignment
of grammatical gender between languages, (2) whether people include gender in their conceptual representations of
objects (despite the fact that objects don’t actually have
gender), and (3) whether people’s ideas about the genders of
objects (if they have any at all) are influenced by the grammatical genders assigned to these objects in their native language.
Unlike English, many languages have a grammatical gender system whereby all objects (e.g., penguins, pockets, and
toasters) are assigned a gender. Many languages only have
masculine and feminine genders, but some also assign neuter, vegetative, and other more obscure genders. It has long
been claimed that the assignment of grammatical gender to
object names is semantically arbitrary, and has nothing to do
with the conceptual properties of the referent (e.g., Bowers,
Vigliocco, Stadthagen-Gonzalez & Vinson 1999). At first
glance, this does appear to be the case. As Mark Twain
noted, “In German, a young lady has no sex, while a turnip
has, ....a tree is male, its buds are female, its leaves are neuter; horses are sexless, dogs are male, cats are femaletomcats included.” Further, the grammatical genders
assigned to names of particular objects vary greatly across
languages (Braine, 1987). For example, the sun is feminine
in German, but masculine in Spanish, and neuter in Russian.
The moon, on the other hand, is feminine in Spanish and
Russian, but masculine in German.
Despite wide variation in the assignment of grammatical
genders, speakers across languages do share some common
beliefs about the genders of objects. For example, when
asked to classify names or pictures of objects into masculine
and feminine, English and Spanish speakers tend judge
natural objects as feminine and artifacts as masculine (Mullen, 1990; Sera et al., 1994). It is also interesting that English speakers make consistent judgments about the genders

of objects, despite the lack of a grammatical gender system
in English (Sera et al., 1994).
So are people’s shared beliefs about the genders of objects reflected in the assignment of grammatical gender, or
is grammatical gender entirely arbitrary? If the assignment
of grammatical gender is not entirely arbitrary, then there
may be some correspondences across languages. For example, animals or things that are easy to anthropomorphize
may have stereotypically feminine or masculine qualities
and so may be more likely to have consistent grammatical
genders across languages. The names of animals that are
beautiful and graceful may tend to be grammatically feminine, while those of aggressive and strong animals may tend
to be masculine. It is possible then, that the grammatical
genders of nouns may correspond across languages. Further, we should see more correspondence for nouns whose
referents are easy to anthropomorphize (and are likely to
have stereotypically masculine or feminine properties) than
for nouns whose referents are more abstract or less humanlike.
To test these predictions, we compared the grammatical
genders assigned to objects in Spanish and German to the
intuitions of English speakers regarding the gender of the
same objects. Since English does not use grammatical gender, English speakers’ untrained intuitions about the genders
of objects provide a nice comparison group. If the assignment of grammatical gender is truly arbitrary, then we
should see no correspondence between the intuitions of
English speakers about the genders of objects and the genders assigned to those objects in Spanish and German. If,
on the other hand, the grammatical genders of nouns do in
part reflect the properties of their referents, then we should
see a correspondence in the assignment of genders across
languages, and also a correspondence between Spanish and
German genders and English speakers’ naive intuitions.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants
Fifteen native English speakers (none of whom were familiar with either Spanish or German) participated in this
study in exchange for payment.
Materials
We constructed a list of 50 animal names and 85 names of
artifacts (including vehicles, articles of clothing, and household items). Only words that had a single dominant translation (as determined by two native Spanish and two native
German speakers) into both Spanish and German were included on the list.
Procedure
English speakers were asked to classify each object and
animal on our list as either masculine or feminine. Participants were required to provide a single answer for each
item.

3

Results
Overall, there was appreciable agreement on the assignment of grammatical genders between Spanish and German
(r=.21, p<.05). As we predicted, the two languages agreed
more on the genders of animals (r=.39, p<.01), then on the
genders of artifacts (r=.10, p=.35). Interestingly, English
speakers’ ratings of these objects showed the same pattern
of correspondence. Spanish and German grammatical genders corresponded well with English speakers’ intuitions
about the genders of animals (r=.29, p<.05, and r=.43, p<.01
respectively), but not the genders of artifacts (r=.04, p=.73,
and r=.11, p=.32 respectively). It is striking that despite a
lack of grammatical gender in English, English speakers
intuitions about the genders of animals corresponded well
with the grammatical genders assigned to those animals in
Spanish and German. These findings suggest that the
grammatical genders assigned to animals may not have been
entirely arbitrary, but rather may have reflected people’s
perceptions of the particular animals as having stereotypically masculine or feminine properties.
It appears that the assignment of grammatical genders to
nouns (or at least to animal names) may not be entirely arbitrary, and may have been influenced in part by people’s
perceptions of the nouns’ referents. But what happens once
grammatical genders are assigned? Could they in turn influence people’s mental representations of objects? If so,
then there may be striking cross-linguistic differences in
how people think about objects.
How might people’s representations of objects be affected
by the grammatical gender of their labels? One possibility
is that in order to efficiently learn the grammatical gender of
a noun to begin with, people focus on some property of that
noun’s referent that may pick it out as masculine or feminine. For example, if the word for “sun” is masculine in
one’s language, one might try to remember this by conceiving of the sun in terms of what are perceived as stereotypically masculine properties like powerful and threatening. If the word for “sun” is feminine, on the other hand,
one might focus on its warming and nourishing qualities.
Even after the grammatical genders of nouns are learned,
language may influence thought during “thinking for
speaking” (Slobin, 1996). Languages can force their speakers to attend to the genders associated with objects by making them grammatically obligatory. When speaking a language with grammatical gender, speakers often need to
mark objects as gendered through definite articles (e.g., “le”
and “la” in French), refer to objects using gendered pronouns (e.g., if the word for "fork" is masculine, a speaker
might say, "he is sharp"), and alter adjectives or even verbs
to agree in gender with the nouns (e.g., in Russian, verbs in
the past tense must agree in gender with their subject
nouns). Needing to refer to an object as masculine or feminine may lead people to selectively attend to that object’s
masculine or feminine qualities thus making them more
salient in the representation.
So, does talking about inanimate objects as if they were
masculine or feminine lead people to think of inanimate
objects as masculine or feminine? Some preliminary evidence suggests that it may (Jakobson, 1966; Konishi, 1993;
Sera, Berge, & del Castillo, 1994). In one early study, Rus-

sian speakers were asked to personify days of the week
(reported in Jakobson, 1966). Subjects consistently personified the grammatically masculine days of the week (Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday) as males, and the grammatically feminine days of the week (Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday) as females, though they could not explicitly say
why they did so.
In another study, German and Spanish speakers rated a set
of nouns on the dimension of potency (a dimension highly
associated with masculinity) (Konishi, 1993). Half of the
nouns were grammatically masculine in German and feminine in Spanish, and the other half were masculine in
Spanish and feminine in German. Both German and Spanish speakers judged the word "man" to be more potent than
"woman". Interestingly, they also judged nouns that were
grammatically masculine in their native language to be more
potent than nouns that were grammatically feminine. This
was true even though all of the test nouns referred to objects
or entities that had no biological gender (including names of
inanimate objects, places, events, and abstract entities).
Converging evidence comes from a series of studies in
which Spanish speakers were asked to rate pictures of objects as masculine or feminine (Sera et al., 1994). Spanish
speakers consistently classified objects in accordance with
their grammatical gender in Spanish. The effect was more
pronounced when the pictures were accompanied by their
Spanish labels. The grammatical gender consistency effect
also showed up when subjects were asked to attribute a
man's or a woman's voice to each picture. Finally, Sera et
al. found that by about second grade, Spanish speaking children assigned voices to objects in accordance with the
grammatical gender of their labels.
Although results of these studies are suggestive, there are
serious limitations common to these and most other studies
of linguistic determinism. First, speakers of different languages are usually tested only in their native language. Any
differences in these comparisons can only show the effect of
a language on thinking for that particular language. These
studies cannot tell us whether experience with a language
affects language-independent thought such as thought for
other languages, or thought in non-linguistic tasks.
Second, comparing studies conducted in different languages poses a deeper problem: there is simply no way to be
certain that the stimuli and instructions are truly the same in
both languages. This problem remains even if the verbal
instructions are minimal. For example, even if the task is
non-linguistic, and the instructions are simply “which one is
the same?”, one cannot be sure that the words used for
“same” mean the same thing in both languages. If in one
language the word for “same” is closer in meaning to “identical,” while in the other language it’s closer to “relationally
similar”, speakers of different languages may behave differently, but due only to the difference in instructions, not because of any interesting differences in thought. There is no
sure way to guard against this possibility when tasks are
translated into different languages. Since there is no way to
know that participants in different languages are performing
the same task, it is difficult to deem the comparisons meaningful.

4

Finally, in all of the tasks so far, participants were asked
to provide some subjective judgment (there were no right or
wrong answers). Providing such a judgment requires participants to decide on a strategy for completing the task.
When figuring out how to perform the task, participants
may simply make a conscious decision to follow the grammatical gender divisions in their language. Evidence collected from such subjective judgments cannot tell us
whether gender is actually part of a person’s conceptual
representation of an object, or if (left with no other criterion
for making the subjective judgment) the person just explicitly decided to use grammatical gender in answering the
experimenter’s questions.
The present study improves on the previous studies in two
important ways. First, both Spanish and German speakers
were tested in English. This allows us to test whether experience with a language affects language-independent
thought (here, thinking for other languages). Second, participants were tested in a memory task and at test were
asked to provide the right answer (not a subjective judgment). The present study examined the ways in which previous knowledge (experience with Spanish or German) interfered with participants’ ability to correctly perform the
task.
In this study, participants were taught proper names for
objects (e.g., an apple may have been called “Patrick”) and
were tested on their memory for these objectname pairs
later in the experiment. First, we were interested in whether
English speakers would be better at remembering female
names for objects that another group of English speakers
had rated as more feminine (and male names for objects
rated more masculine). Second, we were interested in
whether Spanish and German speakers would be better able
to remember a proper name for an object if the proper name
was consistent with the grammatical gender of the object
name in their native language. All objects were chosen to
have opposite grammatical genders in Spanish and German
(e.g., the word for “apple” is feminine in Spanish, but masculine in German). So, we predicted that German speakers
would be better at remembering a proper name for “apple”
if the name was “Patrick” than if it was “Patricia”. The opposite should be true for Spanish speakers. Since the experiment was conducted entirely in English, this is a particularly conservative test of whether grammatical gender
influences the way people think about objects.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants
Twenty-five native Spanish speakers, sixteen native German speakers, and twenty English speakers participated in
the study in exchange for payment.
Materials and Design
A set of 24 object names (e.g., apple, arrow) and 24
proper names (e.g., Patricia, Patrick) was constructed (see
Appendix A). The object names were chosen such that half

were grammatically masculine and half were grammatically
feminine and the grammatical gender in Spanish and German was opposite for each object name (if an object name
was grammatically masculine in Spanish, it was grammatically feminine in German and vice versa). A separate group
of 30 English speakers rated the 24 objects chosen for this
experiment as masculine or feminine.
Half of the proper names were male and half were female;
male and female proper names were chosen to be similar to
one another (e.g., Alexander, Alexandra). This was done to
increase the difficulty of the memory task. All of the materials used including the instructions were in English. For
each participant, the computer randomly arranged the object
names and proper names into objectname pairs, and presented them in a random order.
Spanish, German, and English speakers completed the
same experimental task. Participants read the following
instructions “For this experiment, we have given names to a
bunch of objects. For example, we may have decided to call
a chair ‘Mary’. You will see objects and their names appear
on the screen (e.g., chairMary), and your task is to try to
memorize the name we have given to each object as well as
you can. Your memory for these names will be tested later
in the experiment.”
Procedure
Participants were tested individually. A computer presented the experimental materials and recorded the participants’ responses.
Learning: Participants learned 24 objectname pairs
presented to them on a computer screen in a random order.
Each objectname pair was presented on the screen for five
seconds, and was automatically followed by the next pair.
Each pair was presented only once.
After the learning, participants completed a five-minute
distraction task unrelated to this study which was inserted to
promote forgetting.
Test: Object names from the learning set were presented
on the computer screen one at a time and participants were
instructed to indicate the gender of the proper name that had
been associated with that object name in the learning set by
pressing one of two keys on the keyboard.

Results
As predicted, English speakers remembered objectname pairs better when the gender of the proper name
was consistent with the object’s rated gender (86% correct)
than when the two genders were inconsistent (78% correct),
t=2.17, p<.05. The results suggest that people do include
gender in their conceptual representations of inanimate objects. Further, Spanish and German speakers showed language-specific biases in memory. Both groups remembered
objectname pairs better when the gender of the proper
name given to an object was consistent with the grammatical gender of the object name in their native language (82%
correct) than when the two genders were inconsistent (74%
correct), t=2.55, p<.01. Since the object names used in this
study had opposite grammatical genders in Spanish and
German, Spanish and German speakers showed opposite

5

memory biasesfor those objects that Spanish speakers
were most likely to remember female names, German
speakers were most likely to remember male names (and
vice versa), F(1, 39)=6.21, p<.05. These findings suggest
that people’s ideas about the genders of objects are strongly
influenced by the grammatical genders assigned to those
objects in their native language.

Summary
Two studies examined whether (1) the assignment of
genders to nouns is truly arbitrary (as has been claimed),
and (2) whether the grammatical genders assigned to nouns
have semantic consequences. In the first study, English
speakers’ intuitions about the genders of animals (but not
artifacts) were found to correlate with the grammatical genders assigned to the names of these objects in Spanish and
German. These findings suggest that the assignment of
genders to nouns is not entirely arbitrary but may to some
extent reflect the perceived masculine or feminine properties
of the nouns’ referents. Results of the second study suggested that (1) people do include gender in their conceptual
representations of inanimate objects, and (2) people’s ideas
about the genders of objects are strongly influenced by the
grammatical genders assigned to these objects in their native
language. Spanish and German speakers’ memory for object--name pairs (e.g., apple--Patricia) was better for pairs
where the gender of the proper name was congruent with the
grammatical gender of the object name (in their native language), than when the two genders were incongruent. Since
both groups performed the task in English, it appears that
the semantic representation of gender (once it has been established) is not language-specific. These results suggest
that grammatical gender may not be as arbitrary or as purely
grammatical as was previously thought.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship to the first author. Partial support was also provided by NIMH research grant MH-47575 to Gordon
Bower. The authors would like to thank Michael Ramscar,
Herbert H. Clark, Barbara Tversky, and Gordon Bower for
many insightful discussions of this research, and Jill M.
Schmidt who was indispensable in assembling the stimuli.

References
Boroditsky, L. (1999). First-language thinking for secondlanguage understanding: Mandarin and English speakers'
conceptions of time. Proceedings of the 21st Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver,
BC
Braine, M. (1987). What is learned in acquiring word
classesa step toward an acquisition theory. In B.
MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition
(pp. 65-87). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bowerman, M. (1996). The origins of children’s spatial
semantic categories: cognitive versus linguistic determinants. In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking
linguistic relativity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 145-176.

Bowers, J., Vigliocco, G., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H. & Vi nson, D. (1999). Distinguishing language from thought:
Experimental evidence that syntax is lexically rather than
conceptually represented. Psychological Science, 10(4),
310-315.
Choi, S., & Bowerman, M. (1991). Learning to express
motion events in English and Korean: The influence of
language-specific lexicalization patterns. Special Issue:
Lexical and conceptual semantics. Cognition, 41, 1-3, 83121.
Gentner, D. & Imai, M. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: Universal ontology and linguistic influence. Cognition 62, 2, 169-200.
Heider, E. (1972). Universals in color naming and memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93, 10-20.
Jakobson, R. (1966). On linguistic aspects of translation. In
R.A. Brower (Ed.), On translation. New York: Oxford
University Press, 232-239.
Kay, P., & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 86, 65-79.
Konishi, T. (1993). The semantics of grammatical gender:
A cross-cultural study. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 22 (5), 519-534.
Levinson, S. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux's
question: Crosslinguistic evidence. In P. Bloom & M.
Peterson (Eds.), Language and Space. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 109-169.
Lucy, J. (1992). Grammatical categories and cognition: a
case study of the linguistic relativity hypothesis. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, J., & Shweder, R. (1979). Whorf and his critics: Linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on color memory.
American Anthropologist, 81, 581-618.
Mullen, M. K. (1990). Children’s Classification of Nature
and Artifact Pictures into Female and Male Categories.
Sex Roles, 23 (9/10), 577-587.
Sera, M., Berge, C., & del Castillo, J. (1994) Grammatical
and conceptual forces in the attribution of gender by English and Spanish speakers. Cognitive Development, 9, 3,
261-292.
Slobin, D. (1996). From “thought and language” to “thinking for speaking.” In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.),
Rethinking linguistic relativity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 70-96.
Twain, M. (1880). A Tramp Abroad. Leipzig : Bernhard
Tauchnitz.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, Thought, and Reality: selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, ed. J.B. Carroll.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

6

Appendix A
Materials used in the study:
Proper names
Christopher
Daniel
Paul
Brandon
Eric
Karl
Claude
Phillip
Harry
Donald
Alexander
Patrick

Object-names
apple
arrow
boot
broom
fox
frog
moon
spoon
star
toaster
whale
pumpkin
bench
cat
clock
disk
drum
fork
mouse
snail
sun
toilet
toothbrush
violin

Christina
Danielle
Paula
Brenda
Erica
Karla
Claudia
Phyllis
Harriet
Donna
Alexandra
Patricia

Grammatical Gender
Spanish
.
German
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)
(m)
(f)

