UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Resemblance of One-year-old Infants to Their Fathers: Refuting Christenfeld &amp;
Hill

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1xb9g906

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
French, Robert M.
Bredart, Serge
Huart, Johanne
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Resemblance of One-year-old Infants
to Their Fathers: Refuting Christenfeld & Hill (1995)
Robert M. French, Serge Brédart, Johanne Huart, Christophe Labiouse
Department of Psychology
University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium
(rfrench; Serge.Bredart; jhuart; clabiouse @ulg.ac.be)
Abstract
In 1995 Christenfeld and Hill published a paper that
purported to show at one year of age, infants resemble
their fathers more than their mothers. Evolution, they
argued, would have produced this result since it would
ensure male parental resources, since the paternity of the
infant would no longer be in doubt. We believe this
result is false. We present the results of two experiments
(and mention a third) which are very far from replicating
Christenfeld and Hill’s data. In addition, we provide an
evolutionary explanation as to why evolution would not
have favored the result reported by Christenfeld and Hill.

Introduction
Science overwhelmingly favors positive results. To
appreciate this, one need look no further than the almost
exclusive emphasis on Type I error detection in the
social sciences and the quasi-religious status of the
inequality “p < 0.05.” Since everyone knows that the
null hypothesis cannot be proved, only rejected, it
follows that the only results worth pursuing are those
that involve the rejection of a null hypothesis. This is
why it is so much harder to establish (and publish)
negative results. But sometimes null hypotheses are
rejected incorrectly and subsequently setting the record
straight proves to be very difficult indeed. For every
published rejection of a null hypothesis, a far greater
number of failures-to-replicate are usually necessary to
convincingly establish that the published result was
most probably in error.
Although examples of this problem abound, it is
instructive to briefly recall the well-known experiments
on the chemical transfer of memory done by McConnell
(1962) and others. Planarian worms were trained to
respond in a certain “correct” way to a light source.
These worms were then killed and their RNA fed to a
new set of worms, who, by dint of having ingested the
previous worms’ RNA, would supposedly respond
correctly to the light source more often than worms in a
control group.
Once this result, buttressed by
theoretical arguments about the role of RNA in
memory, was published it became very hard to unseat
it, in spite of numerous failures-to-replicate (e.g.,
Bennett & Calvin, 1964; Byrne et al., 1966). Thus,
even though numerous failure-to-replicate papers had
begun to appear as early as 1964, many courses on
memory into the 1970’s still included McConnell’s
results on the chemical transfer of memory (see, for

example, Munn, Fernald, & Fernald, 1969; Hilgard,
Atkinson, & Atkinson, 1971).
In this paper we will present two negative results
that we hope will help serve to establish the falsehood
of a published result — namely, the claim of greater
resemblance between one-year-old infants and their
fathers than their mothers (Christenfeld and Hill, 1995).
This result received very wide international attention
when it was published in 1995. The result is now cited
often but we believe, both for theoretical and empirical
reasons, that it is wrong. In the present paper, we will
present our own failures-to-replicate the original results
and will give a theoretical justification for our results.
We hope that this will lead other researchers to also
critically examine the originally published results of
Christenfeld and Hill before they become firmly, and in
our opinion wrongly, entrenched as fact.
The remainder of this paper is organized as
follows. We begin by briefly presenting the claim of
Christenfeld and Hill (1995). This will be followed by
the results of two independent experiments (i.e.,
different subjects, different sets of stimuli, etc.) that fail
to replicate their results. We will then give a theoretical
justification for why evolution would most likely have
produced our results and not those of Christenfeld and
Hill.

Christenfeld & Hill (1995): One-year old
Infants Resemble Their Fathers
Christenfeld and Hill (1995) reported a result in 1995
that appeared in Nature and received considerable
attention throughout the world, both in the scientific
and the popular press. They claimed to have found
greater facial resemblance between one-year-old
children and their fathers than between one-year-old
children and their mothers. Their result had wide
appeal, in particular, because it seemed to agree with a
prediction of evolutionary psychology (Gaulin and
Schegel, 1980) — namely, that “It could then be to a
baby’s advantage to look like the father, to encourage
paternal investment [on the part of the male parent]”
(Christenfeld & Hill, 1995) since a mother can be quite
sure that the baby is hers but the father cannot.
According to Christenfeld and Hill, greater fatherchild resemblance would be to the baby’s advantage
because it would encourage the father’s investment in
its survival, since he would be able to clearly identify

the child as his own. This would tend to produce a
differential survival rate among children who, at age
one (when they were most in need of resources from the
father for their survival), looked like their fathers and
those who did not.

Overview of the Two Experiments
In an initial experiment (not reported here) involving
200 subjects done soon after Christenfeld and Hill’s
paper first appeared, we were unable to reproduce their
results. We thought that perhaps there might be some
problem with the photographic stimuli we were using.
(Christenfeld and Hill declined our request to make
their original stimuli available.) We therefore created a
second set of stimuli, careful to make sure that there the
photos displayed no beards, glasses, hats, or other
features that might distract from the identification task.
However, once again, we failed to replicate
Christenfeld and Hill’s results. These results are
reported in Experiment 1 (see Brédart & French, 1999).
We then created another, entirely new set of stimuli
and designed the experiment to record participants’
reaction times during identification. As before, we
found virtually no difference in the level of correct
identification of children and their real mother
compared to children and their real father. Further, in
addition to repeating the results of the first experiment,
there was no significant difference between correct
child-mother and child-father identification times.
We have now attempted to reproduce Christenfeld
and Hill’s result with three different sets of stimuli with
three different groups of participants using two
different measures (% of correct identification and
reaction time). In no case did we find any significant
differences in father-infant and mother-infant
identification. In other words, we have what we believe
to be good empirical evidence that belies the originally
reported findings of Christenfeld and Hill.

Experiment 11
Subjects
One hundred and eighty undergraduate students at the
University of Liège participated in the experiment.
Thirty subjects (15 female and 15 male) were randomly
assigned to each condition. Their ages ranged from 18
to 30 years (mean age = 21.84).
Stimuli and materials
Twenty-eight Caucasian families provided five
photographs: three photographs of the same child at one
year, three years, and five years, as well as one
photograph of the mother and one photograph of the
father taken when the child was approximately one year
old. For fourteen families, the child was a girl, for the
1

Originally appeared in Evolution and Human Behavior.
Reprinted with permission.

other fourteen families the child was a boy. The stimuli
presented to subjects were scanned versions of these
photographs (size = 5x4 cm) of faces. None of the faces
had glasses, beards or moustaches.
Procedure
On each trial, participants were presented with the face
of a child and, according to the condition, the faces of
three women or three men. Their task was to identify
the child’s parent among the three presented adult
faces. There were 28 trials (14 different girls and 14
different boys). The photographs were displayed in the
same way as in the Christenfeld and Hill study: the
child’s face was presented in an upper position and the
three adults' faces were placed beneath the child’s face.
The presentation positions of the adult photos were
appropriately randomized. Participants were tested
individually. Each were each presented with the 28 sets
including one child and three possible parents in a
different random order.
Results
The design of the experiment was as follows. The age
of the child (one-year-old, three-year-old and five-yearold) and the sex of the parent were between-subjects
factors while the sex of the child was a within-subjects
factor. A 3 (age of the child) X 2 (sex of the parent) X 2
(sex of the child) ANOVA with repeated measures on
the last factor revealed a significant main effect of the
age of the child (F(2,174) = 6.614, p <.01), no main
effect of the sex of the parent (F(1,174) < 1) and no
main effect of the sex of the child (F(1,174) < 1). The
analysis revealed no significant interaction between the
first two factors (F(2, 174) < 1), no significant
interaction between the second and the third factor
(F(1,174) < 1) and no three-way interaction (F(2,174) <
1). The main effect of the age of the child was qualified
by a significant interaction between this factor and the
sex of the child (F(2,174) = 5.988, p < .01), but the
magnitude of this interaction effect is low (η2 = 0.06).
This interaction was analyzed using Tukey HSD posthoc tests. These tests showed that, while the level of
parent identification from pictures of girls did not
change across the three ages, it did for pictures of boys.
Parent identification was better for five-year-old boys
than from one-year-old boys (p <.0001) and than for
three-year-old boys (p <.01). No significant difference
appeared between one-year-old and three-year-old boys
(p = 0.56). Post-hoc tests indicated no significant effect
of the sex of the child on parent identification at age
one, three or five (all p’s > .10).
A control analysis taking the items as the random
factor was also carried out. This analysis did not reveal
any significant main effect of the sex of the child
(F(1,26) < 1), of the sex of the parent (F(1, 26) < 1) and
of the age of the child (F(2, 52) = 1.982, p = 0.15). Nor
did it reveal any interaction effect (all p’s > .20). The
results of this control analysis confirmed that the

significant interaction effect obtained in the preceding
analysis was not a strong effect.
Mean no. of correct
identifications
20

friends, colleagues and acquaintances for photographs.
We do not see any a priori reason why such a procedure
would lead to the construction of an unrepresentative
set of faces.
Age

Parent

1

Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother

15
Father

10

Mother

5
0

3
1

3

5

Children’s age (in years)

Figure 1. Mean number of correct identifications
(out of 30) of parents of children at various ages
(one-SD error bars). There is no significant
difference in the level of correct identification of
mothers versus fathers based on children’s faces.
To reiterate, our analyses showed no significant
difference between the level of correct identification of
mothers and the level of correct identification of fathers
from children’s faces (Figure 1 and Table 1).
Christenfeld and Hill (1995) did not perform a direct
comparison between levels of identification of mothers
and fathers. They simply compared the level of
identification of mothers and fathers to the chance level
of 33.3 percent by means of student t-tests, the items
being the random factor. We also carried out this
analysis for our data by comparing the mean number of
identifications to chance (1/3 X 30 subjects = 10). At all
ages tested, our results indicate that, while correct
identification of mothers and fathers was significantly,
although not overwhelmingly, higher than chance, there
is no significant difference between the degree of
father-identification and mother-identification.
It is particularly important to note that while the
degree of correct association of parents with children is
anywhere between 7 and 14% higher than chance, it
remains surprisingly poor. In all cases, nonidentification exceeds 50%.

Discussion
Present results do not replicate those of
Christenfeld & Hill’s (1995) study. Young children
aged 1, 3 and 5 do not appear to resemble their fathers
significantly more than they resemble their mothers.
It could be objected that the sample of faces used
in this experiment is not a representative one. In fact,
there is no clear reason why our sample of items would
not be representative of the larger Caucasian population
in general, and, crucially would be less representative
than Christenfeld and Hill’s original sample. Indeed, we
used photographs from 28 families, whereas
Christenfeld and Hill’s stimuli were drawn from 24
families. Our stimuli were collected in the same way as
those in the Christenfeld and Hill study, i.e. by asking

5

Mean no. of
identifications
(SD in
parentheses)
12.893 (5.363)
11.929 (5.937)
13.178 (6.464)
13.321 (5.644)
14.143 (4.859)
14.143 (6.996)

Student t

2.854
1.719
2.602
3.114
4.512
3.134

p

<.01
<.05
<.01
<.01
<.001
<.01

Table 1. Mean number of correct identifications (out
of 30) as a function of the children’s age and the
parent’s sex. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Note the absence of any significant difference in
levels of correct identification of fathers and
mothers based on a child’s facial appearance.
Is our failure to replicate Christenfeld & Hill
possibly attributable to an inappropriate sample of
pictures that allowed no null hypothesis to be rejected?
This would be very unlikely, because in all six cases of
mothers and fathers for 1, 3, and 5 year old children, we
found that the resemblance of parent to child is, as one
would expect, significantly better than chance. In short,
our sample did demonstrate a significant resemblance
between parents and children, but not that there was a
significantly greater resemblance between fathers and
their children compared to mothers and their children.
This means that our failure to find a significant
difference in the resemblance of fathers-to-children
versus mothers-to-children was not simply due to an
insufficient amount of detail to be able to make
resemblance assessments of any kind.

Experiment 2
Subjects
Forty-four undergraduate volunteers (22 females, 22
males) participated in the experiment.
Stimuli and materials
Thirty-two Caucasian families provided three
photographs: one photograph of a child at one year, one
photograph of the mother and one photograph of the
father taken when the child was approximately one year
old. For sixteen families, the child was a girl, for the
other sixteen families the child was a boy. The stimuli
presented to subjects were scanned versions of these
photographs (size = 5.5 x 4.5 cm) of faces. None of the
faces had glasses, beards or moustaches. Stimuli were
presented using E-prime on a PC.

Procedure
On each trial, participants were presented with the face
of a child and, according to the condition, the faces of
three women or three men. All photographs were
displayed on the computer screen. Their task was to
identify as quickly and as accurately as possible the
child’s parent among the three presented adult faces.
Participants responded by pressing a key on the
numeric keypad of the computer keyboard (1 = left
photo choice, 2 = middle photo choice and 3 = right
photo choice). There were 32 trials (16 different girls
and 16 different boys). The position of the real parent
among the three adult photos was appropriately
randomized. Each participant was presented with the 32
sets consisting one child and three possible parents in a
different random order. The experiment was preceded
by a short practice session using four trials that were
not employed later in the experiment.
Results
The experiment had a repeated measures design with
two factors : the gender of the parent and the gender of
the child. One item was removed because the
proportion of correct mother-infant identification was
below the 2SD cutoff.
The first dependent measure was the proportion of
correct identification of the parent. A 2 (gender of the
parent) X 2 (gender of the child) ANOVA with
repeated measures on both factors revealed no main
effect of the gender of the parent (F(1,43) < 1), no main
effect of the gender of the child (F(1,43) < 1), and no
interaction effect (F(1,43)<1). See Table 2.

mother and the father were computed for each subjects
and submitted to a 2 (gender of the parent) X 2 (gender
of the child) ANOVA. Five subjects were excluded
from this analysis: two subjects whose RTs were
particularly slow (RTs > 2 SD from the sample
average) and three subjects who did not provide any
correct recognition in one subcategory of items. This
analysis revealed no main effect of the gender of the
parent (F(1,38)<1, p=0.49), no main effect of the
gender of the child (F(1,38)<1; p=0.53), and no
interaction effect (F(1,38)<1; p=0.71). See Table 2.
Rate of
0.7
Correct
0.6
Identification 0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Mother

0.1
0

Father

Girl

Boy

Infant gender

Figure 2. As in the first experiment, Exp. 2 shows no
significant difference between child-father and childmother rates of correct identification (1 SD error bars).
The dotted line indicates chance level of identification.
RT 4
(secs)
3
2

Infant gender
Parent
Mother
Father

Girl
0.41 (0.16)
2.72 secs (0.85)
0.38 (0.19)
2.82 secs (1.0)

Boy
0.39 (0.16)
2.72 secs (0.88)
0.38 (0.19)
2.73 secs (1.2)

Table 2. Mean proportions of correct identifications
of parents, and mean correct RTs (in seconds) as a
function of the gender of the child and the parent.
Standard deviations are given in parentheses.
A control analysis taking the items as the random
factor was also carried out and revealed the same
pattern of results: none of the main and interaction
effects were significant (all Fs <1).
The level of identification of mothers and fathers
was also compared to the chance level of 33.3 percent
by means of student t-tests, the subjects being the
random factor. The overall mean level of correct
identification of both mothers (m = 0.397; t(43) =
3.696; p < .001) and fathers (m = 0.381; t(43) = 2.436;
p < .05) was significantly higher than chance.
The second dependent measure was the response
latency (RTs). Mean correct recognition RTs to the

Mother

1

Father

0

Girl

Boy

Infant gender

Figure 3. There is no significant difference between
child-father and child-mother reaction times for
correction identifications (1 SD error bars).
A control analysis taking the items as the random
factor was also carried out and revealed the same
pattern of results: none of the main and interaction
effects were significant (all F’s < 1).

Discussion
This second experiment was, above all, designed to
repeat and refine the results obtained in Experiment 1.
Entirely new stimuli (i.e., black-and-white photographs
of adults and infants) were used. And, unlike the first
experiment in which children of ages 1, 3 and 5 were
used, here we focused exclusively on one-year old
infants. (This was because the claim of Christenfeld and
Hill bears specifically on one-year old infants: it is at
that age that infants supposedly resemble their fathers

more closely than their mothers.) The stimuli in this
experiment were presented on a computer monitor
instead of using the actual photographs, as in the first
experiment. And, of course, all of the participants were
different from the first experiment.
All of the results of the first experiment were
reproduced in this second experiment. As in the first
experiment, we found that the level of correct
identification of infant-father pairs was not significantly
higher than that of infant-mother pairs. We also found
that, as in the first experiment, that both the levels of
infant-father and infant-mother identification are
significantly above chance, as one might expect.
Finally, we found no significant difference in the
reaction times for correct responses for both infantfather and infant-mother pairs. In other words, there is
no significant difference in the speed with which people
can correctly identify an infant’s mother or its father.
As in Experiment 1, these results are in clear
contradiction with Christenfeld & Hill (1995).

General Discussion
The evolutionary analysis of Christenfeld and Hill is
based on the supposed advantage to one-year old babies
of looking more like their father than their mother in
order to encourage greater resource investment on the
part of the father, thereby improving their chances of
survival. This theory is certainly appealing, but we
believe it is undermined by a number of considerations
that we will review below.
We must begin by returning to the fundamental
postulate of Darwinian evolution, namely that the
ultimate winners in the game of evolutionary
competition are those individuals who succeed in
passing on the greatest amount of their genetic material
to subsequent generations. Now, there would be little
obvious evolutionary pressure for a child to resemble its
mother, since the maternity of a child is never in doubt.
This allows us to take the degree to which a child
resembles its mother as a baseline of parent-child
resemblance.
The essence of the argument against greater
resemblance between fathers and their infants as
opposed to infants and their mothers is based on the
following simple observation: If father-child
resemblance was strong enough to enable a father to be
certain when a child was his, it would presumably also
permit a father to identify that a child was not his
(Brédart & French, 1999). Now, in the event that a
child was not his, the chances of his withholding
resources from the child (or very possibly killing the
child outright) would be high. Even today, step-children
are far more likely to be killed by step-parents than by
natural parents. In the U.S. in 1976, for example, Daly
and Wilson (1988) reported that children living with
one or more substitute parents were sixty-five times as
likely to be fatally abused as children living with their

biological parents. Other studies report similar patterns
of child mistreatment (for a recent short review see
Daly and Wilson, 1996). Animal research has also
shown the prevalence of infanticide by male rodents,
carnivores and, in particular, primates (Hdry, 1979).
For much of the two-million year pre-agricultural
course of human existence, three important conditions
prevailed: male parental investment (Trivers, 1972) was
necessary to ensure the survival of offspring, males
were unable to completely control all possible sexual
contact of their mates, and, finally, few individual
males were able to provide resources for many females
(Symons, 1987). Under these conditions, if babies had
unambiguously resembled their fathers, a highly
monogamous society would likely have emerged
because few females would have risked the possibility
of fathering another male’s child, given that the bastard
child would have been recognized as not belonging to
her “official” (investing) mate (see also comments by
R. Dawkins and other discussants following a paper by
Wilson and Daly, 1997) and would thus have risked
maltreatment and, quite possibly, death. In short, few
females would have engaged in extra-pair copulation
(EPC). However, in reality, this is contradicted by the
fact that occasional EPCs by both sexes seems to be a
universal feature of monogamous species (Mock and
Fujioka, 1990), including humans. For example, rates
of human misassigned paternity (based on blood typing
tests) of 6-30% have been reported in studies done in
southern England (Edwards, 1957; Philipp, 1973), 9%
among the Venezuelan Yanomanö (Neel and Weiss,
1975; Smith, 1984), and 10% in rural Michigan, (Smith,
1984). Baker and Bellis (1995) have estimated a crosscultural median EPC figure of 9%, with a range from
1.4-30%. Further, in a survey of 2078 English women,
Bellis and Baker (1990) found that extra-pair
copulations are significantly more likely to be timed
just before ovulation than in-pair copulations. From his
model of parent-infant resemblance, Pagel (1997)
recently concluded that “even small amounts of
paternity uncertainty are sufficient to select against
parent-infant resemblance” (p.973).
Moreover, if relatively high father-child
resemblance were the norm, evolution would tend to
produce progressively greater degrees of father-child
resemblance because any degree of resemblance
significantly below that norm would engender
suspicions on the part of the resource-providing male
concerning the child’s paternity. This would likely lead
to a higher degree of resource-withholding than if the
child had unambiguously resembled the father, which
would ultimately translate into a lower rate of survival
among those children who did not closely resemble
their fathers. In other words, once evolution had
established a trend of father-child resemblance in
excess of baseline resemblance, there would be
evolutionary
pressure
towards
ever
greater
resemblance. One would therefore expect, after three

million years of selection, that there would now be a
very strong tendency of father-child resemblance with
respect to mother-child resemblance. However, our
results — as well as those by Christenfeld and Hill —
demonstrate that this is not the case. Indeed, in
Christenfeld and Hill’s data correct identification of
fathers from infant faces occurred only in 49.2 percent
of cases. In the two experiments reported in the present
paper, the mean rate of correct identification for the
father’s of one-year-old children was only 10% higher
than chance in the first experiment and 5% higher than
chance in the second.
For these reasons, we believe that the original
results reported by Christenfeld and Hill (1995) of
greater father-child than mother-child resemblance in
young children are most likely incorrect.

Conclusion
We believe that the experimental results presented
by Christenfeld & Hill (1995) are most likely in error.
We have attempted on three separate occasions to
reproduce their results, each time with new
photographic stimuli and new participants. We have
used two separate measures (percentage of correct
identifications and reaction times for correct
identifications). In all cases, we have seen no evidence
whatsoever of the results reported in their paper. In this
paper we report two of our experiments. In addition,
we provide a theoretical justification of the outcome of
our experiments. We believe that the evidence
presented in this paper casts serious doubt on the
originally published study by Christenfeld and Hill.

Acknowledgments
The present paper was supported in part by Belgian
Federal research grant IUAP P4/19 and research grant
ARC 99/04-246 from the government of the Frenchspeaking community of Belgium.

References
Baker, R. & Bellis, M. (1995). Human Sperm
Competition. London: Chapman and Hall, 142-144.
Bellis, M. & Baker, R. (1990). Do Females Promote
Sperm Competition? Data for Humans. Animal
Behaviour, 40, 997-999.
Bennett, E. & Calvin, M. (1964). Failure to train
Planarians reliably.
Neurosciences Research
Program Bulletin, July-August, 3-24.
Brédart, S. & French, R.M. (1999). Do babies resemble
their fathers more than their mothers? A failure to
replicate Christenfeld & Hill (1995). Evolution and
Human Behavior, 20(3), 129-135.
Byrne et al., (1966). Memory transfer. Science, 153,
658-9.
Christenfeld, N. & Hill, E. (1995). Whose baby are
you? Nature 378: 669.

Daly, M. & Wilson, M. (1988). Homicide. Hawthorne,
NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Daly, M. & Wilson, M. (1996). Violence against
stepchildren. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 5, 77-81.
Edwards, J. H. (1957). A critical examination of the
reputed primary influence of ABO phenotype on
fertility and sex ratio. British Journal of Preventive
and Social Medicine, 11, 79-89.
Gaulin, S. & Schegel, A. (1980). Paternal confidence
and paternal investment: a cross-cultural test of a
sociobiological
hypothesis.
Ethology
and
Sociobiology, 1, 301-309.
Hdry, S. (1979). Infanticide among Animals: A
Review, Classification and Examination of the
Implications for the Reproductive Strategies of
Females. Ethology and Sociobiology, 1, 13-40.
Hilgard, E., Atkinson, R. & Atkinson, R. (1971). Intro.
to Psychology. Harcourt, Brace Jovan. 232-233.
McConnell, J. (1962). Memory transfer through
cannibalism in Planarians. J. Neurophys, 3, 42-8.
Mock, D. & Fujioka, M. (1990). Monogamy and longterm pair bonding in vertebrates. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution, 5, 39-43.
Munn, N., Fernald, L. & Fernald, P. (1969). Intro. to
Psychology. Houghton Mifflin. 268-269.
Neel, J.V. & Weiss, M. (1975). The genetic structure of
a tribal population, the Yanomama Indians. XIII.
Biodemographic studies. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology, 42, 25-51.
Pagel, M. (1997). Desperately concealing fathers: a
theory of parent-infant resemblance. Animal
Behaviour, 53: 973-981.
Philipp, E. (1973). Discussion: moral, social and ethical
issues. In Law and Ethics of A.I.D. and Embryo
Transfer. Ciba Foundation Symposium (Vol. 17),
G.E.W. Wostenholme and D.W. Fitzsimons (Eds.).
Amsterdam: Elsevier, Excerpta Medica, NorthHolland, 63-66.
Smith, R. L. (1984). Human sperm competition. In
Sperm Competition and the Evolution of Animal
Mating Systems, R.L. Smith (Ed.). London:
Academic Press, 601-660.
Symons, D. (1987). An evolutionary approach: can
Darwin’s view of life shed light on human
sexuality? In Theories of Human Sexuality, J. H.
Geer & W. O’Donohue (Eds.) NY: Plenum, 91-125.
Trivers, R. (1972). Parental Investment and Sexual
Selection. In Sexual Selection and the Descent of
Man, B. Campbell (Ed.). Chicago: Aldine de
Gruyter, 136-179.
Wilson, M. & Daly, M. (1997). Relationship-specific
social psychological adaptations. In Ciba
Foundation Symposium 208: Characterizing Human
Psychological Adaptations, G.R. Bock and G.
Cardew (Eds.). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons,
253-268.

