UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Dynamics of Simple Prediction: Judging Reachability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/814095bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Rooij, Iris van
Bongers, Raoul M.
Haselager, W.F.G Pim

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Dynamics of Simple Prediction: Judging Reachability
Iris van Rooij (irisvr@uvic.ca)
Cognitive Psychology, P.O. Box 3050, Victoria BC, V8W 3P5, Canada

Raoul M. Bongers (bongers@psych.kun.nl)
Developmental Psychology, Montessorilaan 3, 6525 HR Nijmegen, The Netherlands

W.F.G. (Pim) Haselager (pimh@nici.kun.nl)
NICI/Cognitive Science, Montessorilaan 3, 6525 HR Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract
This study addresses the dynamical nature of a ‘representation
hungry’ cognitive task. Participants were asked to judge
whether or not they thought they could reach a distant object
with a hand-held rod. The dynamical effects observed in this
study support a two-attractor model designed by Tuller, Case,
Ding, & Kelso (1994). The results suggest that predictive
judgments regarding the (im)possibility of an action may be
better understood in terms of dynamically evolving basins of
attraction rather than as depending on stable representational
structures.

The ability to think about the outcome of a yet to be
performed action seems to necessitate a representational
explanation. How else to explain this ability except by
assuming that the system constructs a model of the situation,
represents the imagined action, and concludes on the basis
of the ensuing representational structure whether the goal
can be achieved by means of the action or not? In this paper
we aim to question this representational presupposition by
investigating the potential of dynamical systems theory
(DST) to model simple prediction.
Within DST, the behavior of a system is analyzed as an
emergent property of the interactions between its
subsystems. During the last decade the tools of DST have
proven to be valuable assets for understanding behavior
emerging out of multiple interacting components (Beek,
Peper, & Stegeman, 1995; Haken, Kelso, & Bunz, 1985;
Schmidt, Carello, & Turvey, 1990; Vallacher & Nowak,
1994). However, most of the behavioral phenomena that are
currently described with models developed in DST are not
regarded as clear cases of cognitive behavior. DST has been
challenged to try to deal with more ‘representation-hungry’
domains (Clark, 1997, p. 166-170; see also Clark & Toribio,
1994). One such domain, according to Clark, involves the
class of cases that “include thoughts about temporally or
spatially distant events and thoughts about the potential
outcome of imagined actions” (Clark, 1997, p. 167; our
emphasis). In the present paper we take a first, exploratory
attempt towards answering this challenge by exploring
whether participants’ verbal reports on the (im)possibility of
an imagined action can be understood from within a DST
framework. In our task participants have to indicate whether
they think they can reach for an object on a distant table

with a rod. This task can be seen as a simple example of a
situation in which one has to predict the possible outcome of
an imagined action. By systematically manipulating
rodlength we set out to study the dynamical aspects of this
prediction behavior.

Model description
Within the DST approach many different models have been
developed to account for global patterns in behavior. Given
that the task we studied involved discerning which rods
enabled successful reaching and which did not, we used a
dynamical model particularly designed to account for
behavior with two attractor states. Tuller and colleagues
(Tuller, Case, Ding, & Kelso, 1994; see also Case, Tuller,
Ding, & Kelso, 1995) applied such a model to speech
categorization phenomena. Following the example of Tuller
et al. (1994) we use equation 1 to model our data.
V(x) = kx – ½x2 + ¼x4

(1)

V(x) is a potential function with two minima which are
assumed to correspond to two stable conceptual states, viz.
‘No’ (i.e., the participant indicates the belief or judgment
that it is not possible to reach the object with the rod) and
‘Yes’ (the participant indicates the belief or judgment that it
is possible to reach the object with the rod) respectively.
The judgment regarding the imagined action is qualitatively
denoted by x and k is the control parameter specifying the
direction and the degree of tilt of the potential function (c.f.
Tuller et al., 1994). As can be seen in Figure 1, for k = -1
only one stable state exists in the system (i.e., ‘No’).
Increasing k forces the function to tilt. Although the initial
stable state persists, the attractor becomes more shallow.
When the control parameter reaches the critical value -kc an
additional attractor appears (‘Yes’). From this point on, until
k reaches the second critical value +kc, the two stable states
coexist (Both ‘No’ and ‘Yes’ are possible responses). At
+kc, however, the attractor corresponding to ‘No’ ceases to
exist. Increasing k further only deepens the remaining
attractor.
Figure 1 illustrates the tendency of dynamic systems to
cling to the state they reside in. For each value of the control
parameter the state in which the systems has settled is

k = -1

k = -kc

V(x)

k=0

V(x)

V(x)

x

"yes"

"no"

k = +kc
V(x)

x

"yes"

"no"

V(x)

x

"yes"

k = +1

"no"

x

"yes"

"no"

x

"yes"

"no"

Figure 1: Potential landscape defined by equation 1 for different values of k (after Tuller, Case, Ding, & Kelso, 1994)

k = λ + (Nno-Nyes)S,

(2)

in which k specifies the value of the control parameter, λ is
linearly proportional to the length of the rod, Nno and Nyes
are growing functions of the number of accumulative
repetitions of ‘No’ and ‘Yes’ respectively, S≥0 and
represents relevant characteristics of the participant that may
fluctuate during the time course of the experiment. Given
that S represents uncontrolled factors influencing task
behavior, we cannot know the exact value of S. Therefore,
we take a qualitative approach to the combined influences of
(Nno-Nyes) and S on the dynamics of the behavior of the
participants. In equation 2 if (Nno-Nyes)S=0 then k=λ. So
__________
1

See also Parducci’s (1965; Parducci & Wedell, 1986) rangefrequency theory and Helson’s (1964) adaptation-level theory.
2
See Tuller et al. (1994) for the original, more explicitly
specified relationship between the control parameter k and the
experimental variable λ. The simplification in the form of equation
2 is sufficient for our purposes.

when either Nno=Nyes or S=0, then there is a one-to-one
correspondence between k and λ. However, for S>0, k will
be larger than λ when Nno>Nyes and k will be smaller than λ
when Nno<Nyes. The rationale of Equation 2 is illustrated by
Figure 2 for a coupled sequential run, in which rodlength
first
systematically
increases
and
subsequently
systematically decreases (abbreviated ID-run). For the sake
of clarity we hold S constant and only look at the effect of
the accumulative repetitions of a response.
Control parameter (k)

indicated by the black dot. Ideally, the black dot will remain
in the attractor it is in for as long as the attractor is relatively
stable. This means that when multistability exists the
location of the black dot on the potential function depends
on whether the control parameter increased from –1 to +1 or
decreased from +1 to –1. As can be seen in Figure 1 this can
lead to an observable effect classically associated with
dynamical system’s behavior, namely hysteresis. That is, the
switch from ‘No’ to ‘Yes’ occurs at a higher value of the
control parameter than the switch back from ‘Yes’ to ‘No’.
As was said, this holds for the ideal case, in which the
system is not perturbed in any way. Switches between states
within the multistable region can occur, however, as a
consequence of random disturbances. In a cognitive task
like the one we studied, random disturbances may be
assumed to correspond to psychological factors, such as
fatigue, attention, boredom, and so on (c.f., Tuller et al.,
1994).
To capture participants’ behavior in our task the
relationship between the control parameter k and the
independent variable has to be specified. Following Tuller et
al. (1994) we assume that this relationship is not a one-toone correspondence. Instead k is a function of (1) rodlength,
(2) the number of repetitions of the categorical judgments1,
and (3) perceptual and cognitive characteristics of the
participant. The relationship between the control parameter
and rodlength can be symbolized by the following
equation,2

transition

“Yes”
+kc

Multistable region
-kc

transition

“No”

Rodlength (λ
λ)

Figure 2: Illustration of the relationship between the control
parameter and rodlength, for fixed S>0, in a coupled
sequential run in which rodlength first increases and
subsequently decreases (see text for details).
In an ID-run the participant is presented at first with the
smallest rod (bottom left in Figure 2). For short rods the
participants start with no-responses and Nno will become
increasingly larger than Nyes (which will remain zero) with
every next trial. Due to the fact that Nno grows increasingly
larger than Nyes, k will increase faster than λ increases.
When k reaches the value of +kc a transition occurs and the
participant switches to yes-responses. With every next trial
Nyes will grow, whereas Nno will not. Hence the slope of the
function k will decrease. Because the increase sequence is
followed by a decrease sequence Nyes will start to
outnumber Nno. This will cause k to decrease faster than λ.
When -kc is reached a transition occurs and the participant
will switch to yo-responses. Figure 2 thus illustrates that for
sufficiently large S the transition from ‘Yes’ to ‘No’ occurs
at a larger rodlength than the transition from ‘No’ to ‘Yes’.
This is an example of the enhanced contrast effect. One can
imagine that for a certain settings of the parameters one may
find that the first and second transition occur at exactly the
same rodlength, i.e. a critical boundary. However, the
number of parameter settings that result in critical boundary

is much smaller than the number of settings that result in
either hysteresis or enhanced contrast.
The interrelationship between Equation 1 and 2 as
described above leads to the following predictions for our
experiment: (1) There is a tendency in the dynamic system
to remain in the state it resides in. This means that
participants will tend to give the same response as on
preceding trials. (2) Accumulative repetitions of ‘yes’ will
cause the multistable region to shift towards the upper end
of the rodlength continuum. Conversely, accumulative
repetitions of ‘No’ will cause the multistable region to shift
towards the lower end of the rodlength continuum. (3) The
higher the number of repetitions of ‘Yes’ in a run where
rodlength increases and subsequently decreases the greater
the chance of observing enhanced contrast and the smaller
the chance of observing hysteresis. Conversely, the higher
the number of repetitions of ‘No’ in a run where rodlength
decreases and subsequently increases the greater the chance
of observing enhanced contrast and the smaller the chance
of observing hysteresis. Observations of critical boundary
will overall be very limited. (4) Within the multistable
region switches in perception can occur as a consequence of
random disturbances. The narrower the multistable region
(e.g., due to repetitions of a certain response – see figure 2)
the smaller the chance of observing perceptual switches.

Method
Participants
Fourteen participants, 5 male and 9 female, participated in
the experiment. All but two female participants were righthanded. The age of thirteen participants ranged from 22 to
28 years. One male participant was significantly older than
the rest, viz. 56 years of age. The height of participants
ranged from 1.56 to 1.88 meters, with an average of 1.76
meters. All participants, except one who volunteered, were
paid for their participation or participated as a means to
fulfilling a course requirement.

Material
Rods with a diameter of 1.25 cm were used, ranging in
length from 57.0 to 91.5 cm, in 1.5 cm increments.3 The
twenty-four rods were constructed from wood (density 0.67
g/cm3). Attached to each rod was a handle of identical
material with the length of 11.5 cm and a diameter of 1.25
cm. A small disc divided the handle from the rod.
A PVC cylinder (diameter 5 cm, height 6 cm) was placed
on a table (25x25 cm). The height of the table was adjusted
__________
3
Psychophysics studies (e.g. Morgan & Watt, 1989; Watt, 1984)
suggest that the Weber fraction (∆I/I) for length discrimination is
approximately 0.05. In our experiment the fraction between the
increment and rodlength ranged from 0.026 to 0.016. This means
that in increase and decrease sequences the direction of change in
rodlength is not perceivable for participants from one trial to
another. On most occasions the fact that the hand-held rod is
longer or shorter than a preceding rod does not become apparent
within less than three or more trials.

to the participant’s wrist height with the arm at the side. The
back of the cylinder was placed against a barrier of 12.5 cm
height and the front of the cylinder was aligned with the
front edge of the table.

Procedure
A participant was asked to bend forward, with his/her
preferred arm stretched as far as possible (i.e., bending
forward while maintaining enough balance to stay flat on
the feet). The distance between the feet and the hand in this
position was measured. This measure was used to determine
the distance to the table at which each participant was to be
positioned during the experimental session (i.e., maximum
distance reachable without rod + 75 cm4). Participants were
subsequently asked to take this position and stayed there
during the entire experiment. While standing at this distance
it was explained to the participant that the goal was to
displace the cylinder positioned on the table. The participant
was subsequently handed a rod and was instructed to hold
the rod so that it made an angle of approximately 45 degrees
upwards with the horizontal. The participant stood upright
with the rod in one hand and judged whether he was able to
reach the cylinder with the rod from that position while
keeping the two feet flat on the floor. After a participant had
given his categorical judgment he returned the rod to the
experimenter and was handed a new rod for which the
participant again made a judgment. No feedback regarding
accuracy was given.

Design
Each participant performed this judgment under several
conditions. There were three kinds of sequences in which
rods were given to the participant, namely (1) increase
sequences (I): rodlength increased from minimum to
maximum in 1.5 cm increments; (2) decrease sequences (D):
rodlength decreased from maximum to minimum in 1.5 cm
increments; (3) random sequences (R): the rods ranging in
length from the minimum to maximum were randomly
assigned to the task. The two sequential condition I and D
were always coupled, resulting in two kinds of coupled
sequential runs: increase-decrease (ID) runs and decreaseincrease (DI) runs. Coupled sequential runs were always
followed by a random sequence, resulting in two possible
blocks of runs, namely increase-decrease-random (IDR)
blocks and decrease-increase-random (DIR) blocks. The
random sequence served as a kind of buffer between the
coupled sequential run preceding it and the coupled
sequential run of the next block, and as a control condition
in the analyses of the data.
Two different ranges were used in the experiment, namely
range1 of 57.0 - 85.5 cm and range2 of 63.0 - 91.5 cm.
__________
4

We added 75 cm to the personal maximum reaching distance,
because in the range of rodlength used in this experiment 12 rods ≤
75 cm and 12 rods > 75 cm. Hence, for all participants exactly half
of the rods used in the experiment would enable reaching, and half
would not.

Thus, there were two possible minima and maxima for the
three sequences described above. Within a given block the
minimum and maximum for the three constitutive sequences
(I, D and R) were the same. The four possible combinations
of block and range in the experiment were thus, in
shorthand, IDR-1, IDR-2, DIR-1 and DIR-2. Each of these
combinations occurred twice in one experimental session,
resulting in a total of 480 trials (2 ranges x 2 blocks x 3
sequences x 20 rods x 2 repeated measures) per participant.
The block-range combinations were randomized within an
experimental session, with the constraint that each blockrange combination appeared as often in the first half of a
session as in the second half.

Results
Most participants showed a transition in judged possibility
in all sequences (increase-, decrease- and randomsequences). Two of the fourteen participants, however,
overestimated the distance reachable so much that the
lower-end of the range (57.0 cm) was still too high to evoke
a perceptual transition. For this reason these two participants
were excluded from the analyses. Plotting the average
response against rodlength for the remaining twelve
participants for the three types of sequences resulted in the
cumulative distributions as depicted in Figure 3.

yes-responses (%)

100
75
50
Increase

25

Random
Decrease

0
57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81 84 87 90
Rodlength

Figure 3: Percentage of ‘Yes’ responses, averaged over
subjects, per rodlength for increase, random and decrease
sequences separately.
On average participants in this experiment tended to
overestimate their reaching distance. Given the individually
defined distance to table (personal maximum reaching
distance without rod + 75 cm) the expected 50% category
boundary would be about 75 cm for all participants. The
observed 50% category boundaries as depicted in Figure 3
are all lower than this. The finding that participants tended
to overestimate the distance reachable is in correspondence
with findings in other experiments on judging reachability
(Heft, 1993; Rochat, & Wraga, 1997).

To test the effect of sequence, suggested in Figure 3, a
measure was required for the transition point in each
sequence independently. Because in 36 sequences multiple
transitions were observed across the rodlength continuum,
the data of these sequences were transformed so that a
single ‘average’ transition-point resulted5. For the other 192
sequences the real transition-point was simply used as
average transition-point. On the average transition-points a
3 x 2 x 2 repeated-measures ANOVA was performed with
Sequence (random-, increase- and decrease-run), Block
(IDR, DIR), and Range (range1, range2). A main effect of
Sequence was found, F(2, 22) = 14.68, p < .001. A
difference contrast, comparing the average transition-points
in increase- and decrease-sequences, revealed a contrastive
effect, viz. the average transition-point was significantly
lower in increase sequences (66.91 cm) than in the decrease
sequences (70.73 cm), F(1, 11) = 17.19, p = .002. The
average transition-point in random sequences was 69.23 cm.
Further, the main effect of Range was significant, F(1, 11) =
12.39, p = .005. The average transition-point was smaller
for range1 (68.20 cm) than for range2 (69.70 cm). None of
the other effects was significant.
To see whether local contrastive or assimilative effects
were present in random sequences the conditional
probability of judging each rod as belonging to the same
category as the preceding rod was investigated. We found
that in random sequences participants tended to give the
same response as given on the previous trial, χ2(1) = 58.54,
p < .001.
Within the multistable region perturbing influences can
make one percept change into the other and vice versa.
Outside the multistable region only one perceptual form is
possible. Taking these theoretical assumptions into
consideration the boundary of the multistable region was
estimated by the last transition-point6 within a given
sequence. Each coupled sequential run (ID-runs and DIruns) was coded for the type of response pattern it showed,
i.e. either hysteresis, critical boundary or enhanced contrast.
In 66 of the 91 coupled sequential runs7 (72.8%) an
enhanced contrast effect occurred and in 20 runs (20.7%) a
hysteresis effect. Critical boundary occurred in only 6
coupled sequential runs (6.5%), and no more than once per
participant.
__________
5
This transformation involved re-ordering of the no- and yesresponses within a given sequence so that a single transition-point
resulted. The total number of no-responses was projected onto the
lower part of the rodlength continuum and the total number of yesresponses onto the upper part. The average transition-point was
taken to be exactly between the rod receiving the last no-response
and first yes-response in the transformed data.
6
In an increase sequence this last transition-point was defined as
being in between the longest rod receiving a no-response and its
subsequent rod. Conversely, in a decrease sequence the last
transition-point would be in between the shortest rod receiving a
yes-response and its subsequent rod.
7
Five coupled sequential runs were excluded from the analyses
because no perceptual transition occurred.

number of additional switches

Because participants overestimated the distance reachable
the number of accumulative repetitions of ‘Yes’ in a ID-run
were, on average, larger than the accumulative repetitions of
‘No’ in a DI-run. Hence, the dynamical model predicts that
the chance of observing enhanced contrast is greater, and
the chance of hysteresis is smaller, in ID-runs than in DIruns. An analysis of the frequencies of the two response
patterns confirmed this prediction. A Pearson Chi-Square
test with SequenceCoupling (ID-, DI-runs), and
ResponsePattern (enhanced contrast, hysteresis) indicated a
significant association between SequenceCoupling and
ResponsePattern, χ2(1) = 4.44, p = .035. Enhanced contrast
occurred more frequently in ID-runs (37 times) than in DIruns (29 times). Hysteresis on the other hand occurred more
frequently in DI-runs (14 times) than in ID-runs (6 times).
Critical boundary occurred as often in ID-runs (3 times) as
in DI-runs (3 times).
Additional switches (i.e., alternating yes- and noresponses on successive trials preceding the last transitionpoint) occurred on 88 of the 3574 trials8 in sequential runs.
We found that more additional switches occurred in range1
(61 times) than in range2 (27 times; χ2=13.70, p < .001).
Interestingly, this effect of range was observable for both
increase and decrease sequences (see Figure 4).
40
Range 1
30

Range 2

20
10
0
Increase

Decrease

Figure 4: Number of additional switches observed in range 1
and range 2 for increase and decrease sequences separately.
The effect of range in decrease sequences can be
understood as being due to the relatively large number of
repetitions of ‘Yes’ in decrease sequences within range2 as
compared to range1. The two-attractor model can also
account for the effect of range in increase runs. As can be
seen in Figure 3, even the shortest rods used in the
experiment were occasionally judged to enable successful
reaching. Further, the shortest rod in range2 (i.e., 63,0 cm)
was judged as enabling successful reaching once by two
participants, and as enabling successful reaching even 50%
of the time by three participants. This means that the left
boundary of the multistable region was not only on average
__________
8

This number indicates the total number of trials in the
sequential runs of the experiment, i.e. (12 participants) x (40 trials)
x (8 coupled sequential runs) = 3840, minus the first trial of each
coupled sequential run and minus the trials in which a last
transition-point was observed.

closer to the left end of the range of rodlengths, but even
outside range2 for a considerable number of subjects. Thus,
for these participants, the increase sequences in range2
started well within the multistable region. Consequently
there were simply fewer opportunities for switching in
increase sequences in range2 as compared to range1, which
explains the low frequency of additional switches in range 2
for increase sequences.

Discussion
Clark (1997) challenged DST to explain behavioral
phenomena that are considered to be ‘representation hungry’
cases of cognition. We focused on the ability to predict the
outcome of a to be performed action. Participants had to
judge whether a rod afforded displacing an object from a
certain distance. In our interpretation of Clark (1997) such
behavior can be classified as ‘representation-hungry’, that
is, the task seems to require a model of the situation, a
representation of the imagined action, and computations
based on those representations to determine whether the
action will satisfy the goal.
In the present study we explored whether the judging
behavior of our participants could be explained with a
dynamical model. The results are in close agreement with
the predictions derived from a two-attractor model (c.f.,
Case et al., 1995; Tuller et al., 1994). First, it was found that
in random sequences participants tended to give the same
categorical judgment as on preceding trials. This
assimilative effect is in accordance with the notion that a
dynamical system tends to cling to the state it resides in
(Prediction 1).
Further, we observed that on average the transition from
‘No’ to ‘Yes’ in increase runs occurred at a shorter
rodlength than the transition from ‘Yes’ to ‘No’ in decrease
runs. Also we found that on average the transition occurred
at a shorter rodlength in range 1 than in range2 (independent
of the order of presentation of the rods). Both these effects
can be interpreted as being due to the influence of
accumulated repetitions of a certain response causing the
multistable region to shift closer to one of the ends of the
rodlength continuum (Prediction 2).
In coupled sequential runs (ID- and DI-runs) we observed
all three effects that are predicted by the model, viz.
hysteresis, critical boundary, and enhanced contrast. As
expected critical boundary was the rarest of the three.
Because participants overestimated their reaching distance
to a large degree many more accumulative repetitions of
‘Yes’ responses occurred in coupled sequential runs in
which rodlength first increased and subsequently decreased
(ID-runs) than ‘No’ responses occurred in runs in which
rodlength first decreased and then increased (DI-runs). As
predicted, enhanced contrast occurred more often, and
conversely hysteresis less often, in ID-runs as compared to
DI-runs (Prediction 3).
Finally, more additional switches (alternating ‘No’ and
‘Yes’ responses) were observed when the multistable region

was expected to be relatively large, than when it was
expected to be relatively small (Prediction 4).
Dynamic systems models typically describe behavior on
the level of the whole system. On this account behavior is
seen as a self-organized pattern, emerging from the
interaction between subsystems. Such a pattern is called the
collective variable or order parameter, which in turn can
‘enslave’ the behavior of the components (cf. Haken &
Wunderlin, 1990, p. 7; Kelso, 1995, pp. 8-9). Despite the
great complexity at the level of the interacting components
the behavior of the system as a whole can be described and
understood in terms of the lower-dimensional order
parameter dynamics.
According to Clark (1997) an explanation of cognitive
capacity in representational terms is valuable if the
representations are distinguishable as entities serving a role
as information-carriers for behavior. But what if, as DST
would have it, a behavioral pattern is best understood as an
emergent property of the overall activity of the system?
Clark argues that in “such cases (if there are any), the
overall system would rightly be said to represent its world–
but it would not do so by trading in anything we could
usefully treat as internal representations” (Clark, 1997, p.
168). We submit that the effects we observed can be
fruitfully interpreted as a consequence of the interrelationship between control parameter k and the collective
variable V(x) governing the system. In all, these findings
suggest that predictions regarding the possible outcome of
an imagined reach are better understood in terms of
dynamically evolving basins of attraction rather than as
depending on stable representational structures.

References
Beek, P. J., Peper, C. E., & Stegeman, D. F. (1995).
Dynamical models of movement coordination. Human
Movement Science, 14, 573-608.
Case, P., Tuller, B., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. (1995).
Evaluation of a dynamical model of speech perception.
Perception & Psychophysics, 57(7), 977-988.
Clark, A., & Toribio, J. (1994). Doing without representing?
Synthese, 101, 401-431.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body and
world together again. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MITPress.
Haken, H., Kelso, J. A. S., & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical
model of phase transitions in human hand movements.
Biological Cybernetics, 51, 347-356.
Haken, H., & Wunderlin, A. (1990). Synergetics and its
paradigm of self-organization in biological systems. In H.
T. A. Whiting, O. G. Meijer & P. C. W. van Wieringen
(Eds.), The natural-physical approach to movement
control. Amsterdam: University Press.
Heft, H. (1993). A methodological note on overestimates of
reaching distance: Distinguishing between perceptual and
analytical judgements. Ecological Psychology, 5, 255271.

Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation-level theory: An experimental and systematic approach to behavior. New York:
Harper & Row.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The selforganization of brain and behavior. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT-Press.
Morgan, M. J., & Watt, R. J. (1989). The Weber relation for
position is not an artefact of eccentricity. VisionResearch, 29(10), 1457-1462.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgment: range-frequency
model, Psychological Review, 72, 407-418.
Parducci, A., & Wedell, D. H. (1986). The category effect
with rating scales: Number of categories, number of
stimuli, and method of presentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
12, 496-519.
Rochat, P., & Wraga, M. (1997). An account of the systematic error in judging what is reachable. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 23, 199-212.
Schmidt, R. C., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (1990). Phase
transitions and critical fluctuations in the visual
coordination of rhythmic movements between people.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16(2), 227-247.
Tuller, B., Case, P., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. (1994). The
nonlinear dynamics of speech categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 20(1), 3-16.
Vallacher, R. R., & Nowak, A. (1994). Dynamical systems
in social psychology. San Diego: Academic Press.
Watt, R. J. (1984). Towards a general theory of the visual
acuities for shape and spatial arrangement. VisionResearch, 24(10), 1377-1386.

