UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Problem with Logic in the Logical Problem of Language Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9gj1d1hw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Hendriks, Petra

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Problem with Logic in the Logical Problem of Language Acquisition
Petra Hendriks (P.Hendriks@let.rug.nl)
Department of Dutch / Cognitive Science & Engineering (TCW)
University of Groningen
Grote Kruisstraat 2/1, 9712 TS Groningen
The Netherlands

Abstract
This paper discusses the motivation behind the nativist
position with respect to linguistic knowledge. In particular,
the discussion focusses on the argument from the “poverty of
the stimulus”, which is generally assumed to be the most
important argument in favor of a nativist position. On the
basis of current views on human reasoning and learning, we
will argue that the logical (i.e., non-empirical) part of the
poverty of the stimulus argument is invalid. This result
substantially weakens the nativist position, although it does
not imply that the assumption that there must exist a certain
amount of innate domain-specific knowledge has to be
abandoned altogether.

1. The Logical Problem of Language
Acquisition
A fundamental assumption within modern generative syntax
is the assumption that knowledge of language is for a
considerable part innate. This innate knowledge takes the
form of universal principles and parameters that underly all
human languages (cf. Chomsky, 1986a; Chomsky, 1995).
The most important argument in favor of the nativist
position with respect to linguistic knowledge is the so-called
poverty of the stimulus argument. The poverty of the
stimulus argument yields, in Wexler’s (1991) terms,
“Chomsky’s most unique argument” and “the most
powerful theoretical tool that we have available to us” (see
also Wexler, 1999).
This argument forms the basis of the logical problem of
language acquisition, which is essentially an induction
problem. A child only hears a finite number of sentences but
has to generalize from this input to an infinite set of
sentences that includes the input sample. This infinite set is
the set of sentences generated by the language the child has
to learn, which will be refered to here as the target language.
What makes this induction task an extremely difficult one,
however, is that an in principle infinite number of
hypothetical languages is consistent with the finite input
sample. The child has to single out the correct set
corresponding to the target language and reject all other
sets, which are incorrect hypotheses about the target
language. Because every child eventually ends up speaking
her mother tongue, children must be guided by constraints
that allow them to reject the incorrect hypotheses. Just
presenting the child with more sentences of the language she
is learning (i.e., providing her with more positive evidence)
does not reduce the set of hypothetical languages to the

correct one in all cases (cf. Gold, 1967). If the target
language is a subset of the hypothetical language the child
entertains, no amount of positive evidence will lead the
child to conclude that the adopted hypothesis is incorrect. In
this case, only negative evidence will suffice to reject the
larger set in favor of the smaller set. However, negative
evidence does not seem to occur very frequently in the
language input of a child (Brown & Hanlon, 1970), and if it
does occur, it usually is not very effective.
The conclusion must be that the language input of a child
is insufficient (or, in other words, the “stimulus” is too
“poor”) to be able to conclude to the target language. So
how are children able to learn their mother tongue, if the
information available to them is not sufficient to draw
logically valid conclusions from it? Because this is a variant
of the question Plato asked himself with respect to
knowledge in general, the logical problem of language
acquisition is also referred to as Plato’s problem (Chomsky,
1986b).

2. The Defective Nature of the Language Input
Another aspect that is sometimes mentioned in relation to
the poverty of the stimulus argument is the qualitatively and
quantitatively defective nature of the language input the
child receives. That is, children frequently hear
ungrammatical sentences from their parents and other
people. Moreover, the utterances they encounter form only a
small fragment of the language they are learning. These two
characteristics of the language input have been argued to
make language learning extremely difficult, if not
impossible, without prior knowledge. The presence of many
ungrammatical sentences in the language input is highly
problematic because these ungrammatical sentences do not
come labelled as ungrammatical. Since the set of utterances
the child encounters is relatively small, relevant examples of
certain grammatical constructions might not be encountered
during the language-learning years. However, both the claim
about the qualitatively defective nature of the language
input and the claim about the quantitatively defective nature
of the language input have been questioned (e.g., Pullum,
1996; Sampson, 1997).
According to Newport, Gleitman and Gleitman (1977),
“the speech of mothers to children is unswervingly well
formed. Only one utterance out of 1500 spoken to the
children was a disfluency”. On the basis of this evidence, it

cannot be maintained that the language input to the child is
qualitatively defective, or “degenerate”.
The claim about the quantitatively defective nature of the
language input, that is, the non-occurrence of relevant
grammatical constructions in the child’s input language, has
been refuted by empirical evidence as well. The standard
example Chomsky and many others use to illustrate the
poverty of the stimulus argument is the formation of yes/no
questions (e.g., Chomsky, 1980; Chomsky, 1988). The
formation of yes/no questions is dependent on the abstract
property of structure-dependency, in particular on
distinguishing the main clause from embedded clauses. In
order to form a correct yes/no question, the finite verb of the
main clause has to be moved to the front of the sentence. To
refute the simple but structure-independent and thus false
hypothesis that it is the first verb in the sentence that must
be moved, the child needs to encounter questions involving
an embedded clause which precedes the main verb (for
example, “will those who are coming raise their hands?”).
Although it is claimed by Chomsky and others (without
providing any empirical motivation for this claim) that these
examples are very rare, Pullum (1996) found that about 12%
of the yes/no questions in the corpus he searched were
crucial examples which refuted the incorrect hypothesis. So,
relevant sentences for the acquisition of the formation of
yes/no questions are expected to occur in the input language
of the child. Of course, Pullum did not show this for all
other examples that have been used to illustrate the poverty
of the stimulus argument, but there is no evidence that it
will be different for other examples. Thus, the language
input to the child seems to be neither “degenerate” nor
“meager”. For this reason, I will focus on the unavailability
of negative evidence as the crucial and most uncontroversial
aspect of the poverty of the stimulus.

3. The Nativist Solution
The solution that most generative syntacticians have
adopted for the logical problem of language acquisition is to
assume that the core of the grammar is already present in the
child before language learning starts off. This assumption
has changed the agenda of research on language learning
completely. Language learning is no longer viewed as the
acquisition of knowledge on the basis of information present
in the input data. Rather, children are born with a “language
instinct” (Pinker, 1994). Under this nativist view, language
learning merely is a matter of setting the parameter values
of an innate universal grammar (UG) on the basis of specific
triggering experience. A nativist position is also taken in the
recently developed linguistic framework of Optimality
Theory (Prince & Smolensky, 1993; Prince & Smolensky,
1997), although their solution to the logical problem of
language acquisition differs from the generative solution
(see Tesar & Smolensky, 1998).
Although it is seldomly recognized, the logical problem
of language acquisition is not an unavoidable and theoryindependent problem. Even if one agrees on the mentalist
claim that the human brain contains a symbolical

represention of a mental grammar (an assumption which is
refuted by radical connectionists) and that this mental
grammar is at least as complex as a context-free grammar,
the logical problem of language acquisition only arises as a
result of two additional assumptions that are generally
adopted within generative syntax.
The first assumption is the assumption that syntax forms
an autonomous module of language. This assumption is
fundamental to generative syntax. Hence, generative
syntacticians like Lightfoot (1982) and Cook and Newson
(1996) illustrate the logical problem of language acquisition
by putting it on a par with trying to learn chess or snooker
by watching people play the game. Crucial here is the fact
that chess and snooker are systems of purely formal rules
that do not refer to anything outside the system. The nature
of the input and output of the process of learning has
implications for the type of information available to the
learner. As Grimshaw (1981) puts it: because of the
autonomy of syntax, “UG does not permit deduction of a
syntactic analysis from an analysis of the semantics of a
phrase”. In other words, because syntax is autonomous, the
formal properties of the grammar must be learnt from the
formal properties of the input and cannot be inferred from
its meaning.
The second assumption that is crucial to the view that
there exists a logical problem of language acquisition is the
identification of learning a language with finding the correct
hypothesis through a process of hypothesis formulation and
refutation (cf. Pinker, 1989; Wexler & Culicover, 1980).
Note that this view of language acquisition as hypothesis
testing is not present anymore in current nativist theories of
language acquisition. I will return to this point in section 5.
In the next section, I will demonstrate the dependence of the
logical problem of language acquisition on the assumption
that language acquisition is a process of hypothesis testing
and logical deduction.

4. Language Acquisition as Logical Deduction
As was noted in the previous section, an assumption
underlying the logical problem of language acquisition is
the assumption that the child learns her mother tongue
through hypothesis formulation and refutation. Now if
syntax is assumed to be autonomous, this process of
hypothesis testing must be a process of logical reasoning. In
particular, the process of hypothesis testing must involve
logical deduction. Deductive reasoning involves deriving a
conclusion from given information by using a set of formal
(i.e., based on the form of the input) mental operations,
without adding new information. This contrasts with
inductive reasoning, which involves extrapolating a rule
based on limited information. If it is not assumed that
children employ deductive reasoning in hypothesis testing,
there would be no logical problem of language acquisition at
all, since nothing prevents children from concluding to the
target language in the absence of negative evidence, except
for the rules of logical deduction. Of course, it then remains
to be explained how children arrive at exactly the same

grammar, but note that it is an empirical issue whether
children indeed do.
Very few linguists actually discuss the mechanism that is
supposed to lead children to conclude to the target language
in the situation sketched by the logical problem of language
acquisition. Linguists who use the poverty of the stimulus
argument to support their theoretical point of view but do
not discuss the learning mechanism involved, sometimes
have been criticized for neglecting to take into account this
mechanism. A common reaction to this criticism is that the
actual mechanism does not really matter because Gold’s
(1967) proof, that positive evidence is not sufficient to learn
a context-free language, is a formal proof. Such a formal
proof is argued to be independent of the learning mechanism
involved. However, implicit in Gold’s proof is the
assumption that learning a language can be identified with
logically deducing the correct hypothesis on the basis of
relevant evidence. Although it has been noted that there are
some problems with Gold’s model of language acquisition
(Elman et al., 1996; Quartz & Sejnowski, 1997), this
particular aspect of Gold’s model has not been mentioned
before as yielding a problem.
To motivate the claim that a proces of hypothesis testing
forms the basis of the logical problem of language
acquisition, here are a number of quotations from the
literature. According to Pinker (1989), for example,
“[e]xplaining succesful learning basically consists of
showing that the learner can entertain and stick with a
correct hypothesis and can falsify any incorrect ones” (p. 6).
Chomsky (1988) likens the problem of language acquisition
to the endeavour of a Martian scientist trying to understand
Spanish, “pursuing the methods of the sciences, the methods
of rational inquiry [...] His problem is to construct a
hypothesis as to what the rule is and to test it by looking at
more complex examples” (pp. 41-42). Perhaps children
proceed exactly as this Martian scientist did in his inquiry,
Chomsky continues. But this cannot be correct, since no
negative evidence is available to children. Therefore,
Chomsky concludes that innate principles must guide
language acquisition. The motivation for assuming that
certain properties of human language must be innately
determined is explained by Crain (1991) as follows: “every
child comes to know facts about language for which there is
no decisive evidence from the environment. In some cases,
there appears to be no evidence at all; in others the evidence
is compatible with a number of alternative hypotheses
(including false ones)” (p. 598). Jackendoff (1994) suggests
that the unconscious task of a language-learning child can
be compared with the conscious task of a linguist trying to
discover the basic principles of human language: “they [i.e.,
children] must (unconsciously) discover for themselves the
patterns that permit them both to understand these sentences
and to construct new sentences for other people to respond
to. Whether this process of discovery goes on unconsciously
in the child or consciously in the linguist, the very same
problems have to be solved” (p. 27). About the only way it
can be explained that children are able to learn their

language is to assume that “children have a head start on
linguists: children’s unconscious strategies for language
learning include some substantial hints about how a mental
grammar ought to be constructed”.
Summarizing, the basic idea of these authors is that a
strategy of hypothesis testing is not sufficient for learning a
natural language in the absence of negative evidence. This
rejected strategy of hypothesis testing assumes children to
behave like scientists and gather evidence in order to falsify
incorrect hypotheses and employ hypothetico-deductive
reasoning to draw the correct conclusions. However, the
strategy of hypothesis testing by hypothetico-deductive
reasoning seems to be based on implausible assumptions
about human reasoning, as will be argued in section 6.

5. Language Acquisition as Parameter Setting
Many generative syntacticians will respond to the
conclusion of the previous section by claiming that this is
not a correct characterization of the current view on learning
within the field of language acquistion. Rather, they will
argue, language acquisition is currently viewed as a (blind)
process of changing parameter values on the basis of
specific triggering experience (cf. Gibson & Wexler, 1994).
This is indeed true for the nativist framework of Principles
and Parameters Theory and the Minimalist Program.
However, the notion of parameter setting was introduced
(along with the concept of an innate universal grammar) as a
solution to the logical problem of language acquisition.
Thus, first there was the logical problem of language
acquisition, which made implicit use of the assumption that
children employ logical deduction. This problem was
subsequently solved by assuming an innate UG, which is
accompanied by its own learning mechanism: parameter
setting on the basis of triggering. Parameter setting therefore
is the result of an argumentation that started out with the
assumption that children employ logical deduction. If it
would not have been assumed that children employ logical
deduction, there would be no logical problem of language
acquisition to be solved, and hence there would be no
motivation for innate principles and for parameters that have
to be set.
Discussions about learning mechanisms should be careful
to distinguish between learning mechanisms assumed prior
to the acceptance of the logical problem of language
acquisition, and learning mechanisms assumed as a solution
to this problem. This is not a trivial warning. When
Lightfoot (1998) criticizes Elman et al. (1996) for their
seeming lack of interest in the linguistic motivation for the
innateness claim, in particular the poverty of the stimulus
argument, and contrasts this with linguists, who seem to be
interested in learning issues, Lightfoot is in fact already one
step too far: “[l]inguists are actively interested in questions
about learning algorithms. For example, an interesting
debate is emerging about a trading relation between
properties of UG and learning algorithms”. Since the
linguists Lightfoot refers to proceed from the conclusions
drawn from the poverty of the stimulus argument, their

work does not bear on the innateness debate tackled in
Elman et al. Rather, these linguists have already taken sides
in the innateness debate, which makes it impossible to apply
their results to the same debate again.

6. Do People Reason Logically?
One of the central themes within cognitive science is the
question pertaining to the mechanisms underlying human
reasoning. To investigate the role of logic and formal rules
in the proces of human reasoning, Wason (1966) and Griggs
and Cox (1982), among others, carried out a series of wellknown selection task experiments.
In Wason’s experiment (Wason, 1966; Wason, 1968;
Johnson-Laird & Wason, 1977), subjects were presented
with an array of cards and told that every card had a letter
on one side and a number on the other side. In addition, the
following rule was given: “If a card has a vowel on one side,
then it has an even number on the other side”. Subjects were
asked to select those cards that definitely have to be turned
over to find out whether or not they violate the rule. Note
that this rule has the form of a logical implication: if p then
q. In propositional logic, such a rule is false if p is true and
at the same time q is false. If the subjects in Wason’s
experiment would reason according to the rules of deductive
logic, they would choose the cards with a vowel and the
cards with an odd number. All other cards are irrelevant
from a logical perspective. Indeed, most subjects chose the
card with the vowel. On top of that, many subjects (46%)
also chose the card with the even number, although it does
not matter for the validity of the rule whether the other side
of this card carries a vowel or a consonant. On the other
hand, a card that was overlooked by almost all subjects was
the card with the odd number. If there is a vowel on the
other side of this card, the rule is violated. The correct
answer, namely the card with the vowel and the card with
the odd number, was given by only 4% of the subjects.
Griggs and Cox (1982) presented subjects with a task that
was identical in form to Wason’s task, but in which the
abstract problem and the abstract rule had been replaced by
a concrete problem and a concrete rule: “if a person is
drinking beer, then he or she must be over 19 years of age”.
One side of the card had information about a person’s age
(16 or 19 years old) and the other side had information
about what this person was drinking (a beer or a coke). If
human reasoning takes place purely on the basis of the form
of a problem, the results of the two experiments should have
been identical. However, they were not. Like in Wason’s
experiment, all subjects turned over the card that affirmed
the antecedent of the conditional clause (i.e., the card with
“drinking a beer”). In contrast with Wason’s experiment,
however, many subjects (74%) also turned the card with “16
years of age”, whereas almost none of Wason’s subjects
turned the card with the odd number. So, in Griggs and
Cox’s experiment most subjects gave the correct answer,
namely the cards with “drinking a beer” and “16 years of
age”.

Apparently, then, the subjects in the second experiment
used semantic information to solve the problem. In the first
experiment, in which only information about the form of the
problem was available, only few of the subjects managed to
solve the problem. This suggests that human reasoning does
not rely on a kind of mental logic. Logical rules are formal
rules, which only take into account the form of the basic
elements, not their meanings. If only information about the
form of a problem is available, as in Wason’s experiment,
people make mistakes. Whenever they can, they use
information about the meaning of the problem and about its
context. In fact, people not only make mistakes in
conditional reasoning tasks like the ones discussed above,
they also make mistakes in other reasoning tasks requiring
logical reasoning, for example in syllogisms. Conclusions
that are consistent with beliefs or desires are more likely to
be accepted as valid than conclusions that are not (e.g., Janis
& Frick, 1943; Mayer, 1983). In general, people are not
particularly good at solving problems correctly when the
problems are presented to them in an abstract form.
Concrete problems are solved by using all the knowledge
that is available and might bear on the problem.

7. What Does Reasoning Tell Us about
Language Learning?
The main conclusion that can be drawn from the reasoning
experiments discussed in the previous section is that adults
apparently are no naturally logical reasoners. But if adults
do not reason according to some kind of mental logic, and if
children do not differ from adults in this respect, then one of
the two assumptions underlying the logical problem of
language acquisition is not valid. As was argued in section 3
and 4, the logical problem of language acquisition only
exists if it is assumed that syntax is autonomous and
children reason logically. If one of these assumptions does
not hold, then there is no logical problem of language
acquisition. This does not imply that there is no empirical
problem of language acquisition, though. But it implies that
is not in principle impossible that children learn their
mother tongue from the language input they receive. Note
that we cannot conclude from this that children definitely do
not possess innate knowledge of language of some kind. But
since the argument based on the logical problem of language
acquisition appears to be invalid, the evidence for an innate
UG is substantially weakened.
One could object that there is a difference between
learning and reasoning and, therefore, that it is questionable
whether results from the cognitive domain of reasoning
apply to the domain of learning. However, human learning
often involves deductive reasoning, in which one is able to
discover or generate new knowledge based on beliefs one
already holds. In addition, the logical problem of language
acquisition is stated in such a way that it assumes children
to reason about the hypotheses that are compatible with a
given set of data and draw conclusions on the basis of the
sentences they encounter. As an illustration, recall from
section 4 Chomsky’s comparison of a child learning her

language with a Martian scientist trying to understand
Spanish. So, irrespective of whether learning and reasoning
must be distinguished in practice, since learning involves
reasoning in the logical problem of language acquisition, the
results from the selection task experiments discussed in the
previous section bear on the validity of the logical problem
of language acquisition.

8. Conclusions
The logical problem of language acquisition is taken to be
one of the strongest arguments in favor of the nativist view
on language, since its validity is independent of specific
empirical evidence. The basic idea behind this argument is
that it is impossible in principle to acquire a language solely
on the basis of the language input, irrespective of the
presentation of the input data and the amount of positive
feedback the child gets. In this paper, it was argued that
there is no logical problem of language acquisition, since
the combination of assumptions on which the formulation of
the problem rests cannot be maintained in the light of
current views on human reasoning and learning. In
particular, people do not reason logically, which was the
main assumption behind the logical problem of language
acquisition. This does not imply that every aspect of
language must be learnt from the input and that no innate
linguistic knowledge or innate linguistic mechanisms can
exist. But the evidence in favor of an innate UG must be
based solely on empirical observations, now that the
argument based on the logical problem of language
acquisition has been shown to be invalid.

References
Brown, R., & Hanlon, C. (1970). Derivational Complexity
and Order of Acquisition in Child Speech. In J.R. Hayes
(Ed.), Cognition and the Development of Language. New
York: Wiley.
Chomsky, N. (1980). On Cognitive Structures and Their
Development: A Reply to Piaget. In M. Piattelli-Palmarini
(Ed.), Language and Learning: The Debate between Jean
Piaget and Noam Chomsky. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Chomsky, N. (1986a). Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Chomsky, N. (1986b). Knowledge of Language: Its Nature,
Origin, and Use. New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, N. (1988). Language and Problems of
Knowledge: The Managua Lectures. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Cook, V.J., & Newson, M. (1996). Chomsky’s Universal
Grammar. Oxford: Blackwell.
Crain, S. (1991). Language Acquisition in the Absence of
Experience. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 14, 597-650
Elman, J.L., Bates, E.A., Johnson, M.H., Karmiloff-Smith,
A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking

Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibson, E., & Wexler, K. (1994). Triggers. Linguistic
Inquiry, 25, 407-454.
Gold, E.M. (1967). Language Identification in the Limit.
Information and Control, 10, 447-474.
Griggs, R.A., & Cox, J.R. (1982). The Elusive ThematicMaterials Effect in Wason’s Selection Task. British
Journal of Psychology, 73, 407-420.
Grimshaw, J. (1981). Form, Function, and the Language
Acquisition Device. In C.L. Baker & J.J. McCarthy
(Eds.), The Logical Problem of Language Acquisition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1994). Patterns in the Mind: Language and
Human Nature. New York: BasicBooks.
Janis, I.L., & Frick, F. (1943). The Relationship between
Attitudes toward Conclusions and Errors in Judging
Logical Validity of Syllogisms. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33, 73-77.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Wason, P.C. (1977). A Theoretical
Analysis of Insight into a Reasoning Task. In P.N.
Johnson-Laird & P.C. Wason (Eds.), Thinking: Readings
in Cognitive Science. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Lightfoot, D. (1982). The Language Lottery: Towards a
Biology of Grammars. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lightfoot, D.W. (1998). Promises, Promises: General
Learning Algorithms. Mind & Language, 13, 582-587.
Mayer, R.E. (1983). Thinking, Problem Solving, Cognition.
New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Newport, E., Gleitman, H. & Gleitman, L.R. (1977).
Mother, I’d rather do it myself: some effects and noneffects of maternal speech style. In C.E. Snow & C.A.
Ferguson (Eds.), Talking to Children: Language Input
and Acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition: The
Acquisition of Argument Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct: The New Science
of Language and Mind. New York: Wiliam Morrow and
Co.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993). Optimality Theory:
Constraint Interaction in Generative Grammar. To
appear in Linguistic Inquiry Monograph Series,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1997). Optimality: From
Neural Networks to Universal Grammar. Science, 275,
1604-1610.
Pullum, G. (1996). Learnability, hyperlearning, and the
poverty of the stimulus. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Meeting: General Session and Parasession on the Role of
Learnability in Grammatical Theory, Berkeley Linguistic
Society.
Quartz, S.R., & Sejnowski, T.J. (1997). The Neural Basis of
Cognitive Development: A Constructivist Manifesto.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 537-596.

Sampson, G. (1997). Educating Eve: The ‘Language
Instinct’ Debate. London: Cassell.
Tesar, B., & Smolensky, P. (1998). Learnability in
Optimality Theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 29, 229-268
Wason, P.C. (1966). Reasoning. In B.M. Foss (Ed.), New
Horizons in Psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin
Books.
Wason, P.C. (1968). Reasoning about a Rule. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20, 273-281.
Wexler, K. (1991). On the Argument from the Poverty of
the Stimulus. In A. Kasher (Ed.), The Chomskyan Turn.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Wexler, K. (1999). Innateness of Language. In R.A. Wilson
& F.C. Keil (Eds.), The MIT Encyclopedia of the
Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wexler, K., & Culicover, P.W. (1980). Formal Principles of
Language Acquisition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

