UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Précis of Project Nemo, Phase 2: Levels of Expertise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h8636v1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Kirschenbaum, Susan S.
Gray, Wayne D.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Précis of Project Nemo, Phase 2: Levels of Expertise
Susan S. Kirschenbaum (kirschenbaumss@csd.npt.nuwc.navy.mil)
Naval Undersea Warfare Center Division
Code 2214, Building 1171/1
Newport, RI 02841 USA

Wayne D. Gray (gray@gmu.edu)
Human Factors & Applied Cognition
George Mason University; m/s 3f5
Fairfax, VA 22030 USA
Abstract
Project Nemo examines the cognitive processes and
representational
structures
used by
submarine
Commanders while attempting to locate an enemy
submarine hiding in deep water. In phase 2 we collected
performance and protocol data from junior, mid-career,
and senior submarine officers. The data support the
conclusions from phase 1 (Gray, Kirschenbaum, &
Ehret, 1997) that most AO actions can be characterized
as a sequence of small, steps in a shallow goal hierarchy
(rather than as following a detailed master plan). The
nature of these successive choices vary as a function of
the officer’s expertise. The results are congruent with an
interpretation in which the process of schema
instantiation provides the control of cognition.

Introduction
In phase 1 of Project Nemo (Gray et al., 1997) we
analyzed six hours of verbal and action protocols from
expert submarine Approach Officers (AOs) as they detected
and localized (i.e., determined the course, speed, and range)
a hostile submarine hiding in deep water.
The results of phase 1 support a description of the
cognitive control structure that orchestrates the AOs'
behavior as
schema-directed problem solving with
shallow and adaptive subgoaling (Ehret, Gray, &
Kirschenbaum, in press). The schema is the task-relevant
knowledge accumulated in over 20 years of experience as a
submariner (half of it at sea). It is a set of declarative as
well as procedural knowledge structures. An implication
of shallow subgoaling is that the knowledge available to
AOs is so rich that steps to supplement this knowledge
can be shallow.
A second implication is that the AO solves a series of
problems, one every 30 to 300 s. The problem is always
the same; namely, “what is the state of the world –
NOW.” The AO is trying to find a quiet target hiding in a
noisy environment while remaining undetected himself.
The protocol analysis revealed that he takes a series of
short steps that either (a) assess the noise from the
environment or signal from the target – NOW, or (b)
attempt to reduce the noise or increase the signal from the
target by maneuvering ownship. As shown in Figure 1,
these short steps result in shallow subgoaling. When a

subgoal pops, the schema is reassessed. The result of this
reassessment directs the next step (i.e., selects the next
subgoal). This step is accomplished, it returns
information to the schema, the schema is reassessed, and
so on.
LOCATESUB
(t)

DETBEARING

LOCATESUB (t+1)

EVALSNR

LOCATESUB (t+2)

LOCATESUB (t+3)

SETTRACKER

LOCATESUB (t+4)

DETBEARING

LOCATESUB (t+n)

TMA-SOL

Time (t)

Figure 1: Schema-directed problem solving with shallow
and adaptive subgoaling
The process of subgoaling is adaptive in two senses.
First, the subgoal that is chosen next reflects the current
reassessment of the schema. Second, this choice is
sensitive to both the long-term importance of the subgoal
as well as its recent history of success or failure.
Regardless of a goal’s long-term importance, AOs will
not continue to attempt a goal if successive tries fail.
Instead, they will choose another goal and return to the
more important goal later.
The dynamic aspect of the AO's task plays an important
role in this view of schema-directed problem solving.
First, the state of the AO's world is continually changing
– both ownship and target are moving at a given depth,
direction, and speed. For ownship the value of these
attributes can be changed, but the problem cannot be
stopped. Consequently, time is an important part of the
picture. Second, subgoals are not accomplished once and
then discarded. In the AO's world, subgoals bring in
certain types of information or accomplish certain changes
to ownship. As the world changes, any given subgoal
may be revisited not only to acquire the current value, but
also to acquire information about the rate and direction of
change (e.g., DET-BEARING in Figure 1).
Phase 1 ran 10 senior officers on a high fidelity
simulation located at the Naval Undersea Warfare Center

in Newport, RI. For phase 2, we built the Ned 1 scaled
world in Macintosh Common Lisp to run on a portable
computer. (A description of the simulation can be found
in Ehret et al., in press.) This portability enabled us to
take Ned to U. S. Navy submarine bases in Bangor, WA
and Pearl Harbor, HI. Consequently, we were able to
collect data from 36 active-duty submarine officers.
In this paper we present a brief overview of the phase 1
empirical data. (More details can be found in Gray et al.,
1997; and Kirschenbaum, Gray, & Ehret, 1997.) Our
focus is on the data collected using the Ned scaled world,
its similarities to the phase 1 data, and the variations
among levels of expertise.

The Submariner’s Task and Tools
The job of the Approach Officer is to respond to hostile
targets. He2 heads the team that must detect, track,
classify, localize, and if ordered, attack the target. He
performs this task with the support of many specialpurpose systems run by skilled operators, but is
ultimately responsible for the success of the encounter.
Two features of the problem make it an especially
challenging one. First, this is a dynamic problem. Both
ownship and the contacts are moving, and, perhaps,
changing course, etc. during the encounter. Second, there
are only sparse and highly uncertain data about the
contacts. The AO’s expertise lies in using his knowledge
of the relationships among the cues to guide information
gathering over the course of the scenario and instantiate a
generic “contact” schema for each contact.
Special tools are used for controlling own ship,
listening to the contact, and localizing. As sound
transmission is distorted, reflected and bent in the ocean
by temperature, salinity, pressure, detecting, tracking, and
locating the source of a passive sonar contact is highly
very difficult and impacted by uncertainty. Because passive
sonar only provides bearing (direction) data, target-motionanalysis (TMA) tools for localizing the targets employ
statistical methods to estimate the target’s course, speed,
and range. As this is a mathematically under-constrained
problem, submariners call this process “finding a
solution.”

Review of Phase 1
Method
All of the participants in phase 1 were highly experienced
submarine officers who had served as Commanding
Officers (COs) or Executive Officers (XOs) aboard U. S.
Navy Submarines. The officers were presented with
scenarios that required localizing an enemy submarine
hiding in deep water. The scenarios were presented on the
CSEAL (Combat Systems Engineering and Analysis
Laboratory) high fidelity simulation. CSEAL is a
submarine command-center-in-a-box. It has generic
1

Ned Land was an able seaman and trusted assistant to Prof.
Aronnax aboard the Nautilus.
2
In the current US Navy all submariners are men.

versions of all of the essential submarine tools. As
CSEAL is a developer’s tool, it was run by an operator.
The AOs requested information and ordered actions to be
carried out by the operator. Videotapes and verbal
protocols were the primary data. These were supplemented
by computer-logged action protocols.
In both phases we investigated the situation assessment
part of the AO’s mission. Situation assessment begins
with detection of the contact and ends when the AO is
sufficiently confident of the solution to declare that he is
ready to move to the engagement phase. Each scenario
began with a status report such as an AO might receive
when first taking his turn on watch. The status report
provided scenario specific information including ownship
course, speed, and depth as well as information on any
contacts. All scenarios began with a single contact,
classified as a merchant.

Review of Phase 1: Results
During phase 1 we developed an encoding scheme (Gray &
Kirschenbaum, in press) that included nine operators and a
three-level goal structure (for detailed information, see
Kirschenbaum et al., 1997). Most of the AOs’ time and
effort was spent in service of two top-level goals:
LOCATE-MERCHANT (LOC-MERC) and LOCATESUBMARINE (LOC-SUB). Given that localizing the sub
is clearly the higher priority, we were puzzled to find that
the two goals were used with approximately equal
frequency (see the left side of Figure 2). However, as the
middle of Figure 2 shows, this equal frequency of use
masked a large difference in the number of subgoals per
LOC-MERC versus LOC-SUB.
More interesting, this disparity in number of subgoals
per goal was not reflected in the number of operators per
subgoal. As shown by the right-side of Figure 2, the
mean number of operators per subgoal was constant. The
same number of operators were used in a subgoal
regardless of whether its supergoal was LOC-MERC or
LOC-SUB.
Along with other analyses that we conducted, this
analysis suggested that the basic unit of action was the
subgoal. Formalized plans or established methods with
fixed number of steps, exist at the subgoal level. At the
level of LOC-MERC or LOC-SUB, each subgoal returns
a discrete piece of knowledge that is added to the schema.
The schema is reevaluated to determine what piece of
knowledge to select next. When there is little new
information to be gained by continuing working on the
current goal, the goal is popped and a new top-level goal
is pushed.
The question pursued below is whether the phase 2 data
support the phase 1 interpretation of expert performance
and in which ways intermediate and novice behavior
conforms or differs from the experts.

8

mean number

6

4
Subgoals
per goal

Operators
per
subgoal

2
Goals per
scenario

that was available only from that display. Once an AO
selected a display, all information fields for the display
were covered by black boxes (as in the bottom display of
Figure 3). Clicking on the field removed the black box
and revealed the data until the mouse was moved from the
field. (Ned consists of 10 specialized displays.)
Ned captured all AO interactions, including display
navigation and viewing information (enter and exit times
and information content). It also recorded truth every 20
seconds. In addition, the AOs were encouraged to think
aloud and all sessions were video recorded.

0
MERC

SUB

MERC

SUB

MERC

SUB

LOC-MERC VS LOC-SUB

Figure 2: Phase 1. Data for the two main top-level goals,
LOCALIZE-MERC and LOCALIZE-SUB. Left -- mean
number of level-1 goals per AO-Trial. Middle -- mean
subgoals per goal. Right – mean number of operators per
subgoal. [Error bars show the 95-percent confidence
intervals for the standard error of the mean (SEM).]

The Ned Experiment: Replication and
Expansion
Table 1: Demographic data on participants.
Means for
n
Years at sea
Years in Navy
Age

CO/XO
15
8.7
17.8
38.9

DH
11
6.4
13.4
34.4

JO
10
3.2
7.3
28.3

Participants
Three groups of current submarine officers participated in
the study: Junior Officers (JOs), Department Heads (DHs),
and Commanding Officers or Executive Officers
(CO/XOs). The average number of years spent at sea,
years in the navy, and ages can be found in Table 1. The
expert participants in this study had slightly less
experience than those in phase 1. This was most likely
because, unlike the phase 1 AOs, all were active duty and
none were post-command. (The phase 1 COs had a mean
of 10.8 years at sea and 20.3 years in the Navy.)

Figure 3: The Ned Target Motion Analysis screen without
(above) and with (below) black boxes covering data fields.

Ned Simulation

Scenarios

The Ned simulation was designed to overcome
problems encountered in collecting and encoding data from
CSEAL. (These problems and their solution are detailed in
Ehret et al., in press.) For the current discussion, the two
most relevant improvements in Ned over CSEAL were the
elimination of redundant information and the control that
Ned provided over access to information.
With minor exceptions, Ned’s displays were specialized
so that each type of information was available from one
display only. For example, when an AO went to the
display for the broadband spherical sonar sensor, we could
be sure that he wanted one of the 10 types of information

Four scenarios were used. Two were identical to those
used in phase 1 and two were slightly modified versions of
the phase 1 scenarios. At the beginning of each scenario
the AO had ownship position (course, speed, and depth)
and confirmed contact and bearing (direction from
ownship) for a merchant. He also had intelligence that a
“hostile” submarine was in the region.

Procedures
Each session began with training on Ned and training in
talking aloud while problem solving. Each AO solved two

Goals and Subgoals3

scenarios. Sessions lasted approximately 2 hours.

Protocol Encodings
Five CO/XO’s were unable to complete two scenarios due
to interruptions for other responsibilities. From the
remaining 31 AOs, data from six AOs at each experience
level (18 in all) were selected for detailed encoding. In each
case, the second scenario was encoded. Protocols were
selected on the basis of completeness, the lack of technical
glitches, and the clarity of the recorded protocols.

Semi-Automatic Protocol Encoding
Each click of the mouse on a menu item or a black box
was saved to a log file. This enabled us to write code that
encoded each action protocol and segmented groups of
related actions. For example, if the AO clicked on the
black box covering the range information in Figure 3 (see
upper right part of the display), he was credited with two
operators one for querying and one for receiving range
information from the target motion analysis system.

Operators

The AO’s mission, as given in the instructions, is to
destroy the hostile submarine. Therefore his primary goal
is to detect and localize the sub. However, these are not
his only goals. He must also keep track of the merchant,
avoid collision, evaluate the environment, and keep track
of ownship.
Under Ned we have a precise record of the AO’s
information access. This record, linked by time to the
verbal protocol, permitted a more detailed encoding of
goals than was possible for phase 1. Hence, the goal and
subgoals used in phase 2 differed from those discussed in
Kirschenbaum et. al, (1997). However, the discussion of
these differences will have to await a fuller report.
Of the 18 scenarios studied in phase 2, six were used to
train the three encoders. These are referred to as “consensus
encodings.” The operators for each of the remaining 12
scenarios were encoded into goals by two independent
encoders. Cohen’s Kappa for interrater reliability averaged
0.84 and ranged from a low of 0.54 to a high of 0.96. All
correlations are significant (p < .001). The discrepancies
between encodings were resolved by the third encoder.

Operators are the lowest level encoding and represent the
AO’s direct interaction with the Ned simulation. Unlike
phase 1, the majority of operators (approximately 99%)
were encoded automatically from the computer outputted
action protocols. All encodings were confirmed and/or
modified by comparison with the video-taped verbal
protocols. Across the three groups a total of 9,073
operators were encoded as belonging to one of nine
operator categories.

Table 3: Typical goal, subgoal, operator sequence. (This
is a truncated sequence and is for illustrative purposes
only).

Table 2: Example of goal and operator encodings.

TMA-SOLUTION
EVAL-SOLUTION-BEARING
Query
Receive
Derive
TWEAK-SOLUTION-BEARING
Tweak
EVALUATE-SOLUTION-RANGE
Query
Receive
Derive
TWEAK-SOLUTION-RANGE
Tweak
DETERMINE-SOLUTION-QUALITY
Query
Receive

GOAL

OP

INFOSOURCE

DETERMINE-BEARING
NBT-BYQUERY
FIELD
NBT-BYFIELD
RECEIVE

SHIP

ATTR

SUB

BY

SUB

BY

VALUE

DUR

316 or
244

1.15

L-1 L-2

OPERATOR

Query
Receive
Derive
DisplayNav

POP

An example of the result of the automatic encoding of
operators is provided in Table 2. Prior to this point in the
scenario, the AO has called up the narrowband towed
display (NBT). Here he queries the bearing (BY)
information for the SUB by clicking on the black box that
covers the field. The black box disappears, enabling the
AO to receive the information that the narrowband towed
sensor gives the ambiguous information that the hostile
submarine’s bearing from ownship is either 316 or 244
degrees. The bearing information is uncovered for 1.15 sec
before the AO moves the cursor out of the bearing field.
Details of the operator types and categories used in
phase 1 are available from Kirschenbaum, et al. (1997)..
The phase 2 operator types and categories differed
minimally from those used in phase 1; however, their
similarity and differences from the phase 1 operators are
beyond the scope of the current report.

L-3

LOC-SUB
EVALUATE-TRACE

Goals and Schema
The schema instantiation process that we hypothesize
controls cognition during situation assessment proceeds
by pushing and popping a series of largely independent
subgoals (see Figure 1). When a goal pops, information is
returned to the schema being instantiated. The amended
instantiation selects the next goal to push. For example, a
typical sequence of goals, subgoals, and operators might
read like that in Table 3

3

For ease of exposition, level-1 goals will be referred to
simply as goals; level-2 and level-3 subgoals collectively as
subgoals.

In this sequence the AO first evaluates the sonar trace.
This may return information to his schema regarding the
target’s bearing and bearing rate. He then switches to the
display shown in Figure 3 and examines the TMA
solution, alternately evaluating and tweaking the values of
different parameters. As the values are returned to his
schema he can compare them with his knowledge of how
targets and the TMA algorithms work to derive better
values to test. At the end of the sequence, he determines
the solution quality by examining how closely the dots in
the bottom-left section of the TMA screen (Figure 3a)
stack on the central line.

Summary
Ned records AO actions with greater specificity and
accuracy than permitted by CSEAL. Consequently, we
revised the goal types and categories to take advantage of
this greater detail. However, the phase 2 revisions are
elaborations on the goal categories and types used in phase
1. Thus, the phase 1 goal structure, with minor
modifications, can support the detailed analysis of Ned
data.

Data Analysis and Results
The 9,073 operators collected in phase 2 can be
aggregated and examined for many different purposes. In
the current paper we limit our purposes to three. First we
generally compare the goal and subgoal structure used in
phase 2 with that of phase 1. For our second and third
purpose, we limit ourselves to the three measures used in
Figure 2: LOC-MERC and LOC-SUB goals per scenario,
number of subgoals per LOC-MERC and LOC-SUB, and
number of operators per subgoal. We begin by using these
measures to compare the experts in phase 2 (i.e., the
CO/XO’s) to those in phase 1. We then use these same
measures to look across levels of expertise for phase 2.
30

hierarchy of 2-3 levels. This is confirmed by the more
precise Ned data. Level-3 goals were confined to three
level-2 goals, and the large majority 62.1% of all level 3
goals, were subgoals of a single, high-frequency level-2
goal, TMA-SOLUTION.
Secondly, in phase 1 we were able to encode the
protocols using only 9 operators. Nine operators worked
well for phase 2. The only notable difference in operator
sets was exchanging the N/A category from the verbal
protocol encodings of phase 1 for a display-manipulation
category (i.e., clicking on menu item or black-box) in
phase 2. Also, as in phase 1, we found relatively few
operators per goal with a mean of 6.0 operators per Level
2 subgoal and 3.4 operators per Level 3 subgoal (though
this varied by subgoal).

CO/XO: Phase 1 versus Phase 2 Comparisons of
Expert Level Performers
Comparing the three frames of Figure 2 with those of
Figure 4 yields a qualitatively similar picture. In both
phases, although the differences in numbers are small, the
CO/XOs push more LOC-SUB than LOC-MERC goals.
However, these small differences at the goal level are
countered by large differences at the subgoals level (middle
frame of Figure 4). As in phase 1, for phase 2 the number
of operators per terminal subgoal (right frame of Figure 4)
does not differ as a function of the top-level goal.
These comparisons are consistent with our phase 1
conclusions that the subgoal level captures a basic unit of
AO expertise. The goal level, LOC-MERC and LOCSUB, divides the world into episodes. An episode requires
a varying number of subgoals. The exact number depends
on features of the current scenario. Merchants are noisy
and easy to localize. Hence, most LOC-MERC episodes
occur between attempts to detect the submarine and most
end with the AO obtaining a good solution on the
merchant.
40
LOC-MERC
LOC-SUB

Subgoals
per goal

20

15

Operators
per
subgoal

Goals per
scenario

10

5

Mean Percentage

mean number

25

30

20

10

0
CO/XO

0
MERC

SUB

MERC

SUB

MERC

SUB

LOC-MERC VS LOC-SUB

Figure 4: Phase 2 : Data for the two main top-level goals,
LOCALIZE-MERC and LOCALIZE-SUB. Left -- mean
number of level-1 goals per AO-Trial. Middle -- mean
subgoals per goal. Right – mean number of operators per
subgoal. (Error bars show the 95% CI for SEM.)
Compare with Figure 2.

Comparison with CSEAL Data
The Ned data replicated all of the major findings reported
in phase 1. In phase 1 we reported a relatively flat goal

DH

JO

Expertise

Figure 5: Mean frequency of LOC-MERC and LOC-SUB
goals as a percentage of total Level-1 goal usage for three
experience levels.
In contrast, enemy submarines are quiet and trying to
avoid detection. Hence they are difficult to localize. Most
LOC-SUB episodes end after the AO concludes that the
current data are not very good and will not get better
unless he can take some action to reduce noise or to
collect data that will disambiguate data already collected.
This decision to halt the current attempt to localize the
submarine is never cut-and-dried.

These characterizations of the differences between LOCMERC and LOC-SUB provide an explanation for the large
differences in variance (see the error bars in the middle
frame of Figure 2 and Figure 4) in number of subgoals
per level 1 goal. For LOC-MERC, localizing is routine.
In contrast, LOC-SUB requires flexibility to determine
either that the current data are inadequate to enable the
target to be localized or that the current best solution is
such-and-such.
60.00

Mean Subgoals

LOC-MERC
LOC-SUB

40.00

20.00

0.00
CO/XO

DH

JO

Expertise

Figure 6: Mean total time spent in LOC-MERC and
LOC-SUB goals for the three levels of expertise.

Acknowledgments

Expertise Effects
All expertise groups pushed LOC-MERC and LOC-SUB goals
with approximately the same frequency (see Figure 5). For
all groups, within-group variability overshadows the
apparent difference between the goal frequencies. Despite
the approximately equal number of LOC-MERC and
LOC-SUB goals, across expertise levels there were large
differences in the amount of time spent trying to localize
the merchant as opposed to the submarine (see Figure 6).
The inequality in total time spent pursuing the two goals
increases with inexperience.
60.00
LOC-MERC
LOC-SUB

Mean Subgoals

as schema-directed problem solving with shallow and
adaptive subgoaling. The top-level goals, LOC-MERC
and LOC-SUB, do not involve a fixed number of steps;
rather, progress on a goal continues until a reevaluation of
the schema determines that further effort would be wasted.
What is fixed are the number of steps (operators) required
for the terminal subgoals.
The phase 2 differences in expertise enrich our
hypotheses. The most junior officers use the same
building blocks as the most senior officers; that is, the
same terminal subgoals are used with the same number of
operators per subgoal. In contrast to the typical study of
expertise, our “novices” were experienced (see Table 1).
Very few officers switch branches of the Navy. Hence, our
novices had spent 7.3 years in the Navy with 3.2 years at
sea. All of their sea time was spent in submarines.
Where our novices differ from our experts is in their
facility at schema-directed problem-solving. Simply put,
the less experienced officers pursue bad data longer than
the more experienced ones. The experienced ones know
when it is time to give up on the current data set and do
something to obtain more or better data.

Susan S. Kirschenbaum’s work has been jointly
sponsored by Office of Naval Research (ONR) (Program
element 61153N) and by Naval Undersea Warfare Center's
Independent Research Program, as Project A10328. The
work at George Mason University was supported by a
grant from ONR (#N00014-95-1-0175) to Wayne D.
Gray.
We thank Brian Ehret for his knowledgeable encoding,
for his programming skills, and for his development of
the Ned simulation. We also thank LT David Soldow for
collecting the data for the Ned phase of the project and the
officers of the U.S. Navy Submarine force for their
participation, both as AOs and as consultants.

References

40.00

20.00

0.00
CO/XO

DH

JO

Expertise

Figure 7: Mean number of subgoals for LOC-MERC and
LOC-SUB goals.
As suggested by Figure 7, this difference in time as a
function of expertise can be largely accounted for by
differences in the number of subgoals. The Junior Officers
use almost twice as many subgoals as the most
experienced officers. Analyses not reported show that the
number of operators per subgoal does not vary with
expertise.

Summary and Conclusions
The similarity between the CO/XO’s in the two phases of
Project Nemo support our characterization of performance

Ehret, B. D., Gray, W. D., & Kirschenbaum, S. S. (in
press). Contending with complexity: Developing and
using a scaled world in applied cognitive research.
Human Factors.
Gray, W. D., & Kirschenbaum, S. S. (in press).
Analyzing a novel expertise: An unmarked road. In J.
M. C. Schraagen, S. F. Chipman, & V. L. Shalin
(Eds.), Cognitive task analysis . Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gray, W. D., Kirschenbaum, S. S., & Ehret, B. D.
(1997). The précis of Project Nemo, phase 1:
Subgoaling and subschemas for submariners.
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 283-288). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kirschenbaum, S. S., Gray, W. D., & Ehret, B. D.
(1997). Subgoaling and subschemas for submariners:
Cognitive models of situation assessment (Technical
Report 10,764-1). Newport, RI: NUWC-NPT.

