UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Transfer Along a Continuum: Differentiation or Association?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4sm651c2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
McLaren, I.P.L.
Suret, M.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1
CogSci2000

Transfer Along a Continuum: Differentiation or Association?
I.P.L. McLaren (iplm2@cus.cam.ac.uk )
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB UK

M. Suret (mbs22@cam.ac.uk )
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB UK
Abstract
There has been a revival of interest in the question of
the optimal training schedule for a difficult
discrimination. McClelland (personal communication)
argues that the optimal schedule is one which starts with
a much easier discrimination on the same dimension as
the difficult one, arranged so that the easy problem can
be made to gradually converge on the more difficult one.
He further argues, in agreement with Saksida (1999), that
the reason for this is that representations are more easily
formed during acquisition of the easy problem, which can
then be put to use in solving the difficult discrimination.
As associative learning theorists we are more familiar
with another account - that initiated by Lawrence (1952) which agrees that the optimal schedule is one which
employs a strategy of transfer along a continuum. Where
the accounts differ is in the mechanism for transfer;
rather than appealing to representation formation, this
account explains the benefits of training on the easier
problem in terms of the dimensional features / elements
that acquire associative strength and their ability t o
generalize appropriately to the hard problem. In this
paper we report experiments that attempt to distinguish
between these two accounts by manipulating /
deconfounding stimulus exposure and training. We
demonstrate the basic effect, and show that pre-exposure
to the stimuli that comprise the easy problem is less
effective than pre-exposure to the stimuli that make up
the more difficult discrimination. Our conclusion is that
this latter result is not what one would predict from the
non-associative account given above, but that it fits well
with McLaren, Kaye, and Mackintosh’s model of
perceptual and associative learning.

Introduction
Lawrence (1952) demonstrated that it was possible for
training on an easy perceptual discrimination to transfer to
a more difficult problem on the same dimension. An
example of the type of problem that he studied would be a
brightness discrimination between two rectangles in
similar shades of gray (hard version) or black and white
rectangles (easy version). Groups of pigeons trained on
these problems for the same number of trials can reach a
point where the group trained on the easy problem have
solved it, i.e. they have learned to peck at one rectangle for
grain and to ignore the other, whereas the group trained on
the hard problem have made little progress. If both groups
are now trained on the hard problem for a further number

of trials, i.e. the group previously trained on the easy
version of the problem are now switched to the harder
version, then the result of interest is that the group
switched from easy to hard acquires the hard problem much
more rapidly than the group trained on the hard problem
from the outset. This result holds despite the fact that the
total amount of training is the same for both groups, and
that the group that acquires the problem more slowly is
the one that has received more training on that specific
problem. This is the phenomenon of transfer along a
continuum (TAC), and is the subject of the research
reported in this paper.
The standard associative account of this phenomenon
appeals to the notion of generalization. The stimuli for the
easy problem become associated with reward and nonreward respectively, and then generalize to the stimuli for
the hard problem (e.g. see Mackintosh, 1983). This is
more effective than training on the hard problem itself
because it is so difficult to learn, which is taken to be
because the stimuli are so similar to one another. Figure 1
can be used to illustrate one possible instantiation of this
explanation. On this approach, a stimulus is represented
by a set of activated elements or units, a distributed
representation. Variation along a stimulus dimension such
as brightness will, for the most part, be represented by
different elements corresponding to different values on the
dimension, rather than the activation level of an individual
element being the primary indicator of value on the
dimension (c.f. chapter by Thompson in Mostofsky,
1965). Each element has a 'tuning curve' such that it
responds most strongly to a certain value on the
dimension and this response drops off fairly rapidly with
'distance' from this optimal value. Note that many
elements will be active when any stimulus with value on
that dimension is present, the coding is via a pattern of
activation. Learning will proceed via association between
the elements activated by a stimulus and other units
representing reward. We are now in a position to explain
Lawrence’s results. In the case of the easy problem (shown
top in the figure) the stimuli are well separated on the
dimension and there is relatively little overlap between the
patterns of activation that represent them. Learning
proceeds rapidly, favoring those elements which are most
active on a trial, and there is little generalization between
stimuli to slow acquisition of the problem. In the case of
the hard problem (shown bottom in the figure)

2
CogSci2000

P TTE
OF
A
VATIO
FO ONE S M

US

Easy
Discrimination

Elemental
Associative
model

Reward

UNITS B ORDINA PO ITION ON DI EN IO

VALUE O

UNI

DI

onfigural
on-associative
odel

ENSI N

BY ORDINAL P S TIO

O

DI

eward

NSION

}

Hard
Discrimination

on-associative
re-processor

UNITS Y O DI AL P SI ON ON D M NSI N

VALUE

N D MENSION

Figure 1: Stimulus representation on a dimension
for easy (top) and hard (bottom) discriminations.

Figure 2: Architecture for associative and nonassociative models of TAC.

the situation is somewhat different, in that the large degree
of overlap between the stimulus representations results in
considerable generalization between the stimuli, and this is
what makes the discrimination difficult. The elements that
are most active, and so dominate learning, are not those
that best discriminate between the stimuli. As a result
acquisition is slow. Now consider the case where the easy
problem is first acquired, and then the subjects are
switched on to the hard problem. The training on the easy
problem will result in exactly the elements that are the
most predictive of reward or non-reward in the hard
problem gaining considerable associative strength because
they are highly activated by the easy stimuli. Thus the
learning will transfer well to the hard problem, and will be
more than an equivalent amount of training on the hard
problem would have provided (because of the relatively
large activations of the elements concerned).
There is another tradition in psychology, however, that
appeals to quite different, non-associative processes to
explain the phenomenon of transfer along a continuum. It
can be traced back at least as far as the work of Eleanor
Gibson (1969), who conjectured that a process of
differentiation, contingent on exposure to the stimuli in
question, resulted in representations of the stimuli that
better enabled discrimination between them. Gibson’s
thesis is perhaps most naturally captured in terms of
competitive learning coding schemes that require no
explicit instruction to develop representations that capture
the structure of a stimulus set that they are exposed to.
Our example of such a system is that due to Saksida
(1999), which is explicitly designed to deal with
phenomena of the kind under consideration here. Figure 2
allows us to contrast Saksida’s model with the standard
associative account. Instead of stimulus elements being
directly associated with reward representations (shown
top), there is a non-associative pre-processor prior to
association to reward representations (shown bottom in the

figure). The model develops a representation of the input
at this intermediate, competitive layer, and, in Saksida’s
model, it does so in a way that drives initially overlapping
representations for two stimuli apart so that they become
more discriminable (i.e. differentiation). The interesting
possibility raised by such a model is that the explanation
for TAC might be quite different to that generated by the
associative account given earlier. Instead of appealing to
generalization of associative strength from the easy
problem to the hard version, it could be that training on
the relatively easy problem could develop a coding at the
competitive layer that meant that the hard problem was no
longer as difficult as would have been the case. Whereas
before the hard problem would have (initially at least)
given rise to highly overlapping patterns of activation at
the competitive layer, now the patterns of activation are
better separated because of the coding scheme developed for
the dimension whilst solving the easier problem. In a
sense what happens is that the process of developing
discriminable representations for the easier problem drags
apart the representations for the harder problem as well.
Saksida herself is quite definite on this...”One clear
prediction of the current model is that exposure to a pair of
similar stimuli will facilitate discrimination of stimuli
that are even more similar along the same dimension.”
and...”pre-exposure to two stimuli will facilitate
discrimination of other stimuli whose representations fall
between them on the competitive layer” Saksida (1999).
The only provisos being that the easier discrimination
should itself employ relatively similar stimuli, and should
be studied long enough for the stimuli to become
discriminable (i.e. for the competitive layer to develop the
necessary representations.
The strategy adopted in this paper is to contrast these
two accounts with specific reference to the issue of
whether or not TAC is best characterized as due to
elementally-based generalization or rather to perceptual

3
CogSci2000

Easy

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Hard
Figure 3: One of the four morphed face dimensions used in these experiments.
differentiation as a result of representation formation.
Experiment 1 demonstrates TAC using stimuli that meet
Saksida’s criteria for her models application. Experiment 2
then assesses whether the effect can be explained
predominantly in terms of representation development by
looking at the effects of pre-exposure to the stimuli used
in the easy and hard problems. The logic here is that if
TAC is mainly due to representation development, then
the training phase is effectively equivalent to a preexposure phase, and so explicit pre-exposure should
generate the same pattern of results.

Experiment 1
Stimuli and Apparatus
In all phases of the experiment, pictures of faces were
shown in the form of gray-scale images. These had been
created from standard passport photographs of university
undergraduates, which had been scanned into the computer.
These stimuli were presented on an Apple Macintosh
computer running Microsoft Basic. They were 3.5 cm by
4.5 cm and subjects sat approximately 50 cm from the
screen. The face stimuli for this experiment were
constructed by taking pairs of faces and morphing from
one to the other in 10 equal steps, giving a dimension
with 11 values in all. The faces in a given pair are chosen
to be similar (which aids the morphing process in keeping
the transitions smooth) so that neighboring stimuli on the
dimension are very similar indeed. Figure 3 illustrates the
morphed face dimension for one pair of faces, there were

four pairs of faces in total and the faces at 3 and 9 on the
dimension always constituted the easy problem and those
at 5 and 7 the hard version. All four dimensions were used
concurrently for every subject, with the assignment of the
face dimensions to the conditions of the experiment
counterbalanced appropriately. Pilot testing revealed that
the discriminations were difficult (even for the 3 vs. 9
case) but possible under the conditions of this experiment,
and subjects reported that their performance was hard to
characterize in terms of rules based on features (desirable if
performance is to be associatively driven).

Subjects and Design
Subjects were 40 Cambridge undergraduates and
graduates with an age range of 18 - 30. They were
randomly assigned to two equal groups, one of which
(Group Easy) was pre-trained on the easy problem for all
four dimensions concurrently for a fixed number of trials
(40 trials in total, five for each face), the other (Group
Hard) was pre-trained on the hard version for all four
dimensions for an equal number of trials. After the pretraining phase both groups were then trained on the hard
problem for all four dimensions concurrently (again 40
trials in total, five for each individual face). This was
followed by a final test phase in which performance on the
hard problem for each dimension was assessed without
giving the feedback used in pre-training and training. In
this phase each face is also shown 5 times. The data of
interest are the responses to the stimuli in this final test
phase. If the discrimination between 5 and 7 is better

4
CogSci2000
learnt after pre-training on 3 and 9 then this would be
evidence of TAC.

Procedure
In both the pre-training and training phases of the
experiment, subjects were told that once they pressed the
space bar, a constant stream of stimuli in the form of faces
would appear on the screen, and that their task was to sort
these stimuli into two categories. They were to do this by
pressing one of two keys ('x' on the left or '.' on the right)
and would receive immediate feedback as to the correctness
of the response. If they did not respond within a few
seconds (4.25 sec) they would be timed out. The subjects
were told that the faces were randomly and equally
allocated to either left or right key and that their task was
to simply find out and remember which ones were 'right'
and which ones were 'left'. Once the subject initiated the
experiment, trials were continuous. Stimuli were presented
singly, and each trial started with a '+' for 0.7 sec which
was then replaced by a rectangular frame for 0.2 sec. Each
face appeared and stayed in the screen for a maximum of
4.25 sec and disappeared once a response or time-out was
made. Feedback was then given for 1 sec, either 'correct'
displayed in the center of the screen or 'error' and a beep if
the wrong key was chosen.
After they had completed the pre-training and training
phases, subjects progressed to the test phase of the
experiment. Subjects were told to categorize the stimuli
into the two categories based on the judgments they had
made in the training phase. So, if a face had been 'a left
key stimulus' in the training phase, it was to be allocated
again to the 'left key' category in the testing phase. This
time no feedback was given. The procedure of stimulus
presentation was as before with the exception that feedback
was replaced in this phase by a 1 sec pause between the
subject's response and the proceeding stimulus.

Results
The results of Experiment 1 are shown in Figure 4. One
key, e.g. the left key, is designated the negative category
(a press scores -0.5 for that stimulus) and the other right
key the positive category (scores +0.5) during test.
0.2

Score

0.1

0.0

Key assignments were counterbalanced across subjects so
that the positive category has equal numbers of left and
right key responses (at least by design). The test score
indicates the average of the key presses across subjects,
and would be zero if subjects were indifferent to which
stimulus went with a given key, and ranges from +0.5 to 0.5. The group pre-trained on the easy problem (3,9)
shows much better performance on the hard discrimination
than the group pre-trained on that discrimination (5,7)
itself. That is, the 3,9 group has more positive scores for
its positive stimulus on test, and more negative scores for
its negative stimulus.
These impressions are borne out by statistical analysis,
in which all probabilities are two-tail unless otherwise
specified. ANOVA on the results with a between subjects
factor of type of pre-training (3,9, vs. 5,7) and a within
subjects factor of type of stimulus (- vs. +) gave an
F(1,38) = 27.75, p<.001 for the main effect of type of
stimulus and F(1,38) = 4.39, p<.05 for the interaction
between the two factors. The first effect refers to the fact
that the positive stimulus is, overall, given a more
positive score than its negative counterpart, the interaction
reveals that the difference in score between positive and
negative stimuli was significantly greater for the 3,9
group who were pre-trained on the easy problem. This
demonstrates transfer along a continuum with these
stimuli. Planned comparisons on the positive and negative
stimuli for each group separately reveal that both groups
are significantly better than chance on the test
discrimination, F(1,19) = 24.9 and 5.52, both p<.05.
Thus both groups can be said to have learned the
discrimination.

Discussion
Experiment 1 provides a convincing demonstration of
transfer along a continuum in human subjects using an
artificial dimension constructed by morphing between
similar faces. Performance on the hard problem after pretraining on the easy problem is much better than if pretraining had been on the hard problem used during training
and test. Nevertheless, both groups were able to acquire
the discrimination under the conditions of the experiment.
We are now in a position to ask if this TAC effect is
simply due to exposure to the stimuli used in the easy
problem, or if instead it requires that subjects be trained on
the easy problem for the effect to occur. Experiment 2
seeks to answer this question by pre-exposing subjects to
the stimuli of either the easy or hard problem instead of
pre-training them.

Experiment 2

-0.1

trained 3,9
trained 5,7

-0.2

-

+
Category

Figure 4: Results for Experiment 1.

In this experiment the stimuli are the same as in
Experiment 1, and two new groups of 20 subjects from
the same population are assigned to two different preexposure conditions. These are equivalent to the pretraining conditions of Experiment 1 except that a) no
response is required as it is pre-exposure and b) each
stimulus is shown for a fixed duration of 2 sec. This

5
CogSci2000
duration was chosen to ensure that subjects in this
experiment received the same or greater total time of
exposure to the stimuli compared to all the subjects in
Experiment 1. Thus subjects were pre-exposed to the
stimuli that constituted either the easy or the hard
problem, then trained on the hard problem exactly as in
Experiment 1, then tested exactly as in Experiment 1. If
the results of Experiment 1 were predominantly due to
exposure to the stimuli of a given problem, then the
results of this experiment should resemble those of the
previous experiment. If, on the other hand, they were
strongly dependent on the training element during pretraining then we might expect the results to differ in that
evidence for any TAC effect should disappear.

Results
The results of Experiment 2 are shown in Figure 5.

0.2

Score

0.1

0.0

-0.1

pre-exposed 3,9
pre-exposed 5,7

-0.2

-

+
Category

Figure 5: The results of Experiment 2.
Once again an ANOVA with one between factor of type
of pre-exposure (3,9, vs. 5,7) and one within factor of
stimulus type (5 vs. 7) was conducted which gave an
overall main effect of stimulus type, F(1,38) = 9.84,
p<.005, but no significant interaction between the two
factors (F<1). Thus there is good evidence for acquisition
of the discrimination, but no significant evidence that preexposure to either the easy or hard problem stimuli had
any differential effect. Contrary to expectations on a
differentiation account of TAC, the group pre-exposed to
the hard problem stimuli was actually numerically better
on test. Planned comparisons on the two groups revealed
that the group pre-exposed to the hard problem was
significantly better than chance on test, F(1,19) = 7.26,
p<.05, whilst the other group was only marginal, F(1,19)
= 2.89, p(1-tail) = .052.
As the two experiments are highly comparable in their
stimuli, apparatus, procedures and subject populations we
can compare them in a single analysis. When this is done
there is a three way interaction ((pre-trained vs. preexposed) x (problem, 3,9 vs. 5,7) x (stimulus on test, 5
vs. 7) that indicates that the effect of pre-exposure in
Experiment 2 is significantly different to the effect of pre-

training in Experiment 1. Finally, pre-exposure to the
easy problem in Experiment 2 was significantly less
effective than pre-training on the easy problem in
Experiment 1 F(1,38) = 4.83, p<.05. This is despite the
fact that pre-exposure in Experiment 2 was at the
maximum level observed in Experiment 1 (where the
fluctuations were due to different speeds of response during
pre-training).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2, taken in conjunction with
those of Experiment 1, do not support a differentiation
account of transfer along a continuum. The effect of preexposure to the problem stimuli is seen to produce the
converse pattern of results to pre-training, that is, with
regard to learning the hard problem during the training
phase, pre-exposure to the easy problem is less effective
than pre-exposure to the hard problem, whereas pretraining on the easy problem is much more effective than
pre-training on the hard problem. This pattern of results
strongly suggests that the advantage that accrues as a
result of pre-training on the easy problem is due to
generalization of the associations acquired during that pretraining.
One loose end in this experiment concerns the extent to
which pre-exposure can be said to have an effect at all,
given that the two groups do not differ significantly.
Some light can be cast on this issue by considering the
data from a previous series of experiments (McLaren,
1997) which used the same procedures and stimuli, but
merely trained the face discrimination (as here) but without
any pre-training or pre-exposure. Under these
circumstances the hard problem was not solved (mean
difference between the positive and negative stimuli was
only .037, F<1), and a comparison between these results
and those of Experiment 2 reveals that the group preexposed to the hard problem is better than the group
simply trained on the hard problem, F(1,43) = 2.64,
p(one-tail) = 0.055). This means that pre-exposure to the
hard problem has had a near significant beneficial effect
(i.e. we have some evidence for perceptual learning),
though this is not true of pre-exposure to the easy
problem (F<1).

General Discussion
In this paper we have contrasted two classes of model of
TAC, associative and non-associative versions. We should
make it clear that while we have found no evidence that
supports the non-associative account relative to the
associative version, nor do our results falsify the nonassociative position adopted by Saksida and others. What
is needed to rescue this account is a parametrisation of the
non-associative model that allows the generalization from
pre-training to dominate any effects of representation
formation and differentiation. In these circumstances the
two types of models would in some sense be different
instantiations of the same psychological theory.
Taking Saksida’s account first: the perceptual learning
effect seen in Experiment 2 would be due to representation

6
CogSci2000
formation and differentiation, as the initially overlapping
patterns of activation for the two to-be-discriminated
stimuli were pushed apart by competitive learning, and the
TAC effect would be due to generalization associations to
reward and non-reward formed during pre-training to
training and testing. The model would be constrained so
that the latter effect would be stronger than the former,
which is not a typical feature of this class of model. The
more natural account would attribute the difficulty of the
hard problem to the need to establish well differentiated
representations of the stimuli, a process that was aided by
training on the easy problem. It may well be that the need
both to model TAC and perceptual learning within this
class of model may impose unsustainable constraints on
its ability to function effectively, but this is a question for
future research.
The associative account offered here follows McLaren et
al’s (1989) theory of association and representation. The
explanation of TAC is the standard associative account
given earlier in this paper, but the explanation of the
perceptual learning effect seen in Experiment 2 may bear
further exposition. On this theory, exposure to two
similar stimuli that will be represented as overlapping
patterns of activation results in a decrease in the salience
(in this case this can be understood as the degree of
activation) of the elements representing those stimuli.
This occurs to the extent that they become predicted by
associations from other elements. The reduction in
salience will be greatest for the elements shared by the two
stimuli (the overlap) because they are encountered, and
hence engage in learning, twice as often as the elements
unique to either stimulus. The effect is that the elements
that make the discrimination difficult (because they are
shared by the stimuli and lead to generalization between
them) become relatively less salient than those that enable
discrimination between the stimuli. This consequence of
pre-exposure leads to the discrimination between the
stimuli becoming easier, as the distinctive features
(represented by the unique elements) of each stimulus are
now able to preferentially engage in learning. The result
is perceptual learning, in that the discrimination is learned
faster after pre-exposure. The effect is predicted to be
greater for more similar stimuli, which fits well with the
greater pre-exposure benefit for the harder problem. This is
because the more similar stimuli are taken to have a
higher proportion of shared elements, and so the effect of
reducing these elements’ salience relative to the unique,
distinctive elements of the stimuli is proportionately
greater.

Conclusion
Associative theories of representation development and
learning are adeqequate to model the transfer along a
continuum effect reported here. Non-associative theories
that appeal to competitive learning or some other
mechanism for representation formation are probably able
to instantiate the same psychological theory, but offer
nothing new in modelling these data. The challenge is to
find data that require this type of theory rather than an
associative account.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an ESRC grant to IPL
McLaren

References
Gibson, EJ (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and
development. New York: Appleton-Century Crofts.
Lawrence, D.H. 1952. The transfer of a discrimination
along a continuum. Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 45, 511-516.
McLaren, I.P.L. 1997. Peak-Shift on a Novel Stimulus
Dimension. Paper given to the Conference on Associative
Learning at Gregynog, Wales, UK.
McLaren, I.P.L., Kaye, H. and Mackintosh, N.J. 1989.
An associative theory of the representation of stimuli:
applications to perceptual learning and latent inhibition. In
R.G.M. Morris (Ed.) Parallel Distributed Processing Implications for Psychology and Neurobiology. Oxford.
OUP.
Mackintosh, NJ (1983). Conditioning and associative
learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Saksida, LM. 1999. Effects of similarity and experience
on discrimination learning: A nonassociative connectionist
model of perceptual learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 25, 308-23.
Thompson, RF (1965). The neural basis of stimulus
generalization. In DI Mostofsky (Ed.). Stimulus
Generalization, pp.154-178. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

