UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two Views are Better than One: Epistemic Actions May Prime

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70c0d6x2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Maglio, Paul P.
Wenger, Michael J.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two Views are Better than One:
Epistemic Actions May Prime
Paul P. Maglio
IBM Almaden Research Center
San Jose, California
pmaglio@almaden.ibm.com

Abstract
Epistemic actions are physical actions people take more
to simplify their internal problem-solving processes than
to bring themselves closer to an external goal state. In
the video game Tetris, for instance, players routinely
over-rotate falling shapes, presumably to make recognition or placement decisions faster or less error-prone.
Along these lines, an experimental study was performed
to test the hypothesis that it is easier to recognize a
two-dimensional shape if it is presented in two different
orientations than if it is presented in only one. In particular, we tested whether performance on a shape-based
video game task was facilitated by multiple views of a
shape, and whether game performance (an indirect test
of memory) differed from a direct test of memory for
previously presented shapes. Results show that indeed
task performance is both faster and more accurate when
participants see two views of a shape than when they
see one, but that more than two views do not improve
performance further. In addition, multiple views lead to
faster performance on the video game than on the memory test, but only in the earliest stages of training. We
conclude that Tetris players may rotate falling shapes
manually to see the shapes in more than one orientation, which leads to faster and more accurate placement
decisions.

Introduction
Studies of people playing the video game Tetris have
shown players often take actions in the external environment that are not strictly necessary but that serve to
simplify or speed up internal cognitive or perceptual operations (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio, 1995; Maglio &
Kirsh, 1996). Playing Tetris involves maneuvering falling
two-dimensional shapes into specific arrangements on
the computer screen (see Figure 1). It was found that
even as players become faster with practice, they also
tend to over-rotate falling shapes, leading to backtracking in the task environment as these over-rotations are
corrected. To make sense of this backtracking, Kirsh
and Maglio (1994) argued that sometimes physical rotation can serve the same purpose as mental rotation,
effectively offloading mental computation onto the physical world (for other examples, see Clark, 1997; Kirsh,
1995; Maglio, Matlock, Raphaely, Chernicky & Kirsh,
1999). Such physical actions—taken to simplify internal
cognitive computation rather than to move closer to the
external goal state—are called epistemic actions.
Recent work suggests that mental rotation and physical rotation share at least some internal processes (e.g.,

Michael J. Wenger
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame
mwenger1@nd.edu

Wexler, Kosslyn & Berthoz, 1998; Wexler & McIntyre,
1997; Wohlschlager & Wohlschlager, 1998). Specifically,
physically rotating objects can be shown to facilitate or
to inhibit mental rotation under certain conditions. The
epistemic function of physical rotation in Tetris, therefore, might be far more complex than is suggested by
the simple idea that physical rotation can substitute for
mental rotation. In fact, Kirsh and Maglio (1994) speculated that physical rotation might serve the epistemic
function of cueing retrieval. Because physically rotating
a game piece (which we call a zoid) in Tetris provides
the player two views of it (i.e., in each of two orthogonal
orientations), it is possible that seeing two views makes
retrieval of relevant information easier than does seeing
just one. This idea makes computational sense; for example, if one conceives of memory in terms of an attractor space, such as a Boltzman machine, the first presentation of the shape is like placing the system near the
top of the energy sink that represents the target shape
in memory, and the second pushes the system closer to
this attractor.
Of course, if shape recognition is orientationdependent (Tarr & Pinker, 1989; Tarr, 1995; Ullman,
1989), we would not expect multiple views of a single
shape to speed up recognition. However, it has been
shown that shape identification can be facilitated when
primed with orientations different from the target orientation (Cooper, Schacter, Ballesteros & Moore, 1992;
Srinivas, 1995). Moreover, numerosity judgments can
be facilitated even when test stimuli are not presented
at the same orientation as the originally learned patterns (Lassaline & Logan, 1993), suggesting memory for
the pattern may not require that the retrieval cue be
specifically oriented.
That an epistemic action might cue retrieval raises the
possibility that such cueing might be limited to specific
types of retrieval demands. In particular, the effects
of cueing might depend on whether the task requires
direct or indirect access to memory information. Demands for retrieval while playing Tetris can be thought
of as indirect tests of memory in that they allow for
effects of prior experience to be expressed without requiring explicit memory for the original experience (e.g.,
Richardson-Klavehn & Bjork, 1988). Tasks requiring explicit memory for the original event—such as old/new
recognition or recall—are referred to as direct tests of
memory. Previous work has shown that direct and indi-

Rotate
Translate

Drop

Filled
Row
Dissolves

Figure 1: In Tetris, two-dimensional shapes fall one a
time from the top of the screen, eventually landing on
the bottom or on top of shapes that have already landed.
There are seven shapes, which we call zoids— , ,
,
,
, , . As a zoid falls, it can be rotated, and
moved to the right or left. The object of the game is to
fill rows of squares all the way across the screen. When
a row is completely filled, it dissolves and all partially
filled rows above it move down. The game ends when
unfilled rows pile up to the top, blocking new zoids from
falling.
rect tests of memory are differentially sensitive to characteristics such as orientation, object symmetry, and other
physical aspects of visual objects (Srinivas, 1995, 1996;
Srinivas & Schwoebel, 1998). Thus, in the experiment
presented here, we used both direct and indirect assessments of memory to determine how effective previews are
under different retrieval demands. In addition, because
the effectiveness of memory cues generally depends on
the time that elapses between presentation of cue and
presentation of the item to be retrieved, we investigated
the effect of various delays between onset of the first
preview and onset of the test zoid by embedding the
previews in a sequence of zoids presented prior to test.
In this paper, we empirically test the hypothesis that
two different views of a falling zoid are better than one.
In addition, we examine whether such a potential benefit
might depend on the orientation of the preview relative
to the zoid that must be placed, and whether these previews facilitate zoid recognition and Tetris performance.

Method
To test whether two views of a falling zoid leads to faster
or more accurate performance in Tetris than does one, we

created a controlled experimental situation that shared
many attributes with the game of Tetris but that allowed
fine-grained control over the parameters of interest. In
our experimental set up, a Tetris configuration (i.e., a
Tetris board and zoid floating above it) is preceded either by none, one, or two previews of the zoid in either
the same or different orientations (see Figure 2). The
participant’s job is to quickly and accurately determine
whether the zoid fits snugly on the board. Thus, the task
creates situations similar to those faced by Tetris players
during an actual game, and also requires responses similar to those required of players during an actual game.
Participants spent three days (one hour each day)
playing this experimental version of Tetris. Separate
groups of participants were required either (a) to make
judgments about whether a target zoid fit in an accompanying board (the indirect test), or (b) to make this
judgment and indicate whether they remembered seeing
the test zoid in the set of zoids that were presented prior
to the target (the direct test). Between 0 and 2 previews
of the target zoid were presented in a sequence of zoids
prior to the target, and the orientation of these previews
(when present) varied relative to the target. As noted,
by placing the previews in a sequence of events prior to
the test, we were able to manipulate the interval over
which the preview would have to be retained in memory.

Participants
A total of 30 participants were recruited from psychology courses and participated voluntarily in exchange
for course credit. All participants reported normal or
corrected-to-normal vision and unencumbered use of
both hands.

Design
The experiment was conducted as a 3 (number of previews: 0, 1, 2) × 3 (orientation of the first preview relative to the target zoid: same, clockwise rotation of 90◦ ,
counter-clockwise rotation of 90◦ ) × 3 (retention interval
between first preview and target zoid, in frames: 0, 1, 2)
, ,
) × 2 (status of target zoid
× 3 (zoid type:
relative to the board: fit, not fit) × 3 (day of testing:
1, 2, 3) × 2 (type of memory judgment at test: direct,
indirect) mixed factorial design. All factors except type
of zoid and type of memory judgment were manipulated
within participants.

Materials
All zoids and boards were constructed from 20 × 20 pixel
squares. Squares were outlined by light gray lines, 1
pixel in width, and were filled in solid black. The background for all displays was solid black as well. All zoid
types were composed of four blocks. All receptor boards
were six blocks in height and width. Four receptor types
were defined for each zoid type, corresponding to four
ways in which the zoid could be snugly placed. Each
receptor type was used with equal frequency. Materials were displayed on a 33 cm VGA monitor controlled
by a PC-compatible microcomputer. Onset and offset of
each display was synchronized to the vertical scan of the

time
Frames before test

Test Display
(1)

X

X

X

(2)

X

X

X

(3)

X

X

(4)

X

X

X
X

Figure 2: A schematic representation of some of the
events in four frames prior to a test display in a single trial. The Xs indicate non-target zoids. (1) The
events in a 0-preview trial. (2) The events in a 1-preview
trial, with no retention interval (0 frames) between the
preview and the test display. (3) The events in a 1preview trial with a 1-frame retention interval between
the preview and the test display. Here the preview is rotated 90◦ counter-clockwise relative to the test display.
(4) The events in a 2-preview trial with a 2-frame retention interval between the first preview and the test
display. Here the first preview has the same orientation
as the test display, while the second preview is rotated
90◦ counter-clockwise relative to the test display.
monitor. The standard PC keyboard was used to collect
and time (to ±1ms) participant responses.

Procedure
Participants were tested on three consecutive days, at
approximately the same time each day, with each session lasting approximately 1 hour. All sessions were conducted in a darkened room, with participants seated at
an unconstrained distance from the monitor, and began
with a five min period for dark adaptation. Participants
were told that, on each trial, they would see a sequence
of zoids, presented very rapidly. At some random point
in this sequence, they would see a combination of a zoid
and a receptor board, and would need to make one of
two types of responses, depending on whether they were
in the indirect or direct memory test condition.
In the indirect condition, participants simply had to
decide whether the presented piece would fit snugly into
the board. Participants responded in the affirmative using the index finger of their dominant hand, and in the
negative using the index finger of their non-dominant
hand, pressing either the “z” or “/” keys on the lower
row of the PC keyboard. In the direct condition, participants had to indicate with a single key-press both their
judgment about whether the presented piece fit snugly
in the board and their memory for any occurrence of the

test piece (in any orientation) in the sequence of pieces
that preceded the target piece. Participants responded
with the index finger of their dominant hand if the target piece fit and they remembered seeing this piece in
the preceding sequence, with the middle finger of their
dominant hand if the target piece fit and they did not
remember seeing this piece in the preceding sequence,
and with the index finger of their non-dominant hand if
the piece did not fit.1 Speed and accuracy were equally
emphasized.
Each trial began with the presentation of between one
and eight zoids (“non-target zoids”) designed to be distinct from the target zoid assigned to the participant.
The actual number of these non-target zoids shown was
randomly determined for each trial. Each non-target
zoid was presented for 250 ms and then replaced by
the next non-target zoid; the non-target zoids in this
sequence did not repeat (i.e., all were unique). Following this, four zoids (between 0 and 2 target zoids, and
between 2 and 4 non-target zoids) were presented for 250
ms each. After the last of these were presented, a target
zoid and a receptor board were presented for 250 ms.
Following the participant’s response, a tone was briefly
sounded (100 ms) indicating a correct (880 Hz) or incorrect (440 Hz) response.
A total of 480 trials were presented in each session.
Participants were allowed short breaks after every 80
trials. Feedback on overall accuracy and mean response
time was provided at the end of each session.

Results
First, we asked whether having one preview improved
performance over having no previews, and found a pronounced effect in both accuracy and response time (RT).
When participants were presented with a single preview,
the resulting level of accuracy was significantly higher
(0.86) than when they were not presented with a preview
(0.53), t(1,59) = 33.85, p < 0.001. Similarly, when participants were presented with a single preview, the resulting
RTs were significantly shorter (869 ms) than when they
did not see a preview (1791 ms), t(1,59) = 2.01, p < 0.05.
Given that providing a preview had an effect on performance, we moved on to determining whether having
more than one preview had an additional effect, and
whether the provision of previews interacted with our
other experimental factors. Our analysis of the accuracy
data indicated that zoid, number of previews (1 vs. 2),
and retention interval all failed to have an effect on accuracy (all F s < 1.00). However, test type did have a
significant impact on performance, with participants in
the direct test condition performing at a higher level of
accuracy (0.95) than participants in the indirect condition (0.88), F(1,25) = 4.59, MSE = 0.05. Orientation of
the prime exerted a statistically significant effect on accuracy, F(1,25) = 4.01, MSE = 0.01, but the magnitude
of the difference between the previews presented in the
1

We did not ask for a memory judgment on trials in which
the piece was judged not to fit, as our primary concern was
with the effects of previews on accurate placement of pieces
in the board.

Figure 3: Effects of orientation of preview and block on
accuracy. Practice affects the probability of making a
correct response. However, whether the zoid was previewed in the same orientation or in a different orientation (as the test zoid) does not affect the probability of
making a correct response.

Figure 4: Effects of test type and block on mean RT.
Participants in the indirect test condition (i.e., deciding
whether the zoid fits snugly) respond faster than participants in the direct condition (i.e., deciding whether the
zoid fits and whether the zoid had been previewed) only
on the first day of practice.

same orientation (0.92) and those presented in a different
orientation (0.91) suggests that the difference may not
be meaningful. Exploration of these data across blocks
of experience (see Figure 3) suggests that the difference
between the two forms of preview was induced by the
fact that performance with previews in a different orientation did not improve quite as quickly from the first to
the second training block as did performance with previews in the same orientation, though this interaction
was not significant. Finally, as expected, performance
improved consistently across blocks, F(2,50) = 6.67, MSE
= 0.03, as can be seen in Figure 3.
Analysis of the RT data indicated that test type, zoid,
number of previews, orientation of the preview, and retention interval all failed to affect the speed of responding (all F s < 1.00). Although RTs consistently improved
across the experiment, F(2,50) = 57.56, MSE = 44847.84,
the form of improvement was dependent on test type (direct vs. indirect), F(2,50) = 7.03, MSE = 44847.84. As
shown in Figure 4, the direct test condition (which required two response judgments) was slower than the indirect test condition (which required one response judgment), but only in the first block of trials.

ports our hypothesis that two views are better than one.
Nevertheless, it was a bit surprising to find that three
views provide no advantage over two views. In terms
of the simple Boltzman machine model mentioned previously, this would mean that the second view of the
zoid pushes the system so close to the attractor that it
is trapped, and so the third view is rendered irrelevant.
Alternatively, the effect of the first preview might be to
accelerate the system toward the attractor state to such
an extent that a second preview provides no appreciable
additional acceleration.
Note that response time was speeded up by a preview
in any of the three orientations relative to the test zoid.
The benefit was not restricted to previews that shared
orientation with the test display. This finding is consistent with priming studies in which it was found that a
prime need not be presented in the same orientation as
the target to facilitate recognition or identification (e.g.,
Cooper, Schacter, Ballesteros & Moore, 1992; Srinivas,
1995). It is surprising, however, to find that different
orientations prime just as strongly as the test orientation does. One possible explanation is that participants
have stored multiple views of the zoids and so seeing one
view is just as good as seeing another (Tarr & Pinker,
1989).
The only difference between the direct and indirect
tests of memory was observed on the first day of training,
and restricted to the latency data. On the first day, participants in the direct test condition required more time

Discussion
Our results show that if participants are presented with
two views (i.e., one preview) of the falling zoid (a twodimensional shape), response times are faster than if only
a single view (i.e., no previews) is presented. This sup-

to respond than did the participants in the indirect test
condition. This difference may be easily accounted for
by the fact that participants in the direct test condition
had to make two response decisions and choose among
three response alternatives. The lack of a difference in
either accuracy or latency as a function of memory test
suggests that the benefits obtained by having a preview
do not depend on the manner in which memory for that
preview is assessed.
Returning to the idea of epistemic action in Tetris,
these data suggest that by rotating the falling zoids,
players may be able to effectively cue themselves, enabling quicker responses in a Tetris situation. Previous research has established various ways in which Tetris
players take actions for their epistemic effects (Kirsh &
Maglio, 1994; Maglio, 1995; Maglio & Kirsh, 1996). The
data reported here show that a preview of the falling zoid
at least speeds up performance on a Tetris-like task, but
the hypothesis that Tetris players over-rotate zoids in
order to speed up performance is not directly tested. It
remains to be seen whether actually taking the action of
orienting the preview (i.e., physically rotating the falling
shape) is a critical component of performance, independent of the presentation of the preview itself.
In the end, we can conclude that two sequentially presented views of the falling zoid lead to faster and more accurate performance than a single view of the falling zoid.
In addition, it appears that having this single preview is
sufficient to boost performance to something of a limit,
as more than one preview adds little if any additional
help. It also appears that the benefit of the preview
is robust across the retention intervals considered here.
Thus, if players are able to use rotations to self-cue, they
may be able to get all they need from a single rotation,
even one that is somewhat separated in time from the
eventual judgment. The payoff associated with a small
number of additional steps more than compensates for
the temporal and physical costs of executing additional
steps. The epistemic functions of physical rotations in
Tetris, then, might not be merely to substitute for mental rotation or to provide a visual means for matching the
contour of the board with contour of the falling shape,
but also to cue or prime retrieval from memory of information associated with the falling shape, enabling faster
recognition and faster placement decisions.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Chris Campbell and Teenie Matlock for many
thoughtful comments on a draft of this paper. Thanks
also to Khara Guttierez, Nicole Silva, Rhonda Czapla,
and Nathan Shaver for assistance in data collection.

References
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting body, brain, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cooper, L. A., Schacter, D. L., Ballesteros, S., & Moore,
C. (1992). Priming and recognition of transformed
three-dimensonal objects: Effects of size and reflection. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
Memory and Cognition, 18, 43–57.

Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31–68.
Kirsh, D. & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18,
513–549.
Lassaline, M. E. & Logan, G. D. (1993). Memory-based
automaticity in the discrimination of visual numerosity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
Memory and Cognition, 19.
Maglio, P. P. (1995). The computational basis of interactive skill. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, San Diego.
Maglio, P. P. & Kirsh, D. (1996). Epistemic action increases with skill. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
pages 391–396, Mahwah, NJ. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky, B.,
& Kirsh, D. (1999). Interactive skill in Scrabble. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, pages 326–330, Mahwah, NJ. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Richardson-Klavehn, A. & Bjork, R. A. (1988). Measures
of memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 39, 475–543.
Srinivas, K. (1995). Representation of rotated objects in
explicit and implicit memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 21,
1019–1036.
Srinivas, K. (1996). Contrast and illumination effects
on explicit and implicit measures of memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 1123–1135.
Srinivas, K. & Schwoebel, J. (1998). Generalization to
novel views from view combination. Memory & Cognition, 26, 768–779.
Tarr, M. & Pinker, S. (1989). Mental rotation and
orientation-dependence in shape recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 233–282.
Tarr, M. J. (1995). Rotating objects to recognize them:
A case study on the role of viewpoint dependency in
the recognition of three-dimensional objects. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 2, 55–82.
Ullman, S. (1989). Aligning pictorial descriptions: An
approach to object recognition. Cognition, 32, 193–
254.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998). Motor
processes in mental rotation. Cognition, 68, 77–94.
Wexler, M. & McIntyre, J. A. (1997). Is mental rotation a motor act. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
pages 808–813, Mahwah, NJ. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wohlschlager, A. & Wohlschlager, A. (1998). Mental and
manual rotation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 24, 397–412.

