UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ungrammatical Influences: Evidence for Dynamical Language Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3143b0br

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Tabor, Whitney
Galantucci, Bruno

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ungrammatical In uences: Evidence for Dynamical Language
Processing
Whitney Tabor

tabor@uconnvm.uconn.edu

Bruno Galantucci

Bruno.Galantucci@uconn.edu

Department of Psychology
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269 USA

Abstract
A distinguishing feature of self-organizing models of cognitive structure is that they permit incompatible structures to coexist at least temporarily. Here we report
on a connectionist model of natural language processing which appears to temporarily construct incoherent
structures. We then describe two reading-time studies
which reveal people exhibiting the same tendency. In
particular, both networks and people show sensitivity
to the irrelevant structural interpretations of the underlined phrases in (1) and (2).
(1) We did not think the company would re truck
drivers without consulting the union rst.
(2) The manager watched the waiter served pea
soup by the trainee.
This kind of sensitivity is absent in parsing models which
treat grammatical constraints as absolute because such
models lack a principled method of generating incoherent parses. Connectionist networks make the right predictions by using feedback and self-organization. Our
results push in the direction of seeking a solution to
the tractability problems of parsing by using dynamical
mechanisms in a parallel architecture.

Introduction

Current sentence-processing research tends to focus on
ambiguity-related processing in sentences like (1) { (3):
(1) The
mechanic maintained the
truck
was working beautifully.
(2) The cop arrested by the detective was chagrined.
(3) The cook stirred the soup with the tomatoes.
Each of these sentences has a structural ambiguity which
is resolved on the basis of structural or pragmatic information when the underlined words arrive. Reading time
and eye tracking studies show that when biases favor
the wrong interpretation initially, readers tend to slow
down and/or make regressions in the disambiguating region, which suggests that they either choose the wrong
parse initially or are biased toward it (see Frazier, 1988;
Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995).
Such phenomena accord well with a model of sentence processing which assumes people construct phrasestructure parses incrementally based on the input up to
the current point in time. On this view, the slow-down
in the disambiguating region is due either to extra time

Figure 1: The Zollner illusion.

spent on revising an incorrect parse, or to extra time
spent on revising the weighting assigned to di erent possible parses maintained in parallel.
Focusing for a moment on cognitive processes outside
of sentence processing, there is a good deal of evidence
that people are reliably vulnerable to certain adverse
in uences when interpreting complex stimuli. In the
Zollner illusion (Held, 1971|Figure 1), lines on a page
appear to be nonparallel even though retinal and depth
of eld information indicate parallelism. Similarly, in the
Stroop e ect (Stroop, 1966), a decision is supposed to
have been made ahead of time to interpret the stimulus
along one particular dimension of contrast (e.g. color),
and yet when the stimulus is presented, people are often
led astray by irrelevant verbal information.
These cases are di erent from the classic sentence processing examples listed in (1) through (3) in that they
show people temporarily failing to rule out an interpretation that could be ruled out absolutely, given the information at hand. What would be the analogous cases
in sentence processing?

De nition of Ungrammatical In uences

There is a class of sentences in which one parse of a word
sequence can be completely ruled out on grammatical
grounds and yet (we hypothesize) people are in uenced
by it anyway. The following are examples of such hypothesized \Ungrammatical In uences":
(4) a. They won't re truck drivers on Sunday.
b. They won't hire truck drivers on Sunday.

0 MODELS

2

(5) a. The manager watched the waiter served pea soup
by the trainee.
b. The manager watched the waiter given pea soup
by the trainee.
Each of the (a) examples has a familiar construction
within it that is irrelevant to the only grammatical parse
of the sentence. But by the time this distractor construction is encountered, it can be ruled out on grammatical
grounds. Our hypothesis is that people are in uenced by
this \ruled out" parse nevertheless. Thus the (a) examples should be processed di erently from the (b) examples which lack the distractors. In (4), the sequence of
words \ re truck" forms a familiar compound in English,
but coming on the heels of a modal verb, \would", the
word \ re" can only reasonably be interpreted as a verb,
not a noun. Similarly, in (5a), the second verb \served"
must be interpreted as a passive verb introducing a reduced relative clause which modi es the noun phrase,
\the waiter". But, taken in isolation, \the waiter served
pea soup" makes a sensible transitive construction with
an active verb.
Our hypothesis is that readers will be distracted by
these pockets of coherent structure, even though the
structures are incompatible with prior information.

Models

We nd that an often-studied connectionist network, the
Simple Recurrent Network (or SRN), behaves in accordance with the hypothesis that Ungrammatical In uences exist. This prediction distinguishes it from most
current models of sentence processing.
Elman (1991) showed that a recurrent connectionist
network trained by and approximation of backpropagation through time (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams,
1986) on word prediction could extract much of the
structure of a natural-language-like generating process
from a corpus generated by the process.
We trained such a network on the output of Grammar
1 (see Table 1). The network was trained on the task
of predicting next words in a constantly growing corpus
of strings generated by Grammar 1. The sentences were
presented to the network one word at a time. Each input unit corresponded to a possible current word and
each output unit corresponded to a possible next word
(Elman, 1990, 1991). The learning rate was set to 0.01
throughout and no momentum was used.
The network's output layer had normalized exponential units. During training, error on a given word was
thus de ned as the Kullback-Leibler Divergence between
the vector of network output activations and the output
encoding of the next word that occurred in the corpus
(Rumelhart, Durbin, & Chauvin, 1995). We stopped
training when the network had successfully distinguished
the underlying states of the grammar. At this point, it
had seen on average about 500,000 words in sequence.
Since optimal training of such networks causes the output activations to converge on the expected value of the
outputs given the inputs, we computed the KullbackLeibler Divergence between the output activation pattern and grammar-derived probability distributions for

Table 1: A simple phrase structure grammar for generating Noun Noun compounds and Noun/Verb ambiguities.
0.50 S ! SVP
0.50 S ! SNP
0.17 SVP ! to waste N[Obj] is unforgivable
0.17 SVP ! to bear N[Obj] is necessary
0.17 SVP ! to mail N[Obj] is costly
0.17 SVP ! to place N[Obj] is challenging
0.16 SVP ! to cart N[Obj] is toilsome
0.16 SVP ! to fuel N[Obj] is ignoble
0.17 SNP ! the waste baskets are large
0.17 SNP ! the bear cubs are round
0.17 SNP ! the mail men are persistent
0.17 SNP ! the place mats are at
0.17 SNP ! the cart wheels are shaky
0.16 SNP ! the fuel tanks are full

NObj ! baskets, mats, cubs, wheels, tanks, men
each string of interest. The average Divergences over the
six test and control sentences of the form (4) from the
grammar are shown in Figure 2.
We repeated the simulation on 10 networks that
started learning with di erent random initial weights.
The contrast between the Sticky and Inert conditions
occurred in every case. In every case, if we had stopped
training earlier (before the network sorted out the differences between states of the underlying grammar), the
e ect would have been even more pronounced: that is,
the network was overwhelmed by the local coherence of
the Sticky cases, initially failing to recognize when they
occurred in the in nitive context. The e ect was somewhat unstable if we trained the network longer on the
same materials, and sometimes reversed itself. We suspect that this instability might be reduced if the distractor compounds were not such a prominent feature
of the grammar. In real language corpora, coincidences
of the Sticky type appear to be quite rare. There are
no instances, in the million word Brown Corpus, of coincidental juxtaposition of the 20 sticky pairs used in
Experiment 1.
Following Juliano & Tanenhaus (1994), we make an
analogy between the network's error scores and reading
times in the self paced reading task (Just, Wooley, &
Carpenter, 1982) that is often used to study human sentence processing. The network model thus predicts that
readers can be distracted by irrelevant interpretations
of pairs of words, and that this distraction will lead to
higher reading times on the distracting items.
It appears that the Simple Recurrent Network is prone
to be distracted by Ungrammatical In uences. By contrast, standard models of syntactic processing, which
assume incremental construction of phrase-structure
parses, do not predict such e ects, for such models insist
on global coherence of each parse they construct. There

0 EXPERIMENT 1

3

Figure 2: Simulation 1: Divergence from grammarderived expected values. Sticky sentences contain irrelevant Noun-Noun compounds immediately after the main
verb. Inert sentences do not.
0.6
Grammar Derived Error

Sticky
0.5

Inert

suggests, will only make matters worse. But this impression may be misleading. The coincident emphasis
on feedback mechanisms, which allow ecient elimination of incoherent parses through competition, may be
just what is needed to permit a parallel processing solution to the tractability problem. Thus, the signi cance
of nding empirical evidence for Ungrammatical In uences is that it would push us in the direction of seeking
such a solution.
We turn, now, to empirical investigation of the hypothesis.

Experiment 1

0.4

Tabor and Richardson (1999) compared examples like
those in (4a-b) above.

0.3

Method

0.2
0.1
0
to

mail/bear men

is

necessary

is one class of hybrid Connectionist-Symbolic models
which may, with some modi cations, predict Ungrammatical In uence e ects: it is the class consisting of the
the Competitive Attachment Processor (\CAPERS") of
Stevenson (1994) and the Dynamical Uni cation-Space
parser of Vosse and Kempen (1999). These parsers
build phrase structure trees by positing variable-strength
bonds between nodes in a phrase-marker, and allowing
incompatible attachment possibilities to compete with
each other under a set of constraints which favor globally coherent structures. Both of these frameworks currently assume that words are brought into the \Uni cation Space" one at a time, and that some resolution is
reached before additional words are incorporated. Thus
they do not permit local coherences between successive
words to give rise to detached substructures. Nevertheless, it is natural to consider the possibility of allowing
them to do so. If one were to permit arbitrary local
bonding, then these dynamical structure-building models would probably (modulo the setting of some noise
and decay parameters) predict Ungrammatical In uence
e ects.
What, then, is at stake when we ask the question if
Ungrammatical In uences exist? Distinguishing properties of the SRN and the hybrid connectionist models
are the use of dynamical (continuously adjusting) feedback and self-organization. These models contrast with
chart parsers, pushdown automata and other incremental symbolic parsing systems which maximize the use of
constraining information at each point in time. Research
on incremental symbolic parsing has strained to grapple
with tractability problems associated with the combinatorial growth of parse structures. It seems, at rst
blush, that opening the door to the inclusion of local
coherences, as the Ungrammatical In uences hypothesis

Subjects
Thirty-two undergraduates from Cornell University
participated in the experiment. All were native speakers
of English. The subjects received course credit for their
participation. The experiment lasted for about 30 minutes. The data from one subject was removed from the
analysis because of a corrupted le problem.
Materials.
Sixteen target sentences and 16 controls were created.
Each target sentence included a clause beginning with
a syntactic pattern that strongly constrained the next
word to be a verb (e.g., Some people cannot. . . (NP
Aux: 7 stimuli), We decided to. . . (NP V[inf] to: 7
stimuli), on a proposal to. . . (P NP to: 1 stimulus),
need a truck to. . . (V NP to: 1 stimulus)). This next
word (labeled \Word 0" in Figure 3) was lexically ambiguous between a verb sense and a noun sense. In its
verb sense, it t naturally with the preceding and following sentential context, both syntactically and semantically. In its noun sense, this word formed a compound
with the word after it (\Word 1"), but this compound
did not t the surrounding context either syntactically
or semantically. In 15 of the 16 cases, the compound
was a Noun-Noun compound. In one case (\fail safe")
the compound was an Noun-Adjective compound. The
control sentences were exactly the same as the target
sentences except that Word 0 did not form a familiar
compound with Word 1. In 14 out of the 16 controls,
Word 0 was ambiguous between a verb sense and a noun
sense (the two exceptions were \attend" and \ unk").
This control ambiguity was important for ruling out the
possibility that any contrast we might observe between
target and control sentences might be due to contrasting
ambiguity in Word 0.
Procedure.
The sentences were presented using the movingwindow self-paced-reading method of Just, Carpenter,
and Wooley (1982). Readers read sentences one word at
a time, pushing a spacebar to see each successive word.
Reading times are measured as intervals between spacebar presses.
The 20 targets and controls were sampled randomly
and distributed among 80 ller items. The experiment
was preceded by a sequence of six practice trials.

0 EXPERIMENT 2: ENGLISH CLAUSES

4

Figure 3: Graph of mean reading time versus position
for Experiment 1.
450

Reading Time (ms)

Sticky
Inert
400

350

300

to

−1

Results.

WASTE BASKETS needed
STEAL

0

1

2

by

many

people

3

4

5

All subjects scored better than 80% on the
comprehension questions.
We computed the base 10 logarithms of the raw reading times to normalize their distribution. We performed
a linear regression with characters-per-word as independent variable and subjects as random factor. The analyses we report below were performed on the standardized
residuals from this regression analysis (Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994).
Figure 3 shows average self-paced reading times at
word positions -2 through 5. For each region of interest, subject and item means were subjected to separate
analyses of variance (ANOVAs), each with a single factor: Stickiness. The means were not signi cantly different across the two conditions at any word prior to
Word 2 or beyond Word 4. The e ect of stickiness was
signi cant in both subject and item analyses in the region de ned by Words 2, 3, and 4 together (F1(1, 30) =
10.77, p < .005; F2(1, 15) = 4.79, p < .05). The stickiness e ect was also signi cant in the subject analysis at
Word 2 alone (F1(1, 30) = 5.82, p < .05), at Word 3
alone (F1(1, 30) = 8.78) p < 0.01), and at Word 4 alone
(F1(1, 30) = 6.38, p < .05). Stickiness was marginally
signi cant in the item analysis at Word 3 alone (F2(1,
15) = 4.35, p = .054) and at Word 4 alone (F2(1, 15) =
3.51, p = .08).
Discussion.
These results support the claim that Ungrammatical
In uences involving two word sequences exist.
But there is an alternative explanation of the outcome
should be considered. An early indication of the existence of Ungrammatical In uences came from a priming
experiment on the modularity of the lexicon. Tanenhaus, Leiman, & Seidenberg (1979) found that even the
irrelevant meaning of a syntactically ambiguous word
(e.g. \rose") would cause priming for a short interval
(< 200ms) after the word was read in a syntactically

constraining context (e.g., \They all rose."). These results are naturally accounted for in a model that assumes
that an activation based lexicon operates partially independently of a phrase-building parser. An ambiguous
word activates nodes corresponding to all its senses in
the lexicon, and irrelevant nodes are only clamped down
when syntactic information is later brought to bear. The
results of Experiment 1 may re ect such lexical \automaticity", since the two-word locally coherent structures
are Noun-Noun compounds, which are arguably lexical
items (e.g., Mohanan, 1986). Perhaps the parser correctly chooses to treat these sequences as Noun-Verb collocations, but activation of the compound sense in the
lexicon creates interference which slows reading down.
Thus Experiment 1 does not decisively demonstrate
the existence of Ungrammatical In uences. The next
experiment is designed to probe for the existence of Ungrammatical In uences in a case that does not conform
to the lexical activation model's predictions.

Experiment 2: English clauses

Experiment 2

The examples in (5a) contain a potentially distracting
local coherence in the form of a clause. It is less convincing that clauses are stored as lexical units since they
occur in so many combinations and their meanings can
generally be computed compositionally.

Method.

Subjects.
47 subjects were recruited from classes and through
advertisement on the campus of the University of Connecticut. All were native speakers of English. They received either money or course credit for their participation. The experiment lasted for about 30 minutes.
Materials.
Eighteen experimental items were created. Each item
involved four conditions as in (6):

(6) The
a.
b.
c.
b.

manager

who

was

who

was

0
served
served
given
given

watched
1
pea
pea
pea
pea

2
soup
soup
soup
soup

the

3
by. . .
by. . .
by . . .
by . . .

waiter. . .
(R /
(UR
(R /
(UR

H)
/ H)
NH)
/ NH)

Each item included a noun phrase in a non-subject position which was modi ed by a relative clause in passive
voice. Two dimensions of contrast in the relative clause
gave rise to four conditions for each item. The relative
clause was either reduced (R) or unreduced (UR); its
past participle verb was either homophonous and homographic (H) with the corresponding past tense form or
distinct from it (NH). Relative clauses like these have
been extensively studied in the case where they occur as
modi ers of nouns in subject position in a nite clause as
in (7) (e.g., Ferreira and Clifton, 1986; Trueswell, Tanenhaus, and Garnsey, 1994).
(7) The waiter served pea soup by the trainee ate
ravenously.

0 EXPERIMENT 2: ENGLISH CLAUSES

5

Figure 4: Reading times in the four conditions of Experiment 2.

Figure 5: Interaction between Homophony and Reduction in Experiment 2 (Words 0 to 2).
550

700

Homoph/Reduced

Nonhom/Reduced

Homoph/Unreduced

Nonhom/Unreduced

650

O

X = Nonhomophonous

500
Reading Time (ms)

Reading Time

600
550
500
450
400

450

O = Homophonous

X
X

400
350

THE

WAITER

−2

−1

SERVED
GIVEN

0

PEA

SOUP

by

the

1

2

3

4

The evidence indicates that when it is semantically sensible to interpret the verb following the subject noun as
the main verb of the clause, readers have a strong tendency to do so. Consequently, they become confused
starting around the words \by the trainee ate" in a case
like (7) because these words disambiguate in favor of the
relative clause reading. In a case like (6a), however, the
syntax of the words prior to the reduced relative clause
precludes the possibility of a main verb reading of the
relative clause verb (\served"). If readers were to compute such a reading, then, this would be a case of an
Ungrammatical In uence.
We are looking for an e ect of Reduction in the Homophonous case. If this e ect obtains and the Unreduced cases are read faster than the Reduced cases, the
Ungrammatical In uences hypothesis will not be contradicted. However, it would be premature to take such a
result on its own as evidence for the existence of Ungrammatical In uences. Greater speed of processing is
expected at the relative clause verb in (b) simply because the syntax is more constraining at this point in
case (b) than case (a). That is, it is generally the case
that processing speed is faster at grammatical events
that are more expected (Jurafsky, 1996; Tabor, Juliano,
and Tanenhaus, 1997). Thus, we expect a slowing effect of Reduction in the Nonhomophonous case as well
((d) vs. (c)). For this reason, we have employed the
more complex 2 x 2 design. We expect that reduction
will slow processing in both cases (a) and (c), but it will
slow it more in (a) than in (c). If this interaction occurs,
then we will have convincing evidence of the existence of
Ungrammatical In uences.
Procedure
The procedure was the same as for Experiment 1.
Results. All subjects scored better than 80% correct
on the comprehension questions and all the data were
used in the analysis.

O
350

Reduced

Unreduced

For each region of interest, subject and item
means were subjected to separate analyses of variance
(ANOVAs), each with two factors: Homophony and Reduction. There was a main e ect of Reduction in the
region de ned by Words 0 to 2 (F1(1, 46) = 16.83, p <
.001; F2(1, 17) = 7.71, p = .013). There was a main
e ect of Homophony in the region de ned by Words 2
to 3, that was signi cant in the subject analysis only
(F1(1, 46) = 21.10, p < .001). In both subject and
item analyses, there was a signi cant interaction between
Homophony and Reduction over the region de ned by
words 0 to 2 (F1(1, 1) = 26.83, p < .001; F2(1, 1) =
6.99, p = .018). The interaction was also signi cant at
Word 0 (F1(1, 46) = 12.31, p = .001; F2(1, 17) = 11.66,
p = .004), and signi cant by subject at Word 1 (F1(1,
46) = 6.03, p = .018; F2(1, 17) = 3.85, p = .069) and
Word 2 (F1(1, 46) = 4.25, p = .045). Figure 4 is a graph
of reading times for Experiment 2. Figure 5 is graph of
the interaction. As Figure 5 indicates, Reduction slowed
reading times in both the Homophonous and the Nonhomophonous conditions, but the slowing was signi cantly
greater in the homophonous case.
Discussion
The existence of the interaction, with Reduction
slowing the Homophonous case more than the Nonhomophonous case, supports the Ungrammatical In uences
hypothesis.
There is one aspect of the outcome for which we do
not have a clear explanation. The distracting e ect of
the local structural ambiguity a ects reading times earlier in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1, relative to
the locally ambiguous region. We speculate that this difference in timing stems from the fairly unusual syntax of
the grammaticality correct interpretation of the Experiment 2 sentences. Reduced relative structures with ditransitive verbs are especially unusual, so readers may be
working hard to interpret the sentences in the rst place,

0 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

6

and an additional distraction from an Ungrammatical
In uence may easily disrupt processing. By contrast,
the syntactic structures of Experiment 1 are very common modal+In nitive or \to"+In nitive collocations, so
readers may not detect the distracting in uence until
it has had more time to \sink in". This interpretation
again supports a dynamical treatment of information in
parsing: some information takes longer to emerge than
other information.

Conclusion

We have focused on the hypothesized phenomenon of
Ungrammatical In uences: the syntactic parser is expected to be in uenced by local, phrasal coherences that
are incompatible with the structure of preceding syntactic material. Two experiments supported the existence of Ungrammatical In uences in parsing. Such effects push the theory of parsing strongly in the direction of dynamical, self-organizing models: Ungrammatical In uences occur because the parser is letting all local coherences among words compete to combine into a
maximally coherent structure, rather than deductively
eliminating parses based on top-down well-formedness
constraints.
Although the present experiments suggest treating
Ungrammatical In uences as a kind of interference e ect
(consistent with the class of Limited Resource models of
parsing). Ungrammatical In uences may not always get
in the way of parsing. Galantucci, Flores D'Arcais, and
Tabor (1999) found that when sentences required people to establish reference for a pronoun, and there was a
natural candidate embedded in the internal structure of
a compound word (e.g., The killjoy did not manage to
kill it after all.), processing was facilitated, even though
grammatically, the binding is disallowed. These results,
combined with the results discussed in this paper suggest
that the theory of grammar needs to take up in earnest
the problem of incoherent structure representation.
i

i

Acknowledgments

Daniel Richardson was a major contributor to the
early stages of this work. Many thanks also to David
Perkowski and Kate Finerty who helped with the design
and running of the experiments. Helpful comments were
provided by Ted Gibson, Neal Pearlmutter and the members of Pearlmutter's lab group at Northeastern University as well as by the members of the University of Connecticut Linguistics/Psychology lunch talk group.
Elman, J. L. (1991). Distributed representations, simple
recurrent networks, and grammatical structure. Machine Learning 7: 295{225.
Frazier, L. (1988) Sentence Processing: A Tutorial Review. In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and Performance (pp. 559-586). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Galantucci, B., Flores d'Arcais, G.B., Tabor, W. (1999).
Italian V+N compounds: evidence for syntactic processing. Presentation at the XIX Conference on Neuropsychology, Brixen, Italy.

Held, R. (1974). Image, object, and illusion, readings
from Scienti c American. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Juliano, C. & Tanenhaus, M.K. (1994). A constraintbased lexicalist account of the subject-object attachment preference. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 23(6): 459{471.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and
syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science 20: 137-194.
Just, M.A., Carpenter, P.A., & Wooley, J.D. (1982).
Paradigms and processes in reading comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 111,
228-238.
Mohanan, K.P. (1986). The theory of lexical phonology.
Boston: D. Reidel Pub. Co.
Rumelhart, D. E., Durbin, R., Golden, R., & Chauvin,
Y. (1995). Backpropagation: The basic theory. In
D.E. Rumelhart & Y. Chauvin, eds. Backpropagation:
Theory, Architectures, and Applications. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., & Williams, R.J. (1986).
Learning Internal Representations by Error Propagation. In Parallel Distributed Processing, Volume I (pp.
318-362). MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Stevenson, S. (1994). Competition and recency in a hybrid network model of syntactic disambiguation. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 23(4):295{322.
Stroop, J.R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18:
643-662.
Tabor, W. & Richardson, D. (1999). Ungrammatical
in uences in sentence processing. Poster session presented at the 12th Annual CUNY Sentence Processing
Conference, New York, NY.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Leiman, J.M., & Seidenberg, M.S.
(1979). Evidence for multiple stages in the processing of ambiguous words in syntactic contexts. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18:427{440.
Tanenhaus, M. K. & Trueswell, J. C. (1995). Sentence
comprehension. In Miller, J. & Eimas, P., (Eds.)
Handbook of Perception and Cognition: Volume 11
(pp. 217{262). Academic Press, San Diego.
Trueswell, J.C., Tanenhaus, M.K. & Garnsey, S.M.
(1994). Semantic in uences on parsing: Use of thematic role information in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 285-318.
Vosse, T. & Kempen, G. (1999). Syntactic structure assembly in human parsing. Poster session presented at
the 12th Annual CUNY Sentence Processing Conference, New York, NY.

