UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unity of Consciousness: What It Is and Where It Is Found

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5x00x765

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Brook, Andrew

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unity of Consciousness: What It Is and Where It Is Found
Andrew Brook
Philosophy and Interdisciplinary Studies
Carleton University
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1S 5B6
abrook@ccs.carleton.ca
Abstract
traditional appeal to introspection.) Consciousness studies
The unity of consciousness is our capacity to be conscious of a
quickly became a major player in cognitive research. At least
number of items all at once, in what could be called a single
a hundred new books and thousands of articles written from
conscious act. Such unity is found in at least three places:
both an experimental and a philosophical point of view have
consciousness of the world in general, consciousness of self in
now appeared. Interestingly, even though one of the things
general, and paying focal attention to aspects of either. In all three,
that immediately strikes almost everybody about
unified consciousness has both a synchronic and a diachronic
consciousness is its unity, relatively little attention has been
dimension. That is to say, consciousness is unified both at a given
paid to it in this burgeoning literature. Neither philosophers
moment and over time. Unified consciousness can be breached in
two ways: by splitting (into two unified centres of consciousness, as nor experimentalists have had much to say about it.
in brain bisection operations) and by shattering (as in some severe
Here we need to make a distinction. Under the name, the
schizophrenias and dysexecutive disorder). Studying it in its
binding problem, one phenomenon related to the unity of
breakdown conditions is a good way to throw light on it. In this
consciousness has received a lot of attention – our ability
paper, we will delineate the unity of consciousness, explore some
(better, the ability of our visual cortex) to ‘bind’ diverse
situations in which it breaks down, and relate it to some other
features of objects sensed by diverse parts of the visual or
mental unities.
other sensible cortices into representations of three1. IntroductionOne of the most striking features of
dimensional objects. Binding of this sort is not unity of
consciousness is that what is presented to us in it is usually
consciousness, not as I am discussed the latter. First, the
highly unified. This unity takes the following general form.
We are conscious not just of individual objects but of a
representations that result from binding need not even be
multitude of objects related to other objects in a multitude of
conscious. Many perfectly good representations of three
ways. I am aware not just of A and, separately, of B and,
dimensional objects affect behaviour and even enter memory
separately, of C, but of A-and-B-and-C, all at the same time
without us ever becoming conscious of them. Second, the
– or better, as all parts of a single complex object of a single
unity that I am exploring in this paper concerns multiple
conscious state. Since at least the time of Kant (1781/7), this
objects, related to one another in such a way that one is
unity has been called the unity of consciousness.
aware of many of them together, not individual objects by
There has been a huge resurgence of interest in
themselves. Contrary to the situation with binding, unified
consciousness in cognitive science in the past decade or two.
consciousness of multiple objects has received little
Here is how the philosopher Daniel Dennett summarized the
attitude of the nonphilosophical part of the cognitive
attention.
community two decades ago:
Consciousness appears to be the last bastion of
2. Breaches of Unified Consciousness
occult properties, epiphenomena, immeasurable
This lack of attention to the unity of consciousness
subjective states – in short, the one area of mind
notwithstanding, some clinical and experimental phenomena
best left to the philosophers. Let them make fools of in which this unity in fact plays a central role have received
themselves trying to corral the quicksilver of
a lot of attention, especially situations in which there is some
“phenomenology” into a respectable theory. [1978,
drastic change in unified consciousness.
p. 149]
There are at least two ways in which the unity of
He could have added that this was pretty much true of most
consciousness can be breached without unity being
philosophers, too.
destroyed altogether. First, there are the “brain bisection”
This situation began to change in the mid to late 1980s,
operations (commissurotomies) much beloved by
due to the work of psychologist, Bernard Baars (especially
philosophers, in which it appears that one “centre of
1988) and many others. (Baars developed the methodology
consciousness” becomes two under certain conditions (Nagel
called contrastive analysis, in which we compare the
1971; Marks 1981). Since the two centres coexist and are
difference made by performing a task consciously and
both active at the same time, this breach of unity occurs at a
without consciousness. This method gave researchers a
single time.
method to study consciousness much better than the
Much ink has been spilled on the question of what is

going on in the phenomenology of these patients. Some
theorists have even claimed that there is no whole number of
‘centres of consciousness’ in these subjects: there is too
much unity to say that they are two, yet too much splitting to
say that they are one. Some reason work by Sergent (1990)
might seem to support this conclusion. She found, for
example, that when a sign ‘6' was sent to one lobe and a sign
‘7' was sent to the other in these subjects (in such a way that
no crossover could occur), they could say that 6 is a smaller
number than 7 but could not say whether the signs were the
same or different. However, the interpretation of these data
is controversial. In particular, there does seem to be a clear
answer to any precise ‘one or two?’ question we could ask,
so it is not clear that Nagel’s no whole number view receives
any support from them. (‘Unified consciousness of the two
signs with respect to numerical size?’ Yes. ‘Unified
consciousness of the visible structure of the signs?’ No).
At any rate, since there continues to be unified consciousness, whether in what are unambiguously two centres
or in something less well delineated, we do not have the
complete destruction of unity here, though it is a breach of
some kind. Then there is the more controversial phenomenon
that used to be called Multiple Personality Disorder, now
called, more neutrally, Dissociative Identity Disorder. In the
most common variety, the units (whatever we want to call
them: persons, personalities, sides of a single personality)
“take turns” and when one is active, the other(s) usually are
not. This is another breach in unity without unity being
destroyed, in this case across time.
Then there are phenomenon in which unity does seem to
be destroyed. In both brain bisection and dissociative
identity cases, we have at most one unified consciousness
splitting into two or more – two or more at a time or two or
more across time. It is, of course, a matter of debate whether
we have even that, especially in the case of dissociative
identity disorder, but we clearly do not have more than that.
In particular, unity itself does not disappear. The unity may
split but it does not shatter. There are at least two kinds of
case in which unity does appear to shatter.
One is a certain particularly severe variety of schizophrenia in which the victim seems to lose the ability to form
an integrated, interrelated representation of his or her world
and his or her self at all. The person speaks in “word salads”
that never get anywhere, indeed that sometimes never even
reach the level of complete sentences. The person is unable
to put together integrated plans of actions even at the level
necessary to obtain sustenance or escape irritants. And so on.
Here, unity of consciousness appears simply to have
shattered.
In schizophrenia of this sort, the shattering of unified
consciousness is part of a general breakdown or deformation
of mental functioning: affect, desire, belief, even memory all
suffer massive distortion. In another kind of case, the normal

unity of consciousness is just as absent but there does not
seem to be a general disturbance of the mind. This kind of
case has been called dysexecutive syndrome (Dawson 1998,
p. 215). What characterizes the breakdown in the unity of
consciousness here is that subjects are unable to consider
two things together, even things that are clearly related to
one another. For example, such people cannot figure out
whether a piece of a puzzle fits into a certain place even
when the piece obviously fits. They cannot crack an egg into
a hot pan. And so on. The reason seems to be that they
cannot focus on two items simultaneously and so cannot fit
the two together.
The ability to unify the contents of consciousness, as these
last examples show, is central to all cognitive functioning,
certainly functioning of any complexity. Moreover, the
phenomenon once received a lot of attention. For example, it
is the centrepiece of Kant’s model of the mind (Brook 1994).
These facts notwithstanding, the phenomenon has received,
as I said, relatively little attention in recent work on
consciousness.

3. Two Kinds of Consciousness
Before we can draw out the morals for the nature of
unified consciousness contained in breaches of unity of the
kinds we have just sketched, we first need to say a bit about
consciousness in general. In particular, we need to make a
crucial distinction.
Current work on consciousness labours under a huge and
confusing terminology. Different theorists talk about access
consciousness, phenomenal consciousness, selfconsciousness, simple consciousness, creature
consciousness, state consciousness, monitoring
consciousness, awareness taken to be coextensive with
consciousness, awareness distinguished from consciousness,
higher order thought, higher order experience, qualia, the felt
qualities of representations, consciousness as displaced
perception, memes, virtual captains .... and on and on and on.
A terminology this florid, confused and overlapping is a
good sign that consciousness research is still very immature
science. For purposes of this article, we need to make just
one distinction: between what we will call simple
consciousness, on the one hand, and consciousness of self,
on the other.
Simple consciousness is closely related to sentience and to
being awake. It is (perhaps among other things) being in a
certain informationally and behaviourally responsive state to
one’s immediate environment. It is the ability, for example,
to process and act responsively to information about food,
friends, foes, and other items of relevance. One finds simple
consciousness a long way down the evolutionary ladder.
Consciousness of self is the ability to process and respond
in a similar fashion to oneself, more specifically, to one’s
own psychological states and to oneself as onself, as the

thing whose states they are. The latter form of consciousness
of self, the ability to identify oneself as oneself, probably
requires the use of indexicals and may therefore be restricted
to human beings and perhaps a few other species of primate.
The importance of this distinction between simple
consciousness and consciousness of self is that the literature
tends not to distinguish them and even to run them together.
Everyday English does so, too. We speak of someone
regaining consciousness – where we mean simple
consciousness of the word. Yet we also say things like, “She
wasn’t conscious of what motivated her to say that” – where
we do not mean that she lacked simple consciousness of the
world but rather that she was not conscious of something
about herself. Some theorists make this distinction but others
treat consciousness as either synonymous or at least
coextensive with consciousness of the second sort, what we
are calling consciousness of self. A few even occupy a
middle ground, those philosophers who talk about the felt
qualities of things as central to consciousness, for example.
They do not seem to hold that we must be conscious of these
felt qualities for them to exist as conscious states – but they
do not view them as objects of simple consciousness of the
world either.1 To understand the unity of consciousness, we
need to make the distinction. We need to treat consciousness
of self and simple consciousness of the world as distinct.
Why? Because even though the distinctive unity associated
with consciousness is found in both, it takes somewhat
different forms.

4. Unity of Consciousness
Indeed, we find unity of consciousness in at least three
places. We might call them unity of simple consciousness,
unified consciousness of self, and unity of focus.
Unity of consciousness in general starts from the intuitive
idea laid out above that we are aware of a great many things
at once. Here is a more informative definition:
The unity of consciousness =df. a consciousness of
objects in which a number of representations of
objects and sometimes also the representation
themselves are combined in such a way that to be
conscious of any of these objects and/or
representations of them is also to be conscious of
other objects and/or representations as connected to
it/them and of the group together as a single
complex whole of objects and/or representations.
i. Unity of simple consciousness
Unity of simple consciousness is the consciousness that we have of the world
around us (including, it should be noted, one’s own body and
perhaps even psychological states) as a single world, of the
various items in it as linked to other items in it. That is to
say, it is simply unity of consciousness as found in the
conscious representation of one’s environment.
ii. Unified consciousness of self
Here one is aware of

oneself as not just the subject but, as Kant put it (A350), the
“single common subject” of unified fields of representation
(and the single common agent of unified activities of
deliberation and action). Unified consciousness of self has
been argued to have some very special properties, in
particular that the reference to oneself as oneself that
generates it is achieved without “identification” – that is to
say, not via attribution of identifying properties or attributes
to oneself (Castañeda 1966; Shoemaker 1968; Perry 1979)
but we do not have room to go into that interesting issue
here.
iii. Unity of focus Unity of focus refers to our ability to
pay unified attention to objects and one’s own self. It may be
part of unified consciousness in general. Whether it is or not,
it is certainly not the same thing. In the two situations of
unified consciousness just explored, consciousness ranges
over many objects (or, in the case of unified consciousness
of self, many occurrences of becoming aware of an object).
Unity of focus is a matter of focussing on one such item.
What I have in mind is Wundt’s old distinction between the
field of consciousness (Blickfeld) and the focus of
consciousness (Blickpunkt). The consciousness of an item on
which one is focussing is just as unified as the consciousness
of many such items at the same time. If so, we find an
occurrence of unified consciousness within each of the two
sites of unified consciousness laid out in (i) and (ii). We are
talking, of course, about focal attention.
Note that, in addition to paying focal attention to
individual objects, we can also unite a number of
considerations in focal attention at the same time – desires,
beliefs, alternatives, probabilities, and so on – and integrate
them with, for example, available alternatives to reach
decisions and choose courses of action. We can then go on to
do the same with behaviour and resources, focussing on
carrying out the choice in the face of obstacles, conflicting
desires, and so forth. Moreover, there are costs attached to
not having fully functioning focal attention, as the dysexecutive syndrome mentioned above makes painfully apparent.
These remarks suggest that unified consciousness is not the
only form of mental unity, a suggestion to which we will
return briefly below.
Though this has often been overlooked, the unity found in
unified consciousness comes in two very different forms, no
matter which site we have in mind. The unity can consist
entirely in phenomena occurring at the same time and it can
consist in links of certain kinds among phenomena occurring
at different times. In its synchronic form, it consists in such
things as our ability to compare two items to one another, to
see how two items fit or do not fit into one another, etc. Diachronically, it consists in the ability to retain a representation
of an earlier object in the right way and for long enough to
relate the earlier object to some currently represented object.

5. The Situations in which Unity is Breached
Let us now return to the four breaches of unified consciousness discussed earlier. We can see that in every case,
at least one feature of unified consciousness as we defined it
is absent.
In brain bisection cases, there are, notoriously, all sorts of
situations in which a being in the body in question who is
aware of some represented objects is not aware of others.
Thus, for example, if the right hemisphere is asked to do
arithmetic in a way that does not penetrate to the left
hemisphere and the hands are shielded from the eyes, it is
easy to set up a situation in which the left hand will be doing
arithmetic while whatever controls the mouth insists that it is
not doing arithmetic, indeed has not even thought of
arithmetic today. And so on.
In DID cases, a central feature of the case is reciprocal
amnesia (with all sorts of variations). Again, this is a
situation in which a being aware of some represented objects
is not aware of others.
The same pattern is even more clear in the cases of severe
schizophrenia and dysexecutive disorder sketched. In both
cases, awareness of some conscious states goes with lack of
awareness of others. There is nothing aware of all the
relevant conscious states together.
In short, our definition seems to illuminate the situations
in which unity of consciousness is breached quite nicely.

6. Other Unities in Cognition
The unity of consciousness is far from being the only kind
of mental unity as our remarks about what can be integrated
in focal attention might indicate. There is unity in the early
stages of cognition, unity that consists of integration of
motivating factors, cognitive capacities, etc., and also unity
inn the outputs, unity that consists of integration of
behaviour. First, the early stages of cognition.
One of the more striking things about human beings as
cognitive systems is that we can bring an extremely wide
range of factors to bear on a cognitive task, e.g., when we
seek to characterize something or reach a decision about
what to do about something. We can bring to bear: what we
want; what we believe; our attitudes to self, situation, and
context; input from each of our various senses; information
about the situation, other people, others’ beliefs, desires,
attitudes, etc.; the resources of however many languages we
have available to us; the various kinds of memory; bodily
sensations; various problem-solving skills that we have
acquired; and so on. Not only can we bring all these elements to bear, we can integrate them in a way that is highly
structured and ingeniously appropriate to our goals and the
situation(s) before us. This form of mental unity could
appropriately be called cognitive unity.
At the other end of the cognitive process, we find an
equally interesting form of unity, what we might call unity of

behaviour. To act, we need to coordinate our limbs, eyes,
bodily attitude, etc., indeed in ways the precision and
complexity of which would be difficult to exaggerate. Think
of a concert pianist performing a complicated work.
And between the two is the unified consciousness laid out
in the previous section.

7. The Unity of Consciousness as Evidence
It would seem that anything as central to human cognition
as unified consciousness would have to play a role in any
serious attempt to understand cognition. This, of course, has
not been the case for a while. As has often been remarked.
until about fifteen years ago, as cognition was modelled in
cognitive science, it could just as well have been entirely
nonconscious.
Historically, the unity of consciousness played a large
role. Indeed, it is central to one of the most famous
arguments in philosophy, Kant’s “deduction” of the
categories. In this argument, boiled down to its bare
essentials, Kant argued that in order to tie various items
together into a single unified conscious representation, we
must be able to apply certain concepts to the items in
question, in particular qualitative, quantitative, relational and
what he called ‘modal’ concepts. (Modal concepts are the
concepts we use when we decide whether something merely
could exist, actually does exist, or [if this is ever the case]
must exist.) By far the most important relational concept for
Kant was the concept of cause and effect. Indeed, Kant
thought that he could tease a complete defence of physics as
a body of genuine knowledge out of the fact (as he saw it)
that we have to be able to apply the concept of cause and
effect to items in our experience if we are to have a unified
consciousness of them.
It also played a role in arguments for dualism. Theorists
otherwise as different as Descartes and Reid argued that
unified consciousness could never be achieved by any
system of components acting in concert. Give each of these
components a part of a thought or perception divided up as
finely as you please; the result will never be a unified
thought or perception. As James famously put it,
Take a sentence of a dozen words, take twelve men,
and to each one word. Then stand the men in a row
or jam them in a bunch, and let each think of his
word as intently as he will; nowhere will there be a
consciousness of the whole sentence. [James, 1890,
Vol. 1, p. 160]
The inference from this argument was that the human mind
could not be any system of components. Now, anything
material will be a system of components. If so, then the mind
is not made out of matter.
Remarkably enough, some version of this argument
impressed practically all theorists until well into the
twentieth century, despite the complete absence of anything

like an alternative account and even though no less a figure
than Kant poked a huge hole in it as early as 1781. (He noted
that unified consciousness being achieved by a system of
components acting together would be no more mysterious
than it be achieved by something that has no parts or
components.)
Nonetheless and whatever the merits of this argument for
the simplicity and immateriality of the mind, the unity of
consciousness did receive a lot of attention. And rightly so;
cognition of any complexity must be unified in the way that
consciousness is. Without the ability to retain representations
of earlier objects and unite them with current represented
objects, for example, the only language that we would be
able to understand would be single words. The simplest of
sentences is something spread over time. Now, unification in
consciousness might not be the only way of achieving this
unity but it is clearly a central way. If so, consciousness
being unified is central to cognitive life as we know it.
In some circles, the idea that consciousness has a special
kind of unity has fallen into disfavour lately. Davidson,
Fodor, Dennett, Pylyshyn and the Churchlands come
immediately to mind. The mind, they say, is modular (Fodor
1983) and most modules work out of the sight and control of
consciousness. Moreover, we often do things that we don’t
intend, act for reasons of which we are not aware, and so on.
Does any of this entail that consciousness is not unified? Not
at all. The most these observations do is to shrink the range
over which the unity extends. If something is out of the sight
and/or the control of the conscious mind, we should ask: out
of the sight or control of what? Unified consciousness. And
we still need to understand the nature of this unity.
Practically anything that could be said about the unity of
consciousness when consciousness was conceived in the pretwentieth century way as ranging over most everything
mental can still be said about the unity of consciousness
conceived in the twentieth-century way with a range that has
shrunk dramatically.
Yet few recent philosophers and even fewer other
cognitive researchers even raise the question of what the
unity of consciousness is like. This is strange; it hardly
seems controversial to say that we have unified
consciousness, though how far this unity extends and over
what can be debated. Indeed, without knowing what the
unity of consciousness is, it is hard to see how we can even
talk coherently about the situations so prominent at the
moment where unity is absent or breached.

of representations or whatever. On this picture,
representations could function much as they do even if, in
Nagel’s (1974) phrase, it was not like anything to have them.
They would merely not be conscious. If such a split is
possible, then the next question is whether consciousness
plays any important cognitive role at all, its unity included.
Maybe it is a free rider (Jackson 1986; Chalmers 1996).
Then there is a second camp. It holds, to the contrary, that
consciousness is simply a special kind of representation: a
representation of a representation, for example (Rosenthal
1991; Dretske 1995; Tye 1995).
Finally, there are those who hold that what we call
consciousness is really something else. On this view,
consciousness will in the end be “analysed away” – what we
misleadingly label ‘consciousness’ is something very
different from what we take consciousness to be like.
Perhaps it is competing information-parcels in a
Pandemonium architecture that have gained temporary
dominance in the struggle for cognitive resources (Dennett
1991). Perhaps it is self-monitoring transformations of some
sort in a multidimensional phase-space (Churchland 1995).
Whatever, consciousness is not anything like the unified
system of representations that both common sense and the
Kantian model of the mind take it to be like.
No matter what one’s view of the nature of consciousness,
and the three views sketched above probably do not exhaust
the possibilities, one will have to provide an account of the
unity found in it. Indeed, even if one holds that this unity has
been overrated and consciousness is much less unified than
theorists have thought, one will still have to provide an
account of this unity in those situations in which it does
occur. The kind of integration of properties and objects into
more complex objects of experience that we sketched above
is too central to be ignored.
On the other hand, the unity of consciousness as we have
defined it might not have much by way of implications for
which of the three views is right. If it is as genuine and
undeniable as I’ve urged, it may cut a bit against the third,
eliminativist position. But adherents of this position have
increasingly been treating consciousness as something real,
i.e., nothing to be eliminated, in any case. The unity of consciousness seems neutral with respect to the other two
positions. If so, curiously enough, which view of
consciousness we start from may not matter much when we
set out to understand the unity of consciousness.

References
8. Background: Theories of Consciousness

Baars, B. 1988. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness
Cambridge University Press
We will close with a different question: Does the unity of
consciousness have implications for the big debates about Brook, A. 1994. Kant and the Mind. Cambridge University Press.
Castañeda, Hector-N. 1966. ‘He’: A study in the logic of selfthe general nature of consciousness currently raging? There
consciousness. Ratio 8, pp.130-57.
are currently at least three camps. There are those who see
Chalmers, D. 1996. The Conscious Mind Oxford: Oxford
consciousness as something quite unique, the “felt quality”

University Press
Churchland, P. M. 1995. The Engine of Reason, the Seat of
the Soul MIT Press
Dawson, M. 1998. Understanding Cognitive Science. Blackwell’s
Dennett, D. 1978. Toward a cognitive theory of consciousness Brainstorms Bradford Books, pp. 149-73
Dennett, D. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown
Dretske, F. 1995. Naturalizing the Mind. MIT Press
Fodor, J. 1983. Modularity of Mind. MIT Press
Jackson, F. 1986. What Mary didn’t know J. Phil. 83:5, 2915
James, W. 1890. Principles of Psychology, two volumes.
London: Macmillan
Kant, I. 1781/87. Critique of Pure Reason. Trans N. Kemp
Smith. Macmillan 1927
Marks, C. 1981. Commissurotomy, Consciousness and Unity
of Mind. MIT Press
Nagel, T. 1965. Physicalism. Phil. Rev. 74, 339-56
Nagel, T. 1971. Brain bisection and the unity of consciousness. Synthese 22, pp. 396-413.
Nagel, T. 1974. What it is like to be a bat. Phil. Rev. 83, pp.
435-50
Perry, J. . 1979. The problem of the essential indexical. Noûs
13, pp.3-21.
Sergent, J. 1990. Furtive incursions into bicameral minds.
Brain 113: 537-68.
Rosenthal, D. 1991. The Nature of Mind. Oxford University
Press
Shoemaker, Sydney. 1968. Self-reference and self-awareness. Journal of Philosophy 65, pp. 555-67.
Tye, M. 1995. Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press
1

A full set of relevant distinctions here would distinguish among
consciousness of self, consciousness of one’s psychological states,
one’s conscious states themselves, and so on. We do not need to go
into the differences among these things here. For purposes of
understanding the unity of consciousness, it is enough to
distinguish between consciousness of self, on the one hand, and
simple consciousness of the “world”, on the other.

