UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Vagueness in Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3s50m1ms

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Gross, Steven

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1

Vagueness in Context
Steven Gross (gross2@phil.upenn.edu)
Department of Philosophy; 433 Logan Hall; University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
This paper argues that whether an utterance of
a vague term makes any contribution to
propositional content is context-sensitive and that
attention to this fact allows for an attractive
solution to the sorites paradox.

Introduction
A predicate is vague if it permits borderline
cases such that it’s neither clear that the predicate
does apply nor that it doesn’t.1 What, for
example, is the least number of hairs a man must
have in order not to be bald? Vagueness is a
pervasive feature of natural languages, but it has
proven rather resistant to theoretical delineation.
For any attempt to characterize the semantics of
vague terms (what they mean) and their logic
(what reasoning involving them is valid) must
yield a compelling dissolution of the ancient
sorites paradox, which is no easy matter. Here’s a
version of the paradox using the predicate
‘bald’2: Someone with no hairs is bald. But one
hair can’t make the difference between being
bald and not being bald. (That is, for any number
n, if someone with n hairs is bald, then someone
with n+1 hairs is bald.) So, someone with
1,000,000
hairs
is
bald.
Well-nigh
unobjectionable premises seem to lead by wellnigh unobjectionable reasoning to an absurd
conclusion.3 What has gone wrong?
The
enormous
literature
logicians,
philosophers, and semanticists have produced on
vague language over the last few decades has

generated a plethora of competing possible
positions, each with its own well-known
problems.4 These discussions have succeeded in
shedding much light on the phenomenon but have
not generated anything remotely approaching a
consensus on the relevant issues. So, let us
proceed once more into the breach.
In this paper, I defend an approach to vague
language and the associated sorites paradox that
emphasizes the context-sensitivity of vague
terms. A term is context-sensitive if and only if
its contribution to propositional content can vary
across occassions of use without any change in
the term’s standing meaning in the language.
(Indexical expressions, such as the pronoun ‘I’,
Previous
provide
standard
examples.)5
approaches have adverted to context-sensitivity
in attempting to defang the sorites,6 but they have
assumed that vague terms always make some
contribution to propositional content, whereas I
stress how considerations of conversational
coherence can affect whether, in a given context,
the use of a vague term succeeds in contributing
to content at all.
My paper has three parts. I first put forward a
necessary condition on the expression of a
proposition and suggest that utterances of
sentences containing vague predicates only
sometimes satisfy it. Then, I argue that, in
particular, the consideration of a sorites paradox
can result in the violation of this condition.
Finally, I briefly indicate some of the virtues
embodied in this approach to vagueness.

A Condition on the Expression of a
Proposition

1 This characterization is somewhat rough, but (as it’s

frequently noted in the literature) it’s difficult to
characterize vagueness in a non-theory-laden manner.
2 It should be assumed throughout that the hairs on the
person’s head are arranged in a manner optimal for
non-baldness.
3 The reasoning used is simply Universal Instantiation
and Modus Ponens. The latter alone suffices, if one
replaces the universally quantified second premise
with the appropriate conditionals. Note, in particular,
that the principle of mathematical induction is not
employed, though it (or some other sufficiently strong
principle) would indeed be required to reach the
conclusion that no one is bald.

4 Keefe and Smith (1997) is an excellent reader, the

editors’ introduction providing a valuable survey of the
field. Williamson (1994) is an indispensable
monograph. The literature on vague concepts has been
less well-developed and was until recently dominated
by degree-theoretic approaches. But see Kamp and
Partee (1995).
5 This use of the term ‘context sensitive’—common in
semantics and pragmatics—should not be confused
with its use in syntax to describe rules insensitive to
surrounding syntactic context.
6 See, e.g., Kamp (1981), Bosch (1983), Raffman
(1994), and van Deemter (1996).

2
Suppose a jar contains 100 color chips,
spanning red to orange in imperceptible steps,
and I ask you to grab a red one for me. Surely,
you can satisfy my request; and when you say
“Here’s a red one,” you express a true
proposition. If so, then it is not a necessary
condition on the expression of a proposition that

induce property-expression-failure. Leaving out
the connecting step, we have:

(1) the uttered predicates, as used,
partition the contextually relevant
domain of discourse.

No doubt these glosses are prejudicially
theory-laden. But I needn’t claim that mundane
cases force us to accept (1) and (2)—only that
they suggest them. It’s prima facie reasonable to
accept (1) and (2) in light of such cases, and to
that extent they are motivated. Let’s see where
they lead: the proof of the pudding is in the
eating.
If we accept (1) and (2), we will want to ask
when the failure to partition can result in the
failure to express a proposition: what
distinguishes the case in which I ask you to grab
a red chip, from the case in which I ask you to
sort all the chips in the jar? A natural thought is
that, in the first case, the lack of partition just
doesn’t matter: we may proceed as if ‘red’
partitions the chips, because we may ignore the
borderline cases as irrelevant to our purposes. If
something along these lines is correct, then it is a
condition on the expression of a proposition that

(2) a failure of a predicate to partition
the contextually relevant domain of
discourse can result in the failure to
express a proposition.

For there’s no reason to think that the predicate
‘is red,’ as used on that occasion, partitions the
chips in the jar.
But now suppose I ask you to sort the chips
according to whether they are red or orange. You
hesitate—at least, once you recognize that they
form a sorites series.7 I call across the room:
“I’m curious—is there an even number of red
ones?” You are nonplused; you’re not sure what
should count here as being red or being orange.
Perhaps you request some clarification. If I have
none to offer (we can assume I didn’t realize that
the jar contained borderline cases), you will be
unable to satisfy my request. Likewise, you will
be unable to judge whether the sentence ‘The
number of red chips is even’ would express
something true or false. Not, I claim, because you
are ignorant of the matter, and unable to rectify
your lack—but because in this case the lack of
partition results in the failure of the predicate to
express a property: an utterance of the sentence
would thus fail to express a proposition (would
fail, that is, to issue in something assessable for
truth or falsity).8 Of course, as competent
speakers of English, we understand the sentence,
we know its standing meaning in the language—
so an utterance of it wouldn’t amount to
gibberish; and we would know as well much else
relevant to interpreting the utterance, such as
which chips were in question. But here sentencemeaning and the available contextual information
would not suffice to enable the expression of a
proposition. Just as with reference-failure (when
a putatively referring expression fails on some
occasion of use to refer to anything), propertyexpression-failure thwarts the expression of a
proposition; and the failure to partition can

It is clearly a crucial question whether and to
what extent this idea can be clarified. Some light
is shed if we recast the condition as a constraint
on pragmatic presupposition—that is, as a
constraint on the propositions presumed mutually
taken for granted in a given conversational
context.9 The idea is that speakers, in using
predicates, act as if, or presuppose, that the
predicates, as used, partition the domain. When
they must also presuppose, however, that a
predicate, as used, does not partition the domain,
when the failure to partition becomes
contextually salient, then the resulting set of
presuppositions is obviously inconsistent and
thus incoherent. The recast condition thus reads:

7 I use the phrase ‘sorites series’ for any series from

(C) It is a coherent presupposition that
the predicates, as used, partition the
domain.

which we can construct a prima facie paradoxical
sorites argument.
8 I am thus assuming that the “epistemic” view of
vagueness, according to which borderline cases reflect
our often in principle ignorance, is false. Williamson
(1994) defends such a position.

(3) the speaker may proceed as if the
uttered predicates, as used, partition the
contextually relevant domain of
discourse.

9 For this conception of context, see Stalnaker (1974)

as well as other papers now collected in Stalnaker
(1999).

3
There is obviously much more to be said here,
but again this suffices to motivate (C). What I
have to say next will exhibit its attractions.

Application to the Sorites
I have been suggesting that whether sentences
containing vague predicates express propositions
is a context-sensitive matter. Many mundane
utterances of such sentences succeed in
expressing propositions, but some don’t—in
particular, those entered in contexts in which (C)
is violated. What I’ll argue now is that contexts
in which one considers a would-be sorites
argument fall into this latter class—save when
one of the argument’s premises is false or its
conclusion true.
So, consider a standard version of the sorites—
supposing the correctness of (C). Say, for
example, we have objects numbered 1, 2, 3, …,
5,000,000 such that each is F-er than its
successor, and we are presented with the
following would-be argument:
F(1)
For all x, if F(x), then F(x+1)
F(5,000,000),
an argument which is paradoxical if we’re
inclined to consider 1 clearly F, 5,000,000 clearly
not F, and the difference among neighbors too
small to make a difference.10
What can we say on my approach? If we
eschew logical deviancy, to attempt to assess the
crucial sorites premise is to attempt to assess as
well its negation ‘There exists an x such that F(x)
but not F(x+1).’ But, in a setting in which the
objects are ordered as above, to consider that just
is to consider what would be the assertion of a
partition: one is asking whether there’s a last x
that to which ‘F’ applies. Whether there is in fact
a partition thus matters here; the lack of one, if
such there be, cannot be ignored. Considering a
sorites, that is, renders it salient whether there is
a partition. So, when there is not one, the speaker
cannot simply proceed as if there were. The
condition on the expression of a proposition is
thus violated; attempting to use the offending
predicate in this way fails to issue in an argument
at all. Indeed, no use of the predicate in this
context will contribute to the expression of a
proposition.
That’s what happens when there’s not a
partition. But what about when there is one?
Then, of course, one of the premises will be false

10 I label the second premise the ‘sorites’ premise and

shall refer to ‘F’ as the ‘sorites’ predicate.

or the conclusion true. If either the predicate’s
extension or its complement is empty, there’s
trivially a partition: if the former (if no x is F),
then the first premise is false, and if the latter (if
all x are F), the conclusion is true. If neither is
empty—if it’s not the case that, for either one
side or the other, everything in the domain falls
in it—there is then a non-trivial partition, but
then the sorites premise is false: there is an x
such that F(x), but not F(x+1).
In sum, when the sorites predicate does not
partition the domain, sentences containing it
cannot express propositions and so no argument
is presented; an argument is indeed presented
when the predicate does partition the domain, but
then only one that is straightforwardly unsound.
The dissolution of the sorites thus follows fairly
directly from acceptance of (C).
Indeed, the dissolution is so neat that one
might reasonably wonder whether I can explain
the force, however illusory, the paradoxical
argument seems to possess. Let me try.
So, if the sorites is correctly dissolved along
these lines, why do we nonetheless feel the force
of the argument? A first point to note is that there
is a side to us (or at least to many of us) that does
not feel the force, at least not always. We are, I
suggested, nonplussed in situations where (C) is
violated; we feel that something is awry. The
thought that vagueness usually just doesn’t
matter—and that the puzzles to which it
putatively gives rise somehow fall into the
category of “don’t-cares”—is quite natural: at
least it’s certainly one I frequently encounter.
This, I think, is an important datum—and it’s
well-accounted for by the present approach. The
view is thus consistent with—and indeed perhaps
explains—an aspect of the phenomenology, if
you will, of vague language use.
But yet those premises seem true and that
reasoning valid. Especially those of us whom the
sorites has “intermittently obsessed for years”11
will want to know how a non-argument could
have kept us awake so many nights. There are
really two facts that need explaining: first, why
the sorites seems to have force prior to exposure
to my diagnosis, and, second, why this force
persists even if one does adopt this approach.
Well, the reasoning is valid in the following
sense: the argument has the syntactic form of a
valid inference schema, one such that if its
premises express true propositions and if, in the
course of the reasoning, there is no equivocationinducing context-shift, then the reasoning
11I borrow this excellent description of philosophical
pathology from an unpublished paper on scepticism by
Rogers Albritton.

4
preserves truth. But what we have just seen is
that there is no one context in which the premises
express truths and the conclusion a falsehood. If
it can seem otherwise, this is in part because, in
our attempt charitably to interpret these
sentences—to project them into an appropriate
context—it is all too easy to conflate the sorites
premise, in which the predicate is used, and the
meta-linguistic claim that the predicate fails to
partition the domain.12
Note further that this urge to construct an
appropriate context is to an extent beyond our
conscious control. We just can’t help trying to
make sense of what we perceive as linguistic
tokens; we typically exercise our interpretive
capacities automatically, almost as a reflex.13 In
particular, this is true of our ability to track
contextual features relevant to the understanding
of utterances of context-sensitive sentences.
Indeed, this is a necessity imposed by nature’s
design constraints: we simply would not be able
to speak, and cognize generally, with the realtime facility we do possess, if the exercise of the
requisite capacities required more conscious
reflection. Lacking reflective awareness of the
full extent of our reliance on contextual cues, we
are nonplussed when our reflexive attempts to
project a sentence into an appropriate context
founders.14 And even if we consciously conclude
that our inability to identify an appropriate
context for the sorites is owing to the absence of
such a context, not to our ignorance or
inadequacy, this doesn’t mean that the would-be
argument loses all force, psychologically
speaking: again, the automatic nature of our
interpretive skills places them to a certain extent
beyond our control. We might thus compare the
persistence of the sorites with that of the MüllerLyer optical illusion.15
12Further interference is caused by the similarity to the
claim that for all x, if F(x), then there is prima facie
reason to believe that F(x+1). Cf. Travis (1985).
13Cf. Fodor (1983)’s dedication.
14Note that this failure does not so readily flummox us
when the dependency upon context is more obvious—
as when a deranged person yells at a ‘you’ who clearly
isn’t there.
15The comparison needn’t be pushed too far in order
to make its point. In particular, I don’t mean to imply
that there exists something like linguistic experience,
analogous to visual or auditory experience—though, of
course, the comprehension of what is said by particular
utterances requires sensory experience of some sort.
Another possible point of disanalogy is that whereas
the Müller-Lyer illusion arises from contingent
features of our visual system, it is perhaps arguable
that the kind of cognitive design constraints that power
the sorites are not specific to our species, or even to

Some Virtues of this Approach
We now have a first reason for finding our
condition attractive: it yields an attractive
solution to the sorites. I’ll use the space
remaining to indicate briefly a few further virtues
of the present approach.
A. It is not uncommon for responses to
paradoxes (and not just responses to the sorites)
to call forth the complaint that they are
unmotivated and unilluminating, mere ad hoc
tricks tailored to finesse a local problem. The
present approach, however, is not open to this
charge. I have already claimed that our condition
on the expression of a proposition is motivated. If
this is right, then our response to the sorites is to
that extent motivated as well. I have also already
shown how one can locate our condition in the
broader theoretical framework that identifies a
context of utterance with a set of pragmatic
presuppositions. This effects a unification of
otherwise disparate phenomena and enables a
perspicuous description of their interaction. I’ll
now indicate two further ways in which this
approach finds place in a more general
perspective and hence helps illuminate the
phenomena in question.
First, the approach readily generalizes to
various other, prima facie related puzzles. This is
because the presence of vagueness is not the only
reason why a predicate may fail to partition a
domain. There are, for example, predicates
whose application may depend upon a
contextually varying combination of conditions
(with contextually varying weights). Hard cases,
in which these conditions of application seem
insufficient (is coffee food?), may likewise be
seen as violating our condition.16 What’s more,
we may see such puzzles as the problem of the
many and those surrounding vague identity as
involving referential indeterminacy closely
correlated to the failure of certain predicates to
partition the domain. It seems undeniable, for
instance, that a competent speaker can, on some
occasion, refer to a desk; but it can seem
impossible to say which of the many candidate
collections of molecules is, or constitutes, the
desk to which she refers. But perhaps this is a
bad question: that the predicate ‘is a part of the
desk’ fails to partition the domain, though
irrelevant normally, can block the expression of a

those similarly constituted or organized, but rather
apply to all (finite) rational agents.
16 The relevant phenomenon goes by many names. I
borrow the coffee example from Sorenson (1991) who
labels it ‘conflict’ vagueness.

5
proposition in cases where it matters, and this is
arguably correlated with, if not explanatory of,
‘the desk’’s contextually varying ability to
refer.17 Perhaps these brief remarks are
insufficient to convince, but they do at least
indicate how we may exploit the fact that our
condition adverts to matters broader than
vagueness to illuminate a variety of puzzling
phenomena. The solution to the sorites would
thus follow as but one consequence of a more
general framework.
Second, recognizing our condition on the
expression of a proposition helps illuminate what
we might label the dynamics of vague language
use. I don’t have space to go much into these
matters here, but the basic point is that the
violation of (C) puts pressure on speakers to
adjust their use of the relevant predicate so as to
restore (C)’s satisfaction. Among the more
obvious options is to sharpen the offending
vague predicate. As your boss, for example, I
might settle borderline cases by simply
stipulating that chips shall count as red, for the
purposes at hand, only if they exhibit such-andsuch precisely characterized reflectance patterns.
Now, the amenability of vague terms to such
sharpening is an aspect of their standing
linguistic meaning: vague terms are contextsensitive in that they may express different
properties on different occasions of use,
depending on the standards of precision in play.
(For example, the contextually relevant standards
of precision for being too young can shift,
expand, and contract depending on whether
we’re discussing whether she may read from the
Torah, drive a car, or stay up to watch the final
election returns.) Sentences containing vague
predicates are thus not only context-sensitive as
to whether they express a proposition (as I urge
above), they are of course also context-sensitive
as to what proposition they express, when they
express a proposition at all. And these two facets
of their context-sensitivity interact, in that it is
because of the latter that a speaker can adjust the
context so as to avoid the failure to express a
proposition allowed by the former. Adjusting a
context to sharpen a predicate is clearly subject
not only to semantic constraints but more
generally to constraints of reasonableness. Just
what these constraints are is a complex matter—
but it is only the recognition of (C) as a condition
on the expression of a proposition that allows us
a purchase here at all.
B. Another common pitfall responses to the
sorites must avoid is the problem of higher-order
17 For the problem of the many, see Unger (1980). On

vague identity, see Evans (1978).

vagueness. On my proposal, it is the salience of
the failure to partition that forces us into an
incoherent context: but is there, in a given sorites
series, a first object the salience of which effects
this context-shift? In effect, we are putting
forward a meta-linguistic sorites: consider
utterances of the sentences ‘One grain does not
constitute a heap,’ ‘Two grains do not constitute
a heap,’ ‘Three grains do not constitute a heap,’ .
. . —which is the first utterance that fails to
express a proposition?
My view, however, yields a natural answer to
such questions. The predicate ‘expresses a
proposition’ is itself vague, and so, as with all
vague terms, sentences containing it will fail to
express propositions when the predicate’s failure
to partition the domain cannot be ignored.
Higher-order vagueness is thus reflected on this
approach in the vagueness of the terms used to
describe language use generally (and thus used to
describe vagueness in particular).
Of course, it should only be expected that there
be vagueness here too: why should the language
used to describe language be immune to the
vagueness that infects practically all empirical
terms? Indeed it would be extremely surprising,
if things were otherwise; the precision of this one
region of language would cry out for explanation.
But, in fact, as the meta-linguistic sorites itself
demonstrates, there are borderline cases of
expressing a proposition: a realistic view must
therefore find proper place for them, rather than
positing answers where none are to be had. Given
that this region of language does contain
vagueness, it is thus a virtue of my view that it
covers these cases as part of a uniform treatment.
(We also have here a further example of
illumination: it is instructive to see how firstorder vagueness among terms generally is among
the sources of that vagueness to which terms
used to describe language use in particular are
prone.)
C. I have space to mention but one more virtue
my approach possesses—viz., the fact that it
avoids those offenses to common sense
characteristic of much discussion of the sorites.
If we may measure a puzzle’s difficulty by the
prima facie absurdity of the sincerely and ably
defended responses it elicits, then it is clear that
the sorites ranks frustratingly high among its
philosophical peers. Nihilism (the view that
vague predicates are empty) provides the most
extreme example, but there are also, for instance,
the claims that contradictions are half-true,
typically
endorsed
by
degree-theoretic
approaches; that vagueness is but an epistemic
phenomenon, reflecting our (often in principle)
ignorance of borderlines; and that vagueness does

6
not exist at higher-orders—there is always a
sharp line between the clear and gray ranges of a
predicate’s application—to which at least simpler
versions of supervaluationism are committed.18
Indeed, it is a common sentiment among writers
on vagueness that any position will exact a
price—so formidable is the puzzle. But the
suggestion I have explored, as far as I have been
able to determine, is an exception. If I am right
that my view better avoids offending common
sense than its competitors, it obviously possesses
in that respect an enormous advantage.
I hasten to add that I do believe that my
approach brings in tow some surprising
theoretical commitments. One, which is obvious,
is that one can express a proposition without the
uttered predicates being associated with a
determinate extension. So, propositions can’t be
what many people take them to be. Another,
which I did not have space to discuss here, is
that, on my view, the phenomenon of vagueness
imposes limits on our ability to survey our
semantic competence: it restricts the propositions
expressible within any given context and thus the
propositions available for the construction of
truth-conditions, and it likewise inhibits our
ability to isolate, on the one hand, the
contribution to content of linguistic meaning,
from, on the other, the contribution of context. A
desire to avoid these consequences would no
doubt constitute a reason to resist my approach.
But to question certain highly theoretical claims
is not to maintain a prima facie absurd view. I
would thus turn matters around: if it is only those
assumptions that sustain the sorites paradox, then
we have an argument for why those assumptions
have to go. I won’t go so far as to claim this
upshot as a further virtue of my view, but it
certainly adds to its interest.19

Acknowledgements
I thank the many people who have helped me
think about this material, especially Warren
Goldfarb, Richard Heck, and Ian Proops.

References
Ballmer, T. T. and M. Pinkal, eds. (1983).
Approaching Vagueness (North-Holland).
Bosch, Peter (1983). “‘Vagueness’ is ContextDependence. A Solution to the Sorites
Paradox,” in Ballmer and Pinkal (1983).
Evans, Gareth (1978). “Can There Be Vague
Objects?” Analysis 38.
18 For details, see the works cited in footnote 1.
19 I discuss many of the issues raised above at greater

length in Gross (1998, chap. IV).

Fodor, Jerry (1983). The Modularity of Mind
(MIT).
French, P., T. Uehling, and H. Wettstein (1980).
Midwest Studies in Philosophy: Studies in
Metaphysics 4 (Minnesota).
Gross, Steven (1998). Essays on Linguistic
Context-Sensitivity and its Philosophical
Significance
(Doctoral
Dissertation,
Department
of
Philosophy,
Harvard
University).
Kamp, Hans (1981). “The Paradox of the Heap,”
in Mönnich (1981).
Kamp, Hans and Barbara Partee (1995).
“Prototype Theory and Compositionality,”
Cognition 57.
Kanawaza, M., C. Piñon, and H. Swart, eds.
(1996). Quantifiers, Deduction, and Context
(CSLI).
Keefe, Rosanna and Peter Smith, eds. (1997).
Vagueness: A Reader (MIT).
Mönnich, U., ed. (1981). Aspects of
Philosophical Logic (Reidel).
Munitz, M. and P. Unger, eds. (1974). Semantics
and Philosophy (NYU).
Raffman, Diana (1994). “Vagueness without
Paradox,” Philosophical Review 103.
Sorenson, Roy (1991). “Vagueness within the
Language of Thought,” The Philosophical
Quarterly 41.
Stalnaker,
Robert
(1974).
“Pragmatic
Presuppositions,” in Munitz and Unger (1974).
Stalnaker, Robert (1999). Context and Content
(Oxford).
Travis,
Charles
(1985).
“Vagueness,
Observation, and the Sorites,” Mind XCIV.
Unger, Peter (1980). “The Problem of the
Many,” in French et al. (1980).
van Deemter, Kees (1996). “The Sorites Fallacy
and the Context-Dependence of Vague
Predicates,” in Kanawaza et al. (1996)
Williamson, Timothy (1994). Vagueness
(Routledge).

