UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual and Spatial Representations in Relational Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/23v5w86z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Knauff, Markus
Johnson-Laird, P.N.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

CogSci2000

Visual and Spatial Representations
in Relational Reasoning
Markus Knauff (mknauff@princeton.edu)
Princeton University, Department of Psychology;
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA
and
University of Freiburg, Center for Cognitive Science
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

P. N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Princeton University, Department of Psychology;
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

Abstract
Psychologists have argued that visual imagery plays a vital
role in human reasoning. If so, then reasoning with materials
that are easy to visualize should be better than reasoning with
materials that are hard to visualize. The literature, however,
reports inconsistent results. Our starting point was that the
inconsistencies arise from confounding imageability with the
spatial nature of the materials. Hence, we manipulated the
ease of envisaging the materials as visual images and also as
spatial layouts. An experiment showed that materials that are
easy to visualize impair reasoning unless they are also easy to
envisage spatially.

Introduction
“I am by the sea and I have a picture. This is a picture
of a picture. I am – ” She screwed up her face and
scowled – “thinking.” . . . She paused, frustrated by the
vivid detail of her picture, not knowing how to extract
from it the significance she felt was there.
– The Inheritors, William Golding, 1955, p. 62
Speculations about the role of visual imagery in human
reasoning have a long history, and have recently surfaced
again in the claims of computer scientists that reasoning
based on diagrams has advantages from a computational
point of view (Glasgow, Narayanan, & Chandrasekaran,
1995). Yet, the situation is not so clear as it should be from
either a psychological or computational standpoint. In
psychology, Kosslyn (e.g. 1994) and his colleagues have no
doubt that visual imagery plays a key role in reasoning. The
origins of this idea are the pioneering studies of DeSoto,
London, & Handel (1965) and Huttenlocher (1968), who
investigated so-called three-term series problems, such as:
Ann is taller than Beth.
Cath is shorter than Beth.
Who is tallest?
DeSoto et al. argued that reasoners imagine the three
individuals on the vertical axis of a visual image, and then
read off the answer by inspecting the image. Various sorts of

evidence support this hypothesis, including the well-known
effects of mental rotation (Shepard & Cooper, 1982) and
mental scanning (Kosslyn, 1980). Indeed, metrical
information, which is often posited as the main characteristic
of mental images, affects reasoning performance (Kelter &
Kaup, 1995; Rinck, Hähnel, Bower, & Glowalla, 1997).
Likewise, Pearson, Logie, & Gillhooly (1999) studied
mental synthesis tasks, which elicit reasoning, and detected
interference from visual secondary tasks.
In contrast, several studies have failed to find any effect
of imageability on reasoning (Mynatt & Smith, 1977;
Sternberg, 1980; Newstead, Pollard, & Griggs, 1986;
Richardson, 1987; Johnson-Laird, Byrne, & Tabossi, 1989).
Furthermore, Sternberg (1980) did not find a reliable
correlation between reasoning ability and scores on
imageability items of IQ-tests (Sternberg, 1980). Knauff and
his colleagues found interference between relational
reasoning and spatial secondary tasks but no such effects of
visual secondary tasks (Knauff, Rauh, Schlieder, & Jola,
1999; Knauff, Jola, Strube, Rauh, & Schlieder, 2000).
From a computational point of view, the situation is
similar. Researchers into diagrammatic reasoning have
argued that diagrams are useful in solving problems, ranging
from the analysis of molecular structure (Glasgow &
Papadias, 1992) to the navigation of robots (Stein, 1995).
Reasoning based on such analog representations can be
more powerful than traditional propositionally based
reasoning (Glasgow et al., 1995). This approach, however,
appears to conflict with theories of qualitative spatial
reasoning. Their proponents argue that abstract
representations of spatial relations together with an
appropriate reasoning engine are a better way to enable
computers to make predictions, diagnoses, and plans, when
quantitative knowledge is unavailable or leads to
computationally intractable inferences (Hernández, 1994;
Cohn, 1997).
The aim of our research was to clarify the role of mental
images in human reasoning. Our basic assumption is that the
inconsistent psychological effects of imageability arise from

CogSci2000

a failure to distinguish between visual characteristics and
spatial characteristics of mental representations. On the one
hand, if reasoning relies on mental images, then the easier it
is to visualize the information in the premises, the better
performance should be. On the other hand, if reasoning
relies on spatial models, then the easier it is to envisage a
spatial array, the better performance should be. We carried
out a preliminary study of various relational terms to assess
the ease of imagining assertions based on them as visual
images and as spatial arrays. We then carried out an
experiment to investigate the effects of both these factors on
relational reasoning.

refer to as spatio-visual relations; 2. relations such as
cleaner-dirtier that were hard to envisage spatially but easy
to envisage visually, which we henceforth refer to as visual
relations; and pairs such as better-worse that were hard to
envisage either spatially or visually, which we henceforth
refer to as control relations.
The differences between the three groups were statistically
reliable, whereas there were no significant differences within
the groups. None of the relations in the preliminary study
were easy to envisage spatially but difficult to envisage
visually.

A preliminary study

Design. The aim of the experiment was to investigate the
effects of the three sorts of relational terms (visuo-spatial,
visual, and controls) on relational reasoning. The
participants acted as their own controls and evaluated
inferences of all three sorts in 12 three-term series problems
and 12 four-term series problems. The relations in these
problems were those in Table 1. There were two valid and
two invalid problems of each of the three sorts in both the
three-term and four-term series problems, making a total of
24 problems. The problems were presented in a
counterbalanced order over the set of participants.
Participants. We tested 22 undergraduate students of
Princeton University (mean age 19.5; 12 female, 10 male),
who received a course credit for their participation.
Materials. The three-term and four-term series problems all
concerned the same terms (dog, cat, ape and bird). Here is
an example of a problem with a valid conclusion:
The dog is cleaner than the cat.
The ape is dirtier than the cat.
Does it follow:
The dog is cleaner than the ape?
Procedure. The participants were tested individually in a
quiet room, and they sat at a laptop computer that
administered the experiment in separate stages (Potts &
Scholz, 1977). The premises were presented one at a time on
a sequence of screens (in black letters) followed by a
putative conclusion (in red letters). The participants were
told to evaluate whether or not the conclusion followed
necessarily from the premises. They made their response by
pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard, and the
computer recorded their response and latency. Prior to the
experiment, there were eight practice trials.
Results. The problems were easy, and 89 percent of the
responses were correct. Furthermore, there were no
significant differences in error rates for the three sorts of
problems. Figure 1 shows the mean latencies for the correct
responses to the three sorts of relational problems. As there
was no reliable difference between the three-term and fourterm series, we have pooled the results. The participants
responded faster to the visuo-spatial problems (2200 ms)
than to the control problems (2384 ms), though this
difference was not significant, but slower to the visual
problems (2654 ms) than to the control problems (Wilcoxon
test z = 3.07; p < .002). Overall, the difference over the
three groups was reliable (Friedman analysis of variance, F
= 8.08; p < .02).

The Experiment
In order to generate the materials for our main experiment,
10 students at Princeton University, who were native
speakers of English, filled out a questionnaire about the ease
of forming visual images and spatial arrays for a set of thirty
relational assertions, such as:
The cat was above the dog.
The assertions were based on such relations as cleanerdirtier, uglier-prettier, heavier-lighter, smarter-dumber, and
above-below. The participants rated the ease of forming
visual images and of forming spatial arrays of the assertions
on separate seven-point scales ranging from “very easy” to
“very difficult”. The frequencies of usage of the relational
terms were controlled word frequencies were controlled
(Francis & Kucera, 1982), and the order of the assertions
was counter-balanced across the participants.
Table 1: Three sorts of relational terms from the preliminary
study and their mean ratings for ease of forming a visual
image and a spatial array. The scales ranged from 7 (very
easy) to 1 (very difficult)
Visual image
Spatial
ratings
ratings
Spatio-visual relations
5.4
5.3
above-below
5.3
5.2
front-back
Visual relations
cleaner-dirtier
fatter-thinner

5.1
4.8

1.6
2.0

Control relations
better-worse
smarter-dumber

2.1
2.8

1.1
1.2

The ratings of assertions based on a relation and its
converse did not differ reliably, and so we pooled the
results. The ratings enabled us to select three sorts of pairs
of relations from the set as a whole. These pairs and their
mean ratings are shown in Table 1. The three sorts of
relations are: 1. relations such as above-below that were
easy to envisage spatially and visually, which we henceforth

CogSci2000

Figure 1: Mean reaction latencies [in milliseconds] and
standard errors in the relational reasoning with the three
sorts of relation: visual relations, control relations and visuospatial relations.
The differences are also reflected in the premise reading
times. Because for all three premises we obtained a similar
pattern of results, we pooled together all three premises. The
mean reading times were 6.6s for the visual premises, 6.2s
for the control premises, and 6.0s for the visuo-spatial tasks.
The trend over the three groups was reliable (Page’s L =
284; p < .05). Likewise, the difference between the visual
and visuo-spatial premises was reliable (Wilcoxon test z =
2.07; p < .05).

General Discussion
Our starting point was the conjecture that the conflicting
results in the literature on imagery and relational reasoning
arose from a failure to distinguish between visual images
and spatial representations. Our preliminary study enabled
us to identify (a) visuo-spatial relations, such as abovebelow, which are easy to envisage both visually and
spatially, (b) visual relations, such as cleaner-dirtier, which
are easy to envisage visually but hard to envisage spatially,
and (c) control relations, such as better-worse, which are
hard to envisage both visually and spatially. Unfortunately,
we were unable to identify relations that were easy to
envisage spatially but hard to imagine visually; and some
colleagues doubt the existence of such relations.
Nevertheless, the results of our experiment established the
importance of distinguishing between visual and spatial
representations. Visual relations such as fatter and thinner

significantly impede the process of reasoning in comparison
with control relations such as smarter and dumber. In
contrast, visuo-spatial relations, such as front and back,
which are easy to envisage visually and spatially, speed up
the process of reasoning in comparison with control
relations (though the difference did not reach significance).
What causes the trend in our results? One possible
explanation is suggested by the theory of mental models
(Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). It
postulates that people make transitive inferences by
constructing models of the situations that the premises
describe. They possess neither axioms nor rules of inference
for transitivity, but merely construct an appropriate model.
For example, given the premises:
The cat is above the ape.
The dog is below the ape.
they construct a spatial model representing the relative
positions of the three individuals:
cat
ape
dog
They evaluate a putative conclusion by checking whether it
holds in the model. If it does, they search for a
counterexample, i.e., a model that satisfies the premises but
refutes the conclusion. Given that no such counterexample
exists, the conclusion is valid (see Byrne and Johnson-Laird,
1989). Perhaps the ability to envisage spatial models is a
precursor to many forms of abstract reasoning (JohnsonLaird, 1996). Likewise, relational terms that lead naturally
to spatial models should speed up the process of reasoning.
In contrast, a visual relation, such as dirtier, may elicit
irrelevant visual detail. One imagines, say, a cat caked with
mud, but such a representation is irrelevant to the transitive
inference. It takes additional time to replace this vivid image
with one in which dirtiness is represented in degrees. In
other words, the visual relations, which are hard to envisage
spatially, lead to a mental picture. But, the vivid details in
this picture interfere with the process of thinking – much as
they did for the character in our epigraph from William
Golding's novel.
This interpretation is consistent with Logie’s (1995)
distinction between the visual and spatial subsystems in
Baddeley’s conception of working memory (Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974; Baddeley, 1986). One subsystem (the visual
cache) is linked to visual perception and the “visual buffer”
(Kosslyn, 1994), and the other subsystem (the inner scribe)
is amodal and handles spatial information for use by
different cognitive and motor systems (Logie, 1995). Knauff
and his colleagues have carried out a series of experiments
in which the participants evaluated three-term series
inferences as primary tasks together with visual and spatial
secondary tasks (Knauff et al., 1999, 2000). The results
showed that the spatial tasks interfered with reasoning,
whereas the visual tasks did not interfere with reasoning.
A theoretical argument corroborating our hypothesis
comes from a comparison of computational accounts of
spatial reasoning. Schlieder (1999) compared two
computational models of empirical data from Knauff and his
colleagues (Knauff et al., 1995, 1998). One model was
based on visual images with metrical information (Berendt,

CogSci2000

1996), and the other model was based on diagrams that
represent only the characteristic points of objects with no
metrical information (Schleider's own model). This second
spatial account yielded a better account of the empirical
results.
An alternative account of our results, however, makes no
appeal to the nature of mental representations. It is
conceivable that the critical difference between the three
sorts of relations is that they differ in the extent to which
they suggest transitive relations over the individuals in our
problems. Spatial relations among them are unequivocal,
whereas the visual relations are more dubious. Given, say,
the following premises:
The cat is fatter than the ape.
The ape is fatter than the dog.
reasoners may wonder whether the fatnessof cats, apes, and
dogs, is commensurate. Thus, when one asserts than an
elephant is thin, the claim is relative, and so it is perfectly
sensible to assert that a thin elephant is fatter than a fat dog.
Hence, the criteria of fatness shift from one animal to
another. This factor might have confused reasoners in our
experiment momentarily, and accordingly lead to longer
latencies with the visual relations. One strong argument
against this account, however, is that the reading times for
the individual premises also showed an advantage for
visuospatial relations over visual relations. There remains
one other possibility: the visuospatial relations were
expressed by prepositions whereas the other relations in our
experiment were expressed by comparative adjectives. It is
conceivable that this factor, or some other unknown
confound, might be responsible for our experimental results.
Our next task is to examine in more detail our explanation in
terms of irrelevant visual data.

Acknowledgments
The first author is a visiting research fellow at the
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, and the
holder of a post-doctoral scholarship from the German
National Research Foundation (DFG; Kn465/2-1). Both
authors are grateful for the helpful comments of Uri Hasson,
Juan Garcia Madruga, Vladimir Sloutsky, Yingrui Yang,
and Lauren Ziskind on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Baddeley, A.D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Baddeley, A.D. & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In
G.H. Bower (Eds.), The psychology of learning and
motivation (vol. 8, pp. 47-89). New York: Academic
Press.
Byrne, R. M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Spatial
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564575.
Cohn, A. G. (1997). Qualitative spatial representation and
reasoning techniques In: KI-97: Advances in Artificial
Intelligence (pp. 1-30). Berlin: Springer.
DeSoto, L B., London, M., & Handel, M.S. (1965). Social
reasoning and spatial paralogic. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 2, 513–521.Girotto, V.,
Mazzocco, A. and Tasso, A. (1997). The effect of premise
order in conditional reasoning: a test of the mental model
theory. Cognition, 63, 1-28.
Francis W. N. & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency Analysis of
English Usage. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Glasgow, J.I. & Papadias, D. (1992). Computational
Imagery, Cognitive Science, 17, 355-394.
Glasgow, J. Narayanan, N. H. & Chandrasekaran, B. (1995)
(Eds.). Diagrammatic reasoning. Cambridge: AAAI Press.
Golding, W. (1955) The Inheritors. New York: Harcourt
Brace.
Hernández, D. (1994). Qualitative representation of spatial
knowledge. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550–560.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1996). Space to think. In P. Bloom et
al., Language and Space (pp. 437-462). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove
(UK): Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. & Tabossi, P. (1989).
Reasoning by model: the case of multiple quantifiers.
Psychological Review, 96, 658-673.
Kelter, S. & Kaup, B. (1995). Räumliche Vorstellungen und
Textverstehen. Neuere Entwicklungen der Theorie
mentaler Modelle. In B. Spillner (Eds.), Sprache und
Verständlichkeit. Kongressbeiträge zur 25. Jahrestagung
der Gesellschaft für angewandte Linguistik (S. 70-82).
Frankfurt a. M.: Lang.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R. Schlieder, C., & Jola, C. (1999).
Räumliches Denken unter Arbeitsgedächtnisbelastung.
[Spatial Thinking under working memory load]. In E.
Schröger, A. Mecklinger, & A. Widmann (Eds.),
Experimentelle Psychologie. Beiträge zur 41. Tagung
experimentell arbeitender Psychologen (pp. 283-284).
Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers.
Knauff, M., Jola, C., Strube, G., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C.
(2000). Visuo-spatial working memory involvement in
spatial thinking. In preparation.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. In Proceedings
of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Mental models in spatial reasoning. In Freksa, C., Habel,
C., & Wender, K. F. (Eds.), Spatial Cognition – An interdisciplinary approach to representing and processing
spatial knowledge (pp. 267– 291). Lecture Notes in
Computer Sience, Bd. 1404. Berlin: Springer.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1980). Image and mind. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and brain. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Logie, R.H. (1995). Visuo-spatial working memory. Hove:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

CogSci2000

Mynatt, B. T. & Smith, K.H. (1977). Constructive processes
in linear ordering problems revealed by sentence study
times. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Lerning and Memory, 3, 357-374.
Newstead, S.E., Pollard P., & Griggs, R. A. (1986).
Response bias in relational reasoning. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 2, 95-98.
Pearson, D. G., Logie, R., H., & Gillhooly, K.J. (1999).
Verbal representations and spatial manipulation during
mental synthesis. European Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 11, 295-314.
Potts, G.R. & Scholz, K.W. (1975). The internal
representation of a three-term series problem. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 439-452.
Richardson, J.T.E. (1987). The role of mental imagery in
models of transitive inference. British Journal of
Psychology, 78, 189-203.
Rinck, M. Hähnel, A, Bower, G. & Glowalla, U. (1997).
The metrics of spatial situation models. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 622-637.
Schlieder, C. (1999). The construction of preferred mental
models in reasoning with interval relations. In G. Rickheit
& C. Habel (Eds.), Mental models in discourse processing
and reasoning. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Shepard, R.N. & Cooper, L.A. (1982). Mental images and
their transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stein, L. A. (1995). Imagination and situated Cognition.
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Inteligence.
Sternberg, R. J., (1980). Representation and process in
linear syllogistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 109, 119-159.

