UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Work at the Interface between Representing and Represented Worlds in Middle School
Mathematics Design Projects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6024q769

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Hall, Rogers

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Work at the Interface between Representing and Represented Worlds in Middle
School Mathematics Design Projects
Rogers Hall (rhall@socrates.berkeley.edu)
Graduate School of Education
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720

Introduction
A central process in scientific or mathematical thinking
involves being able simultaneously to look at and through
the interface between representing and represented worlds
(Gravemeijer, 1994; Latour, 1999). This is particularly true
of thinking practices in which people construct and then
explore models to gain access to situations that do not yet
exist or that occur across scales of time and space that
prevent direct observation. While this flexible use of
modeling is central to many disciplines, pedagogy has until
recently focused primarily on the notational structure of
formal systems of representation. This approach can trap
learners in the situation of looking at complex
representational systems, without being able to look through
them to construct and explore represented worlds (Greeno &
Hall, 1997).
This paper adds to a line of work in cognitive studies of
mathematics education that examines how learners work at
the interface between representing and represented worlds to
make inferences, identify and recover from conceptual
errors, and manage calculation (Cobb, Yackel, & McClain,
1999; Hall, 1996; Nathan, Kintsch, & Young, 1992;
Nemirovsky, in press). Empirical materials are drawn from
group modeling efforts in project-based middle school
mathematics classrooms (Hall, 1999). In particular, I focus
on how a group of students develops an increasingly
sophisticated capacity for working with the concept of
predation, treated as a functional relation between animal
populations (i.e., predator and prey) that can be
implemented in particular computational media. In my
analysis, these media and other resources available through
talk and embodied action develop into systems of activity
(Goodwin, 1994) that make up conceptual understanding.
From this perspective, concepts and their implementation in
diverse representational technologies are inseparable.

Background to the Student Design Project
Data for this paper (also for papers by Greeno, Sommerfeld,
& Wiebe and Stenning & Sommerfeld, this volume) come
from studies conducted in middle school mathematics
classrooms where students worked on design projects.
These projects were supported by curriculum units
developed to embed important mathematical concepts in
realistic applications (Greeno & MMAP, 1998). In the study
reported in this paper, students were asked to act as
biological consultants who would devise a proposal for

preserving and then returning a population of guppies to a
Venezuelan stream environment. As adopted for use in their
classroom, the project lasted approximately four weeks and
included the following: task memos directing the activities
of student groups, worksheets and supporting case material
for the contexts of design problems, a software tool
(HabiTech) that allowed students to model and investigate
structures and processes in population biology (see Figure
2), and a set of extension scenarios asking students to model
hypothetical events within the Venezuelan stream
environment (e.g., harvesting by farmers or the introduction
of a predatory fish).
Just before and after working on this project, student
groups attempted a 20-minute design challenge in which
they were asked to model the relation between mice and cat
populations living in a barn over a period of several years.
Both the design challenge and students’ daily activities
during the longer unit were filmed, and various design
documents (intermediate and final) were collected. An
analysis contrasting pre/post unit performance of groups on
the design challenge provides evidence that students’
understandings of population biology and associated
mathematical concepts changed over time. In this paper, I
focus on how these understandings changed, by following
the work of a typical group (labeled the MLKN group) with
a particular concept through the longitudinal record of their
daily activities on the unit. Data materials are divided into
six segments: Segments 1 and 6 come from the pre- and
post test design challenge (respectively); Segments 2
through 5 come from the longitudinal record of group work
during the unit.

Evidence of Conceptual Change from a
Pre/Post Design Challenge
An utterance-level comparison of the MLKN group’s
performance on a pre and post-unit design challenge showed
that they, like the majority of groups in their classroom (5 of
7 groups), were able to construct and explore a more
complete functional model of population growth and
predation at the end of the four week unit. At the pretest
challenge, this group failed to mention deaths for either
population, they did not link together overlapping timelines
for otherwise correct models of mouse and cat births, and
they made no mention or use of the concept of predation
until questioned about it.

As evident in the following exchange1, which was
recorded at the end of the pre-test, members of this group
did understand the qualitative effect of predation, in the
sense that cats eat mice and so “reduce” their population.
But they had no way to implement this understanding as a
functional relation linking together their isolated, handcalculated models (i.e., for mice and cat populations).

Segment 1: Predation at the Pre-test (4/21/98)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Rogers: So if the mice are eating grain...
Manuel: Uh, huh.
Rogers: What are the cats eating?
Lisa:
[Mice.
Manuel: [Mice.
Rogers: What does that do to the mouse population?
Manuel: Reduce them.
Rogers: Ok, [so, as you were doing the mice
calculations]
9 Manuel: [Ah! Oh:::]
((Lisa and Kera look at Manuel))
10 Rogers: Sounds like you were just kinda goin with,
four per litter for the mice and letting them...
go=
11 Kera: =Go, ok.
12 Rogers: So they're gonna be getting rubbed out by the
cats, right?
13 Manuel: [Uh huh.
14 Kera: [Right.
The absence of predation as a functionally explicit
concept strikes Manuel first (line 9), then he and Kera agree
that their models allow cats to grow without bound. As they
go on to acknowledge (not shown), this is something that
violates the entire premise of the design challenge, and they
are eager to get another chance at this kind of problem.
At the post test design challenge, the MLKN group’s
understanding of population concepts was still unstable and
dependent on particular means of implementation (see
papers by Greeno et al. and Stenning & Sommerfeld, this
volume), but they were also able to implement and explain a
functional model of predation. For example, as Manuel
struggled to combine timelines for mice and cat populations
into an integrated model, Lisa recalled their earlier use of a
“Special 2 thing” (i.e., a user-defined function) to model the
predation of guppies by wolf fish during the classroom
design project. This recalled use of a special function
provided a starting point for a fully explicit implementation
of predation on the post test.
In the following exchange, recorded near the end of the
MLKN post test, Lisa asks Kera for an update on what they
1

Transcript conventions include: ((activity descriptions))
appear in double parens, (uncertain hearings) in single
parens; [overlapping [onset of talk is shown with left
brackets; dynamic computer responses are transcribed as
turns at talk.

are doing, while Manuel and Ned (silent) work to repair an
error with their combined timeline. As Kera explains, they
started the combined model with too many mice, generated
in an earlier model of mice living alone.

Segment 6: Predation at the Post Test (5/26/98)
1
2

((to Kera)) Could you run that by me?
Um, we ran the model for two years. But we
forgot that one year, the cats were living with
them. So then they were dying [(inaudible).
3 Manuel: [Forty eight. ((resets Moose/Mice2 to 48))
4 Lisa:
((looking at interface)) Uh huh.
5 Kera: [(Not in this year.)
6 Manuel: [Ok, so now... bring that... to negative.
((relinks Special 2 to Moose/Mice negative
pole)) And we started with, how many?
((scrolls down to check Wolves/Cats)) Six, ok.
Here we go. Now build... to two thousand and
four. ((resets timeline)) Two thousand and
four... Now, to the end. ((runs To End))
7 HT:
((huge negative value for Moose/Mice
population))
8 Manuel: Oo:::
9 Lisa:
So how many... [That's only]
10 Manuel: [After], after two thousand and four there's
negative [mice.
11 Lisa:
[Can we bring in some dogs there!
((laughing))
12 Manuel: Ok::: ((laughing, opens graph window))
Kaboom.
13 HT:
((huge negative decline for Moose/Mice))
14 Lisa:
Oh gosh!
At the end of this design challenge, I (as a research
interviewer) asked the group exactly when mice die off.
Their first idea was to narrow the timeline, a simplification
that increased the resolution of their graph in both axes for
time and population abundance. They eventually used this
more fine-grained graph and a table of linked values to find
that, in their implementation of predation, cats consumed all
the mice after only one month.
Comparing pre and post test performances (Segments 1
and 6), it is clear that the concept of predation—along with
technical means for implementing, using, and interrogating
this concept—changed within the working capacity of the
MLKN group. While they neither mention nor implement
predation on the pre-test, at the post test this group makes
several important advances: (1) They combine partial results
from an investigation of mice to model the introduction of
cats; (2) They define a predation function that explicitly
links cat and mouse populations; (3) They display,
investigate, and explain a resulting crisis in the mouse
2

Lisa:
Kera:

HabiTech provides named population nodes for Caribou,
Wolves, Moose, and Guppies. Using Moose for Mice
presented students with no particular difficulty.

population; and (4) They notice that cats will, in turn, face a
related crisis brought about by a lack of food.
Particularly important for an analysis of work at the
interface between representing and represented worlds,
these students appear to be able to move fluidly between
their roles as middle school collaborators (e.g., Lisa asks for
and Kera provides an explanation), technical designers (e.g.,
Manual and Ned implement the network, but Kera follows
and can explain their implementation), and
observers/consultants for a Venezuelan stream environment
(e.g., Lisa’s proposal that they add dogs to the
environment). How students move between these figured
worlds (Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998) in a
way that helps to develop and explore functionally explicit
population models is a question for longitudinal analysis.

A “Net Wall” Solution to Predation
In this and the following section, I analyze several
selections from MLKN’s work during the unit on population
modeling. First (Segments 2 and 3), I examine their
elaborated response as fictional consultants to Venezuelan
farmers, in the form of a “net wall” that will serve as a
mechanical barrier to predatory fish. The MLKN group sees
this as a solution to the problem of losing all the guppies,
which farmers need to control mosquito growth, to an exotic
population of upstream predators (i.e., the wolf fish).
Second (Segments 4 and 5), I examine their computational
implementation of predation more closely, asking how their
experiences during the unit may have contributed to a more
sophisticated performance on the post test design challenge.
After successfully modeling the growth of a guppy
population in captivity, the MLKN group chose an
extension scenario in which predatory wolf fish were
released up stream from the guppies’ pond, and farmers
later noticed that these guppies were disappearing. The
group predicted that the guppy population would flourish in
the stream environment before the arrival of wolf fish, then
die out as guppies were eaten by newly arriving predators.
Engaging their fictional role as consultants to
Venezuelan farmers, the MLKN group began working on
solutions that would preserve the guppy population,
eventually settling on Kera’s proposal for a mechanical “net
wall.” In the following exchange, Kera reprises the idea of a
net in which mesh openings capture wolf fish but allow
guppies to swim through. By installing this net at the
upstream boundary of the pond, she proposes they can catch
and remove wolf fish before they reach the farmers’ guppies
(see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Kera (middle) animates the path of a guppy
swimming through a hole in the net during turn 1 of
Segment 2: ((R hand forms opening; L hand, fingers
wiggling, traces through)). Lisa (right) forms her own
version of the net with her hands as Manuel (left) looks on.

Segment 2: Blocking the Arrival of Wolf Fish
(5/18/98)
1

Kera:

=Ok, this is (the idea with) the guppies. ((R
hand forms opening; L hand, fingers wiggling,
traces through)) And it goes sh:::, straight
through the net. ((R hand holds opening; L
hand traces in and sticks)) And the big fishes
go... and they get caught=
2 Lisa:
=Caught, yeh. And then, they=
3 Kera: =((hands grab at center then rise)) You pull:::
it up and then you take it out.
4 Lisa:
But why should we pull it out?
5 Manuel: No::: [The stream is like fi::ve fee::t deep.
6 Lisa:
[Do you know...?
7 Manuel: No not even five feet, three feet[... deep.]
8 Lisa:
[Ok, ok, ok, come on.]
9 Manuel: You can just pick em out.
10 Lisa:
So, yeh yeh, so, so it should be like... no no,
we can't HIRE anyone to pick it out. It should
just like, flow::: naturally. Stuff like that, you
know? You know, cause see the [guppies
11 Kera: [You gotta pull it out!
12 Lisa:
No... they won't be CAUGHT in there, cause
they're like, HUGE, ok? The hole will be this
big.
In this first selection of work from the classroom,
several phenomena are important for understanding how
students shift between representing and represented worlds.
First, a world of Venezuelan streams, farmers, and
interacting fish populations is densely inhabited by
members of the MLKN group. They literally construct the
stream, fish, and a mechanical barrier in the gestural stage
between Kera and Lisa, as Manuel reaches in from
“downstream.” Fish, the stream, and human actors are all

animated (Goffman, 1979; Ochs, Jacoby, & Gonzales, 1994)
within this shared space.
Second, while the technical details of the “net wall”
barrier are still underway, the importance of isolating
guppies from these predators is clearly their emergent goal.
Animated from the perspective of a consultant to
Venezuelan farmers, this is a response to the consequences
of predation, now articulated with the developing notion of
a habitat that has semi-permeable boundaries.
The importance of predation in MLKN’s consulting
proposal becomes clear later during this class meeting, when
the group calls me over to discuss the boundaries of the
stream environment. When I ask about the effect of their
“net wall” on a graph of the guppy population they had
drawn earlier, Kera starts a conditional response (Segment
3).

Segment 3: The Graphical Shape of Predation
(5/18/98)
1

Rogers: The graph of the guppy population. Manuel
thinks its gonna continue to... [be wavy] and
you all think its gonna go down and then
[come back up.
2 Manuel: [Be wavy.]
3 Lisa:
No we=
4 Kera: =It depends. ((points to drawing of stream in
notebook)) Are there still, like... wolf fish in
here that are eating the guppies?
5 Rogers: Um[::: you can
6 Kera: [If there is, ((traces upward path)) then its
gonna go a little wavy. But if NOT, then the
guppies are just... gonna have their own...
((points to computer)) Like before, when...
like our other, um... thingie? (You know what
I'm talking about?) [Cause the guppies are
living alone, and they're gonna die and
(inaudible)
7 Rogers: [Ok... I mean if you killed, if you get rid of
ALL the wolf fish... then the guppies should...
recover with no trouble.
8 Kera: =Yeh.
9 Rogers: =If there's still some wolf fish, [the wolf fish
are gonna continue to grow and stuff.
10 Kera: [Then they're gonna ((hands trace oscillation))
According to Kera (turn 6), if any wolf fish get through
the net wall the graph of the guppy population will “go a
little wavy.” This is because “there’s still wolf fish in there
eating them,” as she mentions several times. But if the net
wall successfully closes the pond to wolf fish, then guppies
will grow in isolation “like before” (i.e., referring to their
earlier model of guppies alone in the pond).
Another point is important for understanding how
students begin to coordinate movement between
representing and represented worlds. Kera’s conditional
explanation crosses worlds in the sense that shapes in the

representing world (i.e., graph shapes coming out of their
“thingie”) depend upon conditions in the represented world
(i.e., the passage of fish through a net opening). As the
beginning of an activity system that was intended by the
curriculum, types of outcomes, as graph shapes, are being
associated with types of models, as determined by their
assumptions about habitat (i.e., is the pond open or closed to
exotic predators) and relations between populations. And
critical to a broader understanding of modeling as such an
activity system, results are seen to depend upon starting
assumptions.

Implementing and Exploring Predation in an
Integrated Model
The “net wall” consulting proposal is an elegant solution to
an emergent design problem, and it works at several levels.
Guppies will be preserved for rice farmers, since the wolf
fish will be blocked from moving down stream. And this
can be done without killing any of these predators. As these
students have elaborated the fictional world of the task, this
will also keep upstream Venezuelans happy (i.e., those who,
according to Lisa, must own wolf fish). Up to this point, the
group’s work on this proposal is closely tied to a qualitative
understanding of the effects of predation. Yet they are far
from a functional implementation in computational media
that could produce the graphs in question. As Manuel
announces at the beginning of their next class period, “Now
how do we make it work?”
The three final conversational segments in this paper
illustrate the kind of work these students undertook to
construct a plausible (if not entirely correct) functional
model of predation. In Segment 4, the group has already
constructed a user-defined function that links Caribou/Wolf
Fish and Guppies population nodes. With this stable
network topology in view, they repeatedly adjust node
parameters and run the model in an effort to produce a
reasonable number of guppies. Just before this segment
starts, Lisa complains that they have a “river full of not
plants, not insects, but just fishes.”

Segment 4: Opening Boxes and Adjusting
Parameters (5/19/98)
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Lisa:

It’s not enough! As long (as you go over) ten
thousand ((changes Caribou/Wolf Fish births
to 30% every month)) (inaudible) per cent.
HT:
((huge positive population value for Guppies))
Lisa:
It's still a lot. (inaudible) about guppies. Yeh,
that's the problem.
Manuel: Yeh, see, but the special two is gonna, do (3
sec)
Lisa:
Alright. Could you guys explain this to us? hh
Manuel: Uh, explain what?
Lisa:
What's a... special two.
Manuel: Special two is like when you die because of
the caribou.

9 Lisa:
OH! Really?
10 Manuel: Yes.
11 Lisa:
((mouse circles over Special 2/Predation
node)) Oh this is eighteen? And um... how
many guppies do they=
12 Manuel: =No, let's do three... times thirty is... thirty,
ninety. So its caribou times ninety. ((Lisa
changes Special 2/Predation)) Every month,
and (then) go... That's it, just... Go to build, go
to the thing that says build. Then go to the end.
13 HT:
((huge negative population value for Guppies))
14 Lisa:
Negative? [That's a little too (much), yeh.]
15 Manuel: [Oh ok ((sighs))] Now we need to reduce the
births. Go to births. No don't touch that, do the
births. Reduce the births to ten percent every
month.
16 Lisa:
((changes Caribou/Wolf Fish births to 10%
every month))
With the work of implementing predation in these
particular computational media well underway, several
phenomena are worth noticing. First, Lisa has been
adjusting model parameters without understanding how the
predation function works. When she asks “you guys”
(Manuel and Ned) for an explanation, Manuel describes
what the node does from the perspective of Guppies: it is a
type of death caused by Caribou/Wolf Fish.
Second, as Lisa looks inside this function and questions
how many Guppies are eaten by Caribou/Wolf Fish (turn
11), Manuel proposes and Lisa executes a change in how the
predation node is defined. Manuel’s proposal unpacks the
monthly value into a daily rate of consumption (i.e., 3 per
day, times 30 days in a month, gives 90 guppies per
Caribou/Wolf Fish per month).
This exchange is one of many in which students move
back and forth between changing model parameters and
running their updated model (these are called “Build” and
“Play” modes in the interface) to produce a new set of
population values. Over the entire series, each adjustment is
sensible within the network topology of their model, but
none of these changes produce an outcome that the group
finds reasonable (e.g., negative assessments after turns 2 and
13). In the face of this stalled progress, Manuel recalls from
their earlier research that overcrowding will cause the guppy
birth rate to fall. He reduces this parameter and runs the
updated model.

Segment 5: Arriving at a Guppy Crisis (5/19/98)
1
2
3
4

5

HT:
((running Fast))
Lisa:
Too much.
Manuel: [No::: its not gone into the e's yet. And it
hasn't.
HT:
[((Guppies value in population node rises for
awhile, but becomes negative and ends with 2.71826 * 10^6 Guppies))
Manuel: ((opens a graph))

6

HT:

((graph shows Guppy population rising, then
an extinction crisis part way into third year))
7 Manuel: Oh my [god:::
8 Rogers: [YES::::!
9 Lisa:
Oh, it's so funny! [What?
10 Rogers: [Yes:::
11 Manuel: Yes what?
Lisa begins to classify this as another unsuccessful
run of their model (turn 2), but Manuel, who has been
monitoring the value displayed in the Guppy population
node, announces that the positive growth of guppies has not
yet reached scientific notation. Then as they watch the
interface, the value displayed in the Guppy population node
goes hugely negative (i.e., the software automatically shifts
into scientific notation) and Manuel opens a graph window
(see Figure 2).

Figure 2. MLKN’s network model of predation and a graph
showing an extinction crisis for Guppies during their third
year in a Venezuelan pond. The predation node is at the
center of the network (right), linking together Guppies
(above) and Caribou/Wolf Fish (below).
This graph is striking for members of the MLKN group
both because it shows an extinction crisis for Guppies, but
also because it catches my eye (lines 8 and 10) as I was
working with a group on the other side of the classroom. In
a subsequent conversation about this network model and
graph, Manuel insists on the influence of overcrowding in
lowering Guppies births, while both he and Lisa recount
their decision to increase the level of Caribou/Wolf Fish
predation. As a final part of their modeling effort, they
implemented Kera’s “net wall” as an emigration function,
something that was suggested by their teacher as a general
strategy for modeling negative influences on population
growth.

Discussion
By the end of the curriculum unit from which these
longitudinal selections were drawn, the MLKN group had a
sensible and fully implemented model of their consulting
proposal, and its behavior was consistent with what they

hoped to achieve in Segment 3 (i.e., Kera’s conditional
explanation, lines 4 and 6). Since the net wall was
implemented as a yearly reduction in the Wolf Fish
population, these predators still made it into the pond
environment. As a result, some level of predation was
ongoing (i.e., this appeared as a scalloped or “wavy” graph
of the Guppies population over seasons). But the mechanical
“net wall,” which they used to remove predators at a regular
interval, reversed the outcome of their earlier crisis scenario
(i.e., the Guppies population grew steadily over the duration
of their scenario).
Predation, as a concept that can be implemented within
these particular computational media, was one among
several influences in a more complex model of the
Venezuelan pond habitat. These influences included (with
varying levels of correctness): (a) the starting value
established over an earlier period in which Guppies lived
alone in the pond, (b) the production of a Guppy crisis after
the unregulated arrival of predators, (c) the regulated
influence of predation during smaller time cycles within the
“net wall” model, and (d) the idea of birth rate suppression
during conditions of overcrowding in the pond.
These explicit model components, worked out through
repeated cycles of adjusting parameters and holding
outcomes accountable to students’ qualitative expectations,
provided a rich set of resources for their activities on the
post test design challenge.
Across these selections from a longitudinal record of
group work, more complex forms of coordination appear in
the ways that students move between representing and
represented worlds. While still far from a technical
implementation of their model in computational media
(Segment 2), students were able to develop an elegant
solution to the problem of stopping or limiting predation.
Their work included conversations carried out over a stream
environment that was jointly constructed in a shared
gestural stage. Also central in these conversations were
processes of animation in which students spoke for (or as)
fish in the constructed stream environment, Venezuelan
farmers who had diverging interests in these fish, biological
consultants concerned with finding a solution for the loss of
guppies to predation, and middle school students working
on a design project (i.e., as themselves).
As these elaborations of the represented world were
carried into computational media, new forms of
coordination were required (Segments 3 and 4). These
included forms of explanation that linked computational
media to aspects of worlds being modeled (e.g., Kera’s
conditional explanation associates graph shapes with
physical events at the net wall in Segment 3). As the
structural components of their network model were settled,
members of the MLKN group also managed to establish
cycles of modeling activity in which they adjusted
parameters and compared results with their qualitative
expectations.

Through these kinds of activities, students encounter
the need to simultaneously look at and through the interface
between representing and represented worlds. As they work
through design problems, new conceptual understanding
depends upon putting existing concepts and a broader set of
representational technologies into coordination. In this sense
concepts—as systems of activity—develop in ways that are
inseparable from the representational technologies that
implement them.

References
Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & McClain, K. (1999). Symbolizing
and communicating: Perspectives on mathematical
discourse, tools, and instructional design. Mahweh, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates, Inc.
Goffman, E. (1979). Footing. Semiotica, 25, 1-29. Reprinted
in Goffman, E. (1981) Forms of talk. Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American
Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Gravemeijer, K. E. P. (1994). Developing realist
mathematics education. Utrecht, The Netherlands: CDBeta Press.
Greeno, J. G. & Hall, R. P. (1997, January). Practicing
representation: learning with and about representational
forms. Phi Delta Kappan, 361-367.
Greeno, J. G. & MMAP (1998). The situativity of knowing,
learning, and research. American Psychologist 53(1), 526.
Hall, R. (1996). Representation as shared activity: Situated
cognition and Dewey's cartography of experience.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 209–238.
Hall, R. (1999). Case studies of math at work: exploring
design-oriented mathematical practices in school and
work settings. Final Report to the National Science
Foundation (RED–9553648).
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998).
Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora's hope: Essays on the reality of
science studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Nathan, M. J., Kintsch, W., & Young, E. (1992). A theory
of algebra-word-problem comprehension and its
implications for the design of learning environments.
Cognition and Instruction, 9, 329-389.
Nemirovsky, R. (in press). How one experience becomes
part of another. In K. Beach (Ed.), Special issue of The
Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Ochs, E., Jacoby, S., & Gonzales, P. (1994). Interpretive
journeys: How physicists talk and travel through graphic
space. Configurations, 1, 151-171.

