UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Zen in the Art of Language Acquisition: Statistical Learning and the Less is More Hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/08618561

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Ludden, David
Gupta, Prahlad

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Zen in the Art of Language Acquisition: Statistical Learning and
the Less is More Hypothesis
David Ludden (david-ludden@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Prahlad Gupta (prahlad-gupta@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
Abstract
It seems an obvious truth that children are better language
learners than adults. Children seem able to master a second
language with ease, while adults are rarely successful at
second language acquisition. Newport’s (1990) Less is
More hypothesis represented an attempt to explain these
observations by invoking general cognitive mechanisms.
This hypothesis takes as its starting point the observation
that children exhibit reduced working memory capacity
relative to adults and suggests that this reduction serves as
a filter to aid children in deducing the structure of the
language they are learning. We present two experiments
testing a specific prediction that follows from the Less is
More hypothesis, namely that adults will perform better on
language learning tasks if their available working memory
capacity is reduced. The experiments examined the
learning of word boundaries and syntactic agreement, each
with and without a concurrent cognitive load. The results
of these experiments were contrary to the Less is More
prediction, suggesting that other explanations must be
found for the observed superior language learning
performance of children over adults.

Introduction
In Zen in the Art of Archery (Herrigel, 1953), the German
philosopher Eugen Herrigel recounts his endeavor to learn
Japanese archery from a great Zen master. During his
many years of training, Herrigel struggles with his need to
control the bow, to think about the target. The more he
tries to control the bow, the Master tells him, the less
control he will have over it; the more he thinks about the
target, the less accurate his shots will be. Rather, the
Master tells Herrigel to strive for less control, less
conscious thought of the act of releasing the arrow from
the bow, for only then will he gain mastery over the bow.
The idea that Less is More is a dominant theme of Zen
Buddhism. However, this notion is not limited to the
realm of Oriental philosophy; it is one that pops up again
in Western developmental psychology, in particular, in
the area of language acquisition.
It is generally acknowledged that children’s cognitive
abilities, working memory in particular, are considerably
constrained relative to those of adults (Gathercole, Willis,

Baddeley & Emslie, 1994). At the same time, it has also been
widely observed that children are much more successful at
learning language than adults. After all, virtually all children
learn a first language, while few adults ever master a second.
Furthermore, children seem to learn language with such
effortlessness, as opposed to the great expense of effort
necessary for an adult to acquire even marginal proficiency in
a second language. To Newport (1990), this seemed a perfect
example of a Less is More situation: children have less
cognitive ability yet learn language more easily, while adults
have more cognitive ability yet learn language less easily. This
observation led to the formulation of the Less is More
hypothesis (Newport, 1990), which not only maintained that
the restricted working memory of children was an advantage
to language acquisition, but also attempted to explain the
causal nature of that relationship.
The idea for the Less is More hypothesis came out of studies
on critical periods in first and second language acquisition
performed by Newport and her colleagues. For example,
Johnson & Newport (1989) conducted a study of 46 native
Chinese and Korean speakers living in the United States who
had learned English as a second language. The participants
were divided into two groups, those who had arrived in the US
before age 15 (dubbed Early Arrivals), and those who had
arrived in the US after age 17 (dubbed Late Arrivals). All
participants had spent at least the last three years prior to the
experiment in the US. Johnson & Newport (1989) found an
inverse linear relationship between age of arrival in the US
and ultimate performance in English. In that study, only those
participants who had arrived in the US by the age of seven
achieved native speaker proficiency as measured on a
grammaticality judgment task. Beyond age seven,
performance on this task decreased as age or arrival increased.
Johnson & Newport (1989) also examined attitudinal
variables, but found statistical significance for the age of
arrival variable over and above and other variables they
looked at.
In a subsequent study, Newport (1990) examined critical
periods in first language acquisition, in particular in American
Sign Language (ASL). She studied three groups of
congenitally or pre-lingually deaf adults who used ASL as
their predominant language and had limited skills in English.
The first group, dubbed Native Learners, had been exposed to

ASL since birth or shortly thereafter. The second group,
dubbed Early Learners, had been first exposed to ASL
between the ages of 4 and 6. The last group, dubbed Late
Learners, had been exposed to ASL only after age 12. All
participants were tested on their knowledge of ASL
sentence structure and morphology. While all three
groups performed at ceiling on the sentence structure test,
there was a significant decline in performance in
morphology across the three groups from Native to Early
to Late Learners.
Newport (1990) took these findings as clear evidence
for a critical period in language acquisition, and in an
attempt to explain the mechanism responsible for this
critical period she posited the Less is More hypothesis.
The hypothesis takes as its starting point the notion that
the working memory capacity of children is limited
compared to that of adults. The hypothesis then proposes
that this limitation is actually advantageous. According to
Newport (1990), language acquisition requires a
componential analysis. Adults take in too much of the
language input at one time because of their expanded
working memory capacity relative to children. This wider
perceptual window in adults leads to a combinatorial
explosion of possible analyses for the language input,
hence the likelihood of hitting upon the right analysis is
small. Children, with their limited working memories, are
constrained by the size of the input they do take in to a
more limited number of possible analyses. Hence, the
likelihood of hitting upon the right analysis is greatly
increased. According to Newport (1990), it is the
limitations of the child’s ability to process information
that provides the basis for successful language
acquisition.
Elman (1993) tested the Less is More hypothesis with a
connectionist model of syntactic agreement acquisition.
He trained a simple recurrent network (Elman 1990) on a
corpus of sentences based on a simplified English
grammar. In this grammar, subjects and verbs agreed in
number, verbs differed in argument expectations, and
sentences could contain multiple embeddings. The corpus
contained sentences such as cats chase dogs and dogs see
boys who cats who mary feeds chase. The context units of
this simple recurrent network represented the working
memory of the network, and the capacity of this working
memory was a parameter that could be varied. When the
network was trained on the entire corpus with working
memory at full capacity, the network failed to learn.
Elman (1993) then tried incrementing the capacity of
the working memory of the network. Working memory
capacity was manipulated by an automatic flushing of the
context units after every three or four words. As training
progressed, the interval between flushings was gradually
increased. The result was that the network was then able
to learn how to process the input. Elman (1993)
interpreted this finding as consistent with the Less is
More hypothesis.

Relevant empirical data came from a study by Santelmann
& Jusczyk (1998), who used a headturning paradigm with 15and 18-month-old infants to test their sensitivity to
morphosyntactic dependencies in English. The experimental
condition consisted of well-formed English sentences with the
structure ...is...<verb>ing, while the control condition
consisted of ill-formed sentences with the structure
...can...<verb>ing, such as Everybody is baking
vs.
*everybody can baking. Santelmann & Jusczyk (1998) also
varied the distance in syllables between auxiliary verb (is or
can) and main verb by the insertion of adverbs, as in
Everybody is often baking . They found that at distances of 1-3
syllables, 18-month-old infants preferred well-formed over illformed sentences. However, at distances over 3 syllables, the
18-month-olds showed no preference for either form, nor did
the 15-month-olds at any distance. Santelmann & Jusczyk
(1998) concluded that their findings were “consistent with the
hypothesis that 18-month-olds are working with a limited
processing window, and that they are only picking up relevant
dependencies that fall within this window.” Although the
authors found no evidence to determine whether these
limitations in processing space facilitated or hampered
language acquisition, the Santelmann & Jusczyk (1998) study
nevertheless does lend support to a basic premise of the Less
is More hypothesis, namely that infants are processing the
language input in shorter chunks than adults are, justifying the
approach Elman (1993) took in modeling the syntaxacquisition process.
Work on statistical learning by Saffran and her colleagues
has also been relevant to the Less is More hypothesis. Saffran,
Newport & Aslin (1996a) asked adult participants to listen to a
nonsense language that contained words but no meanings or
grammar. The task was to try to figure out where the word
boundaries were. At the end of 21 minutes of exposure, the
participants were asked to choose which of two items sounded
more like a word from that language. The participants
performed significantly above chance, with a mean score of
76% (chance was 50%). This type of exposure condition was
referred to as the explicit learning condition in this and later
Saffran studies.
Saffran et al. (1997) tested the learning of word boundaries
in an incidental learning condition. In this condition,
participants were asked to draw a picture while the stimulus
played in the background. Subjects were told nothing about
the stimulus. After 21 minutes of exposure, the participants
were administered the same test as in the explicit condition.
Saffran et al. (1997) tested two groups, adults (college
students) and children (6-7 years old). Mean percent correct
identification scores for each group were significantly above
chance (50%) at around 59%, with no significant difference
between children and adults. Because of the low scores after
one exposure period, the experiment was redone with two
exposure periods on consecutive days. In this second
experiment, adults averaged 73% and children 68%, with the
difference between adults and children being nonsignificant.
Saffran et al. (1997) concluded that passive exposure was

sufficient at least for some aspects of the language
acquisition process.
In her dissertation, Saffran (1997) extended her
research in statistical learning to the acquisition of syntax,
in particular, hierarchical phrase structure. The stimulus
set in each experiment consisted of a sample of sentences
from an artificial language, with the only cues to syntactic
structure being statistical. In an explicit learning
condition, the participants were exposed to the stimulus
for 30 minutes a day for two days, and tested on their
knowledge of the phrase structure at the end of each
listening period. Mean adult performance in this explicit
learning task was 68%1. (No children were run in this
condition.) In an incidental learning condition in which
participants listened to the stimulus while drawing a
picture, both adults and children (aged 6-9) showed
performance significantly above chance after the first
exposure period, with no significant improvement after
the second session. 2 Children’s scores (57%) were
significantly worse than those of the adults (67%). There
was no significant difference between adults in the
explicit and incidental conditions.
The results of these various experiments by Saffran and
her colleagues seem inconsistent with the Less is More
hypothesis. Specifically, the Less is More hypothesis
predicts that children will perform better than adults in
language learning tasks, and furthermore that adults will
perform better in an incidental learning task than an
explicit one. But these predictions are belied by the data.
Not only was there no significant difference in
performance between children and adults in the incidental
word boundary learning task (Saffran et al. 1997),
children in fact fared worse than adults in the implicit
syntax learning task (Saffran, 1997). Furthermore, there
was no significant difference between explicit and
incidental conditions in adult performance on the syntax
learning task (Saffran 1997).
The various results described above paint an
inconsistent picture of the impact of working memory
resources in language learning. The studies by Elman
(1993) and Santelmann & Juszczyk (1998) appear to
support the Less is More hypothesis, while the results of
the studies by Saffran et al. (1996) and Saffran et al.
(1997) are inconsistent with that hypothesis.
The experiments described below were aimed at
examining the following question: Is adult performance
on a language learning task superior when working
memory resources are reduced, as the Less is More
hypothesis would predict? Although the results of Saffran
1

This and the following three composite scores were calculated
from the data in Saffran (1997).
2
Saffran (1997) acknowledges that this incidental task was not
as incidental as it was in the word boundary experiments. In the
incidental learning condition of the phrase structure experiment,
participants were told about the nature of the background
stimulus and the test they would be given at the end of the
drawing period.

et al. (1997) are inconsistent in this regard, they are difficult to
interpret because they were obtained under different
experimental conditions. The present experiments attempt to
address this question systematically. Experiment I addresses
this question in the domain of word boundary learning while
experiment II addresses this question in the domain of syntax
learning.

Experiment I: Word Boundaries
Because the exposure periods in Saffran et al.’s explicit
(1996a) and incidental (1997) word boundary learning tasks
were not equivalent, a direct comparison cannot be made.
Experiment I represents an attempt to replicate these two
experiments under identical exposure conditions. To insure
this, the difference between these two tasks was reduced to the
presence or absence of a concurrent cognitive load (drawing a
picture) during the exposure to the stimulus. For this reason, in
this and the following experiment, Saffran et al.’s (1996a)
explicit condition is referred to by the more theory-neutral
term No Load, while Saffran et al.’s (1997) incidental
condition is referred to as the Load condition. If the Less is
More hypothesis is true, then we would expect superior
performance in the Load vs. the No Load condition.

Method
Thirty-two participants were recruited for the experiment from
the University of Iowa Psychology Department subject pool.
The participants received partial credit toward fulfilling
requirements for an introductory psychology course. These
participants were randomly assigned to two groups of 16 each,
constituting the No Load and Load groups for this experiment.
The exposure and test materials were reconstructed per the
specifications given in Saffran et al. (1997).
In the No Load condition, participants were informed that
they would be listening to an artificial language that consisted
of a small number of words but no meanings or grammar.
They were not told the exact number of words or anything
about the structure of those words. The participants were
asked to listen to the language and try to figure out where the
word boundaries were. They were also told that they would be
tested on their knowledge of the word boundaries later in the
experiment. These instructions were made as similar as
possible to those given in Saffran et al. (1996).
In the Load condition, participants were asked to draw a
picture using a computer drawing program. They were
informed that an auditory stimulus would play while they
drew, and that the experimenter was looking at a certain effect
that would be explained to them later in the experiment. The
participants were told nothing at the outset of the experiment
about the content of the stimulus, nor were they informed that
they would be given a test based on the auditory stimulus later
on. These instructions were made as similar as possible to
those given in Saffran et al. (1997).
The exposure procedure was identical for both the No Load
and the Load groups, and consisted of three seven-minute
listening periods with five-minute breaks between. This
exposure procedure is the same as that used in Saffran et al.

(1996). After the three listening sessions were finished,
the experiment proceeded to the test phase, in which the
participants were asked to listen to each pair of sound
items and to decide which of the two sounded more like it
came from the stimulus.
1.00

componential analysis: the learning of the pattern of syntactic
agreement in an artificial language. The Less is More
hypothesis predicts that participants with a reduced working
memory capacity (experimentally induced by the imposition
of a cognitive load) will perform better than participants with
no reduction of working memory.

Method
0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
No Load

Load

Figure 1: Results of Experiment I, Statistical Learning of
Word Boundaries (Mean percent correct on vertical axis).

Results and Discussion
The results of both groups are in line with the results of
the word boundary learning experiments of Saffran et al.
(1996) and Saffran et al. (1997), and are shown in Figure
1. The mean score for the No Load group was 74%. A
single-sample t test (two-tailed) showed that performance
was significantly above chance, t (15) = 9.94, p <.01. The
mean score for the Load group was 65%, which was
significantly above chance as well, t (15) = 5.20, p <.01.
A two-sample t test of the No Load vs. Load means was
significant (p <.03), indicating superior performance on
the part of the No Load group over the Load group.
In the present experiment, both groups exhibited
learning. However, the Load group did not outperform the
No Load group, contrary to the prediction of the Less is
More hypothesis. Rather, this finding is consistent with a
More is More hypothesis, that is, with the idea that
enhancing cognitive resources enhances cognitive
performance.

Experiment II: Syntactic Agreement
While the results of Experiment I were inconsistent with
the Less is More hypothesis, it could be argued that
segmenting words from a stream does not involve the sort
of componential analysis that Newport (1990) considered
necessary for successful language acquisition. Experiment
II consists of a task that would require such a

Thirty-two adult college students were recruited from the
subject pool of the University of Iowa Psychology Department
and randomly assigned to two groups (No Load or Load) as in
Experiment I.
An artificial language with a small vocabulary and a simple
grammar was created for this experiment. The vocabulary of
this language consisted of twenty one-syllable noun roots and
twenty one-syllable verb roots. The grammar consisted of two
rules. First, all sentences were two words in length, each
composed of a noun followed by a verb. Second, the noun and
verb of each sentence agreed in number, with singular nouns
marked with the suffix -bo, plural nouns with -za, singular
verbs with -ki, and plural verbs with -nu. Thus, the noun da
and the verb me could form both the sentence da-bo me-ki
(singular) and the sentence da-za me-nu (plural). The exposure
and test corpuses were set up such that all the words in the test
phase had been heard in the exposure phase, but that all of the
test sentences were new.
For the sake of comparison across Experiments, the
instructions and procedures in Experiment II were made as
parallel as possible to those used in Experiment I.
Subjects in the No Load condition were told that they would
hear an artificial language consisting of a series of two-word
sentences. They were told nothing about the number of
different words or the length of the words. The participants
were told that this language was spoken by a computer
speech-synthesis program that did not put pauses between
words or sentences. Their task, then, was to listen to the
language and see if they could figure out where the sentence
breaks were supposed to be. They were also told that they
would be tested on their ability to find the sentence breaks at
the end of the experiment. The rationale for giving the
participants this task during exposure was twofold: One was to
keep the participants focused on the stimulus, and the other
was to keep the procedures in Experiment II as parallel as
possible to those in Experiment I. During the test phase, the
participants were told to listen to each pair of sound items and
decide which of the two sounded more like the training
stimulus.
Subjects in the Load condition were given a drawing task
and cover story as in Experiment I. During the test phase, they
were asked to decide which of the two items in each trial
sounded more like the stimulus that played while they were
drawing. However, at no time were they told about the content
of the stimulus.

Results and Discussion
The results of Experiment II are shown in Figure 2. Mean
performance of the No Load group was 56%. A single-sample

t test showed that performance was significantly above
chance, t (15) = 4.57, p < .01. Mean performance of the
Load group was 52%. This performance was not
significantly above chance, t (15) = 1.23, n.s. A twosample t test comparing No Load vs. Load means,
however, was significant, p < .05.
1.00

in the Word Boundary task was significantly better than in the
Syntactic Agreement task, regardless of condition. Likewise,
performance in the Load condition was significantly worse
than performance in the No Load condition, regardless of task.
The results of this ANOVA suggest, first of all, that the
syntactic agreement task was inherently more difficult than the
word boundary task was. In addition, they suggest that the
imposition of a cognitive load leads to reduced performance in
either of these tasks, a finding that runs counter to the
predictions of the Less is More hypothesis.

0.80

General Discussion
0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00

No Load

Load

Figure 2: Results of Experiment II, Statistical Learning of
Syntactic Agreement (Mean percent correct on vertical
axis).
Contrary to the predictions of the Less is More
hypothesis, the No Load group did not outperform the
Load group; on the contrary, the Load group significantly
outperformed the No Load group. However, the null
result in the Load condition makes the findings of this
experiment hard to interpret. It is not clear whether the
Load group failed to learn due to the inherent difficulty of
the task, or if they would have exhibited learning had they
been given a longer exposure period. When Saffran et al.
(1997) increased exposure in their incidental word
boundary learning task to two 21-minute sessions on
consecutive days, the participants’ performance improved
significantly. However, the participants in Saffran’s
(1997) phrase-structure learning experiments showed no
significant improvement from Day 1 to Day 2 in either the
explicit (No Load) (Saffran, 1997) or incidental (Load)
(Saffran, 1997) conditions. At the very least, the results of
the present experiment suggest that increased working
memory capacity leads to better performance. There could
also be a role for attention in the acquisition of syntax, as
the null result in the Load condition suggests that syntax
may not be learnable at all without attention.
Results across Experiments I and II were analyzed in a
two-way ANOVA of task (Word Boundaries vs. Syntactic
Agreement) by condition (No Load vs. Load). The results,
as shown in Figure 3, indicate main effects for both task
and load, but no interaction. In other words, performance

Experiment I clearly indicates that, at least with regard to
the segmentation of words in a speech stream based on
statistical regularities, the Less is More hypothesis does not
hold. Under that hypothesis, we would expect to see better
performance on the part of the Load participants. What we see
instead is significantly better performance on the part of the
No Load participants, exactly the opposite of what we would
expect if the Less is More hypothesis were true. The same
pattern of results obtained in Experiment II, suggesting that
the Less is More hypothesis does not hold in the domain of
syntax acquisition, either.
A key issue in the Less is More hypothesis is the issue of
the role of working memory in language acquisition. The Less
is More hypothesis posits that the restricted working memory
in children aids them in language learning, and furthermore
maintains that the larger working memory capacity of adults
hinders their language learning ability. An alternative to the
Less is More hypothesis would be a More-is-More hypothesis
predicting that the greater the cognitive resources available,
the better the language learning (or any other) performance
will be. The data presented in this paper are consistent with
that view.
1.00

0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
No Load vs. Load
Word Boundaries
Syntactic Agreement
Figure 3: Result of ANOVA across Experiments I and II.

Even if it were the case that the lower performance in
the No Load condition were in part because participants
were not attending to the stimulus (and not merely
because of working memory limitations imposed), this
would still in some sense represent a reduction of
available cognitive resources and thus, according to the
Less is More hypothesis, should still result in better
performance. We recognize that there is a potential
confound in the two experiments presented here between
the effect of the manipulation on working memory and on
attention. Research currently underway in our lab is
testing the separate effects of working memory and
attention on the acquisition of syntax.
We would also like to address three concerns with the
present research that have been brought to our attention.
The first concern is that Experiment I may not be relevant
to the Less is More hypothesis. However, a similar result
in both experiments suggests similar mechanisms at work
in both the word boundary learning and syntactic
agreement learning tasks, making Experiment I relevant
to our argument. The second concern is that the
dependencies were too close, creating a situation in which
the Less is More hypothesis would predict no advantage
for a limited working memory capacity. But if this were
the case, then we would expect no difference in
performance between the Load and No Load groups.
Rather, we see that even when dependencies are only a
syllable apart, the Load group performs significantly
worse than the No Load group. The third concern is that
the low performance in Experiment II may be due to
having too many words to learn; in other words, syntax
acquisition was hindered by the demands of vocabulary
acquisition. However, it is not at all clear that it is
necessary to learn the words in order to learn the syntax.
For example, it is doubtful that the infants in Santelman &
Jusczyk (1998) knew all the words in the sentences they
heard; nevertheless, they were sensitive to the longdistance dependency being tested for.
To the extent that the Less is More hypothesis is
challenged, the question is raised of how to account for
the observed critical period effect (Lenneberg 1967) in
language acquisition. The Less is More hypothesis makes
the implicit assumption that the only relevant difference
between children and adults approaching the language
learning task is working memory capacity. However, it is
very likely that there are other differences, motivational in
particular, between the conditions under which children
and adults enter a language learning situation besides just
working memory capacity (Schuman, 1975, as cited in
Johnson & Newport, 1989). In fact, empirical evidence
suggests that when motivational factors are held constant
in a laboratory situation, children fare worse than adults,
as they did, for example, in the experiments reported by
Saffran (1997).

Conclusion
After seven years in Japan, Herrigel (1953) finally masters the
bow, learning to send the arrow to its target with apparent
effortlessness. Yet behind that appearance of ease lies seven
years of struggle. Seeming effortlessness is the goal in
mastering the bow, not the means to mastering it. Likewise in
mastering a language. Facility in a language is achieved only
by an arduous, extended process. The language learning
process demands a great expense of cognitive effort, and it
only stands to reason that the more cognitive resources one
has available, the more likely one is to succeed at the task.
This premise is borne out by the evidence presented here:
adults performed better at language learning tasks when there
were no other cognitive demands placed on them. At least for
the aspects of language acquisition examined here, it is clear
that less is less, not more.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Steven Luck and Rochelle Newman
for many helpful discussions.

References
Elman, J.L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science 14, 179-211.
Elman, J.L. (1993). Learning and development in neural
networks: the importance of starting small. Cognition 48,
71-99.
Gathercole, S.E., Willis, C.S., Baddeley, A.D. & Emslie, H.
(1994). The children's test of nonword repetition: a test of
phonological working memory. Memory 2, 103-127.
Herrigel, E. (1981). Zen in the art of archery. New York:
Vintage Books.
Johnson, J.S. & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period effects
in second language learning: the influence of maturational
state on the acquisition of English as a second language.
Cognitive Psychology 21, 60-99.
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language.
New York: Wiley.
Newport, E.L. (1990). Maturational constraints on language
learning. Cognitive Science 14, 11-28.
Saffran, J.R. (1997). Statistical learning of syntactic structure:
mechanisms and constraints. Doctoral dissertation,
Departments of Brain & Cognitive Sciences and
Linguistics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY.
Saffran, J.R., Newport, E.L. & Aslin, R.N. (1996). Word
segmentation: the role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Saffran, J.R., Newport, E.L., Aslin, R.N., Tunick, R.A. &
Barrueco, S. (1997). incidental language learning: listening
(and learning) out of the corner of your ear. Psychological
Science, 8, 101-105.
Santelmann, L.M. & Jusczyk, P.W. (1998). Sensitivity to
discontinuous dependencies in language learners: evidence
for limitations in processing space. Cognition 69, 105-134.

