UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Dynamic Field Model of Location Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47v8x9xd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Spencer, John P.
Schoner, Gregor

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Dynamic Field Model of Location Memory
John P. Spencer
john-spencer@uiowa.edu
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242
Gregor Schöner
gregor@lnf.cnrs-mrs.fr
Center for Research in Cognitive Neuroscience, C.N.R.S.
31, ch. Joseph Aiguier
13402 Marseille Cedex 20, France
Abstract
One of the fundamental questions in cognitive science is how
people remember the locations of important objects in the
world with enough accuracy to find these objects when they
are no longer in view. Evidence from a variety of studies
suggests that people rely on visible reference axes—streets,
walls, the edges of a table—to help them remember the
locations of target objects. Use of such perceptual information
can help stabilize memory, but there is a cost: when people
are asked to reproduce the location of a hidden object, they
exaggerate the distance between the reference axis and the
actual location of the object. These memory errors increase in
magnitude as memory delays increase. Thus, errors away
from reference axes may provide a window into the secondto-second processes the serve to maintain location
information in memory. In the present report, we describe a
dynamic field model that captures in quantitative detail how
information is maintained in memory near reference axes.
This model explains the time-dependent integration of
memory and perceptual processes, thereby moving beyond
current models of location memory.

Introduction
To interact successfully with the world, people must
remember the locations of important objects with enough
fidelity to find these objects when they are no longer visible.
This is relatively easy when the target object shares a clear
relationship with a visible landmark (e.g., under the
landmark). In more challenging situations, however, there
may be long delays between perception of the location and
action toward it, and the target object may be hidden within
a continuously varying scene or a field of view with
relatively few perceptual landmarks. In these situations, how
do people accurately maintain location information in
memory?
Research on the short-term characteristics of location
memory has generally focused on what people represent in
memory when asked to remember the location of a hidden
object. For instance, Smyth and colleagues have
demonstrated that people represent locations relative to both
egocentric body position and an allocentric reference frame
(Smyth, Pearson, & Pendleton, 1988). Other data suggest
that humans and non-human primates encode locations in
retinotopic coordinates, head-centered coordinates, and
shoulder or body-centered coordinates (e.g., Feigenbaum &

Rolls, 1991; Graziano, Hu, & Gross, 1997; Woodin &
Allport, 1998).
Although the question “what is represented” is central to
the study of location memory, it is equally important to
understand how represented information is maintained in
memory over short-term delays. In the past decade, this
issue has been the focus of several neurophysiological
studies (e.g., Constantinidis & Steinmetz, 1996; Rao,
Rainer, & Miller, 1997). These studies have demonstrated
that the sustained activation of neurons in prefrontal cortex,
premotor cortex, and posterior parietal cortex underlie the
maintenance of location information over short-term delays.
Nevertheless, there have been relatively few behavioral
studies investigating the short-term characteristics of
location memory. The small number of behavioral studies is
surprising given that virtually all of the studies examining
what people represent in memory ask participants to
reproduce remembered locations following a delay. A prerequisite for understanding the effects in many of these
studies, then, is to understand how information about one
location is maintained for several seconds.
The relative lack of behavioral data on maintenance
processes has also led to a de-emphasis on time-dependent
models of location memory. The goal of the present report is
to introduce a dynamic model of location memory. This
model represents the first attempt to explicitly capture how
location information is maintained in memory over shortterm delays.

How Is Location Information Maintained?
One way to help maintain an accurate memory of location
over delays is to encode locations relative to visible
reference cues in the environment. People might, for
instance, encode locations relative to salient perceptual
landmarks. This can help stabilize memory, particularly if
the landmark is visible from a variety of vantage points
(e.g., the Eiffel Tower).
Although the use of landmarks has been well documented
(e.g., Sadalla, Burroughs, & Staplin, 1980), the present
report emphasizes people’s use of a different, but equally
prevalent type of reference cue—visible reference axes. The
environments in which people typically act are naturally
sub-divided by visible reference axes. Reference axes such

as streets, rivers, and walls sub-divide far spaces, while axes
such as the edges of tables, the edges of a computer screen,
and the edges of a counter top sub-divide near spaces. Data
from a variety of spatial memory studies suggest that, as
with visible landmarks, people use reference axes to help
them remember locations (e.g., McNamara, Hardy, & Hirtle,
1989). However, the use of reference axes may have a cost.
Specifically, when people are asked to reproduce the
location of a target object near a reference axis after
different delays, responses become systematically distorted
away from the reference axis on a second-by-second basis
(Spencer, 2000). These delay-dependent effects are central
to the present report because they provide insights into the
processes that serve to maintain location information in
memory.

Location Memory Biases Near Reference Axes
Spatial priming and free recall studies have shown that
adults use reference axes to help them remember locations.
Specifically, adults group locations in memory relative to
reference axes. McNamara and colleagues, for example,
asked adults to learn the locations of multiple objects in a
room subdivided by tape on the floor (McNamara et al.,
1989). After the layout of objects was learned, participants
read pairs of object names presented sequentially on a
computer screen and judged if the second object was present
in the original layout of objects. Adults responded more
quickly when the two objects were in the same spatial
region than when they were in different regions. This
occurred even if the objects in different regions were
physically closer than the objects in the same region.
Similarly, free recall of objects and places is ordered
relative to reference axes (McNamara et al., 1989). For
example, adults use reference axes such as streets and rivers,
recalling buildings and businesses from one region before
recalling items in adjoining regions.
Although these data demonstrate that people use reference
axes to organize location memory, it is difficult to isolate
how such axes are used in these tasks because people are
asked to remember multiple locations in the presence of
many reference cues. Other studies have used much simpler
tasks in which people remember a single location on each
trial in the context of simple reference cues. In these studies,
participants are typically shown a dot inside a geometrical
figure. The dot is then covered up, there is a short delay, and
participants are asked to reproduce the dot’s location in a
second, blank figure (e.g., Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Duncan,
1991; Huttenlocher, Newcombe, & Sandberg, 1994).
These studies allow a more complete view of the
processes that maintain location information in memory,
because factors central to these processes can be directly
manipulated. For instance, the length of memory delays and
the separation between the target location and the axes of
the geometrical figure can be manipulated across trials. In
addition, two types of error can be measured—the mean or
constant error across responses to the same location, and the
variability of these responses. These two measures provide
complementary views of how location information is
maintained. Constant error indicates both the direction and

magnitude of memory biases. Variable error indicates how
stably location information is maintained.
Data from several location reproduction studies
demonstrate that location memory is systematically
distorted near reference axes. Specifically, memory is biased
away from visible reference axes when the to-beremembered locations are close to these axes. Huttenlocher
and colleagues (1994) asked children and adults to
reproduce the locations of dots within a rectangular frame.
Responses in this study were biased away from the left and
right edges of the frame. Similarly, when older children and
adults were asked to reproduce the locations of dots within a
circle, they made errors away from the edges of the circle
(Huttenlocher et al., 1991; Sandberg, Huttenlocher, &
Newcombe, 1996). Finally, Engbretson and Huttenlocher
(1996) asked adults to reproduce the direction of a line
within a “V” frame. Responses were once again biased
away from the edges of the frame (see also, Schiano &
Tversky, 1992).
In addition to biases away from visible reference axes,
responses in these studies were biased away from “mentally
imposed” axes. For example, participants made errors away
from the vertical midline axis of the rectangular and V
frames (Engebretson & Huttenlocher, 1996; Huttenlocher et
al., 1994). Similarly, in the circle task, adults made errors
away from both vertical and horizontal axes, suggesting
they mentally sub-divided the circle into quadrants
(Huttenlocher et al., 1991; Sandberg et al., 1996).
Finally, data from a recent study demonstrate that biases
away from reference axes increase systematically over
short-term delays. Spencer and Hund (2000) asked adults to
reproduce the location of targets at different angular
distances from the midline axis of a large, homogeneous
task space. Participants moved to these remembered
locations after delays that ranged from 0 to 20 s. As the
delay increased, participants’ responses were biased away
from midline and became more variable. These delaydependent effects suggest that errors away from reference
axes may be a product of the processes that maintain
information in memory. As such, these errors may offer
unique insights into how location information is maintained
over short-term delays.

Perceptual Processes and Reference Repulsion
Although delay-dependent results from Spencer and Hund
(2000) indicate that memory decay plays a key role in
response biases near reference axes, data from several
studies suggest that memory processes are not the sole cause
of these biases. Instead, perceptual processes contribute to
biases near reference axes. Specifically, perceptual
judgements of dot location and line orientation are biased
away from reference axes. Importantly, these biases occur
even though, in many studies, reference and target displays
are presented simultaneously. Thus, errors away from
reference axes in these studies cannot be caused by memory
processes.
For instance, when a test line abuts a visible reference line
forming an acute angle, people report the angle is larger
than it actually is. This acute-angle expansion or tilt
contrast effect is maximized at small angles and if the

reference line is horizontal or vertical (e.g., Blakemore,
Carpenter, & Georgeson, 1970). Judgements of line
orientation are also repelled from “virtual” reference axes
(e.g., Beh, Wenderoth, & Purcell, 1971). Virtual reference
axes result from the symmetry properties of geometrical
figures. A square, for example, has four virtual reference
axes—two diagonals and horizontal and vertical axes. Beh
et al. (1971) showed that when adults are asked to judge the
orientation of a rod in the context of a square frame, adults’
judgements are repelled from the closest axis of symmetry
defined by the square frame. Such repulsion is particularly
strong near horizontal and vertical axes.
Finally, adults’ judgements of dot position are repelled
from visible reference axes. Rauber and Treue (1998) asked
adults to judge if two sequentially presented locations were
identical. When these locations were close to a vertical
reference line, adults’ judgements were repelled from the
reference line. This effect decreased as the separation
between the target location and the reference line increased.
To summarize, data suggest that both memory processes
and perceptual processes contribute to response biases near
visible reference axes. Response biases increase
systematically over delays, suggesting that these errors are
caused, in part, by how location information is maintained
in memory. However, responses are also biased away from
reference axes when reference and target displays are
presented simultaneously, suggesting that perceptual
processes play an important role.
Here we present a formal model that brings together
perceptual and memory processes to explain the origin of
response biases near reference axes. Central to this account
is the proposal that initial biases in perceptual processes are
amplified in memory over short-term delays. Specifically,
our model demonstrates how enhanced perceptual
processing of visual information near reference axes can
produce both biases in perceptual judgements and biases in
how information is maintained in memory.

5

10

delay (s)

15

20

Figure 1. Schematic of apparatus. Targets projected on
tabletop from below. Movements recorded using an
Optotrak motion analysis system. Inset shows sample
target positions relative to starting point.

reference cues were explicitly controlled (Figure 1). The
experimental table was quite large (4’ x 5’) and the surface
was homogeneous. Experimental sessions were conducted
in dim lighting in a room with black curtains covering the
walls and ceiling. This prevented participants from using
external landmarks. Nevertheless, the hand, body, and table
were clearly visible. Participants sat in a chair positioned
within an arc cut out from one edge of the table (Figure 1).
This limited their ability to use the front edge of the table as
a reference location. Thus, in this task setting, visible
reference cues included the edges of the table and its axes of
symmetry, the location of the participant’s body and hand,
and any reference locations projected onto the surface of the
table.
In the first experiment (Spencer & Hund, 2000),
participants moved to three target locations—a left, center,
and right location—15 cm from a starting position located
on the midline axis of the table. The delay (0-20 s) between
the offset of a target light and a “go” signal was varied as
was the angular distance of the targets from midline (10°,
20°, 40°, 60°, 80°; see Figure 1). Based on the results of
studies by Huttenlocher and colleagues, we expected
participants to make errors away from the midline reference
axis, particularly when targets were close to 0°. The key
question was how these errors would change as a function
of delay. As the delay increased in the 10°, 20°, and 40°
conditions, constant directional errors to the left target
became
significantly
more
negative
(larger
counterclockwise errors), and errors to the right target
became significantly more positive (larger clockwise errors)
(Figure 2a). Errors to the center target remained small
across all delays. At larger target separations, the magnitude

b

10

mean variable error (°)

mean directional error (°)

mean directional error (°)

0

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

80°
start

The model we propose here was designed to capture data
from several experiments that have explicitly investigated
the time-dependent processes that underlie reference
repulsion (Spencer & Hund, 2000). In these experiments,
participants pointed to target locations projected on a large,
opaque tabletop. Pointing movements were tracked using an
optical-electronic motion-analysis system (Optotrak,
Northern Digital, Inc.). Importantly, the layout of all visible
a

20

20°
40°

-80°

Empirical Results to be Modeled

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

Optotrak

-20° 0°
-40°

40

60

target separation (°)

80

5

c

left
center
right

4

3

2
10

20

40

60

80

target separation (°)

Figure 2. (a) Mean directional errors over delays for movements to the left, center, and right targets in the 20° condition. Inset
shows a schematic of target locations and mean directional error. Error bars = ½ standard deviation. (b) Constant (mean) and (c)
variable (standard deviation) directional errors for movements to each target location across target separation conditions.

The Model
To explain the pattern of memory decay near reference
axes, we propose the following dynamic field model. This
model specifies how perceptual and memory processes are
integrated over delays to produce reference repulsion.
Although this model represents a new approach to location
memory, several of the concepts we discuss here have been
used to capture how adults plan reaching movements to
visually specified target locations (Schöner, Dose, &
Engels, 1995).
The starting point for our dynamic field model is the
concept of an activation field, where “activation” indicates
the likelihood that a participant will move to a specific
location at a particular moment in time. Plans to move to a
target can be thought of as distributions of activation values
across all possible target locations, with higher values
indicating that a person is more likely to move to these
locations than to others.
Two different types of information are integrated within
the activation or action planning field. The first input—
target input—captures the appearance and disappearance of
the target light. The second input—P-ACT input—
represents a participant’s memory of previously activated

locations. The integration of these inputs in the planning
field is governed by an interaction function that determines
how activation at one site in the field influences activation
at other sites. We use a local excitation and lateral inhibition
interaction function. Thus, activation at one site increases
the activation of its neighbors and decreases the activation
of sites far away. One consequence of this function is that
strong input can produce “self-sustaining” activation. Such
patterns of activation maintain themselves, even after input
is removed. In this way, the planning field can maintain a
memory of the input.
The main concepts of the dynamic field model are
captured in Equation 1. This equation specifies how
activation in the planning field changes from time step to
time step. Specifically, the change in activation at the next
time step is a function of the current activation, the current
inputs (target, P-ACT), and the way current above-threshold
activation at each site enhances or suppresses activation at
all other sites (local excitation/lateral inhibition function).
Once computed, the change in activation is added to the
current activation to produce the activation in the planning
field at the next time step.

τu& ( x, t ) = −u ( x, t ) + h + ∫ dx′w( x, x′) f (u ( x′, t ))
+ Star ( x, t ) + Spact ( x, t ) + Snoise( x, t )

Equation 1. Rate of change in field activation =
- current activation + base activation + sum(current
thresholded activation weighted by the interaction
function) + target input + P-ACT input + spatiallycorrelated noise
Central to our dynamic field model is the way the model
integrates perceptual and memory processes. We propose
that interaction is not identical across all sites in the field,
i.e., interaction is inhomogeneous. Specifically, interaction
is more precise at sites associated with visible reference
axes due to enhanced spatial tuning of visual processes at
these locations. Thus, local excitation will be narrowly
distributed at sites associated with a reference axis—the
focus of enhancement—and broadly distributed across sites
associated with regions of “empty” space. This is depicted
in Figure 3. This figure shows the local excitation/lateral
inhibition functions (positive/negative values) at twelve
different locations in a sample field. The focal point in this
example is at location 150, reflecting the presence of a
reference axis at this central location. Local excitation is
1.2
1
0.8

activation

of the errors away from midline decreased (Figure 2b) and
no longer depended on delay. Variable (standard deviation)
directional errors also increased over delays (see errors bars
in Figure 2a). As with the constant errors, this effect was
larger for movements to the left and right targets than to the
center. Variability was largest in the 20° condition and
decreased significantly at the other target separations
(Figure 2c).
Results from this study indicate that location memory
decays over short-term delays. More importantly, however,
these results reveal a specific pattern of decay near a
reference axis. Both constant and variable error increased
over delay when participants moved to the left and right
locations, and both types of error remained small when
participants moved to midline. In addition, errors were
largest at 20°, and decreased as the left and right targets
were moved farther from midline. Thus, reference repulsion
decreased for targets far from midline. Finally, there was a
reduction in both constant and variable error very close to
midline (at 10°).
In a second experiment, we found similar delaydependent effects near reference axes, demonstrating that
decay effects generalize to conditions in which the three
targets are not symmetrically positioned around the midline
axis of the table (Spencer & Hund, 2000). Specifically, we
rotated the three targets clockwise and counterclockwise
around the midline axis. For example, in one condition,
targets were located at -60°, -40°, and -20°, while in another
condition, targets were located at -40°, -20°, and 0°. Across
all modified layout conditions, participants’ responses to
non-0° targets were repelled from midline as delays
increased. In addition, the magnitude of these errors
decreased as the targets were rotated away from midline
(e.g., from -20° to -40° to -60°). Finally, participants’
responses to targets along the midline axis were accurate
with low variability.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

location
Figure 3. Sample modulation of local
excitation/lateral inhibition function
around the focal point x0 (location 150).

most narrow at location 150, and expands to the left and
right of this location.
The type of inhomogeneity we propose is conceptually
similar to a proposal made by Suzuki and Cavanagh to
account for repulsion effects in visual processing (1997);
however, according to our proposal, inhomogeneities in
visual processes couple directly into the processes that
maintain location information in memory (via the
interaction function). This has two effects on activation in
the planning field over memory delays. First, activation
peaks situated on or near the focus of enhancement will be
attracted toward this focal point and remain stably
positioned over delays. Second, activation peaks further
from the focus of enhancement will be repelled from this
focal point, because peaks gravitate toward sites with
broader local excitation.
The form of inhomogeneous interaction we use is shown
in Equations 2 and 3. We use an exponential form of
inhomogeneity centered at the focal point x0—the site
associated with the reference axis. The width of local
excitation is modulated across the spatial range specified by
σσ, and the magnitude of the modulation is specified by the
amplitude parameter (Aσ).

w( x, x ′) =

Target Input

direction
Figure 4. Simulation of the dynamic field model. “Input”
axes are identical to axes in field graph. Numbers mark
events during a single trial. See text for details.

panel of Figure 4 shows the P-ACT input. Activation in this
panel is high near -20°, 0°, and 20°, reflecting a
participant’s memory of activation at these sites on previous
trials. For simplicity, we assume that this input is relatively
constant during a 20 s trial. The upper panel shows the
target input. Activation in this panel is zero at the start of the
trial when the target is not visible, high at -20° when the
target is turned on, and zero again when the target is turned
off. The P-ACT and target inputs are integrated within the
action planning field shown in the right panel. At the start of
the trial, the planning field is slightly “pre-activated” at
previously moved-to locations (1). This reflects the P-ACT
input. Next, a target is turned on and a peak of activation
builds up in the planning field at the target direction driven
by the strong target input (2). This input generates a peak
that is maintained even after the target is turned off (3).
Finally, during the delay, the peak is repelled from the focus
of enhanced interaction (0°) and drifts away from midline
(4). This effect is partially counteracted by the P-ACT input
which attracts the peak toward previously activated
locations, in this case, toward 0° (5).
The model depicted in Figure 4 not only captures how
information is maintained in memory on a single trial, but
also the delay-dependent pattern of constant and variable
errors reported in Spencer and Hund (2000). Figure 5 shows
simulation results from 100 iterations of the model in which
the location of maximal activation in the field was read-out
at different delays. As can be seen in this figure, the
constant and variable errors computed from simulations of
the model capture the pattern of error shown in Figure 2
across both delays and target separations.


 ( x − x ′) 2  
− wi + exp −
2 
2π σ int 
 2σ ( x)  

σ ( x) = σ int(1 − Aσ exp[−( x − x 0) / σσ ])
Equation 3. The interaction function (Equation 2) is
inhomogeneous because the effective width of local
excitation, σ(x), depends on the field location x.

Model Results

0

5

10

delay (s)

15

20

mean variable error (°)

mean directional error (°)

mean directional error (°)

Figure 4 shows a simulation of the dynamic field model that
captures delay-dependent results from the 20° condition in
Spencer and Hund (2000). Recall that in this condition,
participants moved to three targets positioned symmetrically
about midline. Figure 4 shows how activation in the
planning field evolves from second to second during one
trial in which the target is presented at -20°. The lower left
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

b

5

10

1

time

5

activation

2

G int

a

4

P-ACT Input

Equation 2. The interaction function is specified by
w(x,x’), a local excitation/lateral inhibition function.

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

Action planning field

3

20

40

60

target separation (°)

80

3

c

left
center

2

1

0
5

10

20

40

60

80

target separation (°)

Figure 5. (a) Directional errors over delays for simulated trials to the left and center targets in the 20° condition. (b)
Constant and (c) variable directional errors for simulated trials to these targets across target separation conditions.

Discussion
The dynamic field model effectively integrates the
perceptual and memory processes that the literature suggests
underlie biases away from reference axes. This model
moves beyond the capabilities of previous location memory
models in three fundamental ways. First, the field model
proposes a specific integration mechanism that captures how
location information is maintained from second-to-second
over short-term delays. No current models of location
memory are explicitly time-based. Second, the field model
effectively reproduces time-dependent changes in both
constant and variable errors near reference axes. Most
models of location memory account for biases near
reference axes; however, we know of no models that capture
patterns of both bias and variability. Third, due to the
“intrinsic” properties of the planning field, this field can
generate its own activation in the absence of input. Thus, the
field model can generate behavior that does not directly
mirror the characteristics of input. Consequently, our model
moves beyond models of location memory that posit that
response biases are due to the relative weighting of inputs
(e.g., Huttenlocher et al., 1991).
Finally, it is important to note that response biases in the
dynamic field model are not solely a function of
inhomogeneous interaction. As noted in Figure 4, the
localization of activation peaks in the field is caused by the
relative strength of repulsion effects (inhomogeneous
interaction) and attraction effects (attraction toward P-ACT
input). This has two important consequences. First, the field
model may account for a second class of response biases
prevalent in the spatial memory literature—attraction
toward “prototypical” locations. We are currently exploring
this possibility. Second, by changing the relative strength of
repulsive and attractive effects, we may be able to capture
striking differences in the performance of individuals.
Consequently, the dynamic field model may offer insights
not only into group effects, but also into the origins of
individual differences in memory performance.

Acknowledgements
This work was
Spencer from
Interdisciplinary
Gregor Schöner
Studies.

supported by a CIFRE grant to John P.
the University of Iowa and an
Research Grant to John P. Spencer and
from the Obermann Center for Advanced

References
Beh, H., Wenderoth, P., & Purcell, A. (1971). The angular
function of a rod-and-frame illusion. Perception and
Psychophysics, 9, 353-355.
Blakemore, C., Carpenter, R., & Georgeson, M. (1970).
Lateral inhibition between orientation detectors in the
human visual system. Nature, 228, 37-39.
Constantinidis, C., & Steinmetz, M. A. (1996). Neuronal
activity in posterior parietal area 7a during the delay
periods of a spatial memory task. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 76, 1352-1355.
Engebretson, P. H., & Huttenlocher, J. (1996). Bias in
spatial location due to categorization: Comment on

Tversky and Schiano. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 125(1), 96-108.
Feigenbaum, J. D., & Rolls, E. T. (1991). Allocentric and
egocentric spatial information processing in the
hippocampal formation of the behaving primate.
Psychobiology, 19(1), 21-40.
Graziano, M. S. A., Hu, X. T., & Gross, C. G. (1997).
Coding the locations of objects in the dark. Science, 277,
239-241.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98(3), 352-376.
Huttenlocher, J., Newcombe, N., & Sandberg, E. H. (1994).
The coding of spatial location in young children.
Cognitive Psychology, 27, 115-147.
McNamara, T. P., Hardy, J. K., & Hirtle, S. C. (1989).
Subjective hierarchies in spatial memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15, 211-227.
Rao, S. C., Rainer, G., & Miller, E. K. (1997). Integration of
what and where in the primate prefrontal cortex. Science,
276, 821-824.
Rauber, H.-J., & Treue, S. (1998). Reference repulsion
when judging the direction of visual motion. Perception,
27, 393-402.
Sadalla, E. K., Burroughs, W. J., & Staplin, L. J. (1980).
Reference points in spatial cognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
6, 516-528.
Sandberg, E. H., Huttenlocher, J., & Newcombe, N. (1996).
The development of hierarchical representation of twodimensional space. Child Development, 67, 721-739.
Schiano, D. J., & Tversky, B. (1992). Structure and strategy
in encoding simplified graphs. Memory and Cognition,
20(1), 12-20.
Schöner, G., Dose, M., & Engels, C. (1995). Dynamics of
behavior: Theory and applications for autonomous robot
architectures. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 16, 213245.
Smyth, M. M., Pearson, N. A., & Pendleton, L. R. (1988).
Movement and working memory: Patterns and positions
in space. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
40A, 499-514.
Spencer, J. P., & Hund, A. M. (2000). Location memory
biases induced by experience-dependent and visually
based reference frames. Manuscript in preparation.
Suzuki, S., & Cavanagh, P. (1997). Focused attention
distorts visual space: An attentional repulsion effect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 23(2), 443-463.
Woodin, M. E., & Allport, A. (1998). Independent reference
frames in human spatial memory: Body-centered and
environment-centered coding in near and far space.
Memory and Cognition, 26, 1109-1116.

