UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Dynamical Model of Insightful Memory Retrieval

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7jf7k5m3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Jimura, Koji
Komazaki, Hisaaki
Matsuoka, Takashi
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Dynamical Model of Insightful Memory Retrieval
Koji JIMURA, Hisaaki KOMAZAKI
Takashi MATSUOKA, Masanori NAKAGAWA, Takashi KUSUMI
f jimura | komaspee | matsuoka | nakagawa | kusumi g@tp.titech.ac.jp

Department of Human System Science, Tokyo Institute of Techonology
2-12-1 O-okayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8552, JAPAN

Abstract

could also travel among memories. Tani employed a nonlinear resistance to control the chaotic transition. It is
interesting to apply such dynamics to the memory retrieval process of actual psychological phenomena.
Therefore, our purposes were (1) to explore how people
reach an impasse and break it by insight in the memory
retrieval process, (2) to develop a dynamical model using
a chaotic neural network from the results, and (3) to
examine the model using computer simulations.

The authors propose a dynamical model of memory retrieval that explains how people break an impasse or a memory block spontaneously without an
external stimulus. We describe the process as \insightful memory retrieval". First, an experiment
was conducted in which 15 participants retrieved
eight Chinese characters from memory space using gural pattern cues. The results indicated that
the retrieval process was divided into three phases:
(1) direct retrieval, (2) indirect retrieval, and (3)
an impasse and insightful retrieval. Second, a dynamical model named DIMeC was developed from
the results. The direct and indirect phases depend on constraint relaxation, and the insightful
retrieval phase is simulated using a chaotic neural network. Third, the DIMeC model was implemented on a computer. The results of the simulation indicate that the model re ects the typical
dynamic retrieval process of the participants.

Experiment

Method
Participants The participants were 15 Japanese grad-

uate students at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Material The problem they were given was to nd
all the Chinese characters (Kanji) that can be made by
adding one straight line to \I " without rotation, where
\I " denotes the initial character in Figure 1. Eight Chinese characters can be constructed from \I ". Figure 1
shows the initial character (I ) and the target characters
(C1 :::C8) and Table 1 shows the operations that must be
made on the initial character to retrieve the targets. All
Japanese people should have learned all these characters
and the initial character in school between ages seven
and fteen years. We call the problem the ALIC (Add a
Straight Line to the Initial Character) task.
Procedure Each participant was tested individually,
and participants' actions and speech were recorded using
a VCR. The participants were told to write down their
answers on a sheet. During the session, they were urged
to speak their thoughts aloud and to write, regardless of
incorrect answers. When the participants indicated that
they could not think of any more targets, they were told
the number of remaining targets. Each session lasted
until all eight targets were retrieved.

Introduction

Insight and memory block resolution are connected (e.g.,
Weisberg & Alba 1981; Bowers, Balthazard, & Parke
1990; Yaniv, Mayer, & Davidson 1995). Insight is characterized by spontaneity, suddenness, unexpectedness,
and satisfaction (Seifelt et al. 1995), however, research
into memory blocks, including the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon, output interference, xation, and priming effects has not shown a \spontaneous" mechanism (e.g.,
Smith 1995; Smith & Tindell 1997; Yaniv et al. 1995).
These researchers have explained a memory block and
its resolution mechanism by setting an external stimulus, such as priming. We assume that \insightful memory retrieval" expresses a spontaneous mechanism, which
breaks a memory block or an impasse without an external stimulus.
An arti cial neural network is one of the cognitive
models that can explain the human memory system.
Many models use a minimized energy function to retrieve a memory from an initial pattern, and cannot
search for additional memories. Inevitably, they cannot
express dynamical retrieval processes, such as retrieving one memory from another. However, Nara, Davis,
& Totsuji (1993) developed a model that could travel
among memories, using chaotic dynamics by controling
the number of connections among units. Tani (1996)
developed the \chaotic steepest descent" model, which

Results
Retreival Times and Targets All the participants

retrieved all the targets within 30 minutes. Figure 2
shows the retrieval patterns of the 15 participants. Each
line represents the retrieval pattern of one participant.
The horizontal axis indicates the cumulative number of
retrieved targets and the vertical axis indicates the cumulative time. These patterns indicate that the retrieval
processes were \insightful". The participants routinely
retrieved ve to seven targets regularly in 0 to 120 seconds, however, they could not retrieve the remaining targets for a long time; they reached an impasse (a memory
1

Table 2: Retrieval times for targets

Target C1 C2 C3 C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
Mean3 44.1 26.5 66.0 71.0 283.0 294.5 291.9 141.5
S.D. 61.5 29.3 64.3 55.1 483.4 487.0 455.1 189.2
Note: n = 15, 3 seconds
2
Time
[sec]
6.0 x10

5.0
4.0

Figure 1: Initial (I ) and target (C1 :::C8 ) characters
Table 1: Targets and operations
Target
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5

C6
C7
C8

3.0
2.0

Operation on the initial character
Add a vertical line inside I
Add a horizontal line inside I
Add a vertical line on the left outside I
Add a horizontal line under I
Add a vertical line that goes through I and
protrudes from the bottom
Add a vertical line that goes through I and
protrudes from the top
Add a vertical line that goes through I and
protrudes from both the top and the bottom
Add a slanted line on the top of I

1.0
0

1

2

3

4

5
6
7
8
Cumulative Number

Figure 2: Retrieval patterns (n = 15)
Distance
3.0
2.0

block developed). Then, they broke the impasse, and
subsequently retrieved the remaining targets relatively
quickly.
Table 2 shows the mean retrieval time and the standard diviation for the eight targets by the 15 participants. There was a relationship between the gural features of the targets and retrieval time. Targets C1 and
C2 , which are made by adding a line inside the initial
character, were retrieved quickly. Targets C3 and C4 ,
which are made by adding a line outside the initial character, were retrieved next. It took longer to retrieve
targets C5 , C6 , and C7, which have same added feature,
a protruding line. Figure 3 shows the cluster tree for
the eight targets obtained by cluster analysis using the
exible method, where = 0:25. Each target was
clustered by retrieval time, so that the distance between
targets indicates the retrieval time interval. It is clear
that C3 and C4 were retrieved within a short interval,
and the same applies to C1 and C2 , and C5 and C6 .
These results show that the participants retrieved the
targets using gural cues.
Protocol analysis The protocol data revealed that the
participants repeated the following processes: (1) drawing a straight line, (2) con rming whether the character
was a target. Repeating the processes, they reached the
following three phases. Phase1 (direct retrieval): 14 out
of 15 participants reached this phase, and retrieved some
targets without failure. Phase2 (indirect retrieval): All
the participants reached this phase, and retrieved some
targets with retrieval failures, repeated retrievals, or by
making writing motions with the hand without producing a visible trace. Phase3 (impasses and insightful retrieval): 13 out of 15 participants reached this phase,
and were unable to retrieve the remaining targets for a
long period (over 50 seconds). In this period, they drew
curved lines, added two stroks and found a Chinese char-

1.0

C1 C2 C3 C4 C8 C7 C5 C6

Figure 3: Cluster tree of the targets
acter formed by adding two lines to the initial character,
or did nothing. They failed repeatedly and their mental
state uctuated. However, they then suddenly retrieved
one of the remaining targets. Once they found the gural
pattern of the retrieved target, the rest were retrieved.
Table 3 shows the frequency of retrieved targets and
time spent in each phase for the 15 participants. C1 and
C2 (add inside) were retrieved mainly in Phase1. C3 and
C4 (add outside) were retrieved mainly in Phase2. C4,
C5, and C6 (add protruding line) were retrieved mainly
in Phase3. C8 (add a slanted line) was retrieved in all
phases. The duration time indicates that it took much
longer to complete Phase3 than Phase1 or Phase2, so
that the subjects smoothly retrieved some targets in
Phase1 and Phase2, with some failues, but were deadlocked for a long time in Phase3. This indicates that
retrieving targets by adding a line inside \I " was easy,
adding a line outside was relatively easy, and adding a
protruding line was dicult.

Discussion
Chinese Characters for Japanese People Japanese

people store Chinese characters as not only letters but
also words, and they can understand their meanings from
their shapes, and it is natural and routine for them. We
regard the ALIC (Add a Straight Line to the Initial
Character) task as similar for Japanese people to the
Word Fragment Completion task (e.g., Smith & Tindell
1997) for English-speaking people in terms of making up
de ciency to retrieve a word.
2

Table 3: Frequency of retrieved target and duration time in each phase

Retrieval with Constraint Relaxation It has been

Duration time3
Mean S.D.
23.2
15.2
57.4
38.1
540.3 547.6

Object Constraint

-

Inhibit Signal

Inner
Outer

-

-

-

-

-

-

Relational Constraint

raki & Suzuki (1998) maintained that the problem can
be expressed by three components (object, relation, and
goal), where each component has a constraint, and that
insight problems are solved by cooperation among the
components and with relaxing their constraints, which
triggers a representation change. We assume that memory retrieval processes in the direct and indirect phases
depend on the relaxation of constraints (object and relation), evaluated by the goal constraint.
Insightful Retrieval with Chaotic Process Finke
& Bettle (1996) maintained that insight is spontaneous,
and occurs at levels of processing that lie below conscious awareness and control of the underlying process,
which characterizes chaotic thinking, and that a chaotic
process can often be employed when normal pathways
are blocked. Then, we assume that chaotic dynamics
explain the insight process.
Conscious and Unconscious Layer Since Finke &
Bettle (1996) maintained that a chaotic process is employed without awareness when logical strategies fail,
we developed a model including conscious and unconscious layers. The former characterizes direct and indirect retrieval and the latter characterizes an impasse
and insightful retrieval. In the conscious layer, a strategic process generates an image by adding one straight
line to the initial character \I ", and then the image is
sent to the unconscious layer. In the unconscious layer,
the memory space associates the image and the retreived
result is sent to the conscious layer, where it is evaluated.
Strategic procedures fail with repeated retrieval failure,
so a chaotic retrieval process is then employed in the
unconscious layer. Consequently, the state of the memory space repeats the chaotic transition and retrieves the
remaining targets by insight.

Retrieval Result
(22x22
nodes)

Memory Space
(Image Bitmap)

Goal Constraint

-

Protruding

Hypothesis of the Model
Retrieval Process and Constraint Relaxaion Hi-

-

Evaluation

-

C1, C2 ...

Activation

(32Nodes)

Horizontal

-

Unconscious Layer Conscious Layer

Model

-

Slanted

Activation

Operator Nodes
Image

Operator

Vertical

Retrieved Target

shown that there are constraints on insight problems and
that insight arises when the constraints are relaxed (e.g.,
Hiraki & Suzuki 1998; Knoblich et al. 1999). In the
ALIC task, there seemed to be stronger constraints to
add lines inside and outside the initial character, and a
weak constraint to add a protruding line. Their strength
seemed to change with repeated failure as the retrieval
process progressed. When the constraints were relaxed,
the participants could retrieve the remaining targets by
insight.

Lead with
Evaluation

2
12
1

Slanted line
C8
5
5
5

Bias Change

C3

Drawing Operation
Outside line
Protruding line
C4 Subtotal
C5 C6 C7 Subtotal
4
6
4 4 5
13
10
22
5 4 4
13
1
2
6 7 6
19

Bias Change

Inside line
C1 C2 Subtotal
Phase1
9 12
11
Phase2
5 3
8
Phase3
1 3 0
1
Note: n = 15, seconds

Figure 4: The DIMeC model

Retrieval Process

Figure 4 illustrates the model. We named the model
\DIMeC" (Dynamical model of Insightful Memory retrieval with Constraint relaxation). Narrow solid lines
are enabled only when a strategic process is employed,
the dashed line is enabled only when a chaotic process is
employed, and bold solid lines are enabled all the time.
DIMeC repeats the following four steps: it generates
an operator to draw a straight line; it generates an image
by adding the line to the initial character; it associates
the image with memory space and retrieves the result;
and it evaluates the result. This process retrieves some
targets and this period includes Phase1 and Phase2.
After retrieving some targets, an impasse arises, with
constraint relaxation because of repeated retrieval failure. Then, the chaotic process is employed and the remaining target is retrieved by insight. This period is
Phase3.

De nition of Memory Space

The image generated by the operator is associated with
the memory space to be evaluated. The memory space
is de ned by learning Chinese characters with the Hebb
rule, and representing their shape on a 22222 pixel image bitmap, where one unit represents one pixel. We employ a Hop eld network (Hop eld & Tank 1985) where
the internal state of the ith unit is de ned as xi ,
3

dxi
dt

=

0 xi

+

X
k

wk ui + i

!

Table 4: Targets and constraints

(1)

Constraint
Object
Relation
Target ver. hor. sla.
inn. out. pro.
C1
+
+
C2
+
+
C3
+
+
C4
+
+
C5
+
+
+
C6
+
+
+
C7
+
+
+
C8
+
+
Note: +indicates positive and - indicates negative

where  > 0;  > 0 and i is the threshold of ith unit.
The output of the ith unit is de ned as ui ,
2
(2)
ui =
1 + e0 x 0 1
where > 0. The energy function of the memory space
is de ned as E ,
X
E = 0 wij ui uj
(3)
where wij is the connective weight between the ith and
j th units. The weight is based on the one-year frequency
data for Chinese characters in the daily Asahi Shimbun
(Nozaki et al. 1996). Only the initial character and the
eight targets are trained.
Retrieval with Constraint Relaxation
As mentioned above, the retrieval process in the direct
and indirect phases depends on constraint relaxation
(object and relation). In the ALIC task, the object
constraint consists of three elements (horizontal, vertical, and slanted) and the relational constraint consists of
three elements (inside, outside, and protruding). Table 4
shows the relationship between constraints and targets.
The goal constraint is not relaxed, but evaluates the result of retrieval and acts on the object and relational
constraints.
Relational and Object Constraints A Hop eld network (Hop eld & Tank 1985) is employed to represent
object and relational constraints, which are called object
and relational constraint networks, respectively. One
unit is introduced for each constraint element, and each
inhibits the others within each network. The strength
of each constraint is represented by its threshold. The
initial state of the unit is set to zero, and the network
repeats the transition, minimizing the energy function.
After it stabilizes, an operator corresponding to the output of the constraint networks generates an image by
adding a straight line to the initial character. The operator consists of 32 units, previously de ned with the
protocol data of the experiment. The output of operator
q is calculated by the transformation matrix W,
i




Z
q = W R

G = 0TA

(5)
where A is the retrieved target vector and T is the transformation matrix from the target to the inhibitory signal.
Consequently, in the next operation, a di erent operator
with the same constraints generates an image.
(b) In the case of repeated retrieval of a target, the constraints corresponding to the previous operation are relaxed by,
@2
= 0r s
(6)
@t
where r > 0, 2 is the strength of the constraints (i.e.,
threshold vector of the object and relational constraint
networks), and s represents the relaxed unit.
(c) In the case of retrieval failure (i.e., nding no Chinese
characters), the constraints corresponding to the previous operation are relaxed by using equation (6) and replacing r with f where f > 0.
(d) In the case of an impasse, the state transition in the
memory space is led by an evaluation function. Details
are presented in the following section.
(e) In the case of an insightful retrieval, constraints
corresponding to the gural pattern of the target are
strengthened,
@2
= sVA
(7)
@t
where s > 0 and V is the transformation matrix from
the target vector to the gural pattern vector.

Impasses and Insightful Retrieval

Impasses and insightful retrieval processes arising in the
memory space are simulated using the \chaotic steepest
descent" (CSD) model (Tani 1996) led by an evaluation
function.
Chaotic Transition Tani (1996) developed the CSD
model with a neural network employing a nonlinear resistant fi for the ith unit.

(4)

where Z is the output of the object constraint network
and R is the output of the relational constraint network.
Then, the memory space assosiates the image and the result is retrieved.
Goal Constraint As mentioned above, the goal constraint evaluates the retrieval result and acts on object
and relational constraints. There are ve functions
(a) When a target is retrieved, the goal constraint sends
an inhibitory signal G to the units of the operator corresponding to the previous operation,

@E
= 0 @u
(8)
i
fi (x_ i ; t) = (d0 sin !t + d1 )x_ i + d2 x_ 2i sgn(x_ i )
where m > 0;  > 0; d0 > 0; d1 > 0; d2 > 0; ! > 0, ui is
the output of the ith unit, xi is the internal state of the
ith unit, x is the acceleration of x, and x_ is the velocity of x. With this model, Tani showed that the state
of the network travels from one energy basin to another
mxi + fi (x_ i ; t)

4

Time
2
x10
2.0

Time

I

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

R(C1 )
R(C2 ) F

2.5

R(C4 )

R(C3 )
F

x10

Time
2
x10
2.0

2

2.0

R(C1 )
R(C4 )
R(C8 )

1.5

R(C6 )

1.0
5.0
Target

C2 C1 C3 C4 C8 C6 C7 C5

0.0

I
R(C2 )R(C1 )
R(C7 )
R(C7 )

I R(C1 )
R
(C3 )
R(C1 )
R(C4 )
R(C2 ) F
R(C8 )
F

1.5
1.0

I
R(C8 )

0.5
Target

C7 C6 C5 C2 C1 C8 C4 C3

0.0

Target

C2 C1 C3 C4 C8 C6 C7 C5

Figure 5: Retrieval patterns simulation 1 (left); simulation 2 (center); simulation 3 (right)

 = 1:0 2 1003, = 3:0, f = 0:2, r = 0:8, s = 1:0,
m = 1:0, ! = =20, d0 = 4:0, d1 = 04:0, d2 = 4:952101,
= 1:0 2 1003 , = 1:2 2 101.

with chaotic dynamics as the resistance characteristics
change from positive to negative, and the transition pattern corresponds to the cluster tree of the memory pattern. We employ the CSD model to simulate traveling
among memories in an insightful retrieval process.
Transition by Evaluation Function Smith (1995)
maintained that metacognitive monitoring towards a
goal was often predictive of impending success. We have
developed a metacognitive evaluation mechanism, similar to that which Nakagawa (1987) used to explain avoidance behavior by maximizing the evaluation of a psychological measure,
X
2
Ev =
(9)
k log kuk 0 uk
k
where k > 0, uk is an already retrieved target vector, and u is the internal state vector in memory space.
The value of the evaluation gets larger as the state in
the memory space gets further from targets already retrieved.
As a result, we obtain the dynamics of the insightful
retrieval, which can go from one memory to others as
maximizing the evaluation,
@E
mxi + gi (x_ i ; xi ; t) = 0
@u
where > 0.

Method

gi (x_ i ; xi ; t)

i

v
= fi (x_ i ; t) + @E
@x
i

Simulation 2 The default constraint 2(0) was set as:
2(0) = [ 2:0 0:5 0:5 1:5 0:0 3:0 ]T (13)

In this condition, the vertical constraint was stronger
than the horizontal and slanted constraints; the protruding constraint was stronger than the inner constraint;
and the inner constraint was stronger than the outer
constraint. The other parameters were the same as in
simulation 1.
Simulation 3 d2 was set to 4:0, and the other conditions were the same as in simulation 1.

Results and Discussion

Figure 5 shows retrieval patterns of simulations 1, 2,
and 3. The horizontal axis indiates the retrieved target,
the vertical axis indicates cumulative time, R(Cn )(n =
1; 2:::8) denotes the repeated retrieval of Cn(n = 1; 2:::8),
F denotes retrieval failure, and I denotes the initial character. These patterns are similar to Figure 2. The retrieval patterns of the simulation re ected the typical retreival patterns of the participants, because (1) each result could be divided into three phases, (2) targets with a
gural pattern corresponding to strong constraints were
retrieved rst and weak ones were retrieved later, (3) targets with the same gural patterns were retrieved within
a short interval, and (4) the retrieval process reached an
impasse, and broke it insightfully by chaotic transition.
Simulaion 1 C2 (add inside) was retrieved at t = 14:3
and C1 (add inside) was retrieved at t = 24:7 because
of the strong inner constraint. This period represents
Phase1 (direct retrieval).
C2 was retrieved again at t = 35:2 and C1 was retrieved again at t = 45:6, so the vertical, horizontal, and
inner constraint were relaxed (i.e., the outer constraint
became relatively stronger). As a result, C3 (add outside) was retrieved at t = 45:7 and C4 (add outside)
was retrieved at t = 45:8. Retrieval failed at t = 57:7
and C4 was retrieved again at t = 57:8, so the horizontal, vertical, and outer constraints were relaxed. Since
the protruding and slanted constraints became relatively
stronger, C8 (add slanted) was retrieved at t = 68:8.
This period represents Phase2 (indirect retrieval with

(10)

Simulation

The threshold vecters that represent the object and relational constraints at t are expressed as:
2(t) = [ v h s i o p ]T (11)
where fv jhjsjijojpg represents the strength of vertical, horizontal, slanted, inner, outer, or protruding constraints, and the notation \T " indicates transposed.
Simulation 1 The default constraint 2(0) was set as:
2(0) = [ 2:0 2:0 1:0 1:5 1:0 0:5 ]T (12)
In this condition, the vertical and horizontal constraints
were stronger than the slanted constraint; the inner constraint was stronger than the outer constraint; and the
outer constraint was stronger than the protruding constraint. The other parameters were as follows:  = 1:0,
5

repeated retrieval of some targets and retrieval failures).
After a retrieval failure at t = 78:9, C8 was retrieved
again at t = 79:5, so the slanted and protruding constraints were relaxed. Then, the strategic process failed,
and the chaotic process was employed. The state in
the memory space traversed C4, I , C1, and C4 . Traveling among memories, C6 (add protruding) was retrieved at t = 162:3. Having retrieved C6 , the protruding constraint became stronger. Therefore, the chaotic
transition stopped and strategic process was employed
again. Consequently, C5 (add protruding) was retrieved
at t = 172:7 and C7 (add protruding) was retrieved at
t = 182:8 because of the stronger protruding constraint.
Retrieving all targets, the retrieval process ended. This
period represents Phase3 (impasses and insightful retrieval).
Simulaion 2 C7 , C6 , and C5 (add protruding) were retrieved rst because of the strong protruding constraint,
then C2 and C1 (add inside) were retrieved. Because
the outside constraint was weak, C4 and C3 were not
retrieved by the strategic process in Phase1 or Phase2,
but were retrieved by the chaotic process in Phase3.
Simulaion 3 In Phase1 and Phase2, the retrieval process was the same as in simulation 1, but C7 , C6 , and
C5 were retrieved earlier than in simulation 1 by the
chaotic process in Phase3, because the retrieval process
traveled among memories more often. This was caused
by the smaller value of the nonlinear resistant coecient
d2 , which corresponds to the result of Tani (1996).

conscious, and can explain the priming e ect, TOT phenomenon, output interference, and other memory block
phenomena.

References

Bowers, K. S., Regehr, G., Balthazard, C., & Parker, K.
(1990). Intuition in the Context of Discovery. Cognitive
Psychology, Vol.22, 72-110.
Finke, R. A. & Bettle, J. (1996). Chaotic Cognition Principles and Applications, Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Hiraki, K. & Suzuki, H. (1998). Dynamic Constraints Relaxation as a Theory of Insight. Cognitive Studies, Vol.5,
No.2, 69-79.
Hop eld, J. J. & Tank, D. W. (1985). \Neural" Computation of Decisions in Optimization Problems. Biological
Cybernetics, Vol.52, 141-152.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D. (1999).
Constraint Relaxation and Chunk Decomposition in Insight Problem Solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, Vol.25, No.6, 15341555.
Nakagawa, M. (1987). A Mathematical Model of Approach
and Avoidance Behavior in Psychological Field. Japanese
Psychological Research, Vol.29, No.2, 59-70.
Nara, S., Davis, P., & Totsuji, H. (1993). Memory Search
Using Complex Dynamics in a Recurrent Neural Network
Model. Neural Networks, Vol.6, 963-973.
Nozaki, H., Yokoyama, S., Isomoto, Y., & Yoneda, J. (1996).
A Study of Character Frequency - From the View Point
of Japanese Language Education. Educational Technology,
Vol.20, No.3, 141-150.
Seifert, C. M., Meyer, D. E., Davidson, N. S., Patalano, A.L.,
& Yaniv, I. (1995). Demysti cation of Cognitive Insight:
Opportunistic Assimilation and the Prepared-Mind Perspective. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (eds.) The
Nature of Insight, Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Smith, S. M. (1995). Fixation, Incubation, and Insight in
Memory and Creative Thinking. In Smith, S. M., Ward, T.
B., & Finke, R. A. (eds.) The Creative Cognition Approach,
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Smith, S. M. & Tindell, D. R. (1997). Memory Blocks in
Word Fragment Completion Caused by Involuntary Retrieval of Orthographically Related Primes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
Vol.23, No.2, 355-370.
Tani, J. (1996). Model-Based Learning for Mobile Robot
Navigation from the Dynamical System Perspective. IEEE
Transaction on System, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B Cybernetics, Vol.26, No.3, 421-436.
Weisberg, R. W. & Alba, J. W. (1981). An Examination of
the Alleged Role of \Fixation" in the Solution of Several
\Insight" Problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
General, Vol.110, No.2, 169-192.
Yaniv, I., Meyer, D., & Davidson, S. (1995). Dynamic Memory Processes in Retrieving Answers to Questions: Recall
Failures, Judgments of Knowing, and Acquisition of Information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, Vol.21, No.6, 1509-1521.

General Discussion

Research into memory blocks has shown its process by
setting an external stimulus (e.g., Smith 1995; Smith
& Tindell 1997; Yaniv et al. 1995). We examined
the dynamic spontaneous process of its resolution, and
showed that the retrieval processes are similar to insight
with constraint relaxation. We think that insight and
memory block resolution can be explained by the same
mechanism, even though representational change or information retrieval can explain the process of insight.
The DIMeC (Dynamical model of Insightful Memory retrieval with Constraint relaxation) was developed, depending on constraint relaxation and a chaotic neural
network. Therefore, we consider that the DIMeC architecture can be applied to the dynamic insight process.
Human memory has been explained using a neural
network model based on its parallelism and distributive
representation. Too much interest in this has prevented
the development of a dynamical model of memory retrieval, although the human cognition process essentially
consists of both parallel and sequential processes. The
DIMeC model is a hybrid system that has both parallel
and sequential mechanisms, enabling it to explain dynamical processes. It also refers to the conscious and un6

