UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Generative Connectionist Model of the Development of Rule Use in Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86m878c8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Marcovitch, Stuart
Zelazo, Philip David

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Generative Connectionist Model of the Development of Rule Use in Children
Stuart Marcovitch (stuartm@psych.utoronto.ca)
Philip David Zelazo (zelazo@psych.utoronto.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, M5S 3G3, Canada

Abstract
The cascade correlation algorithm (CASCOR), a generative
connectionist model, was used to simulate age-related
changes on the dimensional change card sort (DCCS), which
has traditionally been used to evaluate the complexity of
children’s rule-use abilities. Like 2.5-year-olds, inexperienced
networks behave as if following one rule; slightly more
experienced networks (akin to 3-year-old children) behave as
if following a pair of rules; and the most experienced
networks (akin to 5-year-olds) behave as if following two
pairs of rules. Analysis of the networks’ activation levels
revealed that mastery of simple rules is a necessary
precondition for using higher order rules. The model also
generated four novel predictions that can be tested in future
research with children.

Introduction
Since its inception, artificial intelligence has made a large
impact on the field of psychology. The infusion of computer
generated models into psychological research has become
increasingly common. In the past decade, connectionist
models have become particularly influential as a research
tool in psychology. Connectionist models benefit
psychology in three ways: (a) successful simulation requires
formalization of the assumptions of the model, (b) analyzing
the solution of a connectionist network may provide insight
into the psychological mechanisms used, and (c) the model
may generate novel (and often counter-intuitive)
predictions. In particular, connectionist modeling used in
conjunction with empirical research has the potential to shed
light on patterns of development across a wide range of
cognitive domains. Researchers in developmental
psychology have already employed connectionist models to
simulate developmental phenomenon in a variety of
cognitive tasks (e.g., McClelland & Jenkins, 1991; Schultz,
Schmidt, Buckingham, & Mareschal, 1995; see Elman et al.,
1996, for a comprehensive review). Often, the results of
these simulations call into question contemporary
explanations of cognitive development.
According to Cognitive Complexity and Control theory
(CCC; Frye, Zelazo, & Palfai, 1995; Zelazo & Frye, 1997),
developmental improvements on tasks assessing deliberate
reasoning and intentional action can be attributed to the
acquisition of increasingly complex rule systems.
Specifically, CCC postulates that young children (2.5 years)
can use one rule, slightly older children (3 years) can use a
pair of rules, while the oldest preschoolers (5 years) can use
two incompatible pairs of rules. Rule-based card sorting
paradigms have been employed to illustrate the number of

Target Cards

Test Cards

Figure 1: Stimuli for DCCS
rules that children can use. In these tasks, children are given
cards that can be placed in one of two boxes based on a rule.
For example, Zelazo, Reznick, & Piñon (1995) instructed
2.5-year-olds to sort pictures into categories such as things
found inside the house versus things found outside.
Typically, these children were able to sort the first card
correctly, but then perseverated and sorted all subsequent
cards in the same box. Thus, these results demonstrated that
2.5-year-old children could sort by one rule (e.g., if picture
of things found inside the house then put card there), but not
by a pair of rules (e.g., if picture of things found inside the
house then put card here, but if picture of things found
outside, then put card there).
The Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS; Frye et al.,
1995; Zelazo, Frye, & Rapus, 1996) has also been used to
reveal age-related changes in the number of rules children
can use simultaneously. In the standard task, children are
shown two target cards that differ on two dimensions, say
color and shape (e.g., red car and blue flower). Children are
presented with test cards that share one dimension with one
target and the other dimension with the other target (e.g., red
flower and blue car, see Figure 1). In the pre-switch phase,
children are instructed to sort the test cards (i.e., match the
test card to the appropriate target card) according to one rule
(color or shape). After a predetermined number of preswitch trials (e.g., 5, see Zelazo et al., 1996), children are
asked to sort the same test cards by the other rule. So, the
same test card will be sorted differently in the pre-switch
and post-switch phases. On this task, 3-year-old children
tend to pass the pre-switch phase, but fail the post-switch
phase. This indicates that these children can sort by one pair
of rules (e.g., in the color game, if it’s red it goes here, but if
it’s blue it goes here), but not by two incompatible pairs of
rules (e.g., if it’s the color game, then if it’s red it goes here,
and if it’s blue it goes here but if it’s the shape game, then if
it’s a flower it goes here and if it’s a car it goes here.) Fiveyear-old children tend to pass both the pre-switch and post-

Training Phase

was closest to the actual output value was considered the
matching target.
In the training set, the network received a set of simple
rules. The network was presented with the relevant game
(e.g., color), a bidimensional test card (e.g., red flower), and
two bidimensional target cards (e.g., a red car and a blue
flower). For all the examples in the training set, the context
units were set to the training context (i.e., 1.0, 0.0).
The network updated its weights based on a supervised
learning algorithm. The network’s output was compared to
the expected output (i.e., in the color game, a red flower
should be matched to the red car), and the weights were
updated using the quickprop algorithm (Fahlman, 1988) and
batch learning (i.e., the weights were updated after each
epoch, as opposed to each example). Quickprop is a weight
adjustment algorithm that is much quicker than backprop
because it uses second-order (curvature) information as well
as first-order (slope) information when adjusting weights,
whereas backprop is restricted to slope information. Slope
information indicates the direction of change; curvature
information provides an index of the change in slope, which
is used to determine the magnitude of weight change
(Mareschal & Shultz, 1996; also see Fahlman, 1988, for
more details).
In the training phase of the simulation, all possible
training combinations were used. That is, 2 games (color or
shape) X 4 test cards (red flower, blue flower, red car, blue
car) X 4 target combinations (red flower, blue flower, red
car, blue car for target ‘A’; target ‘B’ differed from target
‘A’ on both dimensions), which yielded 32 training
examples. Because the preliminary goal was to simulate
data that were averaged over groups of children, a crosssectional design was implemented as per previous studies of
the DCCS with children (e.g., Zelazo et al., 1996). Twenty
networks were trained in each of 5 conditions that differed
on the number of epochs of training that the network
experienced. The conditions were 50, 75, 100, 150, and 225
epochs.

Age-related changes in the DCCS were simulated using
CASCOR. The networks had 15 inputs. The first input
determined the game that was to be played (color or shape).
The next 12 input units determined the color and shape of
the stimulus cards. Each card was coded across 4 attribute
units (red, blue, car, flower). A value of 1.0 indicated the
presence of an attribute while a value of 0.0 indicated the
absence of the attribute. For example, the values {1.0, 0.0,
0.0, 1.0} indicated a red flower. The test card and the two
target cards were each represented by specific
configurations across the 12 units. The 14th and 15th units
were context units, which determined if the network was
learning in the training context {1.0, 0.0} or the test context
{0.0, 1.0}. These context units were necessary to distinguish
learning that occurred in the natural environment (training)
from the laboratory environment (test). There was one
output unit that returned a value ranging from -0.5 to 0.5.
Matching to the first target card was assigned an output
value of -0.5, whereas matching to the second target card
was assigned an output value of 0.5. The target value that

After various amounts of exposure to the training set,
training was halted so that the network could be tested.
Testing consisted of changing the training set to five
examples (pre-switch trials) that correspond to the five trials
of the pre-switch phase of the DCCS. In all five trials, the
network was presented with the same game (i.e., shape), the
same two target cards (i.e., target ‘A’ was a red flower,
target ‘B’ was a blue car), and the context nodes were set to
the test context (i.e., 0.0, 1.0). The two possible test cards
were presented (i.e., red car and blue flower) on alternate
trials with one test card presented three times and the other
test card presented twice. The network updated its
connection weights after each pre-switch trial. After the fifth
pre-switch trial, the network was tested on two post-switch
trials. These were equivalent to the pre-switch trials, except
now the network was asked to sort by the other dimension
(e.g., color). The output revealed how the network sorted
each of the two test cards. Because weights were not

switch phase, which illustrates that they can sort by two
incompatible pairs of rules in the same context, and
arguably requires the use of a higher order rule for selecting
between pairs of rules.
The goal of the present study was to simulate the
development of rule use in children using a generative
connectionist model. Our study had three objectives: (a) to
capture the age-related changes that are observed in
children’s sorting between the ages of 2.5 and 5 years, (b) to
generate novel predictions, and (c) to explore what the
internal structure of the connectionist networks reveals
about the structuring of dimensions and features within the
dimensions vis à vis success on the task.
In the present study, we used the cascade correlation
learning algorithm (CASCOR; Fahlman & Lebiere, 1990) to
simulate children’s performance on the DCCS. Some
researchers (e.g., Shultz, 1991) have suggested that
CASCOR is appropriate in simulations of cognitive
development because it embodies Piaget’s principles of
assimilation and accommodation. CASCOR is a generative
algorithm that begins with connections between all the
inputs and the output, but no hidden units. The model
attempts to learn the training set in the constraints of this
architecture, a phase akin to the Piagetian concept of
assimilation. However, if the training set cannot be learned
within a specific network architecture, hidden units are
recruited as needed to increase computational power. Each
hidden unit receives connections from all input units and all
previously recruited hidden units. The restructuring of the
network to create a more adaptive architecture is akin to the
Piagetian concept of accommodation. One advantage of
CASCOR is that the hidden unit chosen for recruitment is
the one that will produce the lowest overall error.
Consequently, the modified network is poised to solve the
task at hand, and will do so more efficiently (using fewer
hidden units) than networks with fixed architectures.

Test Phase

updated in the post-switch phase, two post-switch trials
were sufficient for the appropriate categorization of the
network.
The network outputs were categorized into one of four
categories based on criteria used with children (e.g., Zelazo
et al., 1996):
(1) Fail Pre-Switch - The network incorrectly sorted on two
or more pre-switch trials.
(2) Fail Post-Switch (same box) – The network passed the
pre-switch phase, but incorrectly sorted on one of the
two test trials in the post-switch phase (i.e., the network
put all of the cards in the same box).
(3) Fail Post-Switch (perseveratively) – The network
passed the pre-switch but incorrectly sorted both test
cards in the post-switch phase (i.e., the network
perseverated on the two original rules).
(4) Pass Post-Switch – The network correctly sorted both
test cards in the post-switch phase.

Results
The CASCOR network began with the 15 input units and
the one output unit. Although the network did not initially
contain hidden units, these were recruited as needed through
the progression of the simulation. The number of hidden
units recruited was noted. The number of networks in each
of the four classifications is displayed in Table 1.
Table 1: Performance of CASCOR networks on DCCS
Categorization of Network

No. of
Epochs
50
75
100
150
225

FPre
12 (1*)
5 (5*)
10 (10*)
2 (2**)
1 (1**)

FPost
Box

Fpost
Pers

Pass

2 (1*)
7 (7*)
2 (2*)
1 (1*)
0

0
5 (5*)
5 (5*)
4 (2*, 2**)
0

6 (1*)
3 (2*)
3 (3*)
13 (3*, 10**)
19 (19**)

Note. FPre = Fail Pre-Switch; Fpost Box = Fail Post-Switch (same
box); FPost Pers = Fail Post-Switch (perseveratively); Pass = Pass
Post-Switch. The number of hidden units recruited by the networks
is represented by asterisks (*). For example, 3* means three
networks recruited one hidden unit, while 10** means 10 networks
recruited 2 hidden units.

In the 50-epoch condition, 12 out of 20 (60%) of the
networks failed the pre-switch phase. For the slightly more
experienced network in the 75-epoch condition, 15 out of 20
(75%) of the networks passed the pre-switch phase.
Furthermore, 12 out of 15 (80%) of those networks went on
to fail the post-switch phase. In the 225-epoch condition, 19
out of 20 (95%) of the networks passed the pre-switch
phase. All of those networks (100%) went on to pass the

post-switch phase. Overall, this pattern of results mirrored
the pattern found in the empirical literature. Namely, the
youngest children tend to fail the pre-switch phase,
indicating failure to use a single pair of rules systematically.
The slightly older children pass the pre-switch phase but fail
the post-switch phase. Finally, the oldest children tend to
pass both the pre-switch and post-switch phases, arguably
indicating that they were capable of using a higher order
rule for selecting between two incompatible pairs of rules.
Table 2: Number (and row percentages) of networks in
each classification based on the number of hidden units.
Categorization of Network

No. of
Hidden
Units
0
1
2

FPre

11 (61%)
16 (33%)
3 (9%)

FPost
Box

Fpost
Pers

Pass

1 (6%)
11 (23%)
0

0
12 (25%)
2 (6%)

6 (33%)
9 (19%)
29 (85%)

Note. FPre = Fail Pre-Switch; Fpost Box = Fail Post-Switch (same
box); FPost Pers = Fail Post-Switch (perseveratively); Pass = Pass
Post-Switch.

The number of hidden units the network recruited seems
to be related, albeit imperfectly, to performance on the
DCCS. Table 2 displays the classification of networks
across all five conditions based on the number of hidden
units. A chi-squared analysis revealed a relation between the
number of hidden units and the DCCS classification, 32 (6,
N = 100) = 49.40, p < 01. The majority of networks with no
hidden units fail the pre-switch phase, while the majority of
networks with two hidden units pass both the pre-switch and
post-switch phases. Networks with one hidden unit tend to
be transitional and distributed across all four conditions.
Thus, it can be argued that by acquiring more sophisticated
internal representation (measured by the number of hidden
units), more complex rules can be solved.
The current findings are congruent with Siegler’s (1996)
notion that cognitive development is driven by changes in
strategy selection. According to this notion, children
typically have a number of strategies available to them to
solve any task. With age, the likelihood of selecting more
appropriate strategies increases. However, even at older
ages, children sometimes select inappropriate strategies. In
the current simulations, increases in the number of hidden
units may correspond to increases in the likelihood of
selecting a more appropriate strategy. For example,
networks with two hidden units usually adopt the most
appropriate strategy (85% of the time), but occasionally
adopt a less-appropriate strategy.

In addition to capturing the general pattern of age-related
changes on the task, the simulations offer several
predictions that raise interesting questions for future
empirical work:
(1) In networks that passed the pre-switch phase but failed
the post-switch phase, there was a developmental
increase in the proportion that failed perseveratively (as
opposed to sorting cards in the same box). In the four
network conditions where these types of errors occur,
the proportions that failed perseveratively were 0%,
42%, 71%, and 80%, for 50, 75, 100, and 150 epochs
respectively. We expect a similar increase with
children.
(2) The proportion of networks that passed the pre-switch
phase followed a U-shaped developmental trajectory.
The proportions in the network conditions were 40% at
50 epochs, 75% at 75 epochs, 50% at 100 epochs, 90%
at 150 epochs, and 95% at 225 epochs respectively. It is
predicted that children will follow a similar U-shaped
trajectory.
(3) The unexpected decrease in the proportion of networks
that pass the pre-switch phase occurred in the same
condition (100 epochs) as when the networks began to
fail the post-switch phase perseveratively as opposed to
putting the cards in the same box. Arguably, this
occurred because the networks are beginning to
categorize both dimensions simultaneously. This will
lead to a decrease in performance in the pre-switch
phase (sorting is more likely to be based on the wrong
dimension), and an increase in perseverative errors in
the post-switch phase (more likely to sort the cards
according to the dimension that was previously correct).
It is predicted that careful analyses of children’s
performance will reveal similar trends.
(4) Although 60% of the networks at 50 epochs failed the
pre-switch phase, those that passed tended to pass the
post-switch phase (6 out of 8, 75%). It is predicted that
the youngest children (2.5-year-olds) who are able to
pass the pre-switch phase will succeed in the postswitch phase. Perhaps these children have learned to
sort a pair of rules, but fail to link the rules in the preswitch to the rules in the post-switch. As a result, the
post-switch phase is treated independently of the preswitch phase, with a consequent absence of proactive
interference.

Analysis of Network Activations
A primary benefit of connectionist simulations to cognitive
psychology is the ability to analyze the internal
representations of the networks. To that end, cluster
analyses were carried out on the activations of the hidden
units and the output node in the networks for each of the
training examples. Figure 2 displays graphically the results
from the analysis of one randomly selected network in the
225-epoch condition1 (i.e., after the network had learned to
1

Cluster analyses on less experienced nets revealed similar
patterns as the 225-epoch condition. However, the results were

sort successfully on both pre-switch and post-switch trials).
Each training example is represented by a string of seven
letters. The first letter denotes which game the network is
required to play. The next six letters denote the test card, the
first target and the second target respectively. Training
examples that are clustered together elicit similar activation
levels from the hidden units and the output. Because the
features of the first target card necessarily determine the
features of the second target card (e.g., red flower is always
paired with blue car), only the first target card is discussed
in the analysis.
As can be seen from Figure 2, group A contains all of the
examples that have flowers both in the test card and in the
target card. In contrast, all training examples that have cars
in the test card and in the target card are in group B. Thus,
the network appears first to discriminate, at least partially,
on the basis of the shape dimension.
Group A (the flower group) can further be separated into
2 subgroups, C and D. Of all the test cards in group A,
subgroup C contains all of the blue test cards, whereas
subgroup D contains most of the red test cards (75%).
Similarly, group B (the car group) can be further separated
into subgroups E and F. Of all the test cards in group B,
most of the blue test cards (80%) are in subgroup E,
whereas most of the red test cards (75%) are in subgroup F.
Therefore, once the shape dimension is established, the
network appears to discriminate on the basis of color.
Correct performance on the DCCS requires more than
successful categorization of the stimuli by the appropriate
dimension. It is also necessary to categorize the stimuli by
the type of game that is to be played. In Figure 2, all
branches labeled G indicate the six places where this occurs.
Based on the network’s activation levels, we can speculate
that success on the DCCS may first involve categorizing the
stimuli by one dimension. Once this categorization has been
established, the stimuli are then categorized by the other
dimension. Only when both dimensions are appropriately
categorized can a higher order rule that discriminates
between the two dimensions, such as the type of game, be
considered. This interpretation is consistent with CCC
theory (Frye at al., 1995; Zelazo & Frye, 1997). For
example, Zelazo (1999) suggested that success on the preswitch phase of the DCCS requires the conjunction of two
simple rules into a contrastive pair of rules. Each pair of
rules must then be mastered before a higher order rule
controlling their selection can be evoked. Without this
higher order rule, children will select the rule that is most
strongly associated with the given context (i.e., fail
perseveratively on the post-switch phase).

Conclusions
In conclusion, the CASCOR simulations were successful in
its three goals. First, the age-related changes on the DCCS
task were simulated. Namely, inexperienced networks failed
the pre-switch phase, slightly more experienced networks
more variable. It appears that experience stabilizes the clustering
structure.

Figure 2: Cluster analysis on hidden and output unit activations of a
randomly selected network in the 225-epoch condition.
passed the pre-switch phase but failed the post-switch phase
and the most experienced networks passed both the preswitch and post-switch phases. Second, novel predictions
were generated and will be tested in future research. These
include (1) an age-related increase in the number of children
who fail the post-switch phase perseveratively (as opposed
to sorting all the test cards in the same box), (2) a U-shaped
developmental curve depicting performance on pre-switch
trials, and (3) those very young children who pass the preswitch phase will also pass the post-switch phase due to a
relative lack of proactive interference. Third, cluster
analyses on the hidden and output unit activations suggest
that the formation of a higher order rule requires that the
stimuli can be appropriately categorized by the appropriate
dimensions. Further empirical research, coupled with
modifications to modeling, hopefully will lead to an
increased understanding of the mechanisms involved in the
development of children’s flexible rule use.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by a research grant from
NSERC of Canada to Philip David Zelazo. We thank Ulrich
Müller for providing constructive comments on an earlier
draft of this manuscript.

References
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith,
A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking
innateness: A connectionist perspective on development.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fahlman, S. E. (1988). Faster-learning variations on backpropagation: An empirical study. In D. S. Touretzky, G.
E. Hinton, & T. J. Sejnowski (Eds.), Proceedings of the
1988 Connectionist Models Summer School. Los Altos,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Fahlman, S. E., & Lebiere, C. (1990). The cascadecorrelation learning architecture. In D. S. Touretzky (Ed.),
Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol.
2 . Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Frye, D., Zelazo, P. D., & Palfai, T. (1995). Theory of mind
and rule-based reasoning. Cognitive Development, 10,
483-527.
Mareschal, D., & Shultz, T. R. (1996). Generative
connectionist networks and constructivist cognitive
development. Cognitive Development, 11, 571-603.
McClelland, J. L., & Jenkins, E. (1991). Nature, nurture,
and connections: Implications of connectionist models for
cognitive development. In K. VanLehn (Ed.),
Architectures for intelligence. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Shultz, T. R. (1991). Simulating stages of human cognitive
development with connectionist models. In L. Birnbaum
& G. Collins (Eds.), Machine learning: Proceedings of
the eighth international workshop. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Shultz, T. R., Schmidt, W. C., Buckingham, D., &
Mareschal, D. (1995). Modeling cognitive development
with a generative connectionist algorithm. In T. J. Simon
& G. S. Halford (Eds.), Developing cognitive
competence: New approaches to process modeling.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of
change in children’s thinking. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Zelazo, P. D. (1999). Language, levels of consciousness,
and the development of intentional action. In P. D.

Zelazo, J. W. Astington, & D. R. Olson (Eds.),
Developing theories of intention. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zelazo, P. D., & Frye, D. (1997). Cognitive complexity and
control: A theory of the development of deliberate
reasoning and intentional action. In M. Stamenov (Ed.),
Language structure, discourse, and the access to
consciousness. Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Zelazo, P. D., Frye, D., & Rapus, T. (1996). An age-related
dissociation between knowing rules and using them.
Cognitive Development, 11, 37-63.
Zelazo, P. D., Reznick, J. S., & Piñon, D. E. (1995).
Response control and the execution of verbal rules.
Developmental Psychology, 31, 508-517.

