UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are Retrievals from Long-Term Memory Interruptible?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1b922710

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Byme, Michael D.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are Retrievals from Long-Term Memory Interruptible?
Michael D. Byrne
byrne@acm.org
Department of Psychology
Rice University
Houston, TX 77251

Abstract
Many simple performance parameters about human memory
are not well-understood. One such parameter is how the
cognitive system handles interruption at a relatively low level.
This research is an attempt to determine if simple, wellpracticed retrievals from long-term memory can be interrupted
by a higher-priority task. An experimental paradigm referred
to as a “reverse PRP” paradigm is introduced, and the results
of one experiment in this paradigm reported. The results
suggest that retrievals can indeed be interrupted, but that there
is an interruption cost.

interrupted? Rather than attempt to answer this question on
theoretical or computational grounds, this research
approaches this as an empirical question.

Reverse PRP Paradigm
Consider this simple dual task: two digits appear on a
display, and the product of those digit should be spoken
aloud. On some trials, the digits are replaced a short time
after they appear by a colored block. When the block
appears, the task is to make a choice response based on the
color of the block as rapidly as possible. Because the delay is
short, the appearance of the color block may be interrupting
Introduction
the retrieval of the product of the two digits. Can the single,
simple retrieval be interrupted?
There are numerous situations in which people are
This task shares a number of important properties with the
interrupted in doing simple tasks by higher priority tasks and psychological refractory period (PRP) paradigm, which is
must drop what they are working on the new task. In most perhaps the simplest dual-task experimental paradigm. The
situations, this is merely an inconvenience. However, in PRP has a long history in psychology (see Pashler, 1994 for
high-performance tasks such as air traffic control, even a a review). In this paradigm, subjects are asked to do two
small delay in responding to the interrupting task can have tasks, usually referred to as T1 and T2, in rapid succession.
more serious consequences. In many cases, the interruption The stimulus for T1 appears, then after some delay (called
may place demands on perceptual or motor performance, but the stimulus onset asynchronoy or SOA), the stimulus for T2
in other cases it is a cognitive operation that is interrupted. appears. Subjects are instructed to give T1 maximum priority
Generally speaking, cognitive theories have little to say and the typical results are that responses to T2 are slowed,
about what should happen in such situations. However, this
does not mean that these phenomena cannot be understood in
Perception
Retrieval
Motor
the context of, and do not have implications for, theories of
cognition.
ACT-R/PM (Byrne & Anderson, 1998) provides a set of
Cognition
Motor
Perception
perceptual-motor extensions to the ACT-R cognitive
(a)
architecture (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998). Communication
between central cognition (the ACT-R production system)
and the perceptual-motor modules takes two forms: [1] the
left-hand, or THEN, side of productions can request activity
Perception
Retrieval
Motor
from the perceptual-motor modules (e.g. shift visual
attention, press a key), and [2] perceptual-motor modules
Perception
Cognition
Motor
deliver results (e.g. representations of percepts) to ACT-R’s
declarative memory in the form of chunks.
(b)
Declarative memory chunks in ACT-R are accessed via
retrieval, which is a time-consuming process. That is,
retrievals take time, which is part of the process of matching
Perception
Retrieval
Motor
the IF side of productions in ACT-R. Because perceptualmotor modules operate in parallel with the production
system, it is possible for one or more of the perceptual-motor
Perception
Cognition
Motor
modules to change the contents of declarative memory while
a retrieval is in progress. The fundamental question this
research is attempting to address is what happens in this
(c)
situation: Do retrievals always complete or can they be
Figure 1. Predictions of the ballistic retrieval hypothesis

and more so at shorter SOAs. Results of such experiments
have been taken as evidence that central cognition is
effectively serial (again, see Pashler 1994 for a review).
The basic experimental paradigm used in this research
inverts the priority instruction given to the subjects. That is,
subjects are instructed to give T2 maximum priority; when
the T2 stimulus onsets, subjects are to immediately give that
stimulus highest priority. If T1 involves retrieval from
declarative memory, the interruptibility of of that retrieval
will have a large impact on response time for T2. If the T1
retrieval is not interruptible (this will be termed “ballistic”),
then, assuming serial cognition, cognitive processing of the
T2 stimulus will be forced to wait for the completion of the
retrieval and will thus be slowed. In particular, it should be
slowed more at shorter SOAs. This situation is depicted in
Figure 1. In Figure 1 and the following figures, time moves
from left to right, and each stage of processing is represented
by a box. Arrows represent dependencies. T1 stages are the
upper set of boxes, T2 stages the lower set.
Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the situation at short SOAs,
which will result in a long T2 response time. Cognition for
T2 must wait for the T1 retrieval to complete, which causes
an elevated T2 response time. As SOA increases, T2
response time should decrease (Figure 1, panel b) until at
long enough SOAs T2 should no longer be slowed at all
(Figure 1, panel c). The slope of T2 response time as a
function of SOA should thus be -1 until the “long enough”
SOA is reached and the slope drops to zero. At this point, the
response time for T2 should be the same as when T2 is not
an interrupting task, that is, the single task time.

Perception

Motor

(a)

Motor

Perception

Cognition

Motor

Figure 3. Interruptible retrieval hypothesis
There is a potential complication, which is interruption
cost. The shift from T1 to T2 may have a cognitive cost. If
such a cost exists, and it is fixed, then the T2 response time
in the interruption situation should be elevated when
compared to the T2 response time when T2 is performed in
isolation (the single-task case). This should hold regardless
of T1 difficulty or SOA. Figure 4 represents the situation in
which retrievals are interruptible but with an interruption
cost.
Perception

Retr.

Motor

Perception

Cognition

Motor

Figure 4. Interruptible retrieval with switch cost
Motor

Cognition

Perception

Retr.

Motor

Cognition

Retrieval

Perception

Switch

Retrieval

Perception

Perception

result in a time cost for T2 identical in size to the increase in
retrieval difficulty . This is depicted in Figure 2: panel (a)
depicts a short T1 retrieval, panel (b) depicts a long T1
retrieval.
If, on the other hand, retrievals are interruptible, T2
response should be insensitive to the state of the T1 retrieval.
That is, there should be no effect of either SOA or T1
difficulty. This situation is depicted in Figure 3.

Motor

(b)
Figure 2. Difficulty effect under the ballistic retrieval
hypothesis
A secondary prediction made by the ballistic retrieval
hypothesis is that the duration of the T1 retrieval should
directly impact the T2 response time. If processing for T2
must wait for the completion of T1 retrieval, extending the
duration of that retrieval (e.g. by making the retrieval more
difficult) should directly impact T2 response time. If
processing for T2 must wait for the completion of the T1
retrieval, extending the duration of that retrieval should

To summarize, the ballistic retrieval hypothesis predicts
that T2 response time should have a -1 slope as a function of
SOA, and that adding difficulty to retrieval should generate a
parallel function of SOA, with the distance between the RT
functions equivalent to the single-task difficulty effect of T1.
On the other hand, interruptible retrieval hypothesis predicts
that T2 should be insensitive to either SOA or T1 retrieval
difficulty.

Methods
Participants
The participants were 39 Rice University undergraduates
who participated for credit in a psychology class.

Procedures
Participants were first trained on the color identification task
until they performed two consecutive sets of 40 trials with
95% or better accuracy. Participants were then given 40 trials
of practice with multiplication-only trials, followed by a 40trial set of multiplication trials, 20% of which contained
interruptions.
Apparatus
Stimulus presentation and data collection were done on
Apple iMac personal computers. Vocal responses were timed
with an Apple PlainTalk microphone by monitoring the
microphone level and stopping the timer when a threshold
level of input was exceeded. Keypress responses were timed
by actively polling the state of the keyboard. Both measures
should be accurate to approximately 5 ms.

500
450
400
350

RT (msec)

Stimuli and Design
There were three kinds of trials: multiplication only, color
identification, and interruption. Single-digit multiplication
was used as T1 in this paradigm. Participants saw two digits
presented visually (e.g. “6 8”) and responded with the
product of the two digits vocally (e.g. “forty-eight”).
Retrieval difficulty was manipulated by varying the size of
the digits used. This manipulation has been shown to be
effective in previous work (Byrne & Anderson, 1999).
“Easy” retrieval used the digits from 1 to 4, while “hard”
retrieval used the digits 6 through 9. Squares (e.g. “7 7”)
were not used.
A simple color identification task served as T2 in this
paradigm. This was a choice reaction time task with two
alternatives. A rectangular block of color appeared on the
display. If the color block was blue, participants pressed one
key on the keyboard; if the block was red, another key was
pressed.
For interruption trials, the color block appeared and
covered the digits on the screen. The SOA was the time
between the onset of the digits and the onset of the color
block, measured in milliseconds. SOAs of 200, 375, 550, and
725 ms were used. Participants were instructed that when an
interruption occurred, they were to respond to T2 as rapidly
as possible and that completion of T1 was not necessary.
These instructions were given to maximize the priority given
to T2; participants should have no reason to continue with
T1 and thus should switch to T2 as rapidly as possible.
The design was also blocked, each block consisted of five
sets of 40 trials. One set in each block consisted of only color
identification trials, to provide an estimate of single-task
response time. The remaining four sets were a mixture of
multiplication-only trials and interruption trials, with
interruptions occurring 20% of the time. Thus, for
interruption trials, there were three factors, all withinsubjects: block, from one to three, four levels of SOA, and
two levels of difficulty. Which trials contained interruptions
and the order of sets within a block were randomized.

300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1

2

3

Block

Figure 5. Color identification response time as a function of
block

Results
Due to the excellent power of the repeated-measures design
and the large number of subjects and trials, an alpha level of
0.01 will be used for all statistical tests.
The color identification task is fairly simple and
participants were forced to practice to a relatively stringent
criterion, so performance was expected to be rapid but there
was still the possibility that subjects may have been speeding
up with practice. Figure 5 presents single-task color
identification response time as a function of block. Clearly,
there was no practice-related speedup in this case, in fact, the
absolute response times actually went down slightly with
practice, though this is probably coincidental. Overall, the
effect of block was not reliable, F(2, 70) = 1.83, p = 0.17.
The lack of learning on this task suggests that performance
on this task is limited primarily by fixed architectural
properties such as perceptual-motor limitations; the cognitive
demands of this task are fairly minimal.
Multiplication-only trials demonstrated a much more
complex pattern. Response time for multiplication-only trials
is shown in Figure 6. As expected, there was an effect of
difficulty, F(1, 35) = 81.74, p < 0.001 with hard problems
clearly slower than easy ones, on average, about 350 ms
slower. There was also a main effect of block, F(2, 70) =
10.30, p < 0.001,1 and a block by difficulty interaction, F(2,
70) = 12.14, p < 0.001, both primarily a function of
improvement on hard problems. If retrievals are ballistic, all
of these effects should show up in T2 response time in the
interruption trials, since T2 cognition should be forced to
wait for the completion of the retrieval.
1

To control for sphericity problems, repeated-measures factors with
more than two levels were adjusted with either Huynh- Feldt
epsilon or Greenhouse- Geisser epsilon where appropriate.

1400

800

1200

700
600
RT (msec)

RT (msec)

1000
800
600

500
400
300

400

Easy
Multiplication

200

200

Hard
Multiplication

100

Easy
Hard

0

0

200

2
Block

3

Figure 6. Multiplication-only response time for easy and
hard problems as a function of block
The interruptible retrieval hypothesis, given the lack of
practice effects on color identification in isolation, should
predict no effect of difficulty or block on T2 interruption
performance.
The data of primary interest, of course, are the data for the
interruption trials. These data, as a function of SOA, are
presented in Figure 7. The results are generally consistent
with the interruptibility hypothesis. Most importantly, there
was no effect of SOA, F(3, 105) = 0.90, p = 0.40. There is
clearly a potential problem of accepting the null hypothesis
here. However, the prediction made by the ballistic
hypothesis is specific: there should be a -1 slope with SOA.
This can be tested with a linear contrast on SOA, which was
not reliable, t(35) = -0.51, p = 0.61. A -1 slope would be a
large effect in this context, and power to detect a large effect
in this situation was estimated to be 0.99 (see Cohen, 1988
for details on this procedure). Thus, accepting the null
hypothesis in this case is statistically justifiable.
All other effects and interactions were also not reliable,
save one: the effect of T1 difficulty (the difference between
the easy and hard conditions) was reliable, F(1, 35) = 8.29, p
= 0.007. The absolute magnitude of this difference is small,
however, at just under 40 ms. The two difficulty effects, one
in multiplication-only trials, and one in interruption trials, is
presented for each block in Figure 8. These effects are
obviously different, and indeed a repeated-measures
ANOVA on the difficulty reveals a very reliable effect of
multiplication-only vs. interruption, F(1, 35) = 65.46, p <
0.001. This suggests that while the difficulty effect did
manifest itself in the T2 response time, this effect is probably
not due to retrieval difficulty in T1, since that difficulty
effect was roughly nine times larger.

375

550

725

SOA (msec)

Figure 7. T2 interruption response time as a function of SOA
for hard and easy T1 retrievals
There was also a reliable effect of block, F(2, 70) = 6.73, p
= 0.004, and an interaction, F(2, 70) = 10.68, p < 0.001 on
the difficulty effect. This seems to be driven primarily by the
previously-mentioned improvement in “hard” multiplication
problems over time, which results in a reduction in difficulty
effect for the multiplication-only trials; in contrast, the small
Multiplicationonly difficulty
effect

500
450

Interruption
difficulty effect

400
Difficulty Effect (msec)

1

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1

2
Block

3

Figure 8. Difficulty effect as a function of block for
multiplication-only trials and interruption trials

800
700
600

RT (msec)

difficulty effect seen in T2 interruptions is fairly stable over
blocks.
Of course, the lack of SOA effect may be due to subjects
adopting a strategy of delaying response to T1 until they
could be confident that an interruption would not occur. The
multiplication-only response times are fairly rapid,
suggesting this is unlikely, but there is a more direct test.
Subjects often responded to T1 even when the interruption
occurred, but they did so more often for long SOAs than for
short SOAs and more often for easy problems than hard
problems. This is shown in Figure 9. Effects of block, SOA,
and their interaction were reliable, [for SOA, F(3, 105) =
108.70, p < 0.001; for difficulty, F(1, 35) = 152.24, p <
0.001; for the interaction, F(3, 105) = 11.42, p < 0.001 ] but
there were no reliable effects or interactions involving block.
This sensitivity to SOA and difficulty suggests that
participants did indeed attempt to respond as rapidly as
possible to T1 and did not uniformly postpone T1 in
anticipation of an interruption.

500
400
300
200

ST Color
Interruption

100
0
1

1

2

3

Block

0.9

Figure 10. Color identification response time as a function of
block when it was in isolation (single-task or ST) vs. as the
interrupting T2

Proportion Muliplication

0.8
0.7
0.6

There is no real evidence that this cost was reduced with
practice as there was no reliable effect of block, F(2, 70) =
0.80, p = 0.45, or an interaction of task condition and block,
F(2, 70) = 0.81, p = 0.45.

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Easy

0.1

Hard

0
200

375

550

725

SOA (msec)

Figure 9. Proportion of interruption trials on which a T1
response was emitted
The final effect to consider is the interruption cost, that is,
the difference between color identification response time
when it was in isolation vs. when it was the interrupting task.
Figure 10 presents the results. Clearly, there was an
interruption cost, F(1, 35) = 235.58, p < 0.001. The absolute
magnitude of this difference is large relative to the singletask color identification response time. Single-task response
time for color identification averaged just under 450 ms, but
with interruptions it was close to 700 ms, a 250 ms penalty.

Discussion
These data are clearly more consistent with the
interruptibility hypothesis. The lack of SOA effect on T2
response time is most telling. However, the data are not
entirely equivocal. There was a reliable effect of T1 retrieval
difficulty on T2 response time, though this effect was small
and clearly of a different magnitude than the difficulty effect
present in T1. The source of this effect is unclear. One
possible explanation is that perceptual processing of T1 is
more difficult for larger digits but this is purely speculative.
For the purposes of setting architectural policy in ACTR/PM, these results certainly suggest that retrievals should
be interruptible. However, whether retrievals should always
be interrupted by any change in declarative memory or
whether they should only be interrupted under certain
conditions is unclear. In this experiment, the retrieval is
interrupted by a higher-priority change that is both presented
foveally and displaces the T1 stimulus in the visual array.
These conditions at least appear to favor interruption. The
frequency of interruption in this experiment, 20%, may also
play a role.
At a more general level, the interruption cost itself is quite
intriguing. The source of this cost is not clear, though
something of its nature was revealed; it appears not to
change with practice (blocks) and appears not to be affected

by SOA. Whether this cost is sensitive to factors such as
interruption frequency, modality match with the T1 stimulus,
and T2 difficulty, is unknown. Follow-up research certainly
appears appropriate.
However, in some sense, the change from T2 to T1
processing can be thought of as a task-switch (e.g. Rogers &
Monsell, 1995). While a great deal is known about taskswitching (Altmann & Gray, 1999 provides an excellent
account), it is not clear whether or not this is a special case of
task-switching phenomenon. In traditional task-switching
experiments, one type of task follows the completion of
another, but the two tasks do not temporally overlap, that is,
one does not interrupt the other. The ramifications of this
difference in experimental paradigm are not entirely clear;
the interruption cost may be related to the cost associated
with task-switching or it may be an independent effect.
Again, further research will be required to better understand
the interruption cost.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Michael Fleetwood and Bryan Blauvelt
for their assistance in data collection, and to Erik Altmann
for comments on an earlier draft.

References
Altmann, E. M, & Gray, W. D. (1999). The anatomy of
serial attention: An integrated model of set shifting and
maintenance. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (Eds.). (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Byrne, M. D. & Anderson, J. R. (1998). Perception and
Action. In J. R. Anderson & C. Lebiere (Eds.) The
atomic components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Byrne, M. D., & Anderson, J. R. (1999). Serial modules in
parallel: The psychological refractory period and perfect
time-sharing. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pashler, H. (1994). Dual-task interference in simple tasks:
Data and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 220-244.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictable
switch between simple cognitive tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 124(2), 207-231.

