UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attentional Biases in Artificial Noun Learning Tasks: Generalizations Across the Structure of
Already-Learned Nouns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/08h398d5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Samuelson, Larissa K.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attentional Biases in Artificial Noun Learning Tasks: Generalizations
Across the Structure of Already-Learned Nouns
Larissa K. Samuelson (samuelso@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology and
Program in Cognitive Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405

Abstract
Even though learning noun meanings in a first language
should be a difficult task young children learn nouns
quickly and often with little effort. Previous research
suggests that the task of learning words in made easier
by constraints or biases that reduce the problem of
finding the correct word-referent mapping to a solvable
size. The research presented here examines the relation
between the attentional biases young children
demonstrate in laboratory noun learning tasks and the
pattern of word learning seen outside the laboratory.
The comparison suggests that attentional biases in
laboratory noun learning tasks are a generalization
across the nouns young children have already learned.
Further, changing the nouns young children know
changes not only the
attentional biases they
demonstrate in the laboratory, but also their vocabulary
development outside the laboratory.

Introduction
Young children typically say their first word at 1-year-ofage. However, conservative estimates suggest that by 5years-of-age children have as many as 10,000 words in their
productive vocabulary. How do children learn so many words
so fast? One suggestion is that the task of learning words is
made easier by biases or constraints which reduce the
problem of finding the correct word-referent mapping to a
solvable size (e.g. Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988;
Markman, 1992; Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991). There is
strong experimental evidence for the existence of a number
of these word learning biases. The research presented here
concentrates on two: the shape bias for learning names of
solid objects and the material bias for learning names of non
solid substances.
Evidence for these two attentional biases comes from
artificial noun learning experiments. In these experiments, a
young child is presented with a novel object. This exemplar
object is then named, i.e. “this is a dax”. The child is then
presented with novel test objects that match the exemplar in
one perceptual dimension, for example in shape only, color

only, or material only. The child is then asked which of
these test objects can be called by the same name as the
exemplar.
Numerous studies have shown that when the exemplar
object is made of a solid, rigid material such as wood or
hardened clay, children 24-months-of-age and older generalize
novel names to other objects that match the exemplar in
shape. This “shape-bias” has been demonstrated in numerous
laboratories, with stimuli ranging from real, 3-dimensional
objects specially constructed for the experiment (Imai &
Gentner, 1997; Landau, et al., 1988), to pictures of familiar
objects (Imai, Gentner, & Uchida, 1994). However, when
the exemplar object is made from a non solid substance such
as hair gel or face cream, children generalize the novel name
to test objects made from the same material as the exemplar
(Dickinson, 1988; Soja, 1992; Soja, et al., 1991). This
“material-bias” has also been demonstrated in numerous
studies and laboratories, however this bias does not appear to
be robust until after 30-months-of-age (Samuelson &
Smith, 1999).
In a series of recent studies, I have examined the relation
between these attentional biases, demonstrated in laboratory
tasks, and the pattern of noun vocabulary growth seen
outside the laboratory (Samuelson & Smith, 1999). These
experiments suggest that the attentional biases seen in
laboratory word learning tasks may be generalizations across
the category structure of already learned nouns. This paper
reviews these findings and the suggested hypothesis. Two
experiments testing this hypothesis are then presented. The
results show that changing the nouns young children know
changes the development of attentional biases seen in
laboratory word learning tasks, and that this change further
alters the trajectory of vocabulary development outside the
laboratory
Attentional Biases and the Nouns Children Know
If the shape and material biases are to help children learn
nouns, then these biases need to match the kinds of nouns
that young children learn early. That is, if the shape bias
helps children learn names for solid objects by directing their
attention to with-in category similarity in shape, then many

of the nouns young children learn early should refer to solid
things in categories well organized by shape. Likewise, if
the material bias helps children learn names for non solid
things by directing their attention to similarity in material
substance, then there should also be many names for non
solid things in categories well organized by material
substance among the nouns children learn early.
An
important question, then, is what kind of nouns do young
children learn early?
To answer this question, I examined the category
structures of a corpus of early-learned nouns. The corpus of
312 nouns studied was taken from the Mac Arthur
Communicative Development Inventory (MCDI), a parental
checklist of 680 words and phrases commonly found in the
productive vocabulary of children between 16- and 30months-of-age. In a series of yes/no judgments, thirteen
adult native speakers of English were asked to think of
examples of each noun in the studied corpus and say whether
the examples were solid, non solid, similar in shape, and
similar in material. An 85% agreement criterion was then
used to determine the structure of the category referred to by
each noun. For example, 85% of the adults agreed that
crayons were solid, similar in shape, and similar in material.
Thus, CRAYON was classified as referring to a category of
solid things similar in both shape and material.
A summary of the findings across the entire corpus can be
seen in Figure 1. In the figure, each square represents the
312 nouns studied. The area of each circle represents the
proportion of those nouns that fell in each classification.
And, the overlapping area of the circles represents the
proportion of nouns that fell in the intersection of the
classifications. As can be seen in the figure, many of the
nouns children learn early name solid things and things in
categories well organized by shape. And, there is a large
amount of overlap between these classifications; many of
the nouns children learn early name solid things in shapebased categories. In contrast, few of the nouns children learn
early name non solid substances or things in categories well
organized by similarity in material substance. And, there is
not much overlap between these classifications; young
children do not learn many names for non solid substances

in material-based categories (Samuelson & Smith, 1999).
Thus, many of the nouns children commonly learn by 30months-of-age fit the shape-bias. And, by 30-months-of-age
children have not learned many nouns that fit the materialbias. These facts fit with previous findings that children
demonstrate a shape-bias in artificial noun learning tasks by
24-months-of-age, but do not reliably demonstrate a material
bias until 36-months-of-age. However, this study does not
address the developmental relation between these findings.
That is, do children demonstrate a shape bias because they
know many names for solid things in shape-based
categories. Or, do children learn many names for solid things
in shape based categories because they have a shape bias? To
address this question, I compared artificial noun learning
with solid and non solid stimuli in children with a range of
vocabulary sizes. Specifically, fifty-eight children between
17- and 31-months of age completed a forced choice artificial
noun learning task in which half the exemplars and choice
stimuli were made from solid materials such as wood and
Styrofoam, and the other half were made of non solid
materials such as hair gel and face cream. I also measured
each child’s productive noun vocabulary via parental report
on the MCDI.
Figure 2 presents the key results. As can be seen in the
figure, I found that children did not generalize novel names
for solid objects to other solid objects by shape at levels
reliably above chance until they already had 150 nouns in
their productive vocabulary. And, children in the vocabulary
range I studied did not generalize novel names for non solid
stimuli to other non solid stimuli at levels reliably above
chance. Thus, it appears that the shape-bias emerges only
after children have already learned many names for shapebased categories. And, the material-bias does not emerge
within the vocabulary range I studied (Samuelson and
Smith, 1999).
These results suggest that the attentional biases young
children demonstrate in artificial noun learning tasks might
be the product of their previous noun learning. More
1.00

Solid
*

Non Solid
*

0.75

312 Nouns

Proportion
Shape 0.50
Choices

312 Nouns
Solid

0.25

Non solid

0.00

Under 51- 151- 250+
50 150 250

Under 51- 151- 250+
50 150 250

Simulus Set
Shape

Material

Figure 1: Summary of the category structure of the corpus
of 312 early-learned nouns.

Figure 2: Proportion shape choices by noun vocabulary size
for the solid and non solid stimulus sets.
Chance
responding is .50, * = p < .05 difference from chance.

specifically, what children do in artificial noun learning
tasks is attend to whatever perceptual property has mattered
most in learning the nouns they already know. Attentional
biases thus appear to be a generalization across the structure
of already learned nouns. This hypothesis is tested in the
following experiment.

Experiment 1
Previous results suggest that children’s performance in
artificial noun learning tasks is a generalization across the
structure of already learned nouns. The specific question
addressed in this experiment is whether changing the nouns
children know changes their attentional biases in artificial
noun learning tasks. The idea was to intensively teach
nouns to young children who do not have many nouns in
their vocabulary and do not yet demonstrate systematic
attentional biases in artificial noun learning tasks. If
children’s attentional biases in noun learning are a product of
the nouns they already know, then changing the nouns they
know should change their attentional biases.
To this end, two groups of children participated in a nine
week longitudinal study. Children in one group were taught
twelve names for categories of solid objects well organized
by similarity in shape. Another group of children were
taught twelve names for categories of non solid substances
well organized by similarity in material substance. Two
dependent measures were examined: artificial noun learning
with both solid and non solid stimuli, and productive
vocabulary via parental report. Both measures were taken
early in training and, again, later in training. In addition, a
follow-up report of productive vocabulary was obtained one
month after the experiment was complete.

Methods
Participants. Twenty children between 15- and 21months-of-age participated (mean 18m 28d, range 15m 20d
to 21m 3d). Children were recruited from the child
participants file at Indiana University and contacted by
phone. All children were learning English as their first
language. Children were randomly assigned to either the
Shape Nouns or Material Nouns condition such that the
mean age and vocabulary across conditions did not differ.
Four additional children began but did not complete the
experiment. All children received a small prize at each
experimental visit and copies of experimental videotapes and
T-shirts at the completion of the study.
Materials. Conditions differed only in the twelve nouns
taught to the children over the course of the longitudinal
study. All twenty-four nouns are nouns not usually learned
until after 26 months of age. The noun category training
sets for each condition consisted of three examples of each of
the twelve nouns.
In the Shape Nouns condition, children were taught twelve
names for solid things in categories well organized by shape,

for example, bucket, pear, and ladder. In this condition,
example items for each category were the same in shape but
differed in size, color, and the material they were made from.
For example, one ladder was wide and made of red wood, one
was taller and made of white plastic and one was short and
wide and made of pink metal.
In the Material Nouns condition, children were taught
twelve names for non solid things in categories well
organized by material, for example, glitter, lotion, and JellO. In this condition, example items for each category were
made from the same material but differed in amount, color,
and shape. For example, the Jell-O was either red, orange or
blue and was either presented as a large pile, a couple small
piles, or in the shape of a teddy-bear, and these shapes and
amounts changed as the child ate the Jell-O.
Eight sets of artificial noun learning stimuli were also
constructed–four made from solid materials such as wood and
Styrofoam and four made from non solid materials such as
hair gel and face cream. Each set consisted of an exemplar
object and four test objects. In each set, two test objects
were the same shape as the exemplar but were different
colors and made from different materials, and two test
objects were made from the same material as the exemplar
but were different in shape and color. Eight unique nonsense
words were created for use in the artificial noun learning
task. The pairing of names to stimulus sets was
counterbalanced across children.
Twenty unique sets of practice stimuli were also
assembled for use in practice artificial noun learning trials.
These sets consisted of small toys familiar to most 15month-olds such as balls, toy cars, and cups. Each set
consisted of two identical toys and a third toy that differed in
color, shape and size (for example, two purple plastic eggs
and a red wooden block).
Procedure. Children and their parents visited the lab once a
week for nine consecutive weeks. These nine weeks were
broken into three blocks of three weeks each. Each block
consisted of two weeks of noun category training. On the
third week children were tested in artificial noun learning.
Productive vocabulary was measured via parent report on the
Mac Arthur Communicative Development Inventory at the
beginning and end of the experiment and at a follow-up
appointment one month after the final experimental session.
During all experimental sessions, the child sat across a
large table from the experimenter with his or her parent.
Experimental sessions began with two practice trials of the
artificial noun learning task. These practice trials were used
both to engage the child in the experimental session, and to
encourage their participation in the artificial noun learning
task. In these practice trials, the experimenter gave the child
one set of practice stimuli to examine. After the child had
examined the items the experimenter retrieved the toys, put
one of the matching pair and the non-matching item on a
tray, held up the other matching item and said, “See this,

this is my (name of toy).” She then pushed the tray towards
the child saying “Can you get your (name of toy)”. If the
child picked-up or gestured towards the matching toy she
was praised heavily. If she picked the incorrect toy the
experimenter said “Is that the (name of toy)? No! Get the
(name of toy)” until the child picked the correct toy.
On noun category training weeks, noun training followed
the practice trials.
During noun training, the child,
experimenter, and parent played with and named the
examples of four noun categories. The three examples of
each category were played with as a set for approximately
three minutes each. The experimenter then put these items
away and brought out the examples of the next noun
category. The experimenter named each noun category at
least 20 times for each child, and encouraged the child to say
each noun at least once.
On artificial noun learning weeks, the artificial noun
learning task followed the practice trials. This task was
identical to the procedure used during the practice trials. The
child was given the exemplar, one shape-match test object,
and one material-match test object to examine.
The
experimenter then placed the test objects on the tray, held up
the exemplar and said, “See this, this is my bing”, (for
example). The experimenter then pushed the tray towards
the child and said “Can you get your bing?”. If the child did
not respond she was prompted again. The experimenter then
proceeded to the next trial for that stimulus set. The parent
was asked not to refer to the stimuli during this task but to
encourage the child to respond. There were four trials for
each stimulus set (each shape-match test object with each
material-match test object) and one solid and one non solid
stimulus set at each artificial noun learning task. Children
never saw the same stimulus set twice. Order of solid and
non solid sets was counterbalanced across artificial noun
learning tests and order of stimulus sets was counterbalanced
across children.
All experimental sessions were video taped for later coding
of naming instances and artificial noun learning responses.
Three coders blind to the experimental hypothesis coded all
artificial noun learning sessions. Coders indicated which test
object the child picked on each trial. Twenty percent of the
trials were coded by two coders and reliability was greater
than 90%.
Results and Discussion
Figure 3 shows the mean proportion of shape choices in
the artificial noun learning task with solid and non solid
stimuli for children in the Shape Nouns and Material Nouns
conditions at weeks three and nine. A Condition (Shape
Nouns v. Material Nouns) X Stimulus Set (Solid v. Non
Solid) X Week (3 v. 9) ANOVA revealed a significant main
effect of Condition, F = 6.854, p < .02, and significant
Week by Condition and Stimulus Set by Week interactions,
F = 4.695, p < .05, F = 10.436, p < .01 respectively. As
can be seen in the figure, at week three there were no

Week 3

1.00

Proportion
Shape
Choices

Week 9

1.00

0.90

0.90

0.80

0.80

0.70
0.60

0.70

#

*

0.60

#

0.50

#

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

Solid

Non Solid

Solid

Non Solid

Stimulus Set
Shape
Nouns

Material
Nouns

Figure 3. Results of Experiment 1. Chance responding
equals .50. * = p <.05, # = p =.06 difference from chance.
differences between children in the two conditions in their
responding to the solid or non solid stimuli. However, by
week nine, children in the Shape Nouns condition picked
shape matching test objects more than children in the
Material Nouns condition for both the solid and non solid
sets, Tukey’s HSD p < .05. Further, only children in the
Shape Nouns condition at week nine picked shape matching
test objects at levels significantly above chance. Thus,
children who were taught twelve names for solid objects in
categories well organized by shape also learned a shape-bias
but children who were taught twelve names for non solid
substances in categories well organized by material
substance did not learn a material-bias.
Importantly, this learned shape-bias demonstrated in the
laboratory also influenced children’s vocabulary development
outside of the laboratory. Figure 4 presents the mean
number of words in the total productive vocabulary of
children in each condition at the first experimental session,
at the last experimental session, and at the follow-up
appointment one month after the experiment had ended. As
can be seen in the figure, during the course of the
experiment children in both conditions learned new words
outside the laboratory at rates that did not differ. However,
after the experiment ended, children in the Shape Nouns
condition acquired significantly more words by the follow-up
appointment. It appears that the twelve shape-biased nouns
they were taught in the laboratory somehow accelerated their
learning of other words outside the laboratory. It is also
possible, however, that the difference in the vocabularies of
children in the two conditions at the follow-up appointment
was actually due to a suppression of the vocabulary
development of children in the Material Nouns condition.
Perhaps teaching these children twelve names for non solid
things in categories well organized by material
substance–categories that even 30-month-old children do not
know many of–actually harmed their vocabulary
development.This possibility was tested in Experiment 2.

225
200

*

175

Mean
Productive
Vocabulary

Procedure. The procedure was the same as Experiment 1
with the exception that children were not taught any noun
categories.

150

Results and Discussion

125

The key result is pictured in Figure 5. There were no
significant differences in the productive vocabularies of
children from this experiment and children from the Material
Nouns condition of Experiment 1. Thus, teaching children
twelve names for non solid substances in categories well
organized by material substance did not harm the vocabulary
development of children in the Material Nouns condition of
Experiment 1. And, thus, teaching children twelve names for
solid objects in categories well organized by shape in Shape
Nouns condition of Experiment 1 did accelerate their
vocabulary growth.

100
75
50
25
0
1

9

+1mo

Session
Shape Nouns
Material Nouns

225
200

Figure 4. Mean productive vocabulary of children in
experiment 1.

Experiment 2
This experiment provides a control for the possibility that
the vocabulary development of children in the Material
Nouns condition of Experiment 1 was harmed by the
unusual kind of noun categories they were taught. Ten
children visited the laboratory nine consecutive weeks but
did not receive any noun category training.
Children
participated in weekly artificial noun learning task practice
trials as well as the full artificial noun learning task every
third week. As in Experiment 1, the children’s vocabulary
was measured at the beginning, end, and one month followup appointments. Thus, this experiment provides a measure
of the typical vocabulary development of a matched set of
children who repeatedly visit the laboratory and participate in
the artificial noun learning task.

Methods
Participants. Ten children between 15- and 21- monthsof-age participated (mean 18m 2d, range 15m 9d to 21m 7d).
Children were recruited from the child participants file at
Indiana University and contacted by phone. All children were
learning English as their first language. Children were
matched to children from Experiment 1 such that the mean
age and vocabulary across experiments did not differ. All
children received a small prize each experimental visit and
copies of experimental videotapes and T-shirts at the
completion of the study.
Materials. The same eight sets of artificial noun learning
stimuli and 20 sets of practice stimuli used in Experiment 1
were used.

*

175

Mean
Productive
Vocabulary

150
125
100
75
50
25
0
1

9

+1mo

Session
Shape Nouns (Exp. 1)
Material Nouns (Exp. 1)
No Noun Training (Exp. 2)

Figure 5. Mean productive vocabulary of children in
Experiment 2 (no noun training). Data from Experiment 1
are included for comparison

Conclusions
Results from the present experiments comparing early
vocabulary growth and the attentional biases seen in
laboratory artificial noun learning tasks suggest a clear and
sensible developmental story.
Early in vocabulary
development, children learn many names for solid objects in
categories well organized by shape. This learning changes
children: they begin to attend to shape when learning novel
names in the context of novel solid objects. Thus, it appears
that the attentional biases young children demonstrate in
artificial noun learning tasks are a generalization across the
nouns that they have already learned. In fact, teaching very
young children, children who do not yet demonstrate

systematic attentional biases in artificial noun learning
tasks, names for solid objects in shape-based categories
teaches them a generalizable shape bias. This in turn,
promotes the more rapid learning of other words.
There are two important questions that remain unanswered
by these results. First, why is there such an advantage for
solid-shape-based categories over non solid-material-based
categories? One possibility is that this a reflection of the
structure of the language children hear (but see Sandhofer,
Smith, & Luo, 1999).
The second unanswered question is how do children ever
get a material-bias? We know that by three-years-of-age
children reliably demonstrate a bias to attend to material
substance when generalizing a novel name for a novel non
solid substance. However, this bias is not reliable before
30-months-of-age (Samuelson & Smith, 1999). The
developmental story for the material-bias may be the same
as that for the shape-bias, just more protracted in time. That
is, while children are rapidly learning names for solid things,
they are also encountering a smaller number of non sold
substances and their names. Each of these few substances
may have to be individually learned, as an exception,
without the boost from past learning given to names for
solid objects. But, as vocabulary grows, children may learn
enough names for non solid substances that the correlation
between the perceptual cues of non solidity and naming by
substance cohere to form a generalizable expectation about
how substances are named.

Acknowledgments
The research presented in this paper was supported in part by
NIMH grant F31MH12069-02. Thanks go to John Spencer
for comments on an earlier draft.

References
Dickinson, D. K. (1988). Learning names for material:
Factors constraining and limiting hypotheses about word
meaning. Cognitive Development, 3, 15-35.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children's
theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in
early acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9(1), 45-75.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Markman, E. M. (1992). In M. R. Gunnar & M. Maratsos
(Eds.) Constraints on word learning: Speculations about
their nature, origins, and domain specificity. Hillsdale,
NJ: LEA.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category organization and
syntax correspond? Cognition, 73(1), 1-33.

Sandhofer, C., Smith, L. B., & Luo, J. (1999). Counting
nouns and verbs in the input: Differential frequencies,
different kinds of learning. Journal of Child Language.
Soja, N. N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of nouns:
The relationship between perception and syntax.
Cognitive Development, 7, 29-45.
Soja, N. N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1991).
Ontological categories guide young children's inductions
of word meaning: Object terms and substance terms.
Cognition, 38, 179-211.

