UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Blobs, Dipsy-Doodles and Other Funky Things: Framework Anomalies in Exploratory Data
Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1b2051f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Trickett, Susan B.
Trafton, J. Gregory
Schunn, Christian D.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Blobs, Dipsy-Doodles and Other Funky Things:
Framework Anomalies in Exploratory Data Analysis
Susan B. Trickett

J. Gregory Trafton

( stricket@gmu.edu)

(trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)

( schunn@gmu.edu )

Department of Psychology
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030 USA

Naval Research Laboratory
NRL Code 5513
Washington, DC 20375

Department of Psychology
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030

Abstract
This study investigates the role of anomalies in the exploratory analysis of visual scientific data. We found that
anomalies played a crucial role as two experts analyzed astronomical data. Not only did they pay significantly more
attention to anomalies than expected phenomena, both
immediately and over time, but also anomalies provided a
framework within which they investigated the data.

Introduction
Attention to the unexpected may be an important component
of scientific discovery. Exploring anomalies can lead to theory development and even conceptual change. Philosophers
of science (e.g., Kuhn, 1962) have argued that unusual findings play a key role in scientific revolutions, and scientists
themselves have claimed that investigating anomalies lies at
the heart of scientific innovation (e.g., Knorr, 1980).
Within cognitive psychology, response to anomalous data
during scientific inquiry has been noted in a variety of studies, including historical reconstructions of actual scientific
discoveries (e.g., Kulkarni & Simon, 1988), on-line studies
of scientists (e.g., Dunbar, 1997), laboratory studies in
which participants “rediscover” a scientific phenomenon
(Dunbar 1993), and studies of those with little scientific
training as they perform abstract scientific reasoning tasks
(e.g., Tweney, Dowerty, & Mynatt, 1982; Klahr & Dunbar,
1988). These studies have not yielded a consistent pattern of
response to unexpected data, possibly because of the range of
scientific training and knowledge among the participants.
Recognizing this variety of responses to anomalous data,
Chinn and Brewer (1992, 1993), propose a taxonomy of
seven reactions to unusual findings, from ignoring the data
and upholding the theory to accepting the data and changing
the theory. This taxonomy is derived from anecdotal examples from the history of science and from empirical studies
of scientific reasoning in the psychological literature. Although Chinn and Brewer propose that this taxonomy applies to scientists and non-scientists alike, they have tested
it only among undergraduates with little scientific training.
Thus, despite the general belief that anomalous data is
important in scientific discovery, no clear picture has
emerged of how scientists (as opposed to laypersons performing scaled-down scientific discovery tasks) respond to
unexpected findings. On one hand, there is a well-established
tradition in studies of scientific thinking that shows people
overlook data inconsistent with their hypothesis, looking

Christian D. Schunn

only for support for their theories (e.g., Wason, 1960).
Within this tradition, scientists have been found to be as
susceptible to this confirmation bias as laypeople (e.g., Mahoney & DeMonbreun, 1977; Mitroff, 1974.) Similarly,
studies of complex visualization usage have shown that expert meteorologists do not pay much attention to unusual or
anomalous features. Instead, they seem to extract information in a very goal directed manner, rarely following up on
features that are not directly relevant to their immediate task
(Trafton et al., under review). This evidence—of confirmation bias, even among scientists, and of the goal-directed
nature of complex visualization usage—suggests that scientists may overlook unexpected results or anomalies.
On the other hand, however, Dunbar has recently questioned the validity of the studies of confirmation bias on the
grounds that they employ arbitrary experimental tasks that
involve no scientific knowledge and therefore bear little relationship to tasks that real scientists perform (Dunbar, 1997).
Dunbar has argued that in order to investigate how scientists
reason, one must observe scientists as they perform their
scientific tasks.
Using an “in vivo” methodology that involves observing
actual scientists at work, Dunbar has suggested that scientists do attend to unusual results (Dunbar, 1997). He found
not only that scientists attended to unexpected results more
than they did to expected findings, but also that individual
scientists were quick to discard a hypothesis when faced with
results that were inconsistent with it. Furthermore, he noted
that in lab meetings, the group of scientists tended to focus
on a surprising result until they had constructed a plausible
hypothesis to account for it. Dunbar concluded that attending
to anomalous findings is an important strategy that contributes to successful scientific inquiry (Dunbar 1997). Similarly, Kulkarni and Simon (1988) identified an “attend to
surprising result” heuristic as crucial to Hans Krebs' discovery of the urea cycle.
Both Chinn and Brewer's and Dunbar's studies have involved participants, whether trained scientists or not, who
were evaluating data to test a specific theory. However, there
are many phases of scientific inquiry, and response to
anomalous data might be quite different during an exploratory phase from when a theory is firmly established. During
exploratory data analysis, theories may be only partially
defined. Nonetheless, given their extensive domain knowledge, scientists doubtless have general frameworks which
lead to expectations that may or may not be met by the data.
They may therefore pay more attention to unusual results,

because such framework anomalies may provide insights for
interpreting data and developing theories.
Similarly, there are many forms of data, but previous
studies have focused on data that were either presented textually or required direct, relatively simple perceptual judgments. However, scientists in many domains employ complex visualization techniques in order to inspect their data.
Little is known about the role of unusual or unexpected findings in either exploratory or scientific visualization.
Our goal is to investigate the role of anomalies during
early, primarily exploratory phases of visual data analysis.
Specifically, we investigate whether scientists notice anomalies in this type of data and, if so, the extent to which they
attend to them, both immediately and over time. We also
investigate how the visual nature of the data affects the detection of and attention to anomalies.
There are many methodologies available by which to examine the processes of scientific inquiry, and there are
strengths and weaknesses associated with each (see Klahr &
Simon, 1999 for a review). Our approach has been to combine features of several methodologies in order to take advantage of their respective strengths.
First, we have chosen to conduct a case study of actual
scientists at work because this methodology offers an extraordinarily rich set of observations of high face validity.
Most case studies of scientific inquiry have focused on famous scientists who have made discoveries of great historical importance (e.g., Gentner et al, 1997; Kulkarni &
Simon, 1988). We have chosen instead to focus our investigation on more “ordinary”—albeit expert—scientists, the
ultimate significance of whose work is currently unknown.
We believe this focus on the more mundane aspects of scientific inquiry may yield results that are more representative of
scientists’ everyday activities.
Second, we collected verbal and visualization data of the
scientists working together and conducted a verbal protocol
analysis of these data in order to gain insight into the scientists’ concurrent thought processes (Ericsson & Simon,
1993). Verbal protocols have frequently been collected in
laboratory studies of non-scientists performing scientific
discovery tasks; however, this methodology has rarely been
used with practicing scientists. Furthermore, because we
collected a protocol of a work session involving two scientists, there was no need for an experimenter to prompt the
participants to keep talking. By focusing on a dyad, we were
able to obtain a more natural account of the scientists’
thinking than is possible with an individual.
Finally, we have adopted Dunbar’s (1995, 1997) “in vivo”
methodology because, as Dunbar points out, it affords a
unique opportunity to observe “how scientists really reason.” Instead of observing a lab group as Dunbar did, however, we chose to study a dyad, for two reasons. First, the
two scientists we observed were of equal professional status,
thus we avoid social issues that might make junior scientists reluctant to question the interpretations of a senior colleague. Second, we think that the verbal protocols of a dyad
might represent each scientist’s thinking more completely
than those of a group. In a group setting, with more people
“jumping into” a discussion, individuals may be less likely
to pursue lines of thought in significant depth.

Method
Participants
The participants in this study were two expert astronomers,
one a tenured professor at a university, the other a fellow at
a research institute. The astronomers had earned their Ph.D.s
six years and ten years respectively before this study; one
has approximately 20 publications in this general area and
the other approximately 10. One of the astronomers, hereafter referred to as A1, focuses on conducting and analyzing
astronomical observations, and has an expertise in ring galaxies; the other astronomer, hereafter referred to as A2, combines teaching with primarily theoretical astronomical research and model construction. The astronomers have been
collaborating for some years, although they do not frequently work physically alongside one another (i.e., work at
the same computer screen at the same time to examine data).

Procedure
The astronomers were video- and audio-taped as they explored computer-generated visual representations of a new set
of observational data. They were working in one astronomer’s office at a shared computer monitor. One astronomer
was in charge of the keyboard and mouse and sat directly in
front of the screen; the other astronomer sat to his left, with
the monitor clearly in view. They were instructed not to
explain their comments to the researchers, but to carry out
their work as though no camera were present. The relevant
part of the session lasted about 53 minutes and generated
7676 words. The astronomers’ interactions were later transcribed and coded as described below. At a later date, we interviewed A2 to obtain clarification of domain-related issues.

The Task and the Data
The astronomical data under analysis were optical and radio
data of a ring galaxy. A ring galaxy forms as the result of a
collision between two galaxies: one galaxy is thought to
have passed through another, leaving both a doughnutshaped ring of stars and gas (the ring galaxy) and a smaller
galaxy nearby. Such galactic collisions are relatively frequent cosmic events; consequently, ring galaxies per se are
not uncommon. Both astronomers had conducted research
and published scholarly articles on other ring galaxies, but
this particular galaxy was relatively new to them. Nor had
they examined this data set before; consequently, they considered this session exploratory.
The astronomers’ high-level goal was to understand the
evolution and structure of the ring galaxy. This understanding emerges from an understanding of where, how, and why
star formation occurs within the galaxy, which rests on an
understanding of the flow of gas in the galaxy. In order to
understand the flow of gas, the astronomers must understand
the kinematics (the velocity and position) of the system, by
inferring the 3-dimensional streaming motions of the gas.
They make inferences about streaming motions by interpreting the velocity field, represented by contour lines on the 2dimensional display. Examining the velocity contours is
thus the lowest level task in this chain of inferences.
The astronomers’ task was made difficult by two characteristics of their data. First, the data were one- or at best two-

dimensional, whereas the structure they were attempting to
understand is three-dimensional. Second, the data were noisy,
and there was no easy way to distinguish between noise and
real phenomena. Figure 1 shows a screen snapshot of the
type of data the astronomers were examining. In order to
make their inferences, the astronomers used different types of
image, representing different phenomena (e.g., different
forms of gas), which represent different information about
the structure and dynamics of the galaxy. Some of these
images could be overlaid on each other. In addition, the astronomers could choose from images created by different
processing algorithms that result in different weightings of
the data, each with advantages and disadvantages (e.g., more
or less resolution). Finally, they could adjust different features of the display, such as contrast or false color.
Figure 1: Example of data examined by astronomers.
Radio data (contour lines) are laid over optical data.

that addressed issues of data analysis were coded as on-task.
These segments included comments relating to the selection
of a display type (as opposed to comments about how to
implement that display) as well as decisions about obtaining
additional data in the future (as opposed to details about how
to obtain those data). Initial agreement between the coders
was 90%. All disagreements were resolved by discussion.
Episodes Next, we divided the protocol into discrete, nonoverlapping episodes that would allow us to study the astronomers' shifting focus of attention. The protocol was
segmented into 19 exhaustive episodes. An episode began
with the astronomers' focus on a feature or point of discussion and lasted until their attention switched to another phenomenon or theoretical point; at this switch of attention, a
new episode was coded. Although the focus of most episodes
was a feature of the galaxy, this was not necessarily the
case; for example, one episode consisted of a discussion
about a future observation session and the data to be obtained from it. Agreement between coders was 98%.
A new episode frequently coincided with a display change,
but did not necessarily do so. Sometimes the astronomers
switched their focus of attention to another galactic feature
visible on the same display, thus beginning a new episode
without changing the display. At other times, they changed
the display in order to explore another representation of a
feature, thus changing the display within the same episode.
Noticings In order to establish which phenomena—unusual or not—the astronomers attended to, we first
coded for the astronomers' noticing phenomena in the data.
A noticing could involve merely some surface feature of the
display, such as a line, shape, or color, or it could involve
some interpretation by the astronomer, for example, identifying an area of star formation or concentration of gas. Only
the first reference to a phenomenon was coded as a noticing;
coding of subsequent references to the same phenomenon is
discussed below. Agreement between the coders was 95%.
Disagreements were resolved by discussion.
Table 1: Noticings (in italics) coded as unusual or expected

Coding Scheme
The protocol was divided into 829 segments: as each astronomer spoke, a new segment was coded; then their utterances were further segmented by complete thought.
A coding scheme was developed to examine the astronomers’ attention to anomalous phenomena in the ring galaxy.
The protocol was coded independently by two different coders. Inter-rater reliabilities for each code are reported below.
On/Off Task In order to allow us to focus our analysis
only on those utterances relevant to the scientists’ task of
data analysis, we coded each segment as on- or off-task. All
segments that addressed matters external to the data analysis
were coded as off-task; these segments included external interruptions (e.g., the telephone ringing), extraneous comments by the astronomers (e.g., jokes or banter between
them), comments relating to the software, specific details
about plans for future observations, and so on. All segments

Criterion
a) Explicit

Code
Anomalous

b) Domain
Knowledge

Expected

c) Association

Anomalous

d) Contrast

Expected

e) Question

Anomalous

Example
What's
that
funky
thing…That's odd
You can see that all the
H1 is concentrated in the
ring
You see similar kinds of
intrusions along here
That's odd…As opposed
to these things, which
are just the lower contours down here
I still wonder why we
don't see any H1 up here
in this sort of northern
ring segment?

Subsequent References One of our questions was the

extent to which the astronomers continued to investigate
anomalies. Whereas the coding of the noticings captured the
first reference the astronomers made to a phenomenon of
interest, we needed to establish how frequently they made
subsequent reference to each noticing. Consequently, all
subsequent references were also identified and coded.
Because the astronomers were sharing a computer monitor, frequently the first interaction between them after a noticing was to establish that they were both looking at the
same thing. Subsequent references that served purely to establish identity were not included in the analyses.
Table 2: Coding of subsequent references
Noticing: First reference to phenomenon
Establish identity: Reference excluded from analysis
SR: Subsequent reference included in analysis
Code
Noticing (N9)
Establish identity
Establish identity
Establish identity
Establish identity
SR to N9
Noticing (N10)
SR to N9

Utterance
A1: What's that funky thing…
A2: Left center, you mean…
A2: This stuff? [points to screen]
A1: Yeah
A2: Yeah
A1: What is that?
A2: You can see there is some gas
here [points to different area] inside
the ring, but not much…
A1: Except for that little knot there.

Not all subsequent references immediately followed a noticing; frequently, the astronomers returned to a phenomenon
of interest after investigating other features of the galaxy.
The astronomers made frequent gestures to the feature of the
image under discussion; by constructing a map of the noticings on the galaxy, and cross-referencing it with these gestures, the coders were able to determine the specific noticing
to which a subsequent reference referred. Table 2 illustrates
the coding scheme for (sequential) subsequent references.

Results and Discussion
There were 619 on-task segments (75%). Subsequent analyses do not include off-task segments.

Noticing Framework Anomalies
Our first question was did the astronomers notice anomalies
in the data? Recall that a “noticing” is a first-time reference
to a phenomenon of interest. There were 27 noticings during
this session. Of these, 9 (33%) were anomalous, 13 (48%)
were expected, and 5 (19%) were uncoded, because the astronomers themselves or the coders disagreed. This analysis
shows that at least one-third of the phenomena the astronomers identified were unusual in some way. It appears then
that the astronomers did notice anomalies in this dataset.
Interestingly, most of the anomalies (78%) were identified
in highly informal terms or by features of the display, rather
than by underlying astronomical phenomena. Thus, the astronomers usually identified anomalous phenomena as
"blobs," "bulges," or "dipsy-doodles" rather than in formal
astronomical terms (such as a specific type of gas). Not only

were anomalies important to the astronomers, but their attention to these anomalies appears to be drawn primarily by
visual features of the data. We investigate the relationship
between representation and anomalous/expected results elsewhere (Trickett, Fu, Schunn, & Trafton, 2000).

Relationship between Episodes and Noticings
Next, we investigated whether the anomalies played any part
in guiding or structuring this exploratory session, that is,
whether there was any relationship between the noticings
and the episodes, and if so, whether this relationship was
different for the anomalies than for the expected phenomena.
In order to investigate this relationship, we noted how
each episode began. Nine of the 19 episodes began with a
noticing, 7 began with a subsequent reference, and 3 episodes began with something other than a noticing or subsequent reference to a noticing. Thus, out of 19 episodes, only
3 were initiated by theoretical or other similar considerations. Noticing and subsequent references, while common,
only account for 61% of the segments. Thus episodes are
more likely to start with a data-driven event (noticing or SR)
than one would expect from the base rates, X 2 (1) = 3.88, p
< .05. This result suggests that the most likely focus of
attention was some feature of the data rather than some theoretical or other matter. This exploratory session analyzing
visual data appears to have been driven primarily by the data
themselves rather than theoretical considerations.
What features of the data were likely to attract the astronomers' attention? Of the noticings that sparked an episode, an equal number (3) were anomalous and expected. But
whereas no episodes began with a subsequent reference to an
expected phenomenon, 6 subsequent references to anomalies
launched a new episode. This analysis suggests that at a first
pass, the astronomers were equally likely to attend to expected as to anomalous phenomena in the data. However, as
they explored the data further, it was the anomalies, not the
expected phenomena, that directed their investigations. Table
3 summarizes these results.
Table 3: Noticings and subsequent references
beginning an episode

Anomalous
Expected

Notice
3
3

SR
6
0

Initial Attention to Anomalies
Once the astronomers had identified something unusual in
the data, what did they do with this observation? There are
several possible reactions: they could pursue the anomaly in
order to try to account for it, they might temporarily disregard it but return to it later, or they might move on to explore some other, better understood, aspect of the data. A
related question is whether their response to anomalies was
different from their response to expected phenomena.
First, we investigated this issue by considering the extent
to which the astronomers made subsequent reference to a
noticing immediately upon identifying it. If anomalies and
expected phenomena are of equal interest, we would expect

Table 4: Subsequent references (SRs) within episodes

Anomalous (N=9)
Expected (N=13)

Total SRs
68
19

Mean SRs
7.6
1.5

Range
1 - 30
0-4

Furthermore, as Table 4 shows, the range of subsequent
references was also much greater for the anomalies than for
the expected phenomena. All the anomalies received at least
one subsequent reference soon after the astronomers noticed
it. In contrast, 5 of the 13 expected phenomena (38%) received no subsequent references, i.e., no immediate further
attention. In addition, 5 of the 9 anomalies (56%) received
more than 5 subsequent references; none of the expected
phenomena was referred to so frequently. This analysis provides further support for our claim that overall, the anomalies were more important to the astronomers’ goals than the
expected phenomena. In addition, it suggests that the anomallies themselves were not of equal importance, with some
anomalies receiving much more attention than others.

Long-Term Attention to Anomalies
It appears, then, that as the astronomers explored the data
about the ring galaxy, they paid more attention immediately
to the anomalies in this data than they did to expected phenomena. These results say nothing, however, about the continuing role of the anomalies in the astronomers’ analysis.
Possibly, having explored an anomaly, the astronomers
might “consider the matter closed” and switch their attention
to another phenomenon. As with the astronomers’ immediate attention to phenomena, we compare their treatment of
anomalies with their response to the expected phenomena.
In order to investigate the extent to which the astronomers
revisited the phenomena they noticed, we examined the
number of subsequent references to both anomalies and expected findings across episodes. Recall that an episode ended
when the astronomers switched attention to another feature
or point of discussion. Thus, a reference to a feature across
an episode indicates a switch of attention back to that fea-

ture, after having focused attention on something else.
One of the expected phenomena was first noticed in the
last episode; because it was not possible for it to be referenced in a later episode. Thus the number of expected phenomena for these analyses is reduced from 13 to 12.
Seven of the 9 anomalies (78%) were referenced across
episodes, compared with 6 (50%) of the expected phenomena. Overall, the total number of subsequent references
across episodes to anomalies was 66 (mean = 7.3), compared
with 11 (mean = 0.9) to expected phenomena. A t-test on
these data was significant, t (19) = 2.66, SE = 2.41, p <
.05. This result shows that the astronomers continued to pay
more attention to anomalies than to expected phenomena,
revisiting them even after switching their attention to other
features of the data. Figure 2 summarizes these results.
Figure 2: Mean subsequent references (SRs) across episodes

Subsequent References

them to make a similar number of subsequent references to
both the anomalous and expected patterns. However, if
anomalies play a more important role in their efforts to understand the structure of the galaxy, we would expect them
to pay more attention (measured by the number of subsequent references) to anomalies than to expected observations.
Although there were fewer anomalies identified in this
session, collectively these anomalies received over 3 times
as many subsequent references within the same episode as
the expected phenomena. The total number of subsequent
references to anomalies was 68 (mean = 7.6), compared with
19 (mean = 1.5) for expected phenomena. A t-test on these
data was significant, t (20) = 2.27, SE = 2.69, p < .05.
These results show that the astronomers did pay more attention to the anomalies immediately upon noticing them, or
soon thereafter, than they did to the expected phenomena.
This in turn suggests that the anomalies were more important to the astronomers than those phenomena they expected
to find. Table 4 summarizes the results of this analysis.

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Anomalous

Expected

Five of the 9 anomalies (56%) received more than 5 subsequent references across episodes. None of the expected
phenomena was referenced so frequently. Furthermore, the
astronomers persisted in returning to some anomalies, in 3,
4, 5, or even 6 episodes. The spread of episodes during
which subsequent references were made was quite extensive
and in several cases spanned almost the entire session. For
example, Noticing 2 was first identified in episode 1 and was
further referred to in episodes 2, 5, 6, 13, 15, and 17. Noticing 11 was first identified later in the session, in episode 9,
and was further referenced in episodes 11, 13, 15, and 17.
These results suggest that some anomalies were very puzzling to the astronomers and that they were sufficiently important to the exploration of the data that they returned to
them repeatedly, even long after they had first noticed them.

General Discussion and Conclusion
This study was conducted to investigate the role of anomalies in the exploratory stages of visual data analysis. We
found that the astronomers did notice and pay attention to
anomalies. They paid significantly greater attention to the
anomalies in the data than to the expected phenomena. Furthermore, they found some anomalies sufficiently intriguing
that they returned to them later in their exploration, in some
cases repeatedly and over relatively long stretches of time.
None of the expected phenomena received this type of prolonged attention. We conclude, therefore, that anomalies

played an important role in the exploration of these data.
In addition, we found that the astronomers’ attention was
initially drawn by features of the data rather than theoretical
considerations. Although at first an expected phenomenon
was as likely as an anomaly to become the focus of attention, as the analysis proceeded, the anomalies were more
likely to hold the astronomers' attention. Furthermore, attention to the anomalies was initially drawn by irregular features of the visual representation rather than by the underlying phenomenon itself. This suggests that their approach
was highly perceptual, because they identified anomalies
primarily on the basis of unusual curves, lines, etc.
It is possible that anomalies played a significant role in
this data analysis session because of the visual nature of the
data. The anomaly was visible on the display at all times;
consequently, it is possible that the astronomers were cued
primarily by the display rather than memory to revisit the
anomaly. However, this does not seem to be the case. If the
display were the only means by which the astronomers were
cued to make subsequent reference to the anomaly, we would
expect them to make subsequent references to all anomalies.
As our results indicate, though, they were selective in the
anomalies they continued to investigate. Although visibility
on the display may have helped to keep a particular anomaly
activated in the astronomers’ memory, this alone does not
seem to have been sufficient to prompt them to revisit it.
Rather, it appears that some anomalies were “tagged” as
worthy of further investigation, and that the astronomers
continued to search for a satisfactory way to explain them.
In contrast to the widely-held belief that scientists are susceptible to confirmation bias and seek chiefly to confirm
what they already expect, our results present a picture in
which investigating framework anomalies is a central activity in exploratory data analysis. We propose that the anomalies were instrumental in guiding the structure and content of
the data analysis session.
We acknowledge that this is a case study of particular scientists in one domain, working at a specific phase of their
research. However, our results are part of a growing body of
evidence that attention to anomalies may be an important
component of scientific inquiry (cf. Dunbar, 1997). Moreover, the scientists in this study were engaged in a
task—exploratory data analysis—that is undertaken in all
scientific domains. They neither employed unusual techniques nor used specialized equipment unique to their domain. We therefore expect our results to generalize to scientists in other domains. Whether or not they apply to later
stages of data analysis (such as hypothesis-testing) remains
an open question. We are currently extending this research
by applying our methodology to a variety of scientists
working with scientific visualizations in several domains.
We are also planning to conduct longitudinal observations of
scientists, in order to investigate the role of anomalies in
their work at different stages of data analysis.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a student fellowship
from George Mason University to the first author and by
grant number 55-7850-00 from the Office of Naval Research
to the Naval Research Laboratory. We thank Georgia Seeley

and Audrey Lipps for coding assistance and Erik Altmann,
Melanie Diez, Anthony Harrison, William Liles, and Lelyn
Saner for comments.

References
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Psychological
reponses to anomalous data. In Proceedings of the 14th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1998). An empirical test
of a taxonomy of responses to anomalous data in science.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(6), 623-654.
Dunbar, K. (1993). Concept discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 17(3), 397-434.
Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: On-line creativity
and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S. M.
Smith, & J. Vaid, (Eds.), Creative thought: An investigation of conceptual structures and processes. Washington,
DC, USA: American Psychological Association.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R. W., Markman, A. B.,
Levidow, B. B., Wolff, P., & Forbus, K. D. (1997).
Analogical reasoning and conceptual change: A case study
of Johannes Kepler. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
6(1), 3-40.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12(1), 1-48.
Klahr, D. & Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of scientific
discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125(5), 524-543.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kulkarni, D., & Simon, H. A. (1988). The processes of
scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation.
Cognitive Science, 12(2), 139-175.
Mahoney, M. J., & DeMonbreun, B. G. (1977). Psychology of the scientist: An analysis of problem-solving bias.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 3, 229-238.
Mitroff, I. (1974). The subjective side of science: A philosophical inquiry into the psychology of the Apollo
moon scientists. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Trafton, J. G.., Kirschenbaum, S. S., Tsui, T. L., Miyamoto, R. T., Ballas, J. A., & Raymond, P. D. (under
review). Turning Pictures into Numbers: Use of Complex Visualizations.
Trickett, S. B., Fu, W-T., Schunn, C. D., & Trafton, J. G.
(2000). From dipsy-doodles to streaming motions:
Changes in representation in the analysis of visual scientific data.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., & Mynatt, C. R. (Eds.).
(1982). On scientific thinking. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129-140.

