UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Explorations of the Irrelevant Sound Effect in Serial Short-Term Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0pq2k1dv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Beaman, C. Philip

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Explorations of the Irrelevant Sound Effect in Serial Short-Term
Memory.
C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology
University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights
Reading RG6 6AL

Abstract
Although a number of current models of immediate serial
recall exist, only one published model (Neath, 1999, 2000)
incorporates simulations of the disruption of immediate serial
recall by irrelevant background sound. This paper explores a
possible model of irrelevant sound effects derived from Neath
(1999) and applies the results of the model to previously
unconsidered data sets. Studies by Neath (1999, 2000) apply
the feature model, a mathematical model of short-term
memory (Nairne, 1990), to some basic data regarding the
irrelevant sound effect but this approach is ultimately limited
by implicit assumptions regarding the nature of interference in
short-term memory. Relaxing these assumptions allows for a
wider application of a model of the irrelevant sound effect
derived from that of Neath but not tied to the
implementational detail of the feature model. The new model
fits not only the original data considered by Neath (1999,
2000) but also empirical results concerning the effects of
word-dose (Bridges & Jones, 1996) and token set size
(Tremblay & Jones, 1998). It is concluded that the principles
underlying the model provide a promising basis for further
theoretical work.

Introduction
Theories of verbal short-term memory have frequently made
use of the irrelevant sound effect, the disruption to serial
recall of visually-presented verbal lists by background
noise, to inform the proposed architecture of short-term
memory (e.g., Salamé & Baddeley, 1982; Jones & Macken,
1993). Briefly, sound played to a participant during or
immediately following the visual presentation of a to-berecalled list impairs recall of the list even though the
participant was explicitly told to ignore anything they might
hear and participants are never tested on the contents of the
"irrelevant" or "unattended" sound. It is well established
that, although there are individual differences in the level of
susceptibility to irrelevant sound disruption (Ellermeier &
Zimmer, 1997), most participants show the effect.
There has been a paucity of formal simulations of
irrelevant sound disruption, even though it has been claimed
that a number of models of immediate serial recall can, in
principle, account for the effect (Burgess & Hitch, 1999;
Norris, Page & Baddeley, 1995). One model that has been
applied to the effect is the feature model of Nairne (Nairne,
1990; Neath & Nairne, 1995), a mathematical model of

short-term memory based around the idea that the items
most likely to be recalled from a list are those items which
are most distinctive (Nairne, 1988). The model has been
applied to a number of short-term memory phenomena
including modality differences, interference from concurrent
articulation and from post-list stimulus suffixes (Nairne,
1990), the word-length effect (Neath & Nairne, 1995), and
latterly the irrelevant sound effect (Neath, 1999, 2000).

The Feature Model
The feature model assumes that interference rather than
decay accounts for loss from short-term or primary memory.
Representations of items in the feature model are vectors
that code for the "features" of an item using a binary system
allowing features to assume the values of +1 or –1. Features
may be modality dependent, coding information available
only in a specific sensory modality, or modality
independent, coding information that can be conveyed
equally by two or more modalities. Interference occurs in
the model through overwriting. If a feature takes the same
value as its counterpart in the immediately preceding vector,
the earlier feature value is overwritten. This is implemented
by setting the value of the feature to 0 so that it is
informationally uninformative. To give an example, if
feature x of item n+ 1 is the same as feature x of item n,
then feature x of item n is overwritten and can play no part
in determining whether or not item n is accurately recalled
(see Figure 1). Feature values are generated randomly and
independently for each feature vector.
+1
-1
+1
+1
-1
-1
+1
item n

+1
-1
-1
+1
+1
-1
+1
item n+1

0
0
+1
0
-1
0
0
item n after overwriting

Figure 1. Degradation of the representation of a list item in
primary memory when a successive item shares some of the
same feature values.

Retrieval consists of finding the best match to a degraded
cue amongst a set of undegraded feature vectors assumed to
reside in what is termed secondary memory. Two memory
systems coding the same information is in many ways an
unsatisfactory situation if retrieval depends on the degraded
representation. Nevertheless, it is useful from the point of
view of modelling the irrelevant sound effect since accurate
recall of the degraded memory trace can be viewed as recall
of the correct item in the correct order. In immediate serial
recall the to-be-recalled stimuli are typically overlearned,
lists of digits or consonants for example, so the task is
essentially one of identifying which (known) item appeared
in which serial position. As argued elsewhere (Beaman &
Jones, 1997, 1998) the irrelevant sound effect consists
primarily of a disruption of order information. The distance
between the degraded item and its undegraded secondary
memory representation is calculated by summing the
number of mismatched features, M, and dividing by the total
number of compared features, N, as described in Equation 1.

d ij = a ∑

bk M k
N

(1)

The value Mk is the number of times feature position xik
does not equal feature position xjk. The parameter a is a
scaling parameter that is assumed to correspond to the
overall level of attention, and bk is used to weight particular
comparisons if the task makes them more important than
other comparisons. Distance, d, is then used to calculate the
similarity between the degraded vector and the undegraded
secondary memory representation according to Equation 2.

s (i, j ) = e

− d ij

(2)

The probability that a particular secondary memory trace,
SMj will be sampled as a potential recall response for a
particular degraded memory vector PMi is then given by
Equation 3, where wij and wik are possible response bias
weights.

Ps ( SM j | PM i ) =

wij s (i, j )
N

∑w
k =1

ik

(3)

s (i, k )

This basic overwriting model was supplemented by Neath
(1999, 2000) with two additional assumptions to account for
the irrelevant sound effect1. The first assumption was that
1

In fact, the full version of the feature model also includes a
further recovery equation that produces the characteristic bowshaped serial position curve. However here we are specifically
concerned with the results of overwriting. Since there has been
never been any suggestion that interactions between irrelevant
sound and serial position might be of theoretical significance the
recovery equation has been omitted here and performance
averaged over serial position, a procedure also followed by Neath
(Neath, 1999, 2000).

irrelevant sound will act like a concurrent articulation task,
already accounted for by the model (Nairne, 1990) and
overwrite a certain proportion of the modality independent
features. The second assumption was that irrelevant sound
and concurrent articulation manipulations differ in that
effort is required to actively produce irrelevant noises in the
concurrent articulation manipulation, which is not true of
the irrelevant sound manipulation. Neath therefore proposed
varying the attentional parameter a by a greater amount in
simulations of concurrent articulation than in simulations of
irrelevant sound.
With these amendments the feature model shows the
correct qualitative pattern of results across a number of
experimental studies altering only those parameters
associated with the particular psychological process
implicated (Neath, 1999, 2000). For example, the model
shows correctly that the irrelevant sound manipulation
impairs memory for lists of words, but less so than
concurrent articulation. However, as with all simulation
studies, there is experimental evidence not addressed by the
model. Some of this evidence is directly relevant to the way
in which irrelevant sound interferes with memory
representations and cannot be accounted for by the feature
model as it is currently formulated.
Two inconsistencies exist in the feature model account.
Firstly, as described earlier, within-list interference results
only in a lack of information about the overwritten item, not
misinformation. Equation 1 ensures that these effects will be
functionally identical, since only mismatches between the
degraded vector and the undegraded secondary memory
representation influence the similarity calculation (Equation
2) and both lack of information and misinformation are
counted as mismatches. Nevertheless, the theory would be
more parsimonious if all overwriting was implemented in an
identical manner. The second inconsistency is more serious
and concerns the difference between overwriting by
irrelevant sound and overwriting by concurrent articulation.
Concurrent articulation is implemented as setting half of the
modality independent features to a constant value because
participants are required to repeated the same utterance over
and over "so the same information will overwrite the to-beremembered items" (Neath, 2000). However in a simulation
showing how varied speech (referred to in the literature as
"changing-state" irrelevant sound) impairs recall
performance more than repeated speech ("steady-state"
irrelevant sound) (Jones, Madden & Miles, 1992) this logic
was not used. Instead a variation in the attentional parameter
is invoked, with variable speech assumed to attract more
attentional resources.
The alteration in the attention parameter a is necessary as
demonstrated by Figure 2, which shows the average
sampling probabilities of a 9-item list in steady state,
changing state and quiet control conditions across 200
simulations. The steady state condition comprised of setting
half of the modality independent features to a constant value
as described in previous simulation studies (Nairne, 1990).
The changing-state condition comprised of overwriting half
the modality dependent features with different random
combinations of +1 and –1. The attentional parameter, a,
was set to an identical value for all conditions. All other

Probability Correct

weights were set to 1.0. Note that, provided all the other
parameters remain unaltered, the same patterns of
performance can be obtained at different overall recall
levels by simple manipulation of the attentional parameter,
a. However, this would simply be an exercise in data-fitting
and not of psychological interest. The important point to
note is that without the adjustment of the attentional
parameter no changing-state effect is observed. Parameter
adjustment of this type is also perilously close to datafitting.

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Steady State

Changing State

Control

Auditory Condition

Figure 2. Sampling probabilities of items in the feature
model under steady state and changing state irrelevant
sound conditions when the attentional parameter is kept
constant.

A Revised Model: The Changing-State & Token Set
Size Effects
The problem of the changing-state effect can be by viewing
it as a special case of what Tremblay and Jones (1998)
termed "token set size". These authors argued that the
essential cause of disruption by irrelevant sound was the
presence of change in the irrelevant speech stream
(Tremblay & Jones, 1998). The number of different
changes, they argued, was irrelevant: disruption should
markedly increase from one token (steady-state) to two
tokens (changing-state) and there should be little or no
further disruption beyond this token set size.
To give a concrete example, repetition of the utterance
"A" in the irrelevant sound stream constitutes steady-state
irrelevant sound and a token set size of one. According to
Tremblay and Jones this should not cause discernible
disruption to immediate recall. Repetition of the utterance
"A-B" however, has a token set size of two and introduces
change into the irrelevant sound stream and should therefore
disrupt immediate recall. Repetition of the utterance "A-BC" is also a changing-state stimulus (with a token set size of
three) and should therefore also disrupt recall, but not
necessarily to any greater degree than a token-set size of
two since it is the number of changes, not the nature of the
changes, which is important. Thus, changes from A to B
then back to A are functionally equivalent to changes from
A to B to C. Jones and Tremblay (Jones & Tremblay, 2000)
argued that the increment in the attention parameter
necessary to account for the changing-state effect did not

have a principled basis. If the increase in the attention
parameter was necessary to account for increased attentional
demands of changing-state stimuli, they argued, it should be
increased in linearly as token set size increases, which
would result in a linear increase in disruption not present in
the experimental data.
A more realistic simulation than that attempted by Neath
(Neath, 1999, 2000), and one that is not subject to these
criticisms can be attempted by dropping the overwriting
inconsistencies within the feature model. Closer
examination of the experimental procedure employed in the
Tremblay and Jones study reveals that over a 19 second
presentation and retention interval Tremblay and Jones
presented large numbers of repetitions of the same tokens.
38 separate occurrences of the same token in set size 1
condition, 19 repetitions each of 2 tokens in set size 2
condition, 13 repetitions of 3 tokens in set size 3, 8
repetitions of 5 tokens in set size 5 and 5 repetitions of 7
tokens in set size 7. If a conservative estimate of a covert
rehearsal rate no faster than the slowest overt rehearsal rate
of 2 items per second is assumed there could have been 38
rehearsals of a single item in this time period. The feature
model has to assume that interference with the
representations can occur at rehearsal as well as encoding
since the experimental data demonstrate that the irrelevant
sound effect can occur in an unfilled retention interval, after
list presentation but before recall (Beaman & Jones, 1998).
Therefore there will have been multiple opportunities for
interference in this time period and the feature model’s
assumptions that changing-state irrelevant sound randomly
overwrites half of each item’s feature values once begins to
look implausible.
Instead assume that each item was rehearsed once as it is
presented- this is a standard assumption common to many
models of immediate serial recall (e.g., Page & Norris,
1998). This leaves a 10 second retention interval which,
with a slow rehearsal rate of 2 items per second and a 9 item
list to rehearse gives time for only 2 complete rehearsals of
the entire list. Thus altogether there is sufficient time for at
least 3 rehearsals of the whole to-be-recalled list. During
this time overwriting can occur. If, instead of the rather
arbitrary random overwriting in Neath’s version of the
feature model, feature vectors are generated to represent the
irrelevant sound utterances overwriting can then proceed
according to the within-list overwriting principles specified
by Nairne (1990). To simulate the token set size, the number
of feature vectors representing the irrelevant sound was
varied. Unlike the previous reported simulation, there was
no adjustment of the attention parameter between set size 1
(steady-state) and set size 2 or above (changing-state).
The data regarding the token set size effect are shown in
Figure 3, together with a simulation study using the same
procedure described here. The number of overwritings was
set to 3 per item, and the items chosen to overwrite were
randomly sampled from a set size of 2, 3, 5, or 7 randomly
generated feature vectors. As Figure 3 clearly shows, this
procedure produces a very good match between the
performance of the model and the data from the experiment.
Notably, the model actually provides a closer fit to the data
than the predictions of Tremblay and Jones (1998).

0.5
0.4

Model

0.3
Data

0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

5

7

Token Set Size

Figure 3. The effects of token set size of irrelevant sound
on sampling probabilities in the revised model. The crucial
difference between steady state and changing state
conditions is represented by the difference between set sizes
1 and 2, and unlike in the feature model, is here reproduced
accurately.

The Word-Dose Effect
Further evidence not specifically considered by Neath
(2000) which is impossible to fit into his account without
amendment includes the so-called "dose" effect (Bridges &
Jones, 1996). This refers to the finding that increasing the
absolute number of words in the irrelevant sound stream
increases the size of the effect. Dose differs from token set
size in that, for example, "A-B-A-B" has a set size of two
but a dose of four. The word dose manipulation introduced
by Bridges and Jones (1996, Experiment 1) shows strongly
linear effects (see Figure 4) when recall performance is
collapsed across presentation position of the to-be-recalled
lists. An attempt to fit a linear trend line to these data
yielded an R2 value of .9978. The original feature model
cannot account for these data because there is no mechanism
within the model for relating probability of overwriting to
number of irrelevant items presented. In the absence of this
the model simply implements irrelevant sound interference
of any type, regardless of the number of times each
irrelevant item is presented as a single overwriting of each
to-be-recalled item by a random combination of +1s and –
1s. The problem presented by token set size effects is thus
repeated, and the model cannot produce word dose effects.

However, as before, reconsideration of the word dose data
suggests an alternative modelling formulation. Bridges and
Jones presented 5 different speech items repeatedly over the
9 second period of presentation of the to-be-recalled lists, a
10 second retention interval and a 15 second response time
(Bridges & Jones, 1996). If the simplifying assumption is
made to exclude the response time from the analysis then in
the high dose condition participants heard 57 separate
utterances, in the medium dose, 29 utterances, and in the
low dose 19 utterances.
It is not clear how the timing of the rehearsal coincides
with the presentation of the irrelevant sound material,
however the data indicate that a linear relationship exists
across high, medium and low word "dose". In the next
simulation therefore I assume one overwrite per item for the
low dose condition, and increment the number of
overwritings by one for the medium-dose and two for the
high-dose conditions. The item chosen to overwrite each
time will be chosen at random from a set of 5 vectors
representing the 5 irrelevant sound items generated in the
same manner as the vectors representing the to-be-recalled
list. Overwriting will then proceed in the same manner as
within-list overwriting. It is clear that this procedure ensures
not only that overwriting becomes internally more
consistent but also allows for simulation studies of such
effects as word dose that are more directly motivated by the
experimental procedure and do not resort to altering free
parameters. The results of the word dose simulation are
shown in Figure 5. Comparison of this figure to the data
displayed in Figure 4 reveals that a reasonable qualitative fit
to the data has been obtained. There is a discernible effect of
word dose, to which a linear trend line can be fit with
R2=.9198, mirroring the linear trend observed in the
experimental data.
Model
Probability Correct

Probability Correct

0.6

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
High

Probability Correct

Data

Medium

Low

Control

WordDose

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Figure 5. Effects of word-dose on sampling probabilities of
the revised model.

General Discussion
High

Medium

Low

Control

WordDose

Figure 4. Moderating effects of word dose on disruption of
serial recall by irrelevant sound.

Although the basic structure of the feature model was
appropriated for this series of demonstrations, the intention
was not to produce a simulation of irrelevant sound effects
specific to the feature model. Instead, the intention was to
investigate how some of the basic data regarding the
irrelevant sound effect can emerge from an architecture in
which items are represented in a distributed fashion and

presentation of irrelevant sound reduces the signal-to-noise
ratio when recall of the order of those items is necessary.
This investigation has succeeded in showing that increasing
the noise in a distributed representation will reproduce many
of the main findings in the irrelevant sound effect literature
with relatively few assumptions. As such, there are three
important points to note about this exercise.
The first point is to note that many of the feature model’s
assumptions, although implemented here, did not play any
role in determining the outcome of the simulations. For
example, although the assumption that overwriting occurs
across features sharing the same value was implemented
here, it is not necessary to make this assumption in order to
obtain these results. Since each vector was constructed using
random selections of binary values, the same result would
be expected even if overwriting occurred across features
with different values. It is possible to state with some
confidence that reducing the signal-to-noise ratio by
addition of noise to a distributed representation of the to-berecalled item will therefore reproduce at least some of the
key phenomena of irrelevant sound. The second point of
note is that the simulations presented here reproduce many
of the key characteristics predicted by Jones’ changing-state
hypothesis (Jones, Madden & Miles, 1992). These include:
the changing-state effect itself, the specific disruption of
order information, the word dose effect, and the lack of any
great effect of token set size above 2 tokens. The
simulations produce these effects, however, without the
explicit representation of order cues assumed to be
necessary by Jones.
The final point in favour of the current set of simulations
is their relative parsimony and close correspondence to
experimental procedure. Neath (2000) was criticized by
Baddeley (2000) and Jones and Tremblay (2000) for the
number of free parameters required in his simulations of
irrelevant sound effects. The current set of simulations show
that incrementing the attentional parameter is not necessary
if the original (within-list) overwriting principles of the
feature model are followed. This procedure provides a better
fit to the data than the addition of the extra parameter. By
explicitly matching the possibilities of overwriting to the
rehearsal process it also proves possible to account for the
word dose effect, which cannot otherwise be accounted for
by the feature model. What is envisaged is an interference
effect of discrete irrelevant sound elements on a continuous,
serial, mental rehearsal process.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Tom Campbell, Dylan Jones and Philip Smith for
comments and criticism. Much of this work was carried out
while the author was employed as a postdoctoral researcher
at the MRC Cognitive Development Unit, London.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (2000). The phonological loop and the
irrelevant speech effect: Some comments on Neath
(2000). Psychonomic Bulletin and Review. In press.

Beaman, C. P., & Jones, D. M. (1997). Role of serial order
in the irrelevant speech effect: Tests of the changing-state
hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition 23, 459-471.
Beaman, C. P., & Jones, D. M. (1998). Irrelevant sound
disrupts order information in free recall as in serial recall.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 51A, 615636.
Bridges, A. M., & Jones, D. M. (1996). Word dose in the
disruption of serial recall by irrelevant speech:
Phonological confusions or changing state? Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 49A, 919-939.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Memory for serial order:
A network model of the phonological loop and its timing.
Psychological Review, 106, 551-581.
Ellermeier, W., & Zimmer, K. (1997). Individual
differences in susceptibility to the "irrelevant speech
effect". Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102,
2191-2199.
Jones, D. M., & Macken, W. J. (1993). Irrelevant tones
produce an irrelevant speech effect: Implications for
phonological coding in working memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 19, 369-381.
Jones, D. M., Madden, C., & Miles, C. (1992). Privileged
access by irrelevant speech to short-term memory: The
role of changing state. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 44A, 645-669.
Jones, D. M., & Tremblay, S. (2000). Interference in
memory by process or content? A reply to Neath (2000).
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review. In press.
Nairne, J. S. (1988). A framework for interpreting recency
effects in immediate serial recall. Memory and Cognition
16, 343-352.
Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory.
Memory and Cognition 18, 251-269.
Neath, I. (1999). Modelling the disruptive effects of
irrelevant speech on order information. In: I. Neath, G. D.
A. Brown, Poirier, M. & Fortin, C. (Ed.s). Shortterm/working memory. Hove: Psychology Press.
Neath, I. (2000). Modeling the effects of irrelevant speech
on memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review. In press.
Neath, I., & Nairne, J. S. (1995). Word-length effects in
immediate memory: Overwriting trace decay theory.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 2, 429-441.
Norris, D., Page, M., & Baddeley, A. D. (1995).
Connectionist modeling of short-term memory. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 10, 407-409.
Page, M. P. A., & Norris, D. (1998). The primacy model: A
new model of serial recall. Psychological Review, 105,
761-781.
Salamé, P., & Baddeley, A. D. (1982). Disruptions of shortterm memory by unattended speech: Implications for the
structure of working memory. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 21, 150-164.
Tremblay, S., & Jones, D. M. (1998). The role of
habituation in the irrelevant sound effect: Evidence from
the role of token set size and rate of habituation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition 24, 659-671.

