UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraints of Embodiments on Action Coordination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82d049pk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Knoblich, Gunther
Jordan, J. Scott

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraints of Embodiment on Action Coordination
Günther Knoblich (knoblich@mpipf-muenchen.mpg.de)
Cognition and Action; Max Planck Insitute for Psychological Research; Amalienstr. 33
80799 Munich, Germany

J. Scott Jordan (jordan@sxu.edu)
Department of Psychology; Saint-Xavier-University; 3700 West 103rd Street
Chicago, IL 60655 USA
Abstract
One consequence of the embodiment of cognition is that a
single cognitive system may use fast internal mechanisms
to coordinate conflicting actions in real time performance.
In contrast, two different cognitive systems engaged in
joint action have to resolve similiar conflicts via the environment. A tracking paradigm was used to investigate the
coordination of conflicting actions in individuals and
groups. The main question was whether and how persons
engaged in joint action would exploit the perceivable environmental outcomes of their partner´s actions to adjust
their own actions with respect to a jointly desired state.
Groups performed worse than individuals, initially, but
they achieved the same level of performance after some
training. Groups improved because conflicting results of
the partner´s actions were taken into account when members of the pair produced their own actions. This led to the
emergence of an agreed-upon environmental location,
around which, group members coordinated their action effects. The results are consistent with the view that the sp ecial requirements of social interaction may have fostered
the development of higher cognitive functions.

Varieties of Embodiment
During the past decade, more and more researchers have
become interested in the notion of embodied cognition (A.
Clark, 1997; Port & van Gelder, 1995; Varela, Thompson,
& Rosch, 1991). This approach has arisen largely out of
dissatisfaction with the earlier notion of a central, disembodied symbol-manipulation system that is buffered from the
environment via sensorimotor systems. In contrast, the Embodied approach stresses both, the importance of sensorimotor processes in cognitive functioning, and the close, dynamically supportive couplings that exist at all times between organisms and their environments.
Despite their common ground, different versions of the
Embodied approach take issue with different aspects of the
symbolic approach. In its most radical form, which is advocated by proponents of Dynamical Systems Theory (Port &
van Gelder, 1995; Thelen & Smith, 1994), embodied cognition constitutes a rejection of representationalism as a
whole, and conceptualizes cognition in terms of dynamic
organism-environment couplings, exclusively. Less radical
versions also stress the dynamic, organism-environment
couplings, yet retain the notion of internal representation in
order to account for the fact that certain biological systems

are able to produce actions that are directed toward objects
not currently present in the immediate environment (Ballard,
Hayhoe, Pook, & Rao, 1997; A. Clark, 1997). Given that
these representing systems are assumed to have emerged due
to the possibilities they afforded action production, proponents of this version often claim cognitive functioning to be
constrained in one way or another, by the functioning of the
sensorimotor system (e.g. the formation of concepts,
(Barsalou, 1999; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999)).
The present research takes this notion as its starting
point, and addresses its implications for action coordination.
This is because, to date, embodiment has focused primarily
on the individual cognitive system and its continuous environmental couplings. Members of many species, however,
especially humans, often engage in joint action with other
members of their species. Though some may consider social
interaction just another example of environmental interaction, it may be the case that special requirements of joint
action placed certain constraints on action production. Such
constraints may have served, historically, to shape the structures and processes that came to be embodied in evolving
cognitive systems (Mead, 1934; Vygotsky, 1978). The present research addresses these constraints.

Individual and Joint Coordination of
Conflicting Actions
A major function of action control in an individual organism is to select proper actions to obtain a desired impact on
the environment (Prinz, 1997). If there are conflicting action
alternatives, some internal mechanism may resolve the conflict (Anderson, 1990) and the motor system can be adjusted
according to the action selected.
The situation is quite different when the action alternatives are distributed across two different cognitive systems
that are engaged in joint action. Following a definition by
H. H. Clark (1996), by a joint action we denote an action
"that is carried out by an ensemble of people acting in coordination with each other" (p. 3). This implies that the individuals in the ensemble try to achieve a common goal.
However, the intention to achieve a common goal does not
protect the ensemble from encountering conflicts, especially
when each system has only one of many action alternatives
at its disposal.
To illustrate, imagine a situation in which two people
drive a car together on a straight road. They can neither see

Tracker
Screen boarder

Screen boarder

Target

Target trajectory
Turn
Turn

Boarder Region

Middle Region

Boarder Region

Figure 1: Illustration of experimental paradigm (vertical positions of target and tracker do not change in the actual task).
nor speak to one another. Person G controls the gas and
person B, the brakes. As long as the car does not need to
stop, there is no conflict, G acts and B does nothing. Now
imagine a situation in which the ensemble encounters a traffic light. If the traffic light is green, no change is needed. If
the traffic light is red, G has to stop acting and B has to start
acting. Hence, this situation requires G and B to coordinate
their actions according to an anticipated point at which they
want to bring the car to a full stop. Conflicts may arise with
respect to the point in time at which G stops and B starts
acting, and as a consequence the ensemble may give gas and
brake at the same time during a certain time interval. Hence,
the car may well stop at a point that was intended neither by
G, nor by B.
It is very unlikely that an individual in the same situation
would carry out both actions at the same time even if different feet were used for giving gas and braking. An internal
mechanism would select between the action alternatives in
advance, instead of carrying out two conflicting actions at
the same time. In the joint action example, conflict resolution is necessarily linked to noticeable changes in the environment, at least initially. Hence, if the situation requires
braking, and B decides to start braking early, G will only
know of that decision after perceiving that B has started to
brake.
The aim of our research is to investigate how individuals
and groups optimize their performance when conflicts arise
in real time action coordination. Our main hypothesis is that
persons engaged in joint action will use perceivable outcomes of the other´s actions to dynamically adjust their own
actions with respect to a commonly desired future state. Individual performance can be used as baseline to determine
how the same conflict is dealt with within a single cognitive
system.

Experimental paradigm
We use a tracking paradigm for our studies. Generally, in
tracking tasks one has to control a tracker so as to minimize
the distance between the tracker and the target. The tracker is
controlled by means of simple and clearly defined actions,
e.g. hand movements or keypresses. The standard task requires minimal anticipation of future events and no conflict
arises between alternative actions. For our study, we developped a different type of tracking task. In this task, an-

ticipation of future events is crucial, and conflicts between
two different action alternatives arise in a clearly defined
manner. Figure 1 illustrates this task.
A target moves across the computer screen horizontally
with constant velocity. As soon as it reaches a border of the
screen, it changes its direction abruptly and moves back towards the other border, changes its direction again, and so
on. The task is to keep a tracker on the target by controlling
its velocity with two keys. When the tracker is moving to
the right, hitting the right key accelerates it by a constant
amount and hitting the left key decelerates it by the same
amount. When the tracker is moving to the left, hitting the
left key accelerates it and hitting the right key decelerates it.
To illustrate, if the right key has been pressed five times,
the left key will have to be pressed five times to bring the
tracker to a full stop. Within the middle region, tracking
performance can be optimized by decreasing the immediate
error, as in most tracking paradigms. For instance, if the
target is moving to the right and the tracker is left of the
target, accelerating the tracker by a right keypress is the only
reasonable action to be carried out (see panel a, in Figure 2).
The situation is different within the border regions. In
these regions, a conflict arises between two alternative
strategies. The first alternative, i.e., trying to stay on target
as long as possible, will minimize the immediate error up
until the point at which the target changes its direction. Afterwards, a large error will arise because tracker velocity can
only be changed gradually. Several keypresses will be needed
to stop the tracker and more will be needed to gain velocity
in the opposite direction. During this interval, the target
will continue moving in the opposite direction, constantly
increasing the distance between itself and the tracker. Thus,
trying to minimize immediate error will create an extremly
large future error.
The second alternative is to slow down the tracker before
the target turns. In this case, the immediate error will be
increased to prevent future error. This is the case because the
target continues to move toward the border as the tracker
decelerates with each keypress. Using the latter strategy is
the only way to improve performance within the border region, especially when the target moves fast and the impact
of each keypress on the velocity of the tracker is low.
Within this context, we refer to keypresses that decrease
immediate error as compensatory presses, and those that that

increase immediate error in order to reduce future error, as
anticipatory brakes (see panel a, and b, in Figure 2).

before

after

a) Effect of a compensatory button press.

between tracker and target at the time of each button press as
an error measure. Our prediction is that the error should be
lower for individuals, initially, because individuals coordinate conflicting actions by using fast internal mechanisms,
whereas groups can only use perceivable changes in the environment, in their attempt to coordinate conflicting actions.
Hence, groups should need more time to coordinate, which
in turn should deteriorate real time performance, initially.
However, if persons in a group are able to integrate some
aspect of the environment that characterizes their partner´s
actions into their individual planning, the difference in error
between individuals and groups should largely decrease.

Extent and timing of anticipatory strategy

before

after

b) Effect of an anticipatory button press.
Figure 2: Illustration of the effects of compensatory and
anticipatory keypresses (in the actual task target and tracker
are horizontally aligned).
To investigate conflict resolution in individuals and
groups we used two versions of the task that differed in one
single aspect. In the individual condition each person controlled both keys, in the group condition each person controlled only one key. Hence, in the individual condition, the
conflict between minimizing immediate vs. future error
arises within one cognitive system, while in the group condition it arises between two cognitive systems. As a consequence, individuals may solve the conflict by use of fast
internal mechanisms, while groups have to use certain aspects of the environment to act out the conflict overtly.
Thus, in the group condition, the only way to better coordinate conflicting actions and thereby improve performance is
to focus on changes in certains aspects of the environment
that result from the other person´s actions. Regularities in
these changes can then be used to adjust one´s own actions
with respect to the commonly desired future state.

Predicitions
The nature of the present paradigm affords the measurement of several dependent variables that characterize performance, the extent and timing of the anticipatory strategy,
and certain environmental anchors to which coordination can
be linked. In the following, we will describe the rationale for
using each of these variables, and derive predictions for the
individual and group condition, in turn.

Performance
To characterize performance, we use the absolute distance

Anticipatory brakes. The extent to which the anticipatory strategy is employed within the boundary regions can
be defined as the proportion of anticipatory brakes (see Figure 2, panel b) occurring in that region. We predict that the
anticipatory brake rate will be greater for individuals than for
groups, because once individuals have decided to prevent
future error, they will be less likely to switch back to the
conflicting action that reduces immediate error. In contrast,
coordination requires overt action within groups. Therefore,
the person who is responsible for reducing immediate error
will quite likely produce actions that interfere with the anticipatory actions of the other person. The anticipatory brake
rate should increase in both, individuals and groups, as they
become more familiar with the task, because employing an
anticipatory strategy is the only way to reduce overall error.
Decision point. One way in which the person responsible for anticipatory braking in a group can compensate for
conflicting actions of the other is to take them into account,
when timing her or his own actions. This should lead to
earlier initiation of anticipatory braking in the group condition. The decision point, by which we denote the position of
the tracker at the time of the first anticipatory brake, can be
used to test this hypothesis. It should be further removed
from the border in the group condition than in the individual
condition.

Environmental anchors
Location of turn-around points. By the turn-around
point we denote the most extreme tracker location during
each run of the target from one side of the screen to the
other. If the target turns at the right border, the turn-around
point is the maximal screen position of the tracker, if the
target turns at the left border the turn-around point is the
minimal screen position of the tracker (see Figure 1). To
make turn-around points on both sides of the screen comparable they are expressed in terms of the absolute distance to
the respective border. At the turn-around point the tracker
comes to a full stop and is accelerated towards the other direction by the following keypresses. The turn-around point
is functionally important because it can be used as an environmental anchor to which the goal of minimizing overall
error can be tied. The reason is that, given a certain velocity
of the target and a certain impact of each keypress, the optimal turn-around point will be relatively invariant.
If, as predicted, groups pick a decision point that is further
removed from the boarder, groups may achieve a turn-around

point that is as equally removed from the border as the one
was given an individual control panel consisting of one key.
achieved by individuals. Otherwise, it should be less reKeypresses of the individual on the left side of the partition
moved from the border in the group condition. In the indiresulted in tracker acceleration to the left, while those of the
vidual and the group condition as well, the turn-around point
other individual produced tracker-acceleration to the right.
should become further removed from the border in later trials
The experiment consisted of 3 blocks of 40 trials each.
because overall error can be decreased by turning the tracker
earlier.
Results and Discussion
Homogeneity of turn-around points. In the individual condition the turn-around points at the left and the
Performance
right border are the result of actions taken by the same person. The situation is different in the group condition. Whenever the target approaches the right border, the person who is
125
in charge of the left key is responsible for anticipatory brakGroups
ing and the person who is in charge of the right key is responsible for compensating immediate error. Whenever the
Individuals
target approaches the left border, each group member must
assume the opposite role (the compensator becomes the an100
ticipatory braker, the anticipatory braker becomes the compensator).
Hence, the prediction for individuals is that they will pick
similiar turn-around points at both borders. Therefore, the
Distance in pixels
75
absolute difference between the left and the right turn-around
point in a trial should be relatively small and not change
substantially across consecutive blocks. In contrast, two
persons in a group should pick more heterogeneous turn50
around points initially. However, in later trials they may
coordinate their actions by „agreeing“ on a certain turnaround point. Therefore, we predict a huge initial difference
that substantially decreases in later blocks.
25
Method
1
2
3
Participants Forty-five paid participants took part in
the experiment. Fifteen participants were assigned to the
Block
individual condition. Thirty participants were assigned to the
group condition.
Figure 3: Individual and group performance across conMaterial and Procedure Upon entering the lab, parsecutive blocks
ticipants were informed of the nature of the task. They were
instructed individually in the group condition. Afterwards,
As can be seen in Figure 3, error decreased for individuals
they were seated in front of a computer monitor at a distance
and groups across consecutive blocks. Hence, performance
of 80 cm and were asked to put on a set of headphones. Parimproved in individuals and groups. As expected, the error
ticipants in the group condition were divided by a partition.
was much larger in the group condition during the first
They could neither see one nor talk to one another. Howblock. After the second block, group performance reached the
ever, each was provided with a separate computer monitor,
level of individual performance. A 2 x 3 ANOVA with the
and all events taking place during the experiment (e.g. the
factors Experimental Group (Individuals and Groups, bemovements of the tracker and the movements of the target)
tween) and Block (1, 2, and 3, within) revealed a significant
were presented simultaneously on both monitors. Thus, the
main effect for the Block factor, F(2, 56) = 24.2, p < .001,
only information shared was the task display and the acousand a significant interaction between Experimental Group
tic feedback accompanying each keypress.
and Block, F(2, 56) = 3.5, p < .05
At the beginning of each trial target and tracker were displayed in the middle of the screen for 500 ms, the tracker
Anticipatory brakes
being superimposed on the target. Thereafter, the target
The anticipatory brake rate was computed as the number
started moving either to the left or to the right with constant
of anticipatory brakes in a border region divided by the overvelocity. After reaching the border, it abruptly began travelall number of button presses in that region. Figure 4 shows
ling back in the opposite direction. There were three such
the results. The anticipatory brake rate increased over contarget turns during each trial. The initial velocity of the
secutive blocks for individuals and groups. As expected, the
tracker was zero. Each left keypress accelerated the tracker to
anticipatory brake rate was constantly lower in the group
the left and each right keypress accelerated it to the right.
condition than in the individual condition.
Right presses triggered a 600 Hz tone and left presses trigA 2 x 3 ANOVA with the factors Experimental Group (Ingered a 200 Hz tone. Participants in the individual condition
dividuals and Groups, between) and Block (1, 2, and 3,
controlled both keys. In the group condition, each member

within) revealed significant main effects for the Group factor, F(1, 28) = 9.4, p < .01, and the Block factor, F(2, 56) =
26.1, p < .001. There was no significant interaction.
0,70

0,65

0,60
% anticipatory brakes
0,55

Figure 5 shows the result of the analysis of decision
points, i.e., the distance of the tracker from the border at the
time of the first anticipatory brake.
As they became more familiar with the task, individuals
and groups moved the tracker closer to the border before they
initiated the first anticipatory brake. This result indicates
that resolving the action conflict took less time in later trials. As expected, in the Group condition the tracker was
always further from the border, when the first anticipatory
brake occured. A 2 x 3 ANOVA with the factors Experimental Group (Individuals and Groups, between) and Block (1, 2,
and 3) revealed a significant main effect for the Group factor,
F(1, 28) = 4.6, p < .05, and the Block factor, F(2, 56) =
11.2, p < .001. There was no significant interaction.

Location of turn-around points
Groups

0,50

Individuals

Figure 6 illustrates the results of the analysis of turnaround poins, i.e., the absolute distance between the border
and the point at which the tracker stopped before changing
its direction.
75

0,45
1

2

3
70

Block
Figure 4: Anticipatory brake rate in individuals and
groups across consecutive blocks

65

Distance from boarder in pixels

Decision points

60

200
Groups
55

190

Groups

Individuals
Individuals
50

180

1

2

3

Block

170 in pixels
Distance from boarder

Figure 6: Turn-around point chosen by individuals and
groups across consecutive blocks.

160
150
140
1

2

3

Block
Figure 5: Decision point in individuals and groups across
consecutive blocks.

As expected, in later blocks, the turn-around point became
further removed from the border in both experimental conditions. Individuals produced a sharper increase than groups
from the first to the second block. A 2 x 3 ANOVA with
the factors Experimental Group (Individuals and Groups,
between) and Block (1, 2, and 3) revealed a significant main
effect for the Block factor, F(2, 56) = 11.6, p < .001, and a
marginally significant interaction, F(2, 56) = 2.62, p = .08.
The difference between individuals and groups was highly
significant during the second block, t = 4.21, p < .001. The
main effect of experimental group was not significant.

Homogeneity of turn-around points.
Figure 7 depicts the results of the analysis of the homogeneity of turn-around points.
60
Individuals
Groups

50

40

Abs (Left TP - Right TP) in pixels
30

20

10
1

2

3

Block
Figure 7. Homogeneity of turn-around points in individuals and groups across consecutive blocks.
Individuals turned the tracker at roughly the same point on
both sides of the screen, i.e., there was only a small difference of about 30 pixels. The homogeneity of turn-around
points increased only slightly across consecutive blocks. In
contrast, persons in a group picked heterogeneous turnaround points, initially. In later trials, the selected turnaround points which were almost as homogeneous as those
chosen by individuals. A 2 x 3 ANOVA with the factors
Experimental Group (Individuals and Groups, between) and
Block (1, 2, and 3) revealed a significant main effect for the
Block factor, F(2, 56) = 8.25, p < .001, and a significant
interaction, F(2, 56) = 3.30, p < .05. There was no significant main effect of experimental condition.

Discussion
Individuals as well as groups are able to learn to coordinate conflicting actions with respect to a common goal, in
real time, but groups clearly perform worse initially. The
results illustrate robustly the different constraints that
groups must deal with as they attempt to coordinate conflicting actions. To be sure, both groups and individuals improve by employing the advantageous anticipatory strategy.
This is reflected in the fact that both gave rise to increases in
anticipatory braking, as well as increases in the distance of
the turn-around point from the border. Within groups however, this anticipatory strategy had to be worked out via the
environment. Thus, it seems that group members take into
account the potentially interfering actions of their partner by
starting to brake at a further distance from the border. In
addition, they seem to "agree" on a certain point in space at

which to turn the tracker, as is evidenced by increased homogeneity of the turn-around point. As soon as such an
agreement has been reached, both the homogeneity of the
turn-around points and the degree of error become almost
indistinguishable from that produced by individuals.
The additional constraints on action coordination that arise
within groups, as opposed to within an individual, are due to
the fact that embodied cognitive systems have to make use
of the environment to coordinate conflicting actions. This
need to “lean” on the environment in group action, may
constitute a selective pressure responsible for the phylogenetic emergence of cognitive systems capable of integrating
the anticipated effects of another system’s actions, into the
planning of their own. This capability, in turn, may have
afforded the emergence of the ability to produce environmental effects whose intended outcome was not solely entailed in the effect itself, but rather, in the impact that effect
was anticipated to have upon the planning abilities of other
cognitive systems. In short, the group need to collaborate
through the environment may have driven the embodiment
and environmental projection of symbol systems. This is
consistent with Clarks (1996) assertion that the essence of
language is joint action.

Acknowledgements
We thank Rüdiger Flach for helpful comments, and
Irmgard Hagen, Eva Seigerschmidt, and Patric Bach for their
help in collecting the data.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K., & Rao, R. P.
N. (1997). Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 20(4), 723-767.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577-660.
Clark, A. (1997). The dynamical challenge. Cognitive Science, 21(4), 461-481.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, England
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self and society: from the standpoint of a social behaviorist (Ed. with intro by C. W.
Morris.). Chicago: University Press.
Port, R. F., & van Gelder, T. (Eds.). (1995). Mind as motion: Explorations in the dynamics of cognition. Cambridge, MA, USA: Mit Press.
Prinz, W. (1997). Perception and action planning. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9(2), 129-154.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems
approach to the development of cognition and action.
Cambridge, MA, USA: Mit Press.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
Cambridge, MA, USA: Mit Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

