UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deep Learning in Virtual Reality: How to Teach Children That the Earth is Round

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38m524pt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Ohlsson, Stellan
Moher, Thomas G.
Johnson, Andrew

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deep Learning in Virtual Reality:
How to Teach Children That the Earth is Round
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Psychology (MC 285)
1007 West Harrison Street
Chicago, IL 60607-7137

Thomas G. Moher (moher@uic.edu)
Andrew Johnson (ajohnson@uic.edu)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (MC 154)
851 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607-7053

Abstract
To understand deep cognitive change, we have to understand
how learners can go beyond their own prior knowledge. We
propose a displacement scenario in which a learner acquires a
target idea in a different context and then transfers that idea
into a target context. We used virtual reality technology to
implement a displacement scenario for teaching 2nd grade
children that the Earth is round. The rather large pre- to
posttest improvement was stable over four months.

The Paradox of Deep Learning
Knowledge systems are organized along a center-periphery
axis. One or more central ideas dominate more peripheral
ones. The center-periphery structure is particularly obvious
in scientific theories (Lakatos, 1980), but it also plays an
important role in cognitive development (Chi, 1992;
Vosniadou, 1994), social cognition (Eagly & Chaiken, in
press; Rokeach, 1970) and elsewhere.
Changing the peripheral parts of a knowledge system by
learning new facts or skills is easy enough, but revising its
core concepts -- deep learning -- is a different matter
(Ohlsson,
1995).
Both
direct
experiences
and
communications are interpreted in terms of, and with the
help of, prior ideas and hence tend to be understood as
consistent with them. The result is that people assimilate
information that is anomalous or inconsistent with current
ideas or beliefs either by misunderstanding the former or by
revising peripheral parts of the relevant knowledge system
(Chinn & Brewer, 1993; Darden, 1992; Kuhn, Amsel &
O’Loughlin, 1988; Strike & Posner, 1992). Consequently,
neither direct experience nor communications have much
power to change central ideas. Fodor (1976, Chap. 2) has
argued that this is necessarily so: A less powerful

representational system cannot, in principle, replace itself
with a more powerful one.
This conclusion leads to a paradox (Bereiter, 1985). It
implies that central ideas never change, but of course they
do. Scientists sometimes revise fundamental theoretical
principles and non-scientists undergo radical changes in
world view, particularly during childhood. Developmental
psychologists have documented deep changes in children’s
understanding of a variety of domains (see, e.g., Hirschfeld
& Gelman, 1994). Gopnic and Meltzoff (1997) argue that
such developmental changes share many features with
theory change in science.
How is deep cognitive change possible? How does the
mind circumvent the learning paradox? One plausible
hypothesis is that ideas that are new in one domain are
brought into that domain from some other domain.
According to this cross-domain transfer hypothesis, to
acquire a new central idea in a target domain X, the learner
must first acquire that idea in some source domain Y in
which its acquisition is not hindered by prior knowledge, and
then transfer the new idea to X and build a new
understanding of X around it. The new understanding will
gradually replace the old. This hypothetical three-step
process might circumvent the distorting influence of the
learner’s prior ideas about X.
This hypothesis predicts that we can facilitate the
acquisition of a deep idea if we displace the learner’s
attention from the target domain to some other domain,
teach him or her the target idea in that domain, and then
prompt him or her to transfer it into the target domain. We
implemented this displacement scenario in a virtual reality
environment for teaching children that the Earth is round.
Empirical evaluation in a public school resulted in strong

and lasting improvement in the children’s understanding of
the shape of the Earth and related facts.

Mental Models of the Earth
All direct experience supports the idea that the ground is a
flat surface extending in all directions; hills and valleys are
only local perturbations. The sky is parallel to the ground,
the ground is always down and the sky is always up.
These ideas partition the universe into two unequal
regions, above and below the Earth. They strongly imply
that traveling in a straight line will bring the traveler further
and further away from his or her starting point, until he or
she reaches a boundary where the Earth stops. Furthermore,
down and up do not vary with the observer’s location; an
arrow pointing upwards in one location is parallel to an
arrow pointing upwards in any other location. Also, objects
at a distance are hard to see either because they are occluded
by another object or because the observer lacks visual
acuity. Finally, the location of the sun and the moon when
we cannot see them is problematic. Many children in
Western (Nussbaum, 1985; Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992) as
well as non-Western (Vosniadou, 1994) societies develop
some version of this mental model.
The idea that the Earth is spherical has contrasting
implications: It suggests that the surrounding space is
uniform and it implies that a traveler who keeps going in a
straight line will eventually return to his or her starting
point. Furthermore, down and up varies with the observer’s
location; up in New York is not parallel to up in Hong Kong.
Also, distant objects are invisible because they are occluded
by the surface curvature. Finally, the sun and the moon are
sometimes invisible because they are occluded by the planet
itself.
The shift from a flat Earth to a round Earth view is an
instance of deep learning. The two concepts, clearly stated,
contradict each other and they influence many other aspects
of one’s understanding of Earth-related facts and events.
Empirical research has shown that this shift takes
considerable time, at least two years (Vosniadou & Brewer,
1992, Table 4) and possibly as long as six years (Nussbaum,
1985, Fig. 9.16) when it occurs spontaneously, and it
requires one or more intermediate mental models. The
question is whether this process can be speeded up with the
displacement strategy.

A Virtual Asteroid
Our approach to facilitating the shift from a flat to a round
Earth is to teach the idea of a spherical planet in an
unfamiliar context, unhindered by prior ideas, and then
prompt the learner to apply this idea to his or her knowledge
about the Earth. We accomplished the first step in this twostep procedure by using two linked virtual reality (VR)
environments. The Asteroid World simulates the experience
of walking on the surface of an asteroid with approximately
300 yards diameter. The virtual asteroid is roughly spherical

in shape and exhibits a desert-like landscape with a handful
of geographical features (a bulge, a canyon, etc.), large rocks
scattered here and there and fantasy structures that resemble
trees made out of crystal, plus a shuttle-like space ship. The
sky is black but features stars and a large, moon-like object.
The Asteroid World was presented via a so-called
ImmersaDesk, a VR projection device developed at the
Electronic Visualization Laboratory at UIC. The
ImmersaDesk is roughly 6 feet by 4 feet. The device
supports full immersive VR with stereo vision, head
tracking, hand tracking and audio; see Czernuszenko, Pape,
Sandin, DeFanti, Dawe and Brown (1997) for a technical
description.
When the Asteroid World user presses the forward-move
button on the control stick, he or she has the visual
perceptions that would be associated with a physical walk on
a real asteroid with the same properties as the virtual one.
When the diameter of the world is 300 yards, one can
experience its sphericality directly. The horizon is very
close, rocks and other large objects appear over the horizon
very quickly, the stars in the sky are streaming past at a
perceptible pace, objects are difficult to find because they
are hidden by the curvature even when close by and
circumnavigation is accomplished in a couple of minutes.
Our second environment, called the Mission Control,
presents a satellite view of the virtual asteroid, projected in
stereo on a computer monitor. When the user wears stereo
glasses, he or she sees the virtual asteroid as a threedimensional body floating in space against the background
of stars. The various geographical features and the space
ship are clearly visible. In addition, the Mission Control user
sees the user of the Asteroid World as an avatar, a small
space-suited figure. That is, the Asteroid World user and the
Mission Control user access the same virtual reality at the
same time but from different points of view. In particular,
Mission Control can observe the movements of the astronaut
on the virtual asteroid in real time. To remain in visual
contact, Mission Control can rotate the asteroid (but not
change his or her distance from it) by pressing a button on a
control stick.
The Asteroid and Mission Control environments are
described in more detail in Johnson, Moher, Ohlsson and
Gillingham (1999). By alternating between them, the learner
can experience or perceive the uniformity of the surrounding
space, circumnavigation, the relativity of up and down, and
occlusion by surface curvature. Furthermore, these
experiences occur in a context in which the learner has no
prior, conflicting ideas about the shape of the world. The
second step in our learning scenario -- to transfer and apply
this idea to the everyday experience of the Earth -- is
described below.

Empirical Study
Method

Materials The equipment needed to project the two virtual
environments was set up in a large room in a public school
in a Chicago suburb. The user of one environment could not
see the other environment or its user, but the two users were
close enough so that they could talk to each other.
In addition, our instructional procedure required two
physical models. One was a foam rubber model of the
virtual asteroid, approximately eight inches in diameter,
painted and equipped with a model space ship, rocks and
other features to make it recognizable as a model of the
virtual asteroid as seen in the Mission Control environment.
The second physical model was a standard Earth globe
purchased in a book store.
Knowledge test To assess children’s understanding of the
shape of the Earth, we developed a structured interview
derived from those used by previous researchers (Nussbaum,
1985; Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992). The interviewer (a
project team member) asked 18 questions about the shape of
the Earth, the content of the region below the Earth,
circumnavigation, the relativity of up and down and
occlusion by curvature. The children’s answers were
classified at testing time by the interviewer, using a set of
coding categories derived from a pilot study (Johnson,
Moher, Ohlsson & Gillingham, 1999). The knowledge test
interview took 10-20 minutes. The same test was used as
pretest, posttest and delayed posttest.
Subjects All fifty second-grade children in the
participating class rooms were pretested. The 28 children
who answered 10 or fewer pretest questions correctly were
included in the treatment group. Due to the small number of
such students, we preferred to include all of them in a
pretest-posttest design over dividing them into two groups in
a treatment-control design. The 22 children who answered
11-13 questions correctly will be referred to as the
comparison group, although it is not a control group in the
statistical sense due to the non-random group assignments.
Procedure For the children in the treatment group, the
procedure consisted of pretest, VR experience, bridging
activity, posttest and delayed posttest. For the children in the
comparison group, the procedure consisted of pretest and
posttest.
(a) VR experience. The children were paired into teams of
two. During the familiarization phase, the two experimenters
who acted as guides helped the children put on the stereo
glasses and guided them around their respective
environments for five minutes. The two children then
switched places and the familiarization process was repeated
for another five minutes. During familiarization, the guides
pointed out visual features related to sphericality (nearness
of horizon, objects coming up over the horizon, the avatar
seeming to be up side down, circumnavigation, etc.).
During the game phase, the children were told that they
were stranded on the asteroid for lack of fuel and their task
was to find extra fuel cells scattered over the asteroid so that
their space ship could return to Earth. The child on the

asteroid collected the fuel cells, but the child in Mission
Control assisted by locating fuel cells (the latter were clearly
visible in the Mission Control view) and by giving directions
to the other child. The children played this game for ten
minutes, switched places and continued for an additional
then minutes. Each child thus had a total of 30 minutes
(5+5+10+10) of interaction with the two VR environments.
(b) Bridging dialogue. Immediately after the VR
experience, the two children were escorted to two different
rooms for the bridging dialogue, a structured conversation
with a member of the project team. The purpose of this
dialogue was to prompt reflection on the VR experience and
to help the child transfer the spherical planet idea to his or
her mental model of the Earth. In each phase of the dialogue,
the experimenter reminded the child of his or her VR
experience with the help of the physical model of the
asteroid, re-enacting some facet of that experience (e.g.,
circumnavigation) with toy figures. The experimenter then
shifted the child’s attention to the globe of the Earth and told
him or her that what was the case on the asteroid is also the
case on the Earth, enacting the relevant facet with toy
figures vis-à-vis the Earth globe. The conversation then
switched back to the asteroid model to cover another facet of
sphericality, which was also illustrated with the Earth globe;
and so on. The bridging dialogue took approximately 15
minutes.
(c) Posttest. The subjects were posttested 24 hours after
the learning experience.
(d) Delayed posttest. The delayed posttest was
administered four months after the learning experience.

Results
Figure 1 shows the outcome. The performance of the
treatment group increased from a mean of 7.3 correct
answers on the pretest to a mean of 12.9 correct answers on
the posttest. We tested the posttest mean with a singlesample t-test, using the pretest mean as the comparison
value. The difference is statistically significant (t = 13.68, p
< .000). Hence, the treatment group improved from pretest
to posttest. The magnitude of the improvement is 12.9 -7.3 =
5.6 scale units, which is 1.9 times the standard deviation on
the pretest. The mean number of correct answers on the
delayed posttest was 11.4. Almost the entire pre- to posttest
improvement was retained four months later.
Because the posttest questions were identical to the
pretest questions, there is a possibility that the improvement
in the children’s understanding of the Earth was caused by
the test itself. We can use the comparison group to measure
the effect of the test. The members of the comparison group
were pre- and posttested but did not undergo the VR
experience. The mean number of correct answers in this
group was 12.2 on the pretest and 14.0 on the posttest. A
single-sample t-test of the posttest mean, using the pretest
mean as comparison value, showed that the pre- to posttest
difference is statistically significant (t = 4.6, p < .000).

Hence, taking the test prompted some learning, even in the
absence of the VR experience. The magnitude of the effect
is 14.0 - 12.2 = 1.8, which is .6 times the standard deviation
on the pretest. This improvement is considerably smaller
than the improvement in the treatment group. Due to the
non-random assignment of subjects to groups, the evidence
provided by this analysis is admittedly weaker evidence than
that provided by a proper control group.
18

No. of correct answers

16
12.9

14

11.4

12
10
8

7.3

6
4
2
0
Pretest

Posttest

Delayed

Figure 1. The mean number of correct answers on three test
occasions.
A t-test for independent samples shows that the difference
between the treatment and comparison groups on the pretest
was statistically significant (t = 10.71, p < .000). There was
no significant difference between the two groups on the
posttest (t = 1.90, p > .06).

Discussion
The children in the treatment group almost doubled their
understanding of the shape of the Earth, as measured by our
knowledge test. The treatment group initially performed
considerably below the comparison group, but performed as
well as the latter on the posttest. That is, our learning
scenario allowed those children who had not spontaneously
acquired an understanding of the shape of the Earth to catch
up with those who had. Unlike the spontaneous acquisition
process, which occurs over several years (Nussbaum, 1985;
Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992), the displacement scenario
enabled children to acquire the target idea in one day. They
retained it four months later.
Why was the displacement scenario successful? An
explanation for these results must deal with the paradox of
deep learning: Central ideas are seldom transformed by
novel input; they are too protected by the surrounding belt of
auxiliary ideas and beliefs. So how does deep learning ever
come about? The cross-domain transfer hypothesis claims
that central ideas are not transformed but replaced by ideas
transferred from other contexts, domains or situations (Chi,
1992). In the present study, both our virtual asteroid and the
Earth can be said to belong to the domain of elementary
astronomy, but the crucial point for learning is that our

subjects had no prior knowledge about the shape of the
virtual asteroid but they did about the shape of the Earth.
This model of deep learning differs significantly from
other models, e.g., attempts to view deep learning in
children as analogous to scientific theory change (Gopnik &
Meltzoff, 1997; Hewson & Hewson, 1984; Posner et. al,
1982). One difficulty with this theory theory, as it has come
to be known, is that human beings are not conspicuously
good at evaluating evidence, presumably the central process
in theory change. The theory theory describes cognitive
change in logical rather than naturalistic terms (Ohlsson,
2000). It does not explain our results, because we did not
present our subjects with evidence of any kind: We
familiarized them with a previously unfamiliar environment
and then asserted that what was true in that environment is
also true about the Earth. The cross-domain transfer
hypothesis does better because, unlike the theory theory, it
does not claim that dissatisfaction with prior ideas is a
prerequisite for learning. Prior ideas are not necessarily
falsified or rejected; instead, they fall into disuse when
another, more useful idea becomes available.
Unlike the knowledge-in-fragments theory of DiSessa
(1988, 1993) and Smith, DiSessa and Roschelle (1995), the
present theory does not represent deep learning as a process
of clarifying, organizing and systematizing so-called
phenomenological primitives. Instead, it claims that a central
idea that has been transferred from a different context can
serve as a starting point for a new understanding of the
target context. One difficulty with the knowledge-infragments view is that it is unclear how systematizing and
organizing can engender a new idea that directly contradicts
one of the ideas available at the outset. For example, it
seems implausible that experience of the virtual asteroid
would prompt our subjects to organize their no doubt
fragmented knowledge of the Earth in such a way that they
suddenly realized that it must be spherical.
Although our results are more consistent with the crossdomain transfer hypothesis than with these alternative
hypotheses, the present study is limited in several respects.
The number of children was small, we had no proper control
group and the results do not allow us to separate the effects
of the virtual reality experience from the effects of the
bridging dialogue. We are currently completing a follow-up
study that addresses these limitations.
In addition to its theoretical interest, the cross-domain
transfer hypothesis might have practical importance. It is a
commonplace in educational discourse that good instruction
should connect to the students’ prior knowledge and
experience. However, this pedagogical tactic is unlikely to
be productive in those situations in which the target subject
matter conflicts with the students’ prior knowledge
(Ohlsson, 1999; Strike & Posner, 1992). The alternative is to
teach the new idea in a different context and help the student
transfer it to the target domain. Because many scientific
ideas conflict with ideas derived from experience (e.g.,

inertia), the displacement scenario has the potential to be a
useful tool in science education.

Acknowledgments
The work reported here was supported, in part, by grant
#EIA 9720352 from the Learning and Intelligent Systems
program to Thomas DeFanti and, in part, by grant #BCS
9907839 from the Child Learning and Development program
to the first author. Both funding programs are part of the
National Science Foundation (NSF).

References
Bereiter, C. (1985). Toward a solution of the learning
paradox. Review of Educational Research, 55, 201-226.
Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Conceptual change within and across
ontological categories: Examples from learning and
discovery in science. In R. N. Giere, (Ed.), Cognitive
models of science. Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of
Minnesota Press.
Chinn, C., & Brewer, W. (1993). The role of anomalous data
in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical framework and
implications for science instruction. Review of
Educational Research, 63, 1-49.
Czernuszenko, M., Pape, D., Sandin, D., DeFanti, T., Dawe,
G. L., & Brown, M. D. (1997). The ImmersaDesk and
Infinity Wall projection-based virtual reality displays.
Computer Graphics, 31(2), 46-49.
Darden, L. (1992). Strategies for anomaly resolution. In R.
Giere, (Ed.), Cognitive models of science. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
DiSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman
& P. Pufall, (Eds.), Constructivism in the computer age.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
DiSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics.
Cognition and Instruction, 10, 105-225.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (in press). Attitude strength,
attitude structure, and resistance to change. In R. E. Petty
& J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents
and consequences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fodor, J. A. (1976). The language of thought. Sussex, UK:
Harvester Press.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts, and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hewson, P. W., & Hewson, M. G. A. (1984). The role of
conceptual conflict in conceptual change and the design of
science instruction. Instructional Science, 13, 1-13.
Hirschfeld, L., & Gelman, S. (1994). Mapping the mind.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, A., Moher, S., Ohlsson, S., & Gillingham, M.
(1999, November/December). The Round Earth project:
Collaborative VR for conceptual learning. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, pp. 60-69.

Kuhn, D., Amsel, E., & O’Loughlin, M. (1988). The
development of scientific thinking skills. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Lakatos, I. (1980). The methodology of scientific research
programmes. Cambridge, UK: University of Cambridge
Press.
Larkin, J., & Chabay, R., (Eds.), (1992). Computer-assisted
instruction and intelligent tutoring systems. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Nussbaum, J. (1985). The Earth as a cosmic body. In R.
Driver, E. Guesne, & A. Tiberghien (Eds.), Children’s
ideas in science. Milton Keynes, UK: Open University
Press.
Ohlsson, S. (1995). Learning to do and learning to
understand: A lesson and a challenge for cognitive
modeling. In P. Reimann and H. Spada, (Eds.), Learning
in humans and machines: Towards an interdisciplinary
learning science. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Ohlsson, S. (1999). Theoretical commitment and implicit
knowledge: Why anomalies do not trigger learning.
Science & Education, 8, 559-574.
Ohlsson, S. (2000). Falsification, anomalies and the
naturalistic approach to cognitive change. Science &
Education, 9, 173-186.
Posner, G., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A.
(1982). Accomodation of a scientific conception: Toward
a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66,
211-227.
Rokeach, M. (1970). Beliefs, attitudes and values. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Smith, III, J. P., DiSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1995).
Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of
knowledge in transition. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 3, 115-163.
Strike, K. A., & Posner, G. J. (1992). A revisionist theory of
conceptual change. In R. A. Duschl & R. J. Hamilton,
(Eds.), Philosophy of science, cognitive psychology, and
educational theory and practice. New York: State
University of New York Press.
Vosniadou, S. (1994). Universal and culture-specific
properties of children’s mental models of the earth. In L.
Hirschfeld and S. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Vosniadou. S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of
the Earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535-585.

