UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Presentation Format on Memory for Order

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64h487x3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Peterson, Margaret J.
Altmann, Erik M.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Presentation Format on Memory for Order
Margaret J. Peterson (mpeters2@gmu.edu)
Erik M. Altmann (altmann@gmu.edu)
Human Factors & Applied Cognition
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
Abstract
Memory for order is important in everyday settings, for
example in eyewitness testimony about who started a conflict. Although current theories claim that memory for order is different from memory for the to-be-remembered
items themselves, many of the same manipulations that affect item memory also affect order memory. One manipulation that has shown effects in item memory, but that has
not been tested in order memory, is presentation format.
The hypothesis tested here is that order memory will be
better for actions described as pictures than for actions described by text. The hypothesis is not supported by a main
effect. However, presentation format does interact with serial position, suggesting that format effects are analogous
to modality effects across auditory and visual presentation.
Moreover, primacy is greater than recency, undermining
Estes’s (1997) perturbation model of memory for order.

Introduction
Suppose that several witnesses to a knife fight agree that
two knives were pulled, that a fight ensued, and that one
person was killed. However, the witnesses’ recollection of
who drew a knife first is less exact. Although the to-beremembered items are not in question, the recollection of
order spells the difference between life in prison and acquittal on grounds of self-defense. If we can understand under
what conditions people are most likely to be accurate about
the order in which things happened, it could help us make
better decisions about when to believe eyewitness and other
accounts of history.
Understanding order memory also has important implications for our understanding of memory in general. Order
memory is central to skill and language acquisition, both of
which depend on sequence information. Also, order memory
underlies the construct of episodic memory. For example, in
some models of forgetting, people do not forget the word
“bird”, they only forget that “bird” was presented to them in
a particular temporal window (Nairne, 1990b).
Memory for order is often claimed to be separate from
memory for to-be-remembered items themselves (Bjork &
Healy, 1974; Nairne, 1990a). Indeed, Whiteman, Nairne and
Serra (1994) go so far as to say that order memory operates
in a way that is fundamentally different from processes seen
in both item recall and recognition. However, many manipulations that affect item memory have similar effects on order
memory (Glenberg & Swanson, 1986; Nairne, 1990b;
Naveh-Benjamin, 1990), even when the manipulation was
designed to factor out the effects of item memory (Neath,
1997). For example, Glenberg and Swanson (1986) found
that auditory presentation produces higher accuracy than vis-

ual presentation, especially for the last items in a list. This
pronounced recency effect for auditory modality is similar to
the effect seen in item memory. Similarly, Neath (1997)
showed that set-size, presentation modality, and word concreteness all have similar effects on order memory as they do
on item recognition and recall.
If order memory is similar to item memory, one might
expect it to differ across other manipulations that produce
differences in item memory. One such difference is between
pictures and text. In recall and recognition tasks, pictorial
presentation of items produces higher accuracy than verbal
presentation (Baggett, 1979; Snodgrass, Wassner, Finkelstein, & Goldberg, 1974). Dual-coding theory provides one
possible explanation for these results. People usually encode
pictures verbally as well as pictorially, but may or may not
encode verbal material pictorially. This dual encoding of
pictures creates a stronger memory trace, which leads to
better item recall or recognition (Snodgrass et al., 1974).
Further evidence that memory for pictures is better than
memory for text comes from Baggett (1979), who compared
memory for a story across presentation formats. The story
was presented either as a movie or as text, and was structurally equivalent in both formats. After subjects saw or read
the story, they were asked to free-recall as much detail as
they could about a specific episode, either immediately after
study or after seven days. For those who saw the movie,
still pictures were used to cue the beginning and end of the
to-be-recalled episode. For those who read the story, textual
cues were given. Although there was no effect of format in
the immediate recall condition, participants in the seven-day
condition recalled significantly more detail if they had seen
the movie (Baggett, 1979).
This paper examines the effects of presentation format –
pictures versus text – on accuracy of order memory. Our
hypothesis is that memory for order should be better when
items are presented as pictures. This hypothesis is primarily
based on the findings cited above that suggest that item
memory is better for pictures than for text. However, the
hypothesis is also based on the intuition that order information is fundamental to how people function in the world. In
particular, as we suggested in the knife-fight scenario above,
order memory is a cornerstone of causal inference. Similarly,
a picture is often worth a thousand words because it can
make functional inferences easier to generate (Larkin &
Simon, 1987). Thus, there is reason to ask whether order
memory, given its basic nature, is facilitated by presentation
formats more primitive than language.

Experiment
The most common way to test order memory, while factoring out the effects of item memory, is to show participants
a sequence of items at study time, and then show them the
same items at test time in scrambled order. Their task is
then to place the items back in their original order. Nairne
(1992) claims that this type of task can be seen as a pure
test of position memory without being confounded by item
memory processes because all of the item information is
made available at the time of recall.
The current study follows Nairne (1992) in testing incidental memory for order. In that study, subjects were asked
to make pleasantness ratings on each word in five lists of
five words each. The purpose of the rating task was to ensure that subjects would not be expecting any type of memory test and that the learning of order would be incidental.
This type of deception is necessary because if participants
are expecting any kind of memory test, even if they do not
know that it will be a test of order, it is not truly incidental
learning (Naveh-Benjamin, 1990). Tests of incidental memory for order have the highest ecological validity for assessing how order memory functions in everyday life.
Nairne’s participants were brought back at time intervals
ranging from 30 seconds to 24 hours and were then given a
surprise test on the order of the items. The time delay variable is important to study not only to see the effects of decay over time, but also to be able to generalize any findings
across short and long term memory. We adopted the three
intervals (30 seconds, 4 hours and 24 hours) that Nairne
cites as being the most representative of decay of order
memory over time.

Method
Participants
The participants were 76 undergraduates at George Mason
University who participated in the experiment for course
credit in psychology classes. One subject’s data were excluded due to failure to follow instructions. The experimental sessions were conducted in small groups ranging from
four to fourteen participants each with four singletons.

Materials and Design
The experiment consisted of 30 actions arranged into six
thematic groups. The themes were primarily place-oriented;
for example, things that might happen in an office setting,
or buying items at a supermarket. Care was taken to ensure
that actions had no logical or causal sequence of order (e.g.
having to knead the dough before baking the bread). All
actions in a group were presented either in picture format or
in text format. Order of groups, and order of actions within
groups, was determined randomly by sampling without
replacement. The picture format consisted of a silent, color
video segment that depicted an actor performing the target
action. The actor’s gender for each group was determined
randomly before shooting and the same actor in the same
clothing was used for each picture within a group. A text
group consisted of a set of one-to-three-word phrases that
described the actions in a corresponding picture group.

Black and white still shots representative of the video sequences and the corresponding text phrases are given in the
Appendix.
Both text and picture actions were presented on videotape
played on 27 to 35 inch standard televisions. Phrases were
presented in large white block letters against a black background. Participants saw a video with three groups presented
in picture format and three groups presented as text. Two
different videos were used, each with a different mapping of
groups to format. That is, if group was presented as text in
one video, it was presented as pictures in the other, and vice
versa. The purpose of this counterbalancing was to control
for any interaction of format and the theme of the group.
Delay between presentation and test was manipulated between groups at levels of 30 seconds, 4 hours and 24 hours
of delay. The within-subject manipulations of format and
serial position combined with the between-subject manipulation of delay to produce a 2x5x3 mixed factorial design.

Procedure
Participants were asked to watch the video and make pleasantness ratings about each picture or phrase they saw on a
scale ranging from 1 (unpleasant) to 3 (pleasant). The rating
task was used as a decoy to make intentional learning of the
items or of the order unlikely. Each picture and phrase was
visible for five seconds and was followed by 2.5 seconds of
black screen. Between each group of five items, five seconds
of blue screen was shown. Participants were not informed
about the subsequent memory test, nor were they given any
information as to why some of the items were presented as
pictures and others as text. They were simply led to believe
that they were participating in a rating task evaluating their
affect toward everyday actions. Participants wrote their ratings on a response sheet containing six rows of five blanks;
one row was designated for each group.
After completing the rating task, participants in the 4 and
24 hour delay groups were excused and instructed to return at
the designated time for further rating exercises. Participants
in the 30-second condition were asked to turn their rating
sheets over and write down numbers counting backwards
from 100 by threes. After thirty seconds, they were told to
stop and their rating sheets were collected as test sheets were
handed out. At the time of test, participants in all delay conditions were handed a response sheet that corresponded to the
videotape that had been presented to them. Each test sheet
consisted of six rows of five blanks labeled 1st, 2 nd, 3 rd, 4 th
and 5th in that order. Above each row of blanks were the
items that had been presented, but in a new random order.
For groups presented as text, phrases were typed with the
letters A through E to the left of each phrase. For groups
presented as pictures, black and white still pictures representative of the action were presented and were labeled A
through E directly above each picture. Participants were told
that each group on the text sheet contained all five actions
that were in that group at study. They were then asked to put
the letter corresponding to each action in the correct blank to
reconstruct the original order of presentation. Because all of
the to-be-remembered actions were presented at test time,
this type of free reconstruction task can be seen as a pure
test of position or order memory

Proportion correct

The hypothesis that pictures produce more accurate memory
for order than text was not supported. This surprised us,
given that pictures are consistently better than text in memory for items (e.g. Baggett, 1979; Snodgrass et al., 1974)
and that many item-memory manipulations transfer to order
memory (Naveh-Benjamin, 1990;Neath, 1997).
Our results point to a possible confound in how the effects of presentation format have been interpreted with respect to item memory. Another variable that may be correlated with format is whether sequential information is im1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Picture
Text

1

2

3

4

5

Serial position
Figure 1: Accuracy as a function of format
and serial position.

Proportion correct

Discussion

Proportion correct

The measure we focus on in this analysis is the proportion
of items placed correctly in their original order. These data
are shown in Figure 1 (by format, aggregated over delay)
and Figure 2 (by format and delay). All analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was repeated measures on the format variable.
There was a significant effect of delay (F(2,73) = 19.4, p
< .0001). However, there was no main effect of format
(F(1,73) < 1), nor was there an interaction between presentation format and delay (F(3,72) = 1.9, p > .05).
Characteristic primacy and recency effects are reflected in a
main effect of position (F(3,72)=41.0, p < .0001) and a
significant quadratic trend (F(1,73) = 115.0, p < .0001).
However, the linear trend was also significant, (F(1,73) =
21.2, p < .0001), and a post-hoc comparison of accuracy on
the first and last items shows that primacy is greater than
recency (t(75)=3.0, p < .005). The linear trend and post hoc
comparison were significant for five out of six combinations
of format and delay, the exception being 24 hour text. There
was no significant interaction between position and delay
time (F(2,73) = 2.7, p > .05), indicating that the curves
were roughly the same shape at each level of delay.
Although format did not have a main effect, it did interact
with position (F(3,72) = 3.2, p<.05). As Figure 1 shows,
the difference between primacy and recency is more pronounced in the picture format (that is, the serial position
curve for pictures is rotated slightly clockwise compared to
the curve for text). This interaction remains significant
across all of the three time delays, as shown in Figure 2.

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Proportion correct

Results

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

30 sec Picture
30 sec Text

4 hr Picture
4 hr Text

24 hr Picture
24 hr Text

1

2

3
4
Serial position

5

Figure 2: Accuracy as a function of format and serial position, by delay (panels).
portant in understanding the stimulus. For example, Anderson (1976) found that order retention for linguistic materials
(spoken words) was actually higher than for static pictures.
Anderson’s explanation for this superiority in his study
depended on the sequential properties of the stimuli. In his
view, language (in particular, the verbal stimuli in his
study) is highly dependent on sequential information, and is
therefore processed sequentially. In contrast, Anderson argued that the line drawings he used as pictures were not
dependent on sequential processes for interpretation. He
maintains that this sequential processing of linguistic material is robust enough to continue even when strings of nonrelated words are presented as stimuli. Thus, whether pictures are remembered better than words, or vice versa, may
depend on the sequential structure (or other structure) of the
stimuli across the two conditions.
The sequential structure of stimuli could easily be confounded with presentation format. For example, actions

presented as movies may be perceived to be more coherent
than stills of the kind used by Anderson, because they fill
in the details of natural action. If movies do communicate
sequential structure more effectively, and if sequential structure facilitates memory, then our null effect is consistent
with Anderson because the benefit of movies works against
the benefit of text. However, the benefit of pictures in other
studies (e.g., Baggett, 1979; Snodgrass et al., 1974) then
becomes a puzzle. Our results suggest that these studies
should be re-examined for other structural aspects of stimuli
that may confound the effect of presentation format.
Another factor that may explain our null effect of format
is that participants may use the same dual codes to represent
both formats. An informal debriefing of participants after
the experiment supports this view. Most of those questioned reported that they not only thought about the actions
verbally while watching the video, they also visualized
themselves doing the actions when they were presented textually. When asked why they had visualized the textual material, participants indicated it was because they needed to
see it in their minds to be able to judge its pleasantness.
Changing the distracter task used at study time (for example, asking for frequency counts rather than pleasantness
ratings) may produce the asymmetrical recoding (pictorial to
verbal) seen by Snodgrass et al. (1974). Thus the nature of
the distracter task will have to be manipulated in future
studies to isolate its effects on memory for order.
Despite the null effect of format, there was an interaction
between format and serial position. A similar interaction has
been observed between modality (visual and auditory) and
position (Glenberg & Swanson, 1986; Neath, 1997), raising
the possibility that these interactions are related. In the modality interaction, auditory presentation produces better order memory than visual presentation, but only for last one
or two items (Neath, 1997). Early theories of this interaction implicated differences in sensory storage mechanisms
across modalities. However, Gardiner and Gregg (1979)
showed that the interaction was still pronounced when auditory distracter information was presented during the retention interval. These findings suggest that the modality interaction is caused by a variable that was confounded with
echoic memory in earlier studies. The implication for our
results is that the format interaction and the modality interaction may in fact stem from the same underlying process.
The interaction between format and serial position could
also be due to a primacy benefit for pictures that is related
to release from proactive interference. As we noted above,
participants reported visualizing themselves performing the
actions across all of the text groups. This may have made
the text groups less distinct from one another than the picture groups, which each had a new actor and a new context.
If a new picture group is more distinct by virtue of these
visual cues, one would expect a stronger release from proactive inhibition and hence improved memory immediately
afterwards. Thus the format interaction could stem from a
recency benefit for text (similar to a modality effect), from a
primacy benefit for pictures, or from some combination.
The difference between primacy and recency in our data
helps to distinguish among formal models of order memory
(see Brown, 1997, for a review of such models). The most

widely discussed is the perturbation model (e.g., Estes,
1997; Nairne, 1992). In this model, primacy and recency
occur because there is only one direction in which the first
and last items can “perturb”, namely toward the middle of
the list. In contrast, middle items can drift in both directions, increasing the likelihood that they will be placed incorrectly at test. Importantly, the model predicts that primacy and recency should be symmetrical, because there is
no difference between the two ends of the list. Although
Estes (1972) presented this model as pertaining to shortterm order memory, Nairne (1992) applied this model to the
study of long-term, incidental learning for order memory,
with fair results. What the model fails to predict, however,
is the difference between primacy and recency effects, in
which the first item in a group is placed more accurately
than the last item. Nairne (1992) suggested that this difference may prove significant, and the support for this result
found in our data raises a substantial problem for the perturbation model.
Two later models do make the prediction that primacy
should be greater than recency in memory for order. The
primacy model (Henson, Norris, Page, & Baddeley, 1996)
is based on the ad hoc assumption that items earlier in a list
have higher activation levels. These items are then suppressed by another ad hoc mechanism as they are output at
test time. Recency arises from this model because there are
fewer remaining choices nearer the end of the list, and therefore fewer chances to make an error based on noise in the
activation levels. In addition to being largely ad hoc, this
model makes the problematic assumption that participants
place items in forward order at test time. However, informal
debriefing of several participants in our study suggests that
items are often placed in orders other than strictly forward.
Indeed, others have observed a pattern in which participants
initially place the first and last items, and only then place
the middle items (Lee & Estes, 1977). Because sequential
placement of order is a basic assumption of the primacy
model, further study on the order in which participants actually place items is necessary.
The second model that predicts greater primacy than recency is the dual-code associative model (Altmann, in
press). This model represents each item with two codes –
one for the item itself and one for its location – and links
them together in a chain at encoding time. Errors in linking
codes produce order errors at test. Items at either end of a
list have an advantage in that they can only be linked to an
incorrect code in one direction. However, items at the start
of the list have a greater advantage, because they suffer less
interference at encoding time (Altmann, 2000). This model
has the benefit of explaining how memory for order is encoded, an issue that the primacy model fails to address.
To advance our theoretical understanding of order memory, follow-up studies will have to differentiate among the
primacy and dual-code associative models. In addition, existing models fail to account for modality, set-size, presentation format or any of the other effects that appear in studies of both item and order memory. Our goal should be to
integrate these phenomena across item, order, short-term,
long-term, semantic, episodic and all of the other pigeonholes in which we classify memory, into one unified theory.

Conclusion
We expected that pictures would produce better memory for
order than text, based on similar effects in memory for
items and on considerations of the foundational nature of
memory for order. This hypothesis was not supported, but
we did find an interaction between format (picture vs. text)
and serial position. Recency effects were greater for text
across a range of retention intervals, an effect that may be
related to the modality interaction observed by others. We
also found that primacy was greater than recency in aggregate, and, in a finer-grain analysis, in almost all combinations of presentation format and time delay. This finding,
foreshadowed by Nairne (1992), suggests that the perturbation model is incorrect and lends credence to models that
capture directional processing of items at study.

References
Altmann, E. M. (in press). Memory in chains: A dual-code
associative model of positional uncertainty. In N. Taatgen
and J. Aasman (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on cognitive modeling.
Altmann, E. M. (2000). The strength of chains: Why primacy dominates recency in memory for order. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Anderson, R.E. (1976). Short-term retention of the where
and when of pictures and words. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 105, 378-402.
Baggett, P. (1979). Structurally equivalent stories in movies and text and the effect of the medium on recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 33-356.
Bjork, E. L., & Healy, A.F. (1974). Short-term order and
item retention. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 13, 80-97.
Brown, G. D. A. (1997). Formal models of memory for
serial order: A review. In M. A. Conway (Ed.), Cognitive
models of memory . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Estes, W.K. (1972). An associative basis for coding and
association in memory. In A.W. Melton & E. Martin
(Eds.), Coding Processes in Human Memory. Washington
D.C.: V.H. Winston & Sons.
Estes, W. K. (1997). Processes of memory loss, recovery,
and distortion. Psychological Review, 104, 148-169.
Gardiner, J.M., & Gregg, V.H. (1979). When auditory
memory is not overwritten. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 18, 705-719.
Glenberg, A.M., & Swanson, N.G. (1986). A temporal
distinctiveness theory of recency and modality effects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 12, 3-15.
Henson, R.N.A., Norris, D.G., Page, M.P.A., & Baddely,
A.D. (1996). Unchained memory: Error patterns rule out
chaining models of immediate serial recall. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A (1), 80-115.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11,
65-99.
Lee, C. L., & Estes, W. K. (1977). Order and position in
primary memory for letter strings. Journal of Verbal
Learning & Verbal Behavior, 16(4), 395-418.

Nairne, J.S. (1990a). A feature model of immediate memory. Memory & Cognition, 18(3), 251-269.
Nairne, J.S. (1990b). Similarity and long-term memory for
order. Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 733-746.
Nairne, J.S. (1992). The loss of positional certainty in longterm memory. Psychological Science, 3, 199-202.
Naveh-Benjamin, M. (1990). Coding of temporal order information: An automatic process? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 16,
117-126.
Neath, I. (1997). Modality, concreteness and set-size effects
in a free reconstruction of order task. Memory & Cognition, 25(2), 256-263.
Snodgrass, J.G., Wassner, B., Finkelstein, M., & Goldberg, L.B. (1974). On the fate of visual and verbal memory codes for pictures and words: Evidence for a dualcoding mechanism in recognition memory. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 27-37.
Whiteman, H.W., Nairne, J.S., & Serra, M. (1994). Recognition and recall-like processes in the long-term reconstruction of order. Memory, 2(3), 275-294.

Appendix
Pictures (representative stills taken from video) and corresponding textual phrases for the six groups of actions.
Group1
Picture Presentation Format

Text Presentation Format
Wash Dishes
Take Out Trash
Vacuum Floors
Make Bed
Dust Cabinet

Group 2
Picture Presentation Format

Text Presentation Format
Buy Bread
Buy Potato Chips
Group 3
Picture Presentation Format

Text Presentation Format
Type Document Talk On Phone
Group 4
Picture Presentation Format

Buy Soup

File Document

Text Presentation Format
Rest In Bed
Take Temperature
Group 5
Picture Presentation Format

Eat Soup

Text Presentation Format
Hug Teddy Bear Change Diaper Drink Bottle
Group 6
Picture Presentation Format

Text Presentation Format
Highlight Text
Daydream

Take Notes

Buy Eggs

Copy Document

Drink Medicine

Read Story

Study Flashcards

Buy Milk

Dial Fax Machine

Sneeze

Throw Ball

Read Text

