UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From Dipsy-Doodle to Streaming Motions: Changes in Representation in the Analysis of
Visual Scientific Data

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1d2836rc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Trickett, Susan B.
Fu, Wai-Tat
Schunn, Chrisitan D.
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From Dipsy-Doodles to Streaming Motions:
Changes in Representation in the Analysis of Visual Scientific Data
Susan B. Trickett

Wai-Tat Fu

Christian D. Schunn

J. Gregory Trafton

( stricket@gmu.edu)

( wfu@gmu.edu)

( schunn@gmu.edu )

(trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)

Department of Psychology
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030

Department of Psychology
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030

Naval Research Laboratory
NRL Code 5513
Washington, DC 20375

Department of Psychology
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030

Abstract
This paper investigates the change in scientists' representation of phenomena of interest during the exploratory
analysis of visual data. The scientists initially represented
expected findings in formal, scientific terms, whereas they
represented anomalies in informal terms. Over time, these
representations shifted from informal to formal. We propose that this shift in representation is the result of an increased understanding of the individual phenomena, rather
than of greater understanding of the data at a global level.

Introduction
A strong and perhaps foundational theme in cognitive science is the issue of representation. From both empirical and
computational perspectives, performance has been found to
depend heavily on how information is internally represented
(Kotovsky, Hayes, & Simon, 1985; Larkin & Simon,
1987; Newell & Simon, 1972; Zhang & Norman, 1994).
One area in which representation is likely to be especially
important is scientific discovery (Schunn & Klahr, 1995).
There are many formal and informal methods for representing data, even within the same discipline and narrow subarea. The choice of representation of the data is likely to
have a large impact on what can and will be discovered.
An additional twist on the issue of data representations in
science is the difference between goals of scientific discovery
and goals of communication of the discoveries. The external
representations that are best for discovery are not necessarily
the representations that are best for communication of the
discovery to others. For example, issues of historical convention are likely to be more important in communication,
whereas issues of ease of generation and manipulation are
going to be more important for the original discovery.
The goal of this paper is to examine how scientists represent data internally to themselves while they are analyzing
their data. In particular, do they tend to think of their data in
formal, discipline-specific terms, or do they rely on more
informal and simple perceptual terms? One might expect
them to use formal terms because of their expertise and extensive domain knowledge. On the other hand, they may use
perceptual terms because in many areas of science, the data
are presented in fairly complex visual displays that make
heavy use of spatial metaphors—or indeed represent spatial
dimensions directly (Trafton et al, under review).
One dimension that we hypothesize would influence the
choice of internal representation is the degree to which the

data are as the scientist expects. That is, perhaps scientists
are more likely to represent apparently anomalous data in
informal, perceptual terms and expected data in formal, conceptual terms.
Another related dimension that we investigated was time:
How do scientists' representations of their data change over
time as they explore their data? One might imagine that the
representations become more formal as scientists develop an
understanding of the dataset as a whole. Alternatively, the
changes in representation may occur at a more item-specific
level—the representation of each item changes separately as
understanding of the item changes.
A wide variety of methodologies has been used to study
scientific reasoning and scientific discovery, each with their
advantages and disadvantages (see Klahr & Simon, 1999, for
a review). For this research project, we adopted a modified
form of Kevin Dunbar's "in vivo" methodology (Dunbar,
1995, 1997, in press). The "in vivo" methodology involves
observing scientists as they are doing their research. Dunbar
focused on the activities that occur in lab group meetings.
Because we were interested in the processes of data analysis,
we focused, instead, on pairs of scientists working at their
computers, analyzing their data. Like Dunbar, we perform a
form of protocol analysis (Ericsson & Simon, 1993), analyzing the speech produced by the scientists to make inferences about the underlying cognitive processes.
The reason for focusing on pairs of scientists rather than
on an individual scientist is that dyads produce speech naturally as part of their data analysis activities. By contrast,
forcing an individual scientist to give a think-aloud protocol
may change the very representations that we seek to study.
For example, the individual scientist may change her focus
to aspects of the data that are more easily verbalized, or she
may change her representations from visio-spatial representations to more verbal representations.
Our methodology also contrasts with the retrospective
analyses of historical cases from science (e.g., Gentner et
al., 1997; Nersessian, 1985; Thagard, 1999). By focusing on
the activities of non-famous (albeit expert) scientists working on a problem that may or may not lead to an important
discovery, we may obtain a more representative view of how
scientists reason.1
1

Of course, if one's goal is to understand how large conceptual
leaps are made in science, the historical case-study approach
may be more fruitful.

Because our methodology is extremely labor-intensive, it
lends itself most readily to case studies. However, the use of
case studies always raises the question of generalizability:
does the pattern found with these scientists at this particular
time in this particular domain generalize to other scientists
in other domains? To address this issue, we gathered data
from two sets of scientists working in different disciplines
on different kinds of problems. The first set of scientists was
a pair of astronomers examining radio and optical data of
distant galaxies. The second set of scientists was a pair of
neuropsychologists examining fMRI imaging data of brain
functioning under different experimental conditions. Thus we
included both observational and experimental research from
disciplines differing widely in types of training and age of
the discipline. One should note, however, that both situations involved preliminary examinations of complex data
visualizations presented on computer screens.

Method
Participants
The participants in the first domain were two expert astronomers, one a tenured professor at a university, the other
a fellow at a research institute. The astronomers had earned
their Ph.D.s six years and ten years respectively before this
study; one has approximately 20 journal publications and
the other approximately 10 in this area. One of the astronomers, hereafter referred to as A1, focuses on conducting and
analyzing astronomical observations, and has an expertise in
ring galaxies; the other, hereafter referred to as A2, combines
teaching with primarily theoretical astronomical research and
model construction. The astronomers have been collaborating for some years, although they do not frequently work
physically alongside one another (i.e., work simultaneously
at the same computer screen to examine data).
The participants in the second domain were two scientists
in neuropsychology, one a postdoctoral researcher (B1) who
has been in the field over 3 years, the other a graduate researcher (B2) who has been in the field for 1 year. The scientists work in a renowned national US research institute and
are involved in developing a new methodology for analyzing
fMRI brain data. They frequently work simultaneously at the
same computer screen to examine data.

The Tasks and the Data
The astronomical data under analysis were optical and radio
data of a ring galaxy. A ring galaxy forms as the result of a
collision between two galaxies, and such collisions are relatively frequent cosmic events; consequently, ring galaxies
per se are not uncommon. Both astronomers had conducted
research and published scholarly articles on other ring galaxies, but this particular galaxy was relatively new to them.
Nor had they examined this data set before; consequently,
they considered this session exploratory.
The astronomers’ high-level goal was to understand the
evolution and structure of the ring galaxy, by a complex
sequence of inferences that began with interpreting contour
lines on the display in terms of the 3-dimensional flow of
gas in the galaxy. The astronomers’ task was made difficult
by two characteristics of the data: First, the data were one- or
at best two-dimensional, whereas the structure they were
attempting to understand was three-dimensional. Second, the
data were noisy, and there was no easy way to distinguish
between noise and real phenomena. Figure 1 shows a screen
snapshot of the type of data they were examining.
Figure 1. Example of data examined by astronomers.
Radio data (contour lines) are laid over optical data.

Procedure
In both studies, the scientists were video- and audio-taped as
they explored computer-generated visual representations of a
new set of data. For the first study, A1 was in charge of the
keyboard and mouse and sat directly in front of the screen;
A2 sat slightly to his left. For the second study, B2 was in
charge of the keyboard and mouse and sat directly in front of
the screen while B1 sat slightly to her right. In both studies,
all scientists had the shared monitor in their clear line of
sight. They were instructed not to explain or interpret their
comments to the researchers, but to carry out their work as
though no camera were present. For each study, the relevant
part of the session lasted about 1 hour. The scientists’ interactions were transcribed and coded as described below. At a
later date, we interviewed the scientists in both domains in
order to obtain clarification of some domain-related issues.

The fMRI data were obtained to understand how activation
patterns inside the brain would change when people are anticipating some events to happen. There were two experimental conditions and one control condition. The scientists
had to examine the data and compare them across the three
conditions. This was the first time they had conducted the
experiment and examined the data. The session was considered exploratory. Figure 2 shows an example of the fMRI
data that they were analyzing. Similar to the astronomical
data, fMRI data are inherently noisy and can only be displayed in two dimensions although the activation patterns
under analysis were mostly three dimensional.

Figure 2. Example of fMRI data (color removed).

Coding Scheme
The protocols were divided into 829 (astronomy) and 370
(fMRI) segments. As each scientist spoke in turn, a new
segment was established. Then the scientists’ individual
utterances were further segmented by complete thought.
A coding scheme was developed to examine how the scientists explored the data. The entire astronomy protocol was
coded independently by 2 different coders in order to establish
the reliability of this scheme. Inter-rater reliabilities for each
code are reported below. Because we found high agreement in
coding the astronomy protocol, we expect the agreement in
the neuropsychology protocol to be high also.
On/Off Task In order to allow us to focus our analysis
only on those utterances that were relevant to the scientists’
task of data analysis, we coded each segment as on-task or
off-task. All segments that addressed matters external to the
data analysis were coded as off-task; these segments included
external interruptions (e.g., the telephone ringing), extraneous comments by the scientists (e.g., jokes or banter between them), comments relating to the software, specific
details about plans for future observations, and so on. All
segments that addressed issues of data analysis were coded as
on-task. These included comments relating to the selection
of a display type (as opposed to comments about how to
implement that display) as well as decisions about obtaining
additional data in the future (as opposed to details about how
to obtain those data). Initial agreement between the coders
was 90%. All disagreements were resolved by discussion.

entists attended to, we first coded for the scientists’ noticing
phenomena in the data or features of the display. A noticing
could involve merely some surface feature of the display,
such as a line, shape, or color, or it could involve some
interpretation by the scientists, for example, identifying an
area of star formation or concentration of gas for the astronomers or activation in a particular area of the brain (e.g.
thalamus) for the neuropsychologists. Only the first reference to a phenomenon was coded as a noticing; coding of
subsequent references to the same phenomenon is discussed
below. Agreement between the coders was 95%. Disagreements were resolved by discussion.
Because our investigation focused on the change in representation of anomalies in the data, we further coded these
noticings as either "anomalous" or "expected," according to
one or more of the following criteria: a) in some cases the
scientists made explicit verbal reference to the fact that
something was anomalous or expected; b) if there was no
explicit reference, domain knowledge was used to determine
whether a noticing was anomalous or not; c) a phenomenon
might be associated with (i.e., identified as either like) another phenomenon that had already been established as
anomalous or not; d) a phenomenon might be contrasted
with (i.e., identified as unlike) a phenomenon that had already been established as anomalous or not; e) the scientists
might question a feature, thus implying that it is unexpected. Table 1 illustrates these codes. Agreement between
the coders was 87%. Those noticings for which disagreement
could not be resolved were excluded from further analysis.
Subsequent References Our investigation focused on
the astronomers’ representation of phenomena over time.
Whereas the coding of the noticings captured the first reference the astronomers made to a phenomenon of interest, we
also needed to establish how they made subsequent reference
to each noticing. Consequently, all subsequent references to
each phenomenon were also identified.
Because the scientists were sharing a computer monitor,
frequently the first interaction between them after a noticing
was to establish that they were both looking at the same
thing. Subsequent references that served purely to establish
identity were not included in the analyses.
Not all subsequent references immediately followed a noticing; frequently, the scientists returned to a phenomenon of
interest after investigating other features of the data. The

Noticings In order to establish which phenomena the sciTable 1. Noticings (italicized) coded as unusual or expected.
Criterion
Explicit
Domain
Knowledge

Code
Anomalous

Association

Anomalous

Expected

Contrast

Expected

Question

Anomalous

Example - Astronomy
What's that funky thing…That's odd
You can see that all the H1 is concentrated in the ring
You see similar kinds of intrusions
along here
That's odd…As opposed to these
things, which are just the lower contours down here
I still wonder why we don't see any
H1 up here in this sort of northern
ring segment?

Example - fMRI
Bunch of stuff here … Yeah, that's weird
So there is a subcortical activation that is probably
caudate.
So there's the thing we've been seeing consistently.
So it's lateral, which means its not in the midline… on our incentive task we see midline, but
not lateral, so that's why that's not a spot.
[None found]

scientists made frequent gestures to the feature of the image
under discussion; by constructing a map of the noticings,
and cross-referencing it with these gestures, the coders were
able to determine the specific noticing to which a subsequent
reference referred. Tables 2a and 2b illustrate the coding
scheme for subsequent references in each domain.

quent analysis. Coder agreement on this coding was 100%.

Entity Coding To investigate the initial and changing
representations of the phenomena the scientists noticed, we
first identified what characteristics of each noticing (anoma-

Noticing Anomalies and Expected Phenomena

Table 2b. Subsequent references in
neuropsychology domain.
Code
Utterance
Noticing (N23) B1: There, did you see that?
Establish identity B2: Yah did you see that? [points to
screen]
SR to N23 B1: That was near the thalamus.
SR to N23 B1: That might be spurious.
Noticing (N24) B2: So the z-score of that one is
4.22.
SR to N24 B1: It's right up there [points to the
threshold on screen]
lous and expected) first caught the scientists' attention. We
then noted what characteristics the scientists attended to in
their subsequent references to each noticing. We coded each
noticing and subsequent reference as either "formal" or "informal" as follows. Formal references are those for which
the scientists referred to the underlying phenomenon, using
the terminology of the domain—for example, to a specific
gas, star formation, the stellar continuum, or the like in the
astronomy domain, and to the thalamus or caudate nucleus,
for example, in the neuropsychology domain. Informal references include references to some generic feature of the display, such as a blob, a bulge, or a “dipsy-doodle" in the astronomy domain, and a neuron "lighting up" in the neuropsychology domain. They also include references to a phenomenon by its location (e.g., "lower right," "northwest")
and anaphoric references, (e.g., pronouns). A few references
combined characteristics of more than one code (e.g., "big
blob of H1" combined the informal reference to a "blob"
with the formal reference to H1 gas). Such references were
coded as "mixed" references, and were excluded from subse-

There were 27 (astronomy) and 35 (fMRI) noticings. In the
astronomy data, 9 (33%) were anomalous, 13 (48%) were
expected, and 5 (19%) were uncoded because either the astronomers or the coders disagreed. In the fMRI data, 13
(37%) were anomalous, 19 (54%) were expected, and 3 (9%)
were uncoded. Figure 3 shows that the proportion of anomalous and expected noticings was similar in each dataset. Uncoded noticings were excluded from subsequent analysis.
Figure 3. Percentage of anomalous and expected noticings.
100

Expected

Anomalous

80

Percentage

Table 2a. Subsequent references in astronomy domain.
Noticing: First reference to phenomenon
Establish identity: Reference excluded from analysis
SR: Subsequent reference included in analysis
Code
Utterance
Noticing (N9) A1: What's that funky thing…
Establish identity A2: Left center, you mean…
Establish identity A2: This stuff? [points to screen]
Establish identity A1: Yeah
Establish identity A2: Yeah
SR to N9 A1: What is that?
A2: You can see there is some gas
Noticing (N10) here [points to different area] inside
the ring, but not much…
SR to N9 A1: Except for that little knot there.

Results and Discussion
There were 619 (75%) (astronomy) and 317 (85%) (neuropsychology) on-task segments. Subsequent analyses do not
include off-task segments.

60
40
20
0
Astronomy

fMRI

Representation of Noticings
Our first question concerned how the scientists initially represented the phenomena they investigated. In the astronomy
domain, 8 of the 13 (62%) expected phenomena were first
identified by formal references and the remaining 5 (38%) by
informal references. In contrast, most of the anomalies
(78%) were initially identified by informal references, with
only 2 of the 9 anomalies (22%) identified formally. Interestingly, both formal references were negative—they referred
to the absence of the astronomical phenomenon (e.g., "I still
wonder why we don't see any H1 up here.") A similar pattern was observed in the neuropsychology domain. Ten of
the 19 (53%) expected phenomena were first identified by
formal references, and 9 (47%) by informal references. Ten
of the 13 (77%) anomalies were identified informally, with 3
(23%) identified by formal references. Again, 2 of the 3 formal references were negative (e.g. "There's nothing on the
thalamus either, that's surprising"). Figure 4 shows the percentage of formal references to these initial noticings.
Thus it appears that in general, the scientists initially represented the expected phenomena in the formal, scientific
terminology of that domain. However, their initial representations of unexpected or anomalous features of the data were

highly informal. Recall that these informal references were
based primarily on irregular features of the display rather
than the underlying phenomena that these features represented. Occasionally, it was the absence of a phenomenon
that first drew the scientists' attention to these anomalies.

Figure 5. Changes in representation of noticed objects.

80

100

60
40
20
0
anomalous

expected

Local Changes in Representation
Next, we examined whether the scientists' representation of
these phenomena changed as their investigation of the data
progressed. The analyses that follow depend on the subsequent references to the noticings. In order to ensure a sufficient basis on which to judge change, we include only those
noticings that received more than the mean number of subsequent references (i.e., more than 8 subsequent references
for the astronomy and more than 3 for the fMRI data).
Five of the noticings in the astronomy data and 15 in the
fMRI data received more than the mean number of subsequent references. In the astronomy data, the subsequent references to these 5 noticings account for 66% of all segments
that made any reference to a phenomenon noticed by the
astronomers. In the fMRI data, the subsequent references to
these 15 noticings account for 69% of all such segments.
Thus by confining our analyses to these 20 noticings, we
focus on the majority of the data. It should also be noted
that, because in general expected phenomena received little
further attention, especially in the astronomy domain (Trickett, Trafton, & Schunn, 2000), most noticings included in
these analyses are anomalies.
In order to examine change over time, we divided the period of attention to each individual noticed object into two
phases, early and late. We tallied the total number of subsequent references for each and divided it by 2. For noticed
objects with an odd number of subsequent references, we
discarded the midpoint reference, to insure an even split. We
then compared the numbers of formal and informal references
in the early and late phases of the scientists' investigation.
In the astronomy data, in the early phase of investigation,
17 of the 63 (27%) subsequent references were formal compared with 30 (48%) in the later phase. By contrast, 39
(61%) of the subsequent references were informal in the early
phase compared with 25 (39%) in the later phase, χ 2(1) =
6.65, p < .01. (These percentages do not sum to 100% because of the mixed references excluded from the analysis.) In

Formal References (%)

Formal References (%)

Figure 4. Percentage of formal references to initial noticings
(anomalous and expected) in two domains.
100
astronomy
fMRI

the fMRI data, in the early phase of investigation, 18 of the
45 (40%) subsequent references were formal compared with
29 (64%) in the later phase. By contrast, 27 (60%) subsequent references were informal in the early phase compared
with 16 (36%) in the later phase, χ 2(1) = 5.39, p < .05.
Thus, in both domains, the number of formal representations increased, while the number of informal representations decreased. Figure 5 shows the increase in formal references in the later phase.

80
E fMRI

60
40
20

E

1 astronomy

1

0
Early

Late

These results show that the scientists' representations
changed significantly over time, as they investigated these
anomalies. In the early phase of analysis, their representations were informal and display-based, most likely because
they did not have a precise understanding of the phenomenon
under investigation. The scientists needed a label by which
they could identify, discuss, and refer to the phenomenon,
and this label tended to be based on the visual appearance of
the feature. As their investigation proceeded, however, these
visually-based labels decreased. The reduction in displaybased and anaphoric references suggests that the scientists
became more specific, and points to an increased understanding of these anomalous phenomena.

Global Changes in Representation
It is possible that the shift toward a formal representation
occurred not because the scientists' understanding of individual anomalies increased, but because their global understanding of the data increased over time. In order to investigate
this possibility, we divided each entire analysis session into
early and late phases, based on overall time spent. Thus, in
this analysis, there were unequal numbers of reference in
each phase, but the time spent on each phase was the same.
We counted the number of formal and informal references
to these well-referenced phenomena in each phase. In the
astronomy protocol, 63% of the references in the early phase
were informal, compared with 45% in the late phase; 35% of
the early references were formal, compared with 39% in the
late phase. This difference was not significant, χ 2 (1) = 1.4,
p > .2. Although the proportion of informal references did
drop off, the number of formal references remained constant.
In the fMRI protocol, 53% of the references in the early
phase were informal, compared with 52% in the late phase;
47% of the early references were formal, compared with 48%

in the late phase. This difference was also non-significant,
χ 2 (1) < 1. Thus, it does not appear that the shift toward a
more formal representation occurred as a result of a more
general, global understanding of the data.

General Discussion
Our results show that both groups of scientists initially
represented expected and anomalous phenomena quite differently. Whereas they represented the expected phenomena in
the formal terms appropriate to their domain of expertise,
they represented the anomalous phenomena in highly informal terms that referred to salient features of the visual data.
These results also show that these internal representations
changed over time, shifting from informal to formal representations. However, this shift in representation did not appear to be caused by a global increase in understanding of the
data under analysis, but was instead local, and associated
with the individual phenomena under investigation. This
shift in representation appears to have affected primarily the
scientists' representation of anomalous or unexpected findings in their data. We have investigated elsewhere the key
role of anomalies in the exploratory stages of data analysis
(Trickett, Trafton & Schunn, 2000).
Our focus in this study has been on the exploratory stages
of data analysis. We believe that including two independent
data analysis sessions in quite different scientific domains
strengthens our claims about these changes in representation. However, clearly we need to ascertain whether our results generalize to other situations and scientific domains.
In this paper we examined fairly small changes in representation at the item-specific level. Much research in cognitive science on the topic of conceptual change has focused
on relatively larger scale changes in representation (e.g.,
Chi, 1997; Thagard, 1999). One may wonder what the relationship is between the micro-level changes that we have
reported in this paper and the more macro-level changes reported in the conceptual change literature. Some researchers
(e.g., Chi, 1997) have speculated that some macro-level
changes are not the result of many small changes; instead
Chi has argued that some macro-level changes are the result
of a complete conceptual reorganization. Similarly, some
historians of science have noted that some scientific changes
appear to be more radical or revolutionary than others appear
to be (e.g., Kuhn, 1967). We believe that the relationship
between the micro-level changes in representation and the
macro-level changes that are thought to constitute conceptual change remains an open question, and that this question
could be fruitfully studied by observing the same scientists
over a much longer time scale than we have done so far. We
are currently planning such longitudinal studies.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by student fellowships
from George Mason University to the first and second
authors and by grant number 55-7850-00 from the Office of
Naval Research to the Naval Research Laboratory. We thank
Georgia Seeley and Audrey Lipps for assistance with coding.

References
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Creativity: Shifting across ontological categories flexibly. In T. B. Ward & S. M. Smith
(Eds.), Creative thought: An investigation of conceptual
structures and processes. Washington, DC, USA: American Psychological Association.
Dunbar, K. (1993). Concept discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 17(3), 397-434.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. E. Sternberg &
J. E. Davidson, (Eds.), The nature of insight. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press.
Dunbar, K. (in press). What scientific thinking reveals about
the nature of cognition. In K. Crowley, C. D. Schunn, &
T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for Science: Implications from
everyday, classroom, and professional settings. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R. W., Markman, A. B.,
Levidow, B. B., Wolff, P., & Forbus, K. D. (1997).
Analogical reasoning and conceptual change: A case study
of Johannes Kepler. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
6(1), 3-40.
Klahr, D. & Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of scientific
discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125(5), 524-543.
Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why
are some problems hard? Evidence from Tower of Hanoi.
Cognitive Psychology, 17(2), 248-294.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth 10,000 words. Cognitive Science, 4,
317-345.
Nersessian, N. J. (1985). Faraday's field concept. In D.
Gooding & F. James (Eds.), Faraday rediscovered. London: Macmillan.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Schunn, C. D., & Klahr, D. (1995). A 4-space model of
scientific discovery. In the proceedings of the 17th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Thagard, P. (1999). How scientists explain disease. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Trafton, J. G.., Kirschenbaum, S. S., Tsui, T. L., Miyamoto, R. T., Ballas, J. A., & Raymond, P. D. (under
review). Turning Pictures into Numbers: Use of Complex Visualizations.
Trickett, S. B., Trafton, J. G., & Schunn, C. D. (2000).
Blobs, dipsy-doodles, and other funky things: Framework
anomalies in exploratory data analysis. In the proceedings
of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in
distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18(1), 87122.

