UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Handedness and Heterogeneity in Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rr5c4m5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Jones, Gregory V.
Martin, Maryanne

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Handedness and Heterogeneity in Cognitive Science
Gregory V. Jones ( g. v. j on e s @ w ar w i c k . ac . u k )
Dep ar tment o f P sycho lo gy; Univer sity o f W ar wick
Co ventr y CV4 7 AL, UK

Maryanne Martin ( m a r y a n n e . m a r t i n @ p s y . o x . a c . u k )
Depar tm ent of Exper im ental Psychology; Univer sity of Oxf or d
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK

Abst ract
Outside of cognitive neuropsychology, it is often
a s s u m e d t ha t d i f f e r e n c e s a m o n g i n d i v i d u a l s i n
c o g n i t i v e a c t i vi t y m a y be a de qua t e l y r e pr e s e nt e d
t he or e t i c a l l y i n t e r m s o n l y o f q u a nt i t a t i ve
variation across a population.
A possible
exception to the presumption of homogeneity
w i t h i n c o g n i t i v e p r o c e s s i n g i s e x p l o r e d he r e . I t
i s s h o w n t h a t l e f t - h a n d e d a n d r i g h t - ha n d e d
populations
exhibit
consistent,
qualitative
differences in their remembering of orientational
i nf or m a t i o n .
It is concluded that the subject
m a t t e r o f c o g n i t i v e s c i e n c e m a y be m or e
heterogeneous than is commonly assumed.

Assumption of Homogeneity
A widespr ead im plicit assum ption in cognitive
science
is
that
its
subject
m atter
is
hom ogeneous, in the sense that dif f er ences in
cognitive pr ocessing am ong individuals m ay
gener ally be expr essed in ter m s of m er ely
quantitative var iation. A m ajor exception to this
assum ption is com m only r ecognised in the f ield
of cognitive neur opsychology, wher e the
cognitive pr ocesses of individuals have been
shown to exhibit a r ange of idiosyncr asies
associated with dif f er ent f or m s of physical
dam age to the br ain ( e.g., Jones & MacAndr ew,
1990) . For this f ield, the occur r ence of a double
dissociation of f unction is gener ally held to
indicate heter ogeneity of population ( e.g.,
Jones, 1983) , although the validity even of this
inf er ence has been challenged within cognitive
science ( e.g., Juola & Plunkett, 1998) But f or
those without br ain dam age, dif f er ences am ong
individuals ar e of ten viewed within cognitive
science as essentially r andom , with var iation in
cognitive activity am ong individuals r epr esented
theor etically in ter m s of disper sion ar ound a
central tendency.
If this is a correct
char acter isation of m uch of cognitive science,

then it r aises the question of whether the
assum ption, outside cognitive neur opsychology,
of hom ogeneity am ong individuals is justif ied in
particular circum stances.
Wher e
m ay
qualitative
dif f er ences
in
cognitive pr ocesses am ong individuals be
manifested? A classical area of investigation is
that of per sonality ( e.g., Mar tin, 1985) .
However , the dom ain of handedness is also an
appr opr iate ar ea to consider . Can the m odels
and descr iptions of cognitive science be applied
indif f er ently, as is gener ally assum ed, to the
r ight- handed m ajor ity and to the lef t- handed
m inor ity? Or do f ields of heter ogeneity exist in
which people’s handedness inf luences their
cognitive performance? Empirical evidence that
allows these questions to be addr essed is
considered here.
First, however, it is
appr opr iate to consider br ief ly the distinctive
characteristics of handedness itself.

Handedness Populations
Most hum an beings exhibit a pr ef er ence f or the
use of one or other hand. This pr ef er ence is not
evenly distr ibuted between lef t and r ight, as it is
for most animals.
Instead, the pr edom inant
patter n of lim b pr ef er ence is f or use of the r ight
hand.
Although hand pr ef er ence can be inf luenced
by social pr essur es ( e.g., Har r is, 1990) , it has a
num ber of f eatur es which suggest that it is also
under genetic inf luence ( e.g., Cor ballis, 1997;
Laval, Dann, Butler , Lof tus, Rue, Leask, Bass,
Com azzi, Vita, Nanko, Shaw, Peter son, Shields,
Sm ith, Stewar t, DeLisi, & Cr ow, 1998) . For
exam ple, Klar ( 1996) has r epor ted that the
likelihood of a per son being lef t- handed is
incr eased if one of the par ents of the per son,
although r ight- handed, in tur n had two lef thanded par ents.
We have shown ( Jones &
Mar tin, 2000) that a genetic m odel f or

Left up
Centre up
Right up
Left level
Right level
Left-handed
Right-handed

Left down
Centre down
Right down
0

10

20

30

40

Response (%)
Figure 1. Orientation responses
handedness m ay be f or m ulated which accounts
satisf actor ily f or this and a num ber of other
similar effects.
I t has f r equently been suggested ( e.g., Day &
MacNeilage, 1996) that asym m etr y in lim b use,
via an accompanying specialisation of function
in the cerebral hemispheres, played a decisive
r ole in the evolution of language. Sim ilar ly, the
degr ee of later alization of language f unction
between the hem ispher es is known to dif f er
between
lef t- handed
and
r ight- handed
populations ( e.g., McManus, 1999) . However , it
is less clear that cognitively based per f or m ance
itself dif f er s between the lef t- handed and r ighthanded populations. Thus, despite consider able
r esear ch, it has pr oven dif f icult to establish
r eliable associations between handedness and
either developm ental r eading disor der ( e.g.,
Bishop, 1990) or a var iety of sym ptom s linked
to im m une disor der s ( cf . Geschwind &
Galabur da, 1987; Br yden, McManus, & Bulm anFlem ing, 1994) . I ndeed, until r ecently ther e has
been suggestive evidence of a heter ogeneity in
cognitive f unction between lef t- handed and
r ight- handed populations in only one f ield, that
of chimeric perception.

Heterogeneity for Cognitive Function

Chimeric
faces
may
be
constructed
by
ar tif icially pair ing their lef t and r ight halves. I f
people are asked to match a control face to
either a chimeric face composed only of the left
half (and its mirror image) or a chimeric face
com posed only of the r ight half ( and its m ir r or
im age) , it has been r eliably dem onstr ated ( e.g.,
Levy, Heller , Banich, & Bur ton, 1983; Luh,
Redl, & Levy, 1994) that r ight- handed people,
but not lef t- handed people, have a signif icant
tendency to select the lef t half ( plus its m ir r or
image) face as the better match.
The chimeric finding appears to repr esent a
genuinely cognitive, not hem ispher ic, ef f ect
since it occur s with unr estr icted f ixation and
ther ef or e is not r elated to visual f ield ( and
hence hem ispher icality) . However , it m ay also
be noted that the effect is a relatively narrow
one.
I f the assum ption of hom ogeneity of
cognitive pr ocessing br oke down only in this
limited field, then the case for a wider
consider ation of heter ogeneity in cognitive
science would be r elatively weak. I t is now
becom ing appar ent, however , that heter ogeneity
is dem onstr able in the wider ar ea of m em or y f or
or ientation ( e.g., McKelvie & Aikins, 1993;
Mar tin & Jones, 1998) . Two f ur ther studies of
m em or y f or or ientation, which ar e descr ibed
next, conf ir m this f inding.
The f ir st also
investigates whether the heter ogeneity extends

Complete
Partial
Halley
Left-handed
Right-handed

Other
None
0

10

20

30

40

50

Response (%)
Figure 2. Name responses
to m e m or y f or other types of inf or m a tion, a nd
the second also investigates whether it r esides
genuinely in m em or y or alter natively in
str ategic behavior .

Extent of Heterogeneity
Ar e dif f er ences between lef t- handed and r ighthanded populations in cognitive f unctioning
conf ined to m em or y f or or ientation, or do they
extend to memory for abstract information?
This question was investigated by exam ining
people’s m em or y f or Com et Hale- Bopp, selected
as subject because of the long histor y of popular
interest in cometary appearances (see Schechner
Genuth, 1997) .
Appr oxim ately equal num ber s of lef t- handed
and r ight- handed par ticipants wer e tested ( N =
401) .
Testing occur r ed appr oxim ately six
m onths af ter the com et’s visit. Par ticipants wer e
tested on a ser ies of item s "about the com et
which was visible to the naked eye over the
Easter per iod." Questions pr obed both abstr act
and concr ete knowledge.
Binar y handedness
classif ications wer e m ade on the basis of the
hand which the par ticipant used f or dr awing.
Figur e 1 shows m em or y f or or ientation f or
lef t- handed and f or r ight- handed par ticipants.
Recall of the direction of the head of the comet
was classified into eight different sector s,

def ined by the com bination of it pointing
leftwards,
centr ally,
or
rightwards;
and
downwar ds, level, or upwar ds.
Ther e was a
signif icant dif f er ence between the f r equency
distr ibutions of r esponses f or lef t- handed and
2
r ight- handed par ticipants, χ ( 7) = 20.29, p < .01.
I n par ticular , r ight- handed par ticipants pr oduced
a significantly gr eater num ber than left-handed
par ticipants of r esponses with the com et f acing
down to the lef t ( the or ientation m ost f r equently
2
encounter ed) , χ ( 1) = 7.86, p < .01. Sim ilar ly,
consider ing downwar d and level r esponses
overall, it can be seen from Figur e 1 that there
was a contr alater al tendency which associated
r ight- handed
par ticipants
with
lef t- f acing
r esponses, and vice ver sa; this tendency also
2
was signif icant, χ ( 1) = 12.97, p < .001. Sim ilar
r esults wer e f ound with r ecognition r ather than
r ecall r esponses.
Figur e 2 shows the distr ibutions of wr itten
nam e r esponses which wer e m ade by lef t- handed
and by r ight- handed par ticipants. Recall was
classified as either (a) completely accurate (both
Hale
and
Bopp) ,
( b)
par tially
accur ate
( incom plete or m isspelled) , ( c) Halley ( either a
sem antic er r or or an appr oxim ation to Hale) , ( d)
unr elated nam e, or ( e) no r esponse. Ther e was
no signif icant dif f er ence between the two
2
f r equency distr ibutions, χ ( 4) = 3.08. Sim ilar
r esults wer e f ound f or the r ecall of other

60

55
Recognition
(%)

Left-handed
Right-handed

50

45
Left-facing

Right-facing

Figure 3. Contralateral handedness
effect in recognition
abstract information, such as the length of time
since the com et’s last visit to Ear th ( about f our
thousand year s) .
The pr esent f indings suggest ther ef or e that the
assum ption of hom ogeneity, which br eaks down
in the case of m em or y f or or ientation, continues
to hold in the case of memory for more abstract
inf or m a tion.

Heterogeneity for Memory
or for Strategy?
Although over t r esponses concer ning m em or y
f or inf or m ation have been shown to dif f er f or
lef t- handed and r ight- handed populations, it is
possible in pr inciple that the under lying
dif f er ence between these populations r elates not
to their m em or y pr ocessing but instead to their
str ategic behavior . That is, it is possible that
lef t- handed and r ight- handed populations dif f er
not in their likelihoods of r etr ieving inf or m ation
about or ientation, but instead in their str ategies
of pr oducing r esponses when m em or y f ails. To
investigate this possibility, the conf idence with
which r esponses ar e pr oduced can be exam ined.
I f heter ogeneity is conf ined to str ategic
behavior , then dif f er ences between populations
should ar ise only f or r esponses that ar e m ade
with r elatively low conf idence.
But if
heter ogeneity applies to m em or y itself , then
dif f er ences should be obser ved in those
r esponses which ar e m ade with high conf idence.
Appr oxim ately equal num ber s of lef t- handed
and r ight- handed par ticipants wer e tested ( N =
230) . Each par ticipant was shown a sequence of

40 dif f er ent black- and- white photogr aphs f or 3
sec each. I n half of the photogr aphs a per son
faced to the left of the viewer and in half a
person faced to the right. Subsequently, each
photogr aph was shown alongside its m ir r or
image (reflected in a vertical plane) in a twoalternative forced-choice recognition task. In
addition, f or each r ecognition r esponse the
par ticipant assigned a conf idence level on a
scale between 1 ( guess) and 5 ( cer tain) .
Figur e 3 shows the over all levels of
recognition. There was a significant interaction
between the effects of the direction in which the
stimulus faced and the handedness of the
par ticipant, F( 1, 228) = 9.18, p < .01. I t can be
seen that the effect was a contralateral one, in
that lef t- f acing stim uli wer e r ecognised better
by r ight- handed than by lef t- handed par ticipants,
wher eas r ight- f acing stim uli wer e r ecognised
better by lef t- handed than by r ight- handed
par ticipants.
To examine the possible influence of
conf idence, further analyses were carried out on
the r ecognition r esponses that wer e m ade with
the lowest level of conf idence ( 1) and those
m ade with the highest conf idence ( 4 or 5) .
Conf idence level was f ound to m odif y the twoway inter action, yielding a signif icant thr ee- way
inter action, F( 1, 174) = 4.19, p < .05.
Decom posing the thr ee- way inter action, it was
f ound that f or those r esponses m ade with high
conf idence there was again a significant
inter action between the ef f ects of stim ulus
dir ection and of handedness, F( 1, 201) = 5.06, p
< .05. I n contr ast, f or those r esponses m ade

with low conf idence, there was no significant
inter action.
Thus it is in m em or y pr ocessing itself , r ather
than in str ategic behavior , that the assum ption
of hom ogeneity appear s to br eak down. Lef thanded and r ight- handed populations dif f er in
how they r em em ber or ientation, not in how they
guess.

exception to the im plicit assum ption of
hom ogeneity within cognitive science has been
characterised here. Subtle differences can be
detected in the r em em ber ing of or ientation by
lef t- handed and r ight- handed populations.
It
r em ains to be investigated, however , how
widespread
is
the
occurrence
of
such
heter ogeneity.

Origin of Population Effect
for Memory

Acknowledgement

I t is im por tant to note that the r esults do not
suggest that either lef t- handed or r ight- handed
populations enjoy a gener al advantage in
m em or y.
Rather , the f inding is one of
contr alater ality, in that lef t- handed people wer e
more accurate than right-handed people when
recalling right-facing stimuli, but less accurate
when r ecalling lef t- f acing stim uli. This zer osum f inding of contr alater ality pr esents a
pr oblem f or any theor ists ( e.g., Luh, Redl, &
Levy, 1994; McKelvie & Aikins, 1993) who
attem pt to explain the inf luence of handedness
upon cognition in ter m s of possible cor r elated
dif f er ences in hem ispher ic specialization of
function, because such a theory would pr edict
that either lef t- handed or r ight- handed people
should
show
a
consistent
advantage
in
performance.
I n contr ast, we have r ecently pr oposed ( Mar tin
& Jones, 1999) that the consistent dif f er ences
am ong people in patter ns of over t m otor activity
which categor ise them as either left-handed or
right-handed are accompanied by correlated
dif f er ences in m otor im ager y.
I t is well
established that extensive m otor activation
occur s in the cor tex in the absence of physical
movement (e.g., Decety, Grezes, Costes, Perani,
Jeanner od, Pr ocyk, Gr assi, & Fazio, 1997;
Jeanner od, 1994; Logie, 1995) . Char acter istic
patter ns of m otor activation f or lef t- handed
people dif f e r f r om those f or r ight- ha nded
people, par tly in r esponse to the asym m etr ic
natur e of the ever yday envir onm ent ( e.g., lef tto- r ight wr iting) . The pr esent r esults suggest
that, depending upon the pr ecise details of a
cognitive task, either lef t- handed or r ighthanded m otor im ager y m ay pr ove to be the m or e
ef f ective in assisting m em or y f or or ientation.

Conclusions
Outside of cognitive neur opsychology, it is of ten
assum ed that dif f er ences in cognitive activity
between
individuals
m ay
be
adequately
r epr esented theor etically in ter m s of r andom
var iation ar ound a centr al tendency.
One

Resear ch suppor t has been pr ovided by ESRC
( UK) Gr ant R000236216.

References
Bishop, D. V. M. ( 1990) .
Handedness and
developmental
disorder.
Oxford,
UK:
Blackwell.
Br yden, M. P., McManus, I . C., & Bulm anFlem ing, M. B. ( 1994) .
Evaluating the
em pir ical suppor t f or the Geschwind- BehanGalabur da m odel of cer ebr al later alization.
Brain and Cognition, 26, 103- 167.
Cor ballis, M. C. ( 1997) .
The genetics and
evolution of handedness.
Psychological
Review, 104, 714- 727.
Day, L. B., & MacNeilage, P. F. ( 1996) .
Postur al
asym m etr ies
and
language
later alization in hum ans ( Homo sapiens) .
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 110, 8896.
Decety, J., Grezes, J., Costes, N., Perani, D.,
Jeannerod, M., Procyk, E., Grassi, F., & Fazio,
F. ( 1997) . Br ain activity dur ing obser vation
of actions - inf luence of action content and
subject’s str ategy. Brain, 120, 1763- 1777.
Geschwind, N., & Galabur da, N. ( 1987) .
Cerebral
lateralization:
Biological
mechanisms, associations and pathology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Har r is, L. J. ( 1990) .
Cultur al inf luences on
handedness: Histor ical and contem por ar y
theory and evidence. In S. Coren (Ed.), Lefthandedness: I mplications and anomalies ( pp.
195- 258) . Am ster dam : Nor th- Holland.
Jeanner od, M. ( 1994) . The r epr esenting br ain:
Neur al correlates of motor intention and
imagery. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17,
187- 245.
Jones, G. V. ( 1983) . On double dissociation of
f unction. Neuropsychologia, 21, 397- 400.
Jones, G. V., & MacAndr ew, S. B. G. ( 1990) .
Unif or m ity of associative im pair m ent in
amnesia. Proceedings of the twelfth annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society
( pp. 750- 756) . Hillsdale, NJ: Er lbaum .

Jones, G. V., & Mar tin, M. ( 2000) . A note on
Cor ballis ( 1997) and the genetics and
evolution of handedness: Developing a unif ied
distr ibutional
m odel
f r om
the
sexchr om osom es gene hypothesis. Psychological
Review, 107, 213- 218.
Juola, P., & Plunkett, K. ( 1998) . Why double
dissociations don’t m ean m uch. Proceedings
of the twentieth annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society ( pp. 561- 566) .
Mahwah, NJ: Er lbaum .
Klar , A. J. S. ( 1996) . A single locus, RGHT,
specif ies pr ef er ence f or hand utilization in
hum ans. I n Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology: Vol. 61. Function and
dysfunction in the nervous system ( pp. 59- 65) .
Plainview, NY: Cold Spr ing Har bor Labor ator y
Pr ess.
Laval, S. H., Dann, J. C., Butler, R. J., Loftus,
J., Rue, J., Leask, S. J., Bass, N., Comazzi,
M., Vita, A., Nanko, S., Shaw, S., Peter son,
P., Shields, G., Smith, A. B., Stewart, J.,
DeLisi, L. E., & Cr ow, T. J. ( 1998) . Evidence
f or linkage to psychosis and cer ebr al
asym m etr y ( r elative hand skill) on the X
chr omosome. American Journal of Medical
Genetics, 81, 420- 427.
Levy, J., Heller, W., Banich, M. T., & Burton,
L. ( 1983) . Asym m etr y of per ception in f r ee
viewing of chimeric faces.
Brain and
Cognition, 2, 404- 419.
Logie, R. H. ( 1995) .
Visuo- spatial working
memory . Hillsdale, NJ: Er lbaum .
Luh, K. E., Redl, J., & Levy, J. ( 1994) . Lef tand r ight- hander s see people dif f er ently: Fr eevision perceptual asymmetries for chimeric
stim uli. Brain and Cognition, 25, 141- 160.

Mar tin,
M.
( 1985) .
Neur oticism
as
pr edisposition towar d depr ession: A cognitive
mechanism.
Personality and I ndividual
Differences, 6, 353- 365.
Mar tin,
M.,
&
Jones,
G.
V.
( 1998) .
Gener alizing ever yday m em or y: Signs and
handedness. Memory & Cognition, 26, 193200.
Mar tin, M., & Jones, G. V. ( 1999) .
Motor
im ager y theor y of a contr alater al handedness
effect in recognition memory: Toward a chiral
psychology
of
cognition.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 265282.
McKelvie, S. J., & Aikins, S. ( 1993) . Why is
coin head or ientation m isr em em ber ed? Tests
of schem a inter f er ence and handedness
hypotheses.
British Journal of Psychology,
84, 355- 363.
McManus, I . C. ( 1999) . Handedness, cer ebr al
later alization, and the evolution of language.
I n M. C. Cor ballis & S. E. G. Lea ( Eds.) , The
descent of mind: Psychological perspectives
on hominid evolution ( pp. 194- 217) . Oxf or d,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Schechner Genuth, S. ( 1997) . Comets, popular
culture, and the birth of modern cosmology.
Pr inceton, NJ: Pr inceton Univer sity Pr ess.

