UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hypothesis-Testing Method in a Community of Psychologists

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5j94c4vx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Okada, Takeshi
Shimokido, Takashi

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hypothesis-Testing Method in a Community of Psychologists
Takeshi Okada (j46006a@nucc.cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
School of Education, Nagoya University; Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya, 464-8601, JAPAN
Takashi Shimokido (m47031a@nucc.cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
School of Education, Nagoya University; Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya, 464-8601, JAPAN
Abstract
Cognitive scientists have become increasingly interested in doing research on the nature of interdisciplinary
collaboration. This new direction raises questions about
the role that discipline specific practices may have
when scientists from different disciplines collaborate.
In this paper we explore one such discipline-specific belief: the importance of hypothesis testing in psychology research.

Introduction
We interviewed scientists about their collaborative
processes (Okada, Schunn, Crowley, Oshima, Miwa, Aoki,
& Ishida 1995), and a computer scientist who had
collaborated with a cognitive psychologist mentioned the
following:
“The most important benefit of participating in this
interdisciplinary collaboration is that there are
scientists who have a different sense of value on
science. For example, when working with
researchers in the same discipline, we share a
common ground and a common language. We can
make progress in our project very quickly without
wondering about what the co-researcher meant.
Now, I think that my co-researcher in this
interdisciplinary project and I didn’t share that
common ground when we started our project.
Therefore, we could not make any progress for
about one year. We could not understand what
confused us… The difference of disciplines related
to the differences in the sense of value on science,
methodology that we use, and more concretely
speaking, evaluation criteria. Those differences
made me feel this interdisciplinary collaboration
was very interesting!” [Translated from Japanese]
We have also had similar experiences when working
with computer scientists. It seemed that the computer
scientists were more concerned with creating phenomena on
a computer system, while we, as psychologists, were
concerned with understanding phenomena in the real world,
through experimental design, hypotheses, and manipulating
variables.
These episodes suggest that scientists have beliefs
about how science should proceed and be evaluated, and that

these beliefs are discipline-specific. These beliefs influence
scientists’ research activities, such as conducting research
projects, writing research articles, and advising students’
research projects. In this paper, we will focus on a
discipline-specific belief about science that is widely shared
in the psychology community. Recently, research interests
in interdisciplinary collaboration have been growing in the
cognitive science community (Derry & Gernsbacher, in
press). An interdisciplinary collaboration, by nature, is an
enterprise by collaborators with different beliefs from
different backgrounds. Thus, it would be extremely
important for us to know what kind of beliefs each disciplne
brings into the collaboration.

Hypothesis-Testing as a Prescriptive Method
Scientific psychology has emphasized the importance of
justification as a measure for being scientific. The
hypothesis-testing style (i.e., entertaining clear hypotheses
and testing them based on data) has been adopted as a
prescriptive means for justification. When conducting scientific research, many psychologists believe that they must
first develop clear hypotheses before testing them against
the available data.
This hypothesis-testing style seems to be an offshoot of
several dominant movements that emerged in Western
psychology in the 1930s: logical positivism and
operationism, hypothetico-deductive method, and inferential
statistics.
Logical positivism aims to clarify the language of
science and investigate the conditions under which empirical
propositions are meaningful, then verify the propositions by
means of a concrete procedure. This movement in the
philosophy of science was introduced to the psychology
community in the 1930s by Stevens (1939). Operationism
(Bridgeman, 1928), which claims that a scientific concept
should be defined by concrete operations to achieve the
concept, was integrated into the logical positivism movement. These movements served as a strong theoretical
background for the formation of scientific psychology.
The hypothetico-deductive method (H-D method) is a
scientific method in which investigators are required to
adopt a postulate tentatively and deduce its logical
implications, and then check the validity of them by
observation. Hull, a founder of neo-behaviorism, adopted it

as a core research method for his studies (Hull, 1943). As
neo-behaviorism became dominant in psychology for the
next several decades, Hull’s emphasis of the H-D method
had a strong influence in the psychology community.
With the development and introduction of inferential
statistics to psychological research, investigators then had
tools to implement logical positivism and the H-D method
in their research (Fisher, 1935).
These movements had strong influences on the
psychology community, the effects of which are still being
felt today. In the rest of this paper, we will address the
following questions related to the hypothesis-testing style
of research in the community of psychology: How and when
was such a belief formed in the psychological community in
Japan? What kind of role does this belief about science play
in shaping research activities?
The primary data are from the Japanese psychology
community. However, we feel that this data reflects the
situation of psychology in the Western community as well,
since the Japanese psychology community has been strongly
influenced by Western psychology, particularly by the USA.
Moreover, Kerr (1998) found a similar pattern of researchers’
beliefs on the hypothesis-testing style in the psychology
community in the USA using a similar questionnaire survey
with somewhat a different focus.

Three Aspects of Research Activities
We will focus on three important aspects of scientific
research: 1) Writing journal articles; 2) educating
psychology students, and, most importantly; 3) conducting
research projects.
On Writing Journal Articles
When submitting articles to psychology journals,
authors sometimes receive comments that may have been
motivated by the belief that research papers without
hypotheses are unscientific. Following are examples of
comments that our colleagues received from journal
reviewers:
“The authors do not make any predictions or
provide the foundation for predictions.” (Cognitive
Science)
“The most serious problem of this paper is that
there is no clear hypothesis mentioned. ...You
should predict what kind of result you would
acquire and describe what the paper would
contribute if the result is obtained.” (Japanese
Journal of Psychology) [Translated from Japanese]
In order to verify whether or not these examples reflect
the current situation of the psychology community in Japan,
we conducted a questionnaire survey of psychology
researchers in 1998. Participants were first and second
authors of articles published in the Japanese Journal of Psychology and the Japanese Journal of Educational
Psychology over the previous year. Those two journals are
bulletins of the two major scientific psychology societies in
Japan. A questionnaire was mailed to 137 authors. We
received replies from 111 authors—a response rate of

81.2%! The questionnaire included questions about the
timeline of developing the hypotheses mentioned in each
article and authors’ past experiences of hypothesis formation
in research activities. Each question will be described in
detail in later sections of this paper.
Participants were asked if they had ever received
reviewer comments that recommended revising the article to
clarify the hypothesis: 25.7% of respondents answered yes.
Considering the fact that this question only applies to
authors who have previously submitted at least one paper to
a journal without including any hypotheses, this rate should
be regarded as higher than it appears. This suggests that the
Japanese psychology community encourages researchers to
write articles with clearly stated hypotheses. On the same
issue, Kerr (1998) conducted a similar study, giving a
questionnaire to 156 behavioral scientists in the USA. It
asked them to estimate what percentage of publishable
research articles should state an explicit hypothesis,
according to journal editors and reviewers. Respondents
thought journal editors and reviewers would say that
research articles should state an explicit hypothesis about
80% of the time. Though this research did not focus on
respondents’ actual experience with reviewers, it does
suggest that beliefs about the hypothesis-testing style in
journal review processes are widely shared among
psychologists, not only in Japan, but also in the USA.
In order to see how such journal review processes affect
the style of journal publications, we coded the empirical
articles (i.e., articles with data) in the 1997 volume in the
Japanese Journal of Psychology (Okada & Shimokido, in
press). If any hypotheses, predictions, or expectations were
stated in an article, it was coded as an “article with
hypothesis.” Sometimes, hypotheses were clearly stated in
the articles: “The hypothesis of this research is…” or “We
have three hypotheses. The first one is…” Sometimes, the
expression in an article was more subtle such as, “…was
expected” or, “If it is true, this result would happen.” We
included all of them as “article with hypothesis” because,
with this analysis, we wanted to capture how authors were
influenced by the hypothesis-testing style of writing. Using
this criterion for hypotheses, we divided the empirical articles into four categories. The first category is articles with
no hypotheses mentioned. The second category is articles
with hypotheses mentioned after the first experiment. The
third category is articles with one or more hypotheses
mentioned in the introductory section. The fourth category
is the articles with two or more hypotheses mentioned in
order to distinguish a correct one from wrong ones (i.e., a
diagnosis test). The third and fourth categories were
regarded as “articles with hypotheses.”
The results showed that, in 1997, 58.8% of the
empirical research articles in the Japanese Journal of
Psychology had some kind of hypotheses written in the
introductory section. Note that the other empirical articles,
that didn’t have any hypotheses, focused mainly on clinical
case studies, testing the validity of a questionnaire, or
psychophysics, which traditionally are types of articles
written without hypotheses. Taking this into account, we
can say that the hypothesis-testing style of writing articles

100%
90%
80%

No Hypothesis (%)
Hypotheses After Exp. 1 (%)
One or More Hypotheses (%)
Alternative Hypotheses (%)

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Vol. 10
Vol. 20
(1935-36) (1949-50)

Vol. 30
(1959-60)

Vol.40
Vol. 50
(1969-70) (1979-80)

Vol. 60
Vol. 68-69
(1989-90) (1997-98)

Figure 1: Hypotheses in the Japanese Journal of Psychology

is currently dominant in the Japanese community of
psychology.
Do research articles in other disciplines follow the same
hypothesis- testing style? We checked the 1996 volumes of
Japanese science journals— these were the most recent
volumes available in our university library at the time. We
looked at the publication lists of the faculty members of
each discipline in our university, then chose journals in
which they were frequently published. We used the same
coding scheme as the one previously mentioned, for the
1997 volume of the Japanese Journal of Psychology.
Table 1. Articles with hypotheses in various disciplines.
journal
Solid-state physics
Earth Science
Analytical chemistry
Environmental medicine
Neuroscience
Ocean & Sky (Meteorology)
Analytical Chemistry
Polymer chemistry

Articles with hypotheses
0% had hypotheses
0% had hypotheses
0% had hypotheses
0% had hypotheses
0% had hypotheses
0% had hypotheses
2.8% had hypotheses
24% had hypotheses

The main result of this analysis is shown in Table 1.
As we can see, many research articles in other scientific
disciplines do not follow the hypothesis-testing style of
writing. Despite the belief about a scientific writing style
that our psychology community shares, it seems that many
scientists in natural science disciplines do not adhere to the
hypothesis- testing style of writing. Are we willing to say
that these articles without hypotheses are unscientific?
The next question that occurred to us was whether or
not psychology articles have always used the hypothesistesting style. If movements such as logical positivism, H-

D method, and inferential statistics had influenced research
activities in psychology, the hypothesis-testing style of
writing should have emerged at some point thereafter and
spread throughout the psychology community. In order to
answer this question, we conducted a historical analysis of
the Japanese Journal of Psychology. It has been published
since 1925, is the official journal for the Japanese Psychological Association, and is the oldest and most
prestigious psychology journal in Japan. We coded the
journal articles using the same coding scheme as previously
described.
Figure 1 shows the results of the historical analysis of
empirical articles in this journal. We examined every tenth
volume of the journal from 1935 to 1998. (The most recent
volume was Volume 69 at the time of this analysis.) As
shown: 1) There were almost no articles with hypotheses in
the introduction published prior to WWII; 2) the number of
articles with hypotheses gradually increased after WWII; and,
3) the majority of the articles in the current volumes have
hypotheses.
These results suggest that after WWII Japanese
psychology researchers formed the standard that scientific
articles should have hypotheses clearly stated in the
introduction. This standard is quite different from that of
the journals in other scientific disciplines. (Currently, we
are conducting the similar analysis with American scientific
journals so we can verify whether or not this trend is unique
to the Japanese psychology community.)
The results of the historical analysis of the Japanese
Journal of Psychology agree with the historical evidence
regarding
the
import
of
the
aforementioned
movements—logical positivism, hypothetico-deductive
method, and inferential statistics—from
Western
psychology to Japan. Although those movements emerged
in Western psychology in 1930s and 1940s, World War II
prevented Japanese psychologists from being exposed to

them. When World War II ended, these movements were
introduced and gradually adopted into the Japanese
psychology community. Theoretical articles on logical
positivism and operationism appeared in the 1948 volume
(the first volume after WWII) of the Japanese Journal of
Psychology. Before WWII, there was very little research in
behaviorism in Japan. After WWII, neo-behaviorism was
introduced. For example, symposia on behaviorism were
held at the 13th annual conference of the Japanese
Psychological Association in 1949. Inferential statistics
were introduced to Japan right after WWII. In the Japanese
Journal of Psychology, the first theoretical article on
inferential statistics appeared in the 1948 volume of the
Japanese Journal of Psychology and the percentage of
articles with inferential statistics increased dramatically
during the 1950s (Omi, 1997).
From this evidence, we believe that it would be a fairly
valid inference that a new belief about the hypothesis-testing
style of writing articles among Japanese psychology
researchers was influenced by logical positivism,
hypothetico-deductive method, and/or inferential statistics.

90.1%. Thus, the hypothesis-testing style seems to be the
dominant practice in Japanese psychology.
The results of this survey are not surprising because
many research methodology textbooks in psychology also
mention that psychological research should proceed by
finding questions and entertaining clear hypotheses first,
then by collecting data. This is an excerpt from popular
Japanese textbooks about research method in psychology.

On Teaching How to do Research
During four years of teaching in a psychology
department in Japan, the first author found that many
psychology majors were taught that they must form clear
hypotheses before collecting data. An undergraduate student
in a research methods course complained to him, “Although
I want to study this topic, I cannot come up with a clear
hypothesis. So, I cannot study this topic.” A graduate
student writing a master thesis came to his office one day
and confessed, “Though I conducted three experiments for
my master thesis, I could only come up with a clear
hypothesis in the last experiment. So, I may not have the
ability to conduct scientific research.”
In the process of learning about psychology, many
students seem to acquire the idea that they have to form a
clear hypothesis in order to conduct a psychological research
study. In the questionnaire survey mentioned in the last
section, we asked the following questions:
1. When you were a student, had you ever received
advice from someone telling you that you should
start a research project by developing clear
hypotheses? 77.4% of respondents answered yes.
2. When writing papers, had you ever received advice
telling you that you should write clear hypotheses in
the paper? 65.1% of respondents answered yes.
3. Have you ever read a textbook on research
methodology of psychology suggesting that you
should start with clear hypotheses when conducting
research? 70.8% of respondents answered yes.
4. Have you ever given advice to someone telling him
or her that when conducting research they should
develop clear hypotheses before collecting data?
69.8% of respondents answered yes.
Overall, the percentage of the respondents who
answered yes to at least one of the above questions was

On Conducting Research Projects
Our questionnaire survey was individualized for each
respondent. We identified hypotheses in an article they had
published and asked the authors specific questions about the
hypotheses. If no hypothesis had been stated in their article,
the same question was asked without identifying any
specific hypothesis. The question was regarding whether
they had developed the hypothesis written in their paper
before they had collected the data. Respondents had to
choose one of the following answers: a) The same
hypothesis was entertained throughout; b) a different
hypothesis was entertained; c) a vague hypothesis was
entertained; d) no hypothesis was entertained; or (e) others.
In the case of articles with hypotheses, 70.6 % of the
respondents said that the same hypotheses had been
entertained throughout the study. However, 23.5% of the
respondents admitted that they had different hypotheses,
vague hypotheses, or no hypotheses at all before collecting
data. Thus, we found that even if there are hypotheses
clearly written in journal articles, it does not necessarily
mean that the authors used the hypothesis-testing style
when conducting their research. That is, in some cases
hypotheses may have been developed between data
collection and the writing of the paper. When interpreting
the data, we have to consider that this survey was addressed
to authors who have successfully published articles in
mainstream psychology journals in Japan. It is highly
possible to imagine that many psychologists who conducted
research without hypotheses either could not publish their
work in those mainstream journals or did not have the
courage to submit them.
These results tell us somewhat contradictory stories
about psychologists’ research activities. While researchers in
psychology conduct research in diverse ways (i.e.,
sometimes starting with a hypothesis and sometimes
without), when they write journal articles they often imply
that they had conducted the hypothesis-testing style of

How to conduct research and write a paper, Sirasa
(1987): “The research process is the process of
testing hypotheses… Thus, entertaining hypotheses
is a very important first step to start research. If
you think that you can discover something when
conducting a survey or experiment with vague
ideas, you will never succeed in your research.”
The same trend was found in textbooks in the USA
(Kerr, 1998). It seems that both in Japan and in the USA,
psychology undergraduate and graduate students have been
taught to use the hypothesis-testing style of research and to
write articles following that style.

research. When researchers teach others how to conduct
research, they strongly emphasize employing the
hypothesis-testing style. Does this mean that those
psychologists who could not come up with any hypothesis
before collecting data are not practicing the “correct” method
of scientific research? Is the hypothesis-testing style really
the best and the most scientific method of conducting
research?

Potential Problems with the HypothesisTesting Style of Research
Many philosophers of science have pointed out that
scientists are not necessarily using the hypothesis-testing
style of research when conducting scientific research (e.g.,
Hanson, 1958). Scientific discovery processes have two
main phases: discovery of an explanation and justification
for it. The hypothesis-testing style of research is strongly
related to the justification side of scientific discovery
processes, but not as much to the discovery side. Therefore,
it does not completely reflect the actual process of scientific
discovery. For example, Hanson (1958) stated in his famous
book, Patterns of discovery:
“Physicists do not start from hypotheses: They
start from data. ...H-D accounts begin with the
hypothesis as given. …The H-D account describes
what happens after the physicist has caught his
hypothesis; but it might be argued that the
ingenuity, tenacity, imagination and conceptual
boldness which has marked physics since Galileo
shows itself more clearly in hypothesis-catching
than in the deductive elaboration of caught
hypotheses.”
Like Hanson, it seems that the majority of philosophers
of science abandoned the concept that the hypothesis-testing
style of research was the ideal scientific method a long time
ago. However, as we have described, many psychology
researchers still believe that this method is the best (and
sometimes the only) scientific method that psychology
should follow.

Various Styles of Research in Science
Some scientists have pointed out that they are actually
conducting research and producing prominent findings using
other research styles. For example, Herbert A. Simon (1991),
one of the founders of the fields of cognitive science,
artificial intelligence, and cognitive psychology, has written
about his research style as follows:
“When I examine my other experimental research, I
find to my embarrassment that this fundamental
condition for sound experimentation is seldom met.
What have I been up to? What can I possibly have
learned from ill-designed experiments? The answer
(it surprised me) is that you can test theoretical
models without contrasting an experimental with a
control condition. And apart from testing models,
you can often make surprising observations that
give you ideas for new or improved models...”

“Perhaps it is not our methodology that needs
revising so much as the standard textbooks on
methodology, which perversely warn us against
running an experiment until precise hypotheses
have been formulated and experimental and control
conditions defined. Perhaps we need to add to the
textbooks a chapter, or several chapters, describing
how basic scientific discoveries can be made by
observing the world intently, in the laboratory or
outside it, with controls or without them, heavy
with hypotheses or innocent of them.” (pp. 383385.)
Simon (in press) describes a case study of Faraday and
further argues that curiosity and careful observation, which
often lead to surprising results, are centrally important
values to the scientific enterprise.
It seems that, at least in some scientific disciplines, scientists conduct research without using the hypothesistesting style. They form hypotheses after observing
phenomena.
The Cognitive Psychology of Scientific Thinking
This point is supported by further evidence from
studies in cognitive psychology. In the field of cognitive
psychology, there have been substantial numbers of studies
focused on scientific discovery processes (e.g., Klahr &
Dunbar, 1988; Okada & Simon, 1997; Schunn, 1995).
These studies suggest that: 1) Subjects frequently design
experiments without hypotheses; 2) the frequency with
which subjects design experiments without hypotheses is
higher at the beginning of research; 3) there are individual
differences in whether people tend to design experiments
without hypotheses (experimenters who start experiments
without hypotheses versus theorists who start experiments
with hypotheses). These results fit with our findings from
the questionnaire survey. Together, they converge to tell us
that there are various research methods and styles in science.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Scientific Styles
Hypothesis-testing styles of research, which are based
on the H-D method and strong inference (Platt, 1964: i.e.,
develop alternative hypotheses and devise a crucial
experiment that excludes one or more of the hypotheses,
then carry out the experiment so as to get a clean result), are
probably useful when the research field has been welldeveloped or the research project has progressed up to the
level that the researchers do not need to create any new
paradigm or theory. Although the percentage of articles
which used strong inference in psychology journals is not
high (see Figure 1), Platt (1964) claimed that this scientific
method is the most productive way to conduct scientific
research.
However, we feel that his claim is probably too strong
to generalize. In certain situations, the H-D method
(especially strong inference) might not work well. For
example, when the research field is not well formed yet, or
the research project is at the starting stage, the hypothesistesting style of research might force researchers to form a
hypothesis prematurely. Toyoda (1998) pointed out that

even a study with a precise statistical analysis to distinguish
rival hypotheses might only be able to distinguish the rival
hypotheses that are located very close to each other in a
highly complicated hypothesis space. Therefore, when there
is no valid reason to form hypotheses with the currently
available data and theory, there is a possibility that the
researchers will focus on hypotheses that are far apart from
the correct hypothesis. In such a case, they might be stuck
with irrelevant questions or irrelevant hypotheses that might
not lead to any major discovery.

Conclusion
In the historical and social context of Japanese
psychology, many psychology researchers in Japan acquired
the belief that the hypothesis-testing style was the best, and
sometimes the only, scientific way. Such a belief creates a
cognitive constraint (Miyake & Hatano, 1991; Siegler &
Crowley, 1994) on the way that psychology researchers
participate in research activities such as conducting research,
writing research articles, and teaching research methods.
Such a belief, on one hand, has a positive effect in
enhancing effective research activities—many research
articles have been published using this hypothesis-testing
style. However, on the other hand, there could be situations
in which such a belief has negative effects on research
activities. As we have shown above, it was suggested that
some articles without hypotheses have been rejected by
journal reviewers as non-scientific even though such articles
might have made a great contribution to the community of
psychology, had they been published. It was also suggested
that such a belief shaped types of research procedures that
might have distorted researchers’ views on scientific discovery. As for the educational aspect, it was suggested that
some of the psychology students felt discouraged to explore
new research directions because they received advice
emphasizing the hypothesis-testing style of research.
We believe that the information from these analyses
about researchers’ beliefs in psychology would be useful
when we try to understand cognitive processes among psychologists and other scientists in an interdisciplinary collaboration.

Acknowledgments
Partially supported by the Japan Foundation, 1999, the
Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Grantin-Aid for encouragement for young scientists, 1997-1998,
and the grant of the Tokai Science Academy, 1999.

References
Bridgeman, P. W. (1928). The logic of modern physics.
New York: Macmillan.
Derry, S.J. & Gernsbacher, M.A. (Eds.) (in press).
Problems and promises of interdisciplinary collaboration:
Perspectives from
cognitive science.
Mahwah,
NJ:Erlbaum.
Dunbar, K. (1993). Concept discovery in a scientific
domain. Cognitive Science, 17, 397-434.

Fisher, R. A. (1935). The design of experiments. London,
England: Oliver & Boyd.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of discovery. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Hull, C. L. (1943). Principles of behavior. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Kerr, N. L. (1998). HARKing: Hypothesizing after the
results are known. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 2, 196-217.
Klahr, D. & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Miyake, N. & Hatano, G. (1991). Nichijoteki ninchi
katsudo no shakaiteki bunkateki seiyaku [Socio-cultural
constraints and beyond]. In Japanese Cognitive Science
Society (Ed.), Ninchi Kagaku no hatten, 4. Tokyo:
Kodansha.
Okada, T., Schunn, C. D., Crowley, K., Oshima, J., Miwa,
K., Aoki, T. & Ishida, Y. (1995, June). Collaborative
scientific research: Analyses of historical and interview
data. Paper presented at the 12th Annual Conference of
the Japanese Cognitive Science Society.
Okada, T. & Shimokido, T. (in press). The role of
hypothesis formation in a community of psychology. In
K. Crowley, C. D. Schunn, & T. Okada (Eds.),
Designing for Science: Implication from everyday,
classroom, and professional settings. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Okada, T. & Simon, H. A., (1997). Collaborative discovery
in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 2, 109-146.
Omi, Y. (1997). Kenkyuhou no hensen [Change of research
methods]. In T. Sato & H. Mizoguchi (Eds.), Tsushi
Nihon no shinrigaku. Kyoto, Japan: Kitaoji-Shobo.
Platt, J. R. (1964). Strong inference. Science, 146, 347-353.
Schunn, C. D. (1995). A goal/effect trade-off theory of
experiment space search. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
USA.
Shirasa, T. (1987). Kenkyu no susumekata matomekata
[How to conduct research and write a paper]. Tokyo:
Kawashima-Shoten.
Siegler, R. S. & Crowley, K. (1994). Constraints on
learning in nonprivileged domains. Cognitive Psychology,
27. 194-226.
Simon, H. A. (1991). Models of my life. New York: Basic
Books.
Simon, H. A. (in press). “Seek and ye shall find”: How
curiosity engenders discovery. In K. Crowley, C. D.
Schunn, & T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for Science:
Implication from everyday, classroom, and professional
settings. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stevens, S. S. (1939). Psychology and the science of
science. Psychological Bulletin, 36, 221-263.
Toyoda, H. (1998). Kyoubunsankouzobunseki nyumonhen:
Kozohoteishiki modeling [Introduction to Covariance
Structure Analysis: Structural Equations Modeling]. Tokyo: Asakura-Shoten.

