UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Differences in Exemplar-Based Interference During Instructed Category Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2q90503c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Noelle, David C.
Cottrell, Garrison W.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences in Exemplar-Based Interference During
Instructed Category Learning
David C. Noelle
(NOELLE @ CNBC . CMU . EDU)

Garrison W. Cottrell
(GARY @ CS . UCSD . EDU)

Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Abstract
Instructed category learning studies have shown that categorization practice on a fixed set of labeled training exemplars
can cause learners to violate explicitly provided categorization
instructions. We have previously proposed a connectionist account of this exemplar-based interference effect — an account
which predicts that individuals who display initial difficulty
in the application of a categorization rule will exhibit greater
exemplar-based interference than good rule-followers. In this
paper, we report on a study of human instructed category learning performance intended to test this prediction of the model,
and we provide the results of additional connectionist simulations which are fit to the human experimental data.

Introduction
Instructed category learning studies have revealed that experience with labeled examples can sometimes cause learners
to deviate from previously provided categorization instructions, even when the category labels on the training items
are perfectly consistent with the given instructions (Allen and
Brooks, 1991; Brooks et al., 1991). Such experiments typically begin with the presentation of an explicit rule for categorizing stimuli. These initial instructions are followed by a sequence of trials in which stimuli are presented to the learner,
one at a time. The learner is asked to make a categorization judgment for each stimulus, and this judgment is immediately followed by performance feedback, providing the correct category label for the object. After a substantial period of
such training, the learner is presented with novel stimuli and
is asked to provide category labels for these novel items. Previous studies have discovered that learners may sometimes
violate the instructions that they were given when faced with
a novel stimulus, assigning the category label of a similar
training set exemplar to the novel item in lieu of accurately
applying the given explicit rule.
We have previously presented a connectionist model of
instructed category learning which explains this exemplarbased interference effect as emerging from the use of an errorcorrecting learning rule when learning from examples (Noelle
and Cottrell, 1996). This model posits the existence of a
working memory network which actively maintains a distributed pattern of activity encoding the explicitly provided
categorization rule. The model also includes a categorization
network — a system which assigns category labels based on
stimulus features. The behavior of the categorization network
is modulated by activity in the working memory network,
allowing explicit instructions to shape categorization performance. Exemplar-based interference appears when connec-

tion weights in the categorization network are modified, by
an error-correcting learning rule, as the result of performance
feedback on the training exemplars. This mechanism makes
a general prediction concerning exemplar-based interference:
difficulty in rule-following should result in larger amounts of
interference. If the network exhibits substantial residual error
when applying a given explicit categorization rule, this error will produce large weight changes during exemplar-based
training, and significant interference will arise. This prediction has a number of corollaries. First, the complexity of
the categorization rule should impact interference, with more
complex rules producing more interference. Second, a corresponding trend should be seen across individual learners, with
individuals who are error prone at rule application exhibiting
more interference than those who find rule application easy.
In this paper, we investigate these predictions. We report
on a human instructed category learning study which investigates individual differences in exemplar-based interference,
and we provide the results of detailed connectionist simulations which model the observed human learning performance.

Individual Differences in Interference
Method
Undergraduate students were asked to learn to categorize a set
of simple geometric line drawings into two categories. Each
geometric stimulus involved a circle with a radial line, drawn
in green on a black computer screen. The circle stimuli varied
along two continuous dimensions: size and orientation. Four
different
sized
used, with  radii of approximately
 
  circles were

mm, 
mm, 
mm, and 
mm. The number of
distinct orientations was also four, with the radial line of the
circle rotated
counterclockwise
from the right-pointing vector



by
,
,  , or 
. Each of the four angles of rotation
could be paired with each of the four sizes, producing a set
of  different stimulus items. These stimuli may be graphically depicted as points in a two dimensional feature space,
as shown on the right side of Figure 1. Of the  possible
circle stimuli, seven were distinguished as training set items.
These items are marked with boxes in Figure 1. Four training
stimuli were to be placed in one category, called the “black”
category here for convenience, and the remaining three were
to be placed in the other, called the “white” category.
A typical experimental trial involved the presentation of a
circle in the middle of a blank computer screen. Participants
were expected to identify the appropriate category for each
stimulus, communicating their judgment by depressing the
appropriate key on the computer keyboard. No time pressure

was placed on the learners, and accuracy was stressed in initially provided task instructions. Once a category judgment
was made for a given stimulus object, a message appeared
above the circle indicating if the given classification was correct or not. The correct category label was also explicitly
provided at this time. This feedback remained on the display
for seconds, after which time the next trial began.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions: the simple rule condition or the complex
rule condition. In each of these two conditions, the experimental session began with the presentation of an explicit rule
for categorizing the circle stimuli. The learners in the simple rule condition were told that circles in the “black” category were those
 of the smallest size, or of the largest size,
or rotated 
. All other circles were to be placed in the
“white” category.1 Participants in the complex rule condition
were given similar categorization instructions, only their rule
included an “exception” clause. All circles of the smallest
size, the largest size, or rotated 
were to be placed
in the

“black” category unless they
were
rotated
by
.
All
cir
cles with radial lines at
were to be placed in the “white”
category, even if they were of the largest or smallest sizes.
The instructions were designed to ensure that the rules were
clearly understood. The four stimuli sizes and the four angles of rotation were graphically displayed on the same screen
with the textually presented categorization rule. The rule was
described in plain English, making reference to the graphical examples. Furthermore, participants were not allowed to
advance to the next stage of the experiment until they demonstrated an accurate memory of the rule by correctly identifying a reworded version of it in a list of three alternatives. Participants also demonstrated retention of the rule by describing
it during an informal debriefing following the experiment.
Once categorization instructions were given, learners were
presented with  blocks of training trials, each block consisting of one presentation of each of the seven training set
items, appearing in a random order. Each trial involved the
display of one of the stimuli, a categorization judgment on
the part of the learner, and a period of performance feedback which provided the correct category label for the object.
At the end of this training phase, participants were given a
short break, during which time they were told that performance feedback would be suspended for the remainder of
the experimental session. They were then presented with 
blocks of trials incorporating all  of the possible stimulus
objects. The stimuli were presented in a random order, with
the learner providing a category label for each object but receiving no feedback concerning the accuracy of such judgments. Following this testing phase, the session was paused
once more, and learners were given a new categorization rule
to apply. They were told that they would soon be asked to
classify circles according to the new rule without the benefit of performance feedback. The new rules involved rotating the structure of the original rules in feature space, keeping the complexity of the rules constant. In the simple rule
condition, the new rule placed
items in the “black” category

if they were rotated to
, or to 
, or if they were of
the smallest size. The new complex rule was the same, ex1

The stimuli used here and the simple categorization rule are derived from the experiments of Nosofsky, Clark, & Shin (1989).

 

mm radius)
cept all circles of the penultimate size (i.e., 
were to be placed in the “white” category, regardless of orientation. Following these new classification instructions, 
more blocks of trials were given, each involving all  stimuli, randomly sequenced. The goal of this final collection of
trials was to assess the rule-following ability of each learner
when no exemplar-based feedback was made available. This
final rule-following phase was conducted with new categorization instructions to avoid transfer from the earlier training
phase.2 The total numberof categorization trials experienced
by each participant was  , and
 these were typically completed within a period of  to minutes.
The performance of participants from a third experimental
condition is also reported here. The data for these learners
were collected during a previous experiment (Noelle et al.,
2000). In this third condition, no explicit categorization instructions were given. Participants were asked to learn to categorize the circle stimuli from feedback on the training items
training trials with the
alone. These learners experienced
seven training stimuli, as the instructed learners did, and they
were tested, without feedback, on all  objects for  trials,
as before. Since no explicit instructions were given to these
participants, no final rule-following test was conducted.
All of the participants in this experiment were undergraduate students enrolled in psychology or cognitive science
courses at the University of California, San Diego during the
1996–1997 academic year. They received course credit in
exchange for their participation. Data were collected for 
uninstructed participants,  learners in the simple rule condition, and  in the complex rule condition. Some students did
not appear to be engaged by the task, exhibiting chance level
rule-following performance or chance level performance on
training trials. The
the training set items even after the
data for these participants were discarded, leaving valid data
for  uninstructed learners,  learners in the simple rule
condition, and  learners in the complex rule condition.

Results
The mean frequency of classification responses, averaged
over the uninstructed learners, are displayed in Figure 1. The
mean results for the instructed participants are shown in Figure 2. The chart on the right side of Figure 1 presents the
letter labels which will be used to refer to individual stimulus objects in the discussion, below. The other feature space
graphs in these two figures show the frequency with which
learners identified objects as being in the “black” category
during various phases of the experiment.
Exemplar-based interference, if present, should be found
in the testing phase categorization frequencies. Such interference involves a change in categorization performance
away from that dictated by the rule instructions and towards
that suggested by the distribution of training set items alone.
The responses of the uninstructed learners may be taken as
a characterization of the category structure suggested solely
2

Previous experiments attempted to assess rule-following ability
by testing each participant on the original categorization rule, over
all  stimuli, without feedback, prior to the training phase. It was
found, however, that such an initial rule-following test, even without performance feedback, impacted performance during the later
training and testing phases in a manner which masked interference.

Object Identifiers:

P

66 02 08 56

I

J

K

L

E

F

G

H

A

B

C

D

95 12 14 96

05 00 01 79

92 04 06 91

06 02 16 94
99 95 95 98

90 07 08 91
99 87 86 100

Figure 1: Uninstructed Condition Mean Responses: Categorization results are shown as the percentage frequency with
which items were placed in the “black” category. Training
set items are marked with boxes, colored according to the assigned category label. Also shown are letter labels for the
stimuli, used to reference items in this report.

96 35 66 88

78 12 13 80

32 03 04 75

35 04 07 36

41 03 24 92
97 49 91 99
ANGLE

by the training exemplars. Performance during the final rulefollowing phase may be used to approximate the accuracy,
over all  items, with which a learner might have applied
the original rule prior to the training phase. Thus, exemplarbased interference may be said to have been present in a given
condition to the degree that the pattern of testing phase responding deviated from rule application behavior in the direction of that exhibited by the uninstructed learners.
In order to assess if exemplar-based interference was
present in a given experimental condition, careful attention
must be given to the amount of error displayed by the participants when they apply an explicit rule without the benefit
of exposure to training items. Exemplar-based interference
may be said to exist only if deviation from perfect rule application increases as a result of performance feedback on
the training set. This characterization suggests a quantitative measure of interference involving assessing the deviation
from the explicit rule in both the rule-following and testing
phases and taking the difference between these two values.
Rule-following phase accuracy may be used as an approximation of how well learners might have applied the original
explicit categorization rule prior to exemplar-based training.
This estimate is compared to categorization accuracy during the testing phase, after training is complete. Using this
measure reveals that deviation from the rule did not reliably
change in the simple rule condition ( "!$#&%' ( ) but did
increase in the complex rule condition, with marginal reliability ()*+!,' %  ; -.!/%' % ).
Comparing deviation from the rule across the rulefollowing and testing phases is not a very powerful test of
interference, however. The presence of exemplar-based interference does not entail increased deviation from the rule
for all stimulus items. Indeed, it is reasonable to expect that
the classification performance for some of the stimulus objects will become more consistent with the explicit rule as
a result of exemplar-based performance feedback, since, for
some objects, the category structure suggested by the training
items is consistent with that specified by the rule. A more
sensitive test of interference would restrict its consideration
to those stimulus items for which interference is reasonably
expected. A simple operational definition of this expectation
can be based upon the uninstructed participant data, expecting

ANGLE

ANGLE

SIZE

ANGLE

95 84 80 98

ANGLE

SIZE

95 70 85 98

Complex Rule

66 04 42 88

Rule-Following:

SIZE

O

SIZE

M N

Testing:

Simple Rule

92 25 18 70
SIZE

SIZE

Uninstructed

Testing:

89 13 13 86
99 91 93 99
ANGLE

Figure 2: Instructed Conditions Mean Responses: Categorization results are shown as the percentage frequency with
which items where placed in the “black” category. Explicitly
provided rules are displayed as dashed boundary lines.
interference for those objects which the uninstructed learners,
on average, placed in the opposite category as that specified
by the explicit rule. The simple categorization rule conflicts
with mean uninstructed learner performance at items “E”, “I”,
“N”, and “O”. For the complex rule, interference is expected
for items “B”, “E”, “I”, and “O”. Restricting our attention
to these items, our measure of interference becomes: the increase in mean error, defined as deviation from the rule, from
the rule-following phase to the testing phase, averaged only
over those items for which interference was expected.3
Making use of this more sensitive measure reveals no reliable interference in the simple rule condition ( 01!2%' %% ;
SD !3%'45(( ; MSE !6%' % 78 ; 9:;<=?>@ ) but substantial interference in the complex rule condition ( 0A!B%'4% ;
SD !C%' (( ; MSE !C%' %% ; 9:)<*+!DE7' (GF* ; -H>I%' %% ).
Our previous connectionist model of instructed category
learning explained exemplar-based interference as the result
of connection weight modifications made during the training
phase, driven by an error-correcting learning rule (Noelle and
Cottrell, 1996). Under this view, large residual errors will
produce large weight changes in the network, producing large
amounts of interference. Thus, this model gave rise to the
prediction that increased error during rule application (estimated by rule-following phase error) should be accompanied
by increased exemplar-based interference. Support for this
3
There may be concern that this measure of interference is inappropriate since different rules were used in the rule-following and
testing phases. Indeed, it may seem odd to compare categorization
error on a specific stimulus (e.g., item “O”) across the two phases
when the relationship of that stimulus to the category boundaries
changes between the phases. These concerns may be partially alleviated, however, by noting that none of the significance results
reported here change if deviation from the rule is averaged over all
stimuli in the rule-following phase, and this average deviation is then
compared to the average testing phase error on stimuli for which interference is expected.

CATEGORY

HIDDEN

INSTANCES

SIZE
ANGLE

DEGRADED STIMULUS

WORKING MEMORY

SIZE

SIZE

SIZE

ANGLE

ANGLE

ANGLE

STIMULUS

RULE (POSITIVE)

RULE (NEGATIVE)

Figure 3: Network Architecture: Each circle represents a
standard sigmoidal processing unit, with the units grouped
into layers. Arrows represent connections between the units
in these layers. Example activations for stimulus “J”, being
classified according to the complex rule, are also shown.
prediction may be seen in the difference between the simple rule and the complex rule conditions. The complex rule
condition, which elicited a greater degree of rule-following
J
average erphase error than the simple rule condition
( 
 J
ror per stimulus object versus   ), elicited a greater degree of interference during the testing phase. This prediction may also be investigated at the level of individual differences. According to the model, poor rule-followers should
display more interference than good rule-followers. In order
to test this prediction, a correlation was computed over participants in each condition between the mean classification
error during the rule-following phase (averaged over all 
stimuli) and the sensitive measure of interference. A statistically significant positive correlation would verify the prediction. When tested, a marginally reliable negative correla
tion
in the 
simple
rule condition (KMLON
5 ;


PQ Rwas observed
), but a robust positive correLSNT U ; VDL

 ;
lation
in the
  complex rule condition (KWL

PQ R was found
 ). In brief, the condition which dis5 L$  ; VYX
played significant interference over all (the complex rule condition) also supported the individual differences prediction of
the connectionist model, while the condition which showed
no reliable interference (the simple rule condition) revealed a
tendency for poor rule-followers to become more consistent
with the explicit rule as a result of training.

A New Connectionist Model
Simulation Method
Our connectionist model of instructed learning (Noelle and
Cottrell, 1996) has been augmented to provide a detailed
account of the experimental results reported here, and new
model simulations have been conducted. The network architecture used in these simulations is diagramed in Figure 3. Standard connectionist processing elements were used,

grouped into layers, the activation level of each processing
element being the result of applying a logistic sigmoid to the
weighted sum of input activity levels. The activity of each
unit was, thus, bounded between zero and one.
The network took a representation of categorization instructions and a pair of stimulus features as input and produced a category judgment at the output layer. The input rule
representation included eight units corresponding to the four
levels of size and the four levels of angle of rotation used
in the human learning experiments. Activating one of these
units indicated that all stimuli of the given size or of the given
orientation were to be placed in the “black” category. These
rule input units are shown in Figure 3 as the “RULE (POSITIVE)” layer. Alongside this layer is a collection of inputs,
called “RULE (NEGATIVE)”, which encoded “exceptions”
to the positive rule terms. Activating one of these eight “negative” units indicated that all stimuli incorporating the given
feature level were to be placed in the “white” category, regardless of the category suggested by the positive terms. As
an example, the input representation for the complex rule
used in our human learning study is shown in Figure 3.
These explicit rule inputs fed activity to a 5 unit working
memory layer. When modeling uninstructed learners, the activity levels of these working memory units were set to zero.
The weights on the connections from the rule inputs were
bound to be non-negative, forcing the working memory layer
to encode explicit rule terms by an increase in the activation
levels of its processing elements. These weights were initially
set
random values sampled uniformly from the range
Z  to[\small

] . Complete connectivity extended from the working memory layer to a pool of 5 instruction-sensitive hidden units, and these, in turn, provided activity to the category
output units. There were no bounds on these weights. The
hidden layer also received complete connections from the degraded stimulus layer, which is described below. All of these
unrestricted weights were initialized Z tosmall
4[\ random values,
] . Bias values
sampled uniformly from the range N
on the
working
memory
and
hidden
units
were
initialized to

N& in order to encourage sparse internal representations.
Each stimulus was encoded by activating exactly one of
the size units and one of the angle units. In order to incorporate perceptual similarity information into the network, this
“place coded” stimulus representation was mapped, through
connections with fixed weights, to a degraded stimulus representation. In this modified stimulus representation, each unit
responded preferentially to a particular stimulus size or stimulus orientation, with partial activity appearing for stimuli of
similar sizes or orientations. Levels of partial activation were
set to decay exponentially with the number of feature levels
separating the given unit from the stimulus. For example, the
activity of the “size ” unit when the stimulus was of “size
 ” was set to ^_`acb_ed\f , where g was a gain parameter which
could be modified to fit the model to data. Each stimulus dimension, size and orientation, had its own independent gain
parameter, making them analogous to the dimensional attention weights used in models like ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992).
The “instances” layer contained  processing elements,
with each unit corresponding to one of the possible stimulus
objects. Each unit in this layer received input from exactly
one size unit in the degraded stimulus layer and from exactly

one angle unit. Unlike other connections in this network, the
activity from these two units was multiplied together, rather
than summed, to get the resulting activity of the instances
layer unit. Thus, each unit in this layer responded preferentially to a unique stimulus object, and activity declined exponentially with city-block distance in feature space. The
weights which gave rise to this pattern of activation were
fixed. This representational scheme was adopted because of
its success in capturing perceived similarity between stimuli
in models such as ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992). The instances
hidden layer provided complete connections to the two category output units, with these weights initialized toZ small
 [\ran
dom values uniformly sampled from the range N  
].
The biases on the output units were initialized to N& .
In order to capture human performance, the network had
to be able to apply categorization instructions from the very
start of the experimental session. Connection weights which
allowed the network to produce accurate categorization decisions immediately following explicit instruction were discovered through a training process conducted during a network
initialization phase. During this phase, the network was iteratively presented with a randomly sampled categorization
rule along with a randomly sampled stimulus object. It was
trained to activate the rule-determined category unit for the
given stimulus, modifying weights based on squared error at
the output layer using the generalized
  delta rule (Rumelhart
was used, with no moet al., 1986). A learning rate of
mentum term. The gain
 terms used in the degraded stimulus layer were fixed at [ during
[  this initialization training.
training trials, after which
This phase continued for
the network consistently demonstrated essentially perfect rule
application performance. The distribution of stimuli experienced by the network during this initial training was uniform over the  items, but the distribution of categorization
rules was skewed towards simple category structures. This biased distribution of rules produced a network which exhibited
slightly lower residual error when following a simple rule, as
compared to a complex one, and it also encouraged the working memory layer to devote more representational resources
to the encoding of simple category structures. The skewed
rule distribution also reflected a belief that simple rule structures are much more common in the rule-driven categorization experience of most humans.
Once initialized, the network was presented with the same
sequence of trials that was presented to the human learners.
When uninstructed, the working memory units were turned
off and the network was trained on the seven training items
trials. To measure rule-following performance, the
for
appropriate rule was presented at the input, and category outputs were recorded without performance feedback. To measure performance after both instruction and exemplar-based
training, the network was given the appropriate rule at its intrials. The netput and trained on the seven exemplars for
work’s performance on all  stimuli, without feedback, was
then recorded. All exemplar-based training was conducted
4
using the generalized delta rule, with a learning rate of
and no momentum. Only weights from the instances layer to
the output category units, and the bias weights on the output
units, were modified during this training process.
To simulate limitations in the cognitive resources applied

to the task, random noise was injected into the activation levels of the processing elements in the working memory layer.
During each trial, a random deviant was sampled from a zeromean normal distribution independently for each unit in the
working memory layer and the absolute value of this deviant
was subtracted from the activation level of the unit. This
caused components of the distributed rule representation held
in the working memory layer to become weakened. This use
of random noise was intended as a simple and abstract way
to capture the temporary failure of the working memory system to actively maintain complete representations of categorization instructions. Resampling the noise on every trial was
meant to allow for the possibility of refreshing working memory contents from a longer term episodic memory store.

Network simulations were run
times for each experimental condition. Each network was initialized with the same
set of connection weights, determined during the initialization phase, but both the injected noise and the order of stimulus presentation was randomized
for each simulation. The

simulations were averaged to
results of each collection of
produce figures to be compared to mean human categorization behavior. Four free parameters were adjusted to fit the
simulations to data. These included the two gain parameters
on the exponential decay used in the degraded stimulus layer
representation, the gain parameter used on a Luce choice ratio
which converted output activity values to probabilities, and
the variance of the noise injected into the working memory
layer. A simple grid search was conducted over this parameter space to find values for these four parameters which minimized the squared difference in the probability of “black”
category assignment between the human learners and the networks, over all experimental conditions.

Simulation Results
The best fit of mean simulation results to the human data
was had by sharpening the representation of stimulus orientation slightly (gain
 of  ) over the representation of stimulus
size (gain of  ). This meant that the angle of rotation was
slightly more discriminable by the networks than size. The

best fit to the mean data required a Luce choice gain of
on the output activation levels
 and working memory injected
. The resulting probabilities of
noise with a variance of
“black” category membership, as predicted by the model, are
shown in Figure 4. That diagram also displays the variance
accounted for by the model, over stimulus items, for each
condition. Notice that, like the humans, the network simulations exhibit no interference
in the simple rule case on aver 
age (a value of N
E in the interference measure previously
used with the human data), but they show
substantial interfer
 ).
ence when given the complex rule (
These simulations involved only a single source of individual variation: the ability to actively maintain an accurate
representation of the categorization instructions. Individual
differences in exemplar-based interference, then, were to be
explained in terms of the weight modifications which were
driven by the rule application error introduced by a failure to
maintain explicit rules in working memory. Variable working
memory ability was reflected by the noise variance parameter in these networks. Thus, in order to examine individual
differences in interference, networks with a range of values

 

Uninstructed

SIZE

72 08 09 69
78 09 39 91
92 83 92 93
ANGLE

Conclusions

2

R = 0.97

Rule-Following:

92 77 93 93

83 09 08 79

08 07 08 89

73 08 08 90

08 09 11 93

SIZE

SIZE

Simple Rule

Testing:

ANGLE

ANGLE

2

2

R = 0.96

90 17 84 93

60 08 07 78

34 08 10 92

08 07 07 21

32 08 37 92
90 43 91 93

SIZE

SIZE

R = 0.98

Complex Rule

93 18 17 93
93 90 93 93

93 90 92 93

92 11 14 93
93 89 93 93

ANGLE

ANGLE

2

2

R = 0.93



and  . When correlations between rule-following
tween
error and interference were calculated for such participantmatched samples of network simulations, a positive corre4
lation
 ;
 complex rule case (KoL
PQ R was  found for the
), and
no
correlation
was
found
in
5 Lp  ; VDX

 
PQ R
the simple rule case (KqLDN
 ;
LDN  ).

91 25 21 73

R = 0.95

Figure 4: Simulation Results: Categorization results are
shown as the mean probability with which items where assigned to the “black” category. Training set items are marked
with boxes, colored according to the assigned category label.
Variance accounted for is listed for each condition separately.
for this noise parameter had to be compared. Given a collection of networks with a variety of noise levels, the correlation
between rule-following error and interference may be measured. Recall that human learners displayed a positive correlation when confronted with the complex rule, but showed a
marginally negative correlation when given the simple rule.
When the variance on the noise injected into the working memory units was sampled uniformly from a bound
range, these simulations matched the human findings. For
example,
was sampled uniformly from the
 [\if noise
[i [ivariance

set h

j , then the correlation between rulefollowing error andinterference
negative

R was reliably

  for the
PQ
simple rule (KkLON
 ;  LONl  ; Vm
X

PQ  ) R and
reliably
positive
U ;  L

  for the complex rule (KnL
 ; VHX
 ). Similar results were found when the noise
parameter was sampled in a manner sensitive to the observed
distribution of human rule-following performance. This sampling was done by finding individual network simulations that
matched, as closely as possible, the rule-following phase accuracies exhibited by individual human learners. These best
match networks were found by varying the noise variance be-

The magnitude of exemplar-based interference was found to
be sensitive to the complexity of the explicitly provided categorization instructions, with more complex categorization
rules producing more interference. Also, in situations which
elicit robust interference, a reliable correlation across individuals is observed: increased error at explicit rule application is paired with increased exemplar-based interference. A
connectionist account of these effects, in which interference
arises as the result of an error-correcting learning process,
was found to fit the human performance data fairly closely.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported, in part, by the NIH through a National Research Service Award (# 1 F32 MH11957-01) from
the National Institute of Mental Health, awarded to the first
author. We extend our thanks to Craig R. M. McKenize,
James L. McClelland, David Plaut, and the members of the
UCSD-based Gary’s Unbelieveable Research Unit and the
CMU based PDP Research Group, as well as to five anonymous reviewers, for their comments on this work.

References
Allen, S. W. and Brooks, L. R. (1991). Specializing the operation of an explicit rule. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 120(1):3–19.
Brooks, L. R., Norman, G. R., and Allen, S. W. (1991).
The role of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic
task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
120(3):278–287.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based connectionist model of category learning. Psychological Review, 99:22–44.
Noelle, D. C. and Cottrell, G. W. (1996). Modeling interference effects in instructed category learning. In Cottrell,
G. W., editor, Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 475–480,
La Jolla. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Noelle, D. C., Cottrell, G. W., and McKenzie, C. R. M.
(2000). Modeling individual differences in the specialization of an explicit rule. (in preparation).
Nosofsky, R. M., Clark, S. E., and Shin, H. J. (1989).
Rules and exemplars in categorization, identification,
and recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15(2):282–304.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986).
Learning internal representations by error propagation.
In Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition, volume 1, chapter 8, pages
318–362. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

