UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning and Generalizing New Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rw8861b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning and Generalizing New Concepts
Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jpthibaut@ulg.ac.be )
Department of Psychology
Université de Liège
Boulevard du Rectorat, 5
4000 Liège BELGIUM
Abstract
When subjects learn to categorize new stimuli adequately,
they have to segment these stimuli into relevant features
for categorization. In the experiments reported here,
children had to discover a rule for categorization.
Preliminary experiments have shown that depending on the
nature of the irrelevant features, children could find the
relevant features from age four or could not find them before
the age of eleven or twelve. A central question is whether
children aged four or six who have discovered the rule in a
simplified version of the relevant features would generalize
to a "complex" version (i.e., in which there is more
background noise) of the relevant features, i.e., a version
that they would be unable to learn before twelve without
pre-training. Conditions promoting the generalization
from the simple version to the complex version were also
investigated. Two conditions were compared: relearning
with or without feedback. Results showed that children aged
4 and 6 could generalize the "simple" version of the target
concept to a more complex version of the same concept,
either with and without feedback in the generalization
phase.

Introduction
Children have to learn to categorize stimuli according to
adults' standards. In order to achieve this correctly, they have
to find the relevant features for categorization. If the
particular task is to learn to categorize a set of new stimuli
into two new categories, they will have to find the features
that characterize stimuli of each category and that
distinguish them from stimuli of the other category.
Imagine a traditional concept learning experiment in which
participants have to discover one relevant feature that allows
for perfect categorization. Stimuli are constituted of a
number of dimensions, either relevant or irrelevant.
Subjects are presumed to formulate and test simple
hypotheses concerning the rule that define membership
(Nosofsky, Palmeri, & McKinley, 1994). This means that
participants will analyze stimuli into their dimensions and
test whether each dimension partitions the set of stimuli. A
number of characteristics of the stimuli contribute to the
task difficulty. The salience of dimensions: a non salient
relevant dimension among salient irrelevant dimensions
presumably requires more systematic analyses of the stimuli
than a salient relevant dimension among non salient
irrelevant dimensions.
Variability in the perceptual manifestation of a relevant
feature can hinder this relevant feature and impede its
discovery. For example, compare Figure 1A stimuli with

Figure 1C stimuli which define two experimental
conditions. In the two conditions, the stimuli come from
two categories defined by the same relevant features. Each
stimulus has four "legs", with one category being defined as
"1 isolated leg and 3 connected legs" (1+3), the other
category being defined as "two sets of two connected legs"
(2+2). In Figure 1C the length, shape, size of the legs were
made more variable than in Figure 1A. Preliminary results
obtained by Thibaut (1999) indicate that the rule (1+3 vs.
2+2) could be discovered from the age of four in the case of
Figure 1A stimuli whereas children under thirteen could not
find the equivalent rule for Figure 1C stimuli. Figure 1B
stimuli elicited intermediary results: most children aged ten
discovered the rule.
Thibaut (1999) suggested that young children had
problems either in screening the stimuli, or inhibiting
irrelevant features, or plan systematic comparisons between
stimuli. The purpose of the present contribution is to assess
to what extent young children (four- or six-year olds) who
discovered the relevant features for categorization 1+3 vs.
2+2 in the simplified version (Figure 1A) would be able to
generalize to more complex versions of the same features
(Figure 1B and 1C). In other words, once he/she has learned
to apply a classification rule in a low variability context
(such as Figure 1A stimuli), is a child able to apply it in a
high variability context ?
It has been emphasized in the developmental literature
that there are differences between adults' and children's in
processing abilities. According to Kemler (1989), children
are more holistic processors than adults. She suggested that
holistic processors would run into more difficulties when
only one of many attributes is relevant for categorization
than when categories are defined by overall similarity
relationships, i.e., when stimuli share many characteristic
features. Other authors consider that property-specific
information is accessible to young children, even those aged
4 or 5 years. This means that children can analyze stimuli
in terms of their constituent features, even if they do not
analyze the stimuli in the same way older children and
adults do. Ward (1989), Ward and Scott (1987) have argued
that the difference between young learners and older learners
is that younger learners may have rigid attribute preferences.
Following the holistic view, one can hypothesize that if
young children perceive stimuli holistically, they should be
unable to analyze the complex stimuli into their
constituents and, thus, should also be unable to isolate
specific aspects of the legs in order to generalize the simple
version of the rule to the complex version. In the same

way, if young children have rigid attribute preferences it
might be that, when confronted to the complex stimuli,
they will focus their attention on the salient irrelevant
properties and be unable to analyze the legs in terms of less
salient properties.
Studies on generalization generally take a different
perspective from the one followed here. Usually, children
first learn a given concept, then they are presented with a set
of new stimuli, the purpose being to analyze to which
among these new stimuli they generalize the concept. Here
the issue is to analyze to what extent children who
discovered a rule for categorization in a simplified context
will be able to generalize it to more complex objects for
which they would be unable to discover the rule if they had
to discover it without being first presented with the simple
version. This is important because a positive answer would
mean that an appropriate learning sequence can lead to an
understanding of concepts which, otherwise, would remain
out of the conceptual world of the child. Two generalization
conditions will be compared. In the first one, children will
be given feedback when they will learn to apply the simple
rule to the complex stimuli. In the second condition, there
will be no such feedback. It is believed that feedback will
promote the understanding of the equivalence between the
known simple version of the rule and its complex version.
This is because, if young children do not perceive this
equivalence at first glance, they can test different
translations of the simple rule in terms of the complex rule
and get feedback at each trial. In the no feedback condition,
successive trials do not bring any information about
children's successive hypotheses. If a child does not find the
correct way to generalize the simple version of the rule after
a limited number of trials, the absence of feedback increases
the probability that his/her attention will be caught by
salient irrelevant features.

6.11-year-olds participated in the complex transfer items
with NO-feedback condition, fourteen 6-6.11-year-olds
participated in the semi-complex transfer items with
feedback condition, fifteen 6-6.11-year-olds participated in
the semi-complex transfer items with NO feedback
condition, eleven 4-4.11-year-olds participated in the
complex transfer items with feedback condition, twelve 44.11-year-olds participated in the semi-complex transfer
items with feedback condition and nine 4-4.1- year-olds
participated in the complex transfer items with NO feedback
condition. All children were tested individually.
Table 1 : design of the experiment.

Age

Aged 4

Aged 6

Conditions

Training condition and transfer with
complex stimuli, NO feedback

x

Training condition and transfer with
complex stimuli, with feedback

Training condition and transfer with
semi-complex stimuli, with feedback

Training condition and transfer with
semi-complex stimuli, NO feedback

Experimental Design
Preliminary results (Thibaut, 1997) have shown that
children under thirteen could not parse Figure 1C stimuli
adequately. In the same way, most of children under eight
could not find the relevant feature for categorization in the
stimuli displayed on Figure 1B. On the other hand, the
majority of children aged four could find the relevant
features 1+3 and 2+2 in stimuli such as the ones displayed
in Figure 1A. The purpose of the experiment was to assess
whether children aged four and six who are able to find the
relevant features for categorization for the simple stimuli
(Figure 1A) would be able to generalize them to the stimuli
displayed in Figures 1B or 1C.
The design of the experiment is summarized in Table 1.

Methods
Participants. Fourteen 6-6.11-year-olds participated in the
complex transfer items with feedback condition, eleven 6-

Note. Cell marked "x" was not run.
Materials. The two categories (1+3 and 2+2) of eight
stimuli were the ones used by Thibaut (1997). The learning
stimuli (simple version) are presented on Figure 1A. The 16
stimuli were composed of four legs which were thin and
vertical. There were eight 1-3 stimuli and eight 2-2. In this
condition, the purpose was to remove salient irrelevant
features for categorization. There were two sets of transfer
stimuli, complex and semi-complex. The complex transfer
stimuli were outlines of unknown shapes composed of two
parts, the upper part (the body) and the lower part (four
legs). The two categories had the same structure. In five
out of the eight stimuli, the body had a mushroom-like
shape that was slightly distorted over the stimuli in the case

Figure 1A: two "simple" stimuli used in the training phase.

Figure 1B. Four semi-complex stimuli. Both categories (2+2 and 1+3) contain an equivalent proportion of thin and large
stimuli.

Figure 1C. Four complex stimuli from categories 1+3 and 2+2. The first stimulus has the body (upper part) characteristic of
category 1+3 and the third stimulus has the body characteristic of category 2+2. The UP1 stimuli are neutral stimuli.
of category 1+3, and an angular shape in the case of
category 2+2 stimuli. These two shapes were selected for
their distinctiveness and perceptual saliency. The three
remaining stimuli from each of the two categories were
constructed with three different bodies (UP1, UP2, UP3).
Since UP1, UP2, and UP3 were present in both categories

they could not be considered as cues for categorization (see
Figure 1C). For each stimulus, the lower part consisted of
four legs which were spatially grouped either as one leg on
the left and three legs on the right in category 1+3, or two
pairs of legs in category 2+2 (see Figure 1C). These

distinctive features (1-3 vs. 2-2) were the only ones
available in order to categorize all the stimuli correctly.
For the semi-complex transfer stimuli, a set of 16 stimuli
was constructed. The irrelevant cues "thin" "vertical", "the
rightmost leg pointing to the right", and "large" were
crossed with the cues "one leg plus three legs" (1+3) and
"two pairs of legs" (2+2) according to four types of stimuli.
There were four 1-3 stimuli and four 2-2 stimuli with "thin"
legs and "the rightmost leg pointing to the right", and four
1-3 stimuli and four 2-2 stimuli composed of "broad and
vertical legs" (see Figure 1B for examples of the 4 types of
stimuli).

and the subject had to guess its name. The experimenter
gave the appropriate feedback and presented the second
stimulus in the same way, followed by the other stimuli.
Feedback was provided after each answer. The order of
presentation of the stimuli was random. Once the entire set
of stimuli had been presented to the subject, it was
presented a second time. The learning phase was stopped
when children made no mistake during two successive
presentations of the set of stimuli or if they were still
making errors after the ninth presentation of the set.
Subjects were tested individually. A session lasted for 10 to
25 minutes, depending on the number of trials necessary to
complete the task.

Procedure
Familiarization phase. The entire set of training
stimuli (Figure 1A) was presented once to the subject. Each
stimulus was shown for five seconds. Then, it was
removed and followed by a new stimulus. There was no
feedback during this phase, and when it was over,
participants were then told that they would have to learn to
sort the stimuli into two categories, the name of which was
provided, “bollo” for the 1-3 category, “tipi” for the 2-2
stimuli.

Transfer phase. Children who had learned the rule for
categorization had to categorize the transfer stimuli.
Children were told that they would have to classify new
"tipi" and "bollos" different from the ones they had seen
before. In the complex stimuli with feedback condition,
children were presented with the complex stimuli (Figure
1C) in the same way as in the learning phase. They received
a feedback after each trial. In the semi-complex with
feedback condition, children were presented with the semicomplex stimuli and received a feedback after each trial. In

Learning phase. A first stimulus (simple version,
Figure 1A) was presented for approximately five seconds
Table 2. Number of subjects who reached the criterion in the two age groups and the various experimental conditions: with
or without training with simple stimuli and with or without feedback in the transfer phase

Condition
Complex stimuli
(no training with simple stimuli)
Semi complex stimuli (no training
with simple stimuli)
Training condition and transfer
with complex stimuli and no feedback
Training condition and transfer
with complex stimuli and feedback
Training condition and transfer with
semi-complex stimuli and with feedback
Training condition and transfer with
semi-complex stimuli and NO feedback
Note. Cells marked "x" were not run.

Four-year-olds
Correct
Failure
0
10

Six-year-olds
Correct
Failure
0
10

0

10

6

8

x

x

6

5

4

7

9

5

9

3

12

2

8

6

11

4

the complex with NO feedback condition, complex stimuli
were presented, and children never received a feedback after
their classification. In the semi-complex with NO feedback
condition, semi-complex stimuli were presented, and
children never received a feedback after their classification.
In all these experiments, the learning criterion was the same
as in the learning phase.

Results and discussion
The purpose of the experiment was to assess whether
children who had first learn the rule for categorization with
simple stimuli would be able to generalize it to semi
complex or complex stimuli when a feedback was provided
or not. Results are summarized in Table 1. Khi square
comparing data obtained in the control condition (no
training with simple stimuli, Thibaut, 1997) with the new
data (training with simple stimuli) revealed a significant
difference in the majority of cases (p < .05). The only
exception was the case of the "generalization to complex
stimuli with feedback" condition with children aged four. In
this condition, a majority of children failed to generalize
correctly. In sum, in a majority of conditions, training with
simple stimuli influenced generalization positively. This is
important because it suggests that people can generalize
what they have learned to new situations that would have
been beyond their understanding without this pre-training.
The results obtained in conditions with feedback were
compared with the equivalent results in conditions with no
feedback. Comparisons revealed no significant difference
(Khi square, p > .05).
A number of authors have described children's concept
learning in terms of attentional capacities (capacity to focus
on specific dimensions) or of sensitivity towards
dimensions (see introduction). The present results indicate
that one has to include other dimensions in any model of
concept learning. First, provided that exemplars of a given
dimension can be highly variable (compare the simple and
the complex versions of the rule), the notion of a
"sensitivity to a dimension" cannot be assessed
independently of the variability across instances of this
dimension. This means that the probability that a relevant
dimension will be discovered also depends on the presence
and the structure of the other dimensions (irrelevant) that
compose the stimuli. Second, in order to understand
whether or not a particular instance of a dimension will be
discovered by children, one has to include participants'
history of categorization. By history of categorization, I
mean the categorizations already performed by an individual
(see Schyns, Goldstone, & Thibaut, 1998; Thibaut &
Schyns, 1995). The present data suggest that the history of
categorization influenced positively the way children
generalized the rule. To summarize, a model of
categorization and generalization has to take selective
sensitivity to a particular dimension into account, provided
that this notion incorporates the notion of variability in the
instanciation of the dimension across stimuli. It must also

incorporates the history of categorization with a particular
category in order to understand whether or not children are
able to generalize a given dimension to new instances of
this dimension. The present data show that knowing the
history of categorization, one can predict whether a set of
new stimuli is learnable. Complementarily, one can predict
which history of categorization is necessary to promote
generalization to subsets of highly variable stimuli. This is
particularly important given that, in a majority of cases, we
do not encounter identical instances of the same category.
The results presented here are important because the
status of the transfer stimuli is controlled a priori more
systematically than in traditional category learning
experiments. In these latter studies, participants are
confronted with transfer items of which the "intrinsic
complexity" is not known. Here, the stimuli complexity in
terms of learnability was independently assessed before the
experiment. This is important for the control of the "paths
of generalization". Following the learning strategy used
here, one can bypass the role of the salient irrelevant
features that would mask the relevant features for
categorization whereas starting with the complex stimuli
would lead to the incorrect conclusion that young children
are unable to abstract the rule for categorization.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Evelyne Artus, Sophie
Bylyna, Nathalie Stoffe, Marie Wiart and Julia Wronowski
for their help in running the experiments.

References
Nosofsky, R.M., Palmeri, T.J., & McKinley, S.C. (1994).
Rule-Plus-Exception Model of Classiication Learning,
Psychological Review, 101, 53-79.
Schyns, P.G., Goldstone, R. & Thibaut, J.-P. (1998). The
development of object features. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21, 1-53.
Smith, L. B. (1989). A model of perceptual classification
in children and adults. Psychological Review, 96, 125144.
Thibaut, J.P. (1999) The abstraction of relevant features by
children and adults in the case of visual stimuli.
Manuscript in preparation.
Thibaut, J.P., & Schyns, P.G. (1995). The development of
feature spaces for similarity and categorization.
Psychologica Belgica, 35, 167-185.
Ward, T.B. (1989). Analytic and holistic modes of
processing in category learning. In B.E. Shepp S.
Ballesteros (Eds.) Object perception: structure and process
(pp. 387-419). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ward, T.B. & Scott, J.G. (1987). Analytic and holistic
modes of learning family-resemblance concepts. Memory
& Cognition, 15, 42-54.

