UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lexical Contact During Speech Perception: A Connectionist Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6tx4g6w6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Forbell, Eric
Chown, Eric

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lexical contact during speech perception: A connectionist model
Eric Forbell (eforbell@bowdoin.edu)
Department of Computer Science; 8650 College Station
Brunswick, ME 04011
Eric Chown (echown@bowdoin.edu)
Department of Computer Science; 8650 College Station
Brunswick, ME 04011
Abstract
A connectionist architecture comprised of cell assemblies was
developed and applied to the problem of speech perception at
the phonemic and lexical levels. The problem addressed involved a disagreement amongst theorists over the possible
sources of lexical priming effects. Speech was encoded in
the model as the temporal activity of phoneme units that are
connected to higher-level word assemblies. The lexical layer
was topographically organized based upon similarity of phonemic structure. Lateral inhibition at the lexical level was
shown to be both necessary and sufficient to support results
from phonological priming experiments involving human
participants.

Introduction
Speech processing represents a rich source of constraints
for the development of neural models of cognition. These
constraints are particularly challenging since they often
arise out of the temporal nature of the task, a weakness of
most connectionist models. This paper presents a connectionist model that addresses a long-standing matter of controversy in the psycholinguist literature involving a task that
is highly temporal in nature.
The model task involves lexical contact, which is defined
as the phase of speech processing whereby the representations activated by the speech input make initial contact with
the lexicon. The data comes from a series of studies to test
a variety of priming conditions (Hamburger & Slowiaczek,
1996; Slowiaczek & Hamburger, 1992). The basic design
of these studies involved prime words that are related to
target words by sharing initial phonemes (i.e. “black” and
“bleed” share two initial phonemes). Primes are presented
500 ms. before the targets and the subject’s only task, called
shadowing, is to repeat the target word aloud as quickly and
accurately as possible. The major result is that when three
initial phonemes are shared, response time actually slows by
about 40 ms. whereas there is very little effect when one or
two phonemes are shared (Hamburger & Slowiaczek,
1996).
The model for these data is based upon a variant of
Hebb’s cell assembly called TRACE (Kaplan, Sonntag, &
Chown, 1991). The cell assembly is particularly suited for
this type of modeling since it is well grounded biologically
and was originally proposed to address issues of temporal
processing in a neural framework. TRACE modeled a single cell assembly and has since been extended to model

multiple cell assemblies in a more general system called
multiTRACE (Chown, 1994; Sonntag, 1991).

Lexical and phonological priming
The data from Slowiaczek and Hamburger suggest that
phonologically similar words compete at the lexical level of
speech recognition (1996). Specifically, this competition
was observed in a priming paradigm whereby the primes
were phonologically related to target words by the number
of initial phonemes. The critical number of overlapping
initial phonemes was three, for primes that were presented
500 ms before the targets. Additionally, this data also elucidated the cause of a facilitatory effect (a decrease in RT)
in the low-similarity case (1- to 2- phoneme overlap) that
was presenting some difficulty in interpretation.
It was suggested from other studies that low-similarity facilitation only occurs if the phonological relatedness proportion (PRP) is high (50 %) (Goldinger, Luce, Pisoni, & Marcario, 1992). That is, the number of trials containing phonological overlap was manipulated across subject groups, and
it was only in groups containing a majority of trials with
phonological overlapping (high PRP) that displayed facilitation effects (Hamburger & Slowiaczek, 1996). Goldinger et
al. explained this prelexical facilitation effect by suggesting
that subjects were strategically assuming that the initial phoneme of the target would be the same as that of the prime,
because the majority of previous trials had been this way
(1992). When the experiment was controlled for subject
expectancy, however, this facilitatory effect was virtually
eliminated and only the 3-phoneme overlap interference
was observed (Hamburger & Slowiaczek, 1996). Nevertheless, there remains a debate in the literature over whether
either effect truly comes from competition among lexical
candidates or whether it is simply an artifact of the experimental design.
A different kind of priming has been studied with a
smaller interstimulus interval (the time between the end of
the prime word and the beginning of the target) of 50 ms.
Goldinger et al. found that for uncommon targets (lowfrequency words) preceded by phonologically related
primes, response time was increased (1992). This phonological inhibition result is included to provide a bigger picture of the priming literature, but was not a focus of this
work.

The multiTRACE model
Hebb developed the cell assembly construct to address
questions concerning the temporal nature of neural processing. Essentially a cell assembly is a large collection of neurons which act in concert and which have temporal extent
due to their recurrent connections and their corresponding
ability to “reverberate.” Hebb’s theory lost favor initially in
part because he omitted inhibition, a construct for which
there was no evidence at the time. More recently, however,
cell assemblies have undergone something of a revival as
advances in neuroscience have been incorporated in the
theory (Kaplan, et al., 1991) and experimental evidence for
their existence has been found (Amit, 1995).
In the Kaplan model of cell assemblies, called TRACE
(Tracing Recurrent Activity in Cognitive Elements), the
emphasis was on simulating the internal dynamics of a
population of neurons that would comprise a cell assembly.
In the TRACE model various neural control mechanisms
were postulated to play different functional roles in the cognitive system. For example, inhibition is useful as a selection mechanism when multiple cell assemblies are competing to become active. A major addition to cell assembly
theory by the Kaplan group was to add fatigue to counterbalance the reverberation inherent in a highly recurrent system.
TRACE, which serves as the basis for multiTRACE, uses
a set of difference equations that are updated at each time
step to model the collective behavior of a large group of
neurons. The equations model various biological functions
such as activity, neural fatigue, short-term connection
strength, long-term connection strength, sensitivity to firing,
and network or external input (Table 1).
Kaplan et al. argued that units built with these basic properties have a number of advantages over the simple units
used in many traditional connectionist models (1991). Different levels of activity in a cell assembly, for example, can
serve different cognitive purposes, such as coding for conscious versus unconscious processing. The major questions
left open by the original work on TRACE was how the notion of a single cell assembly could be extended to the cognitive system as a whole.
Table 1: The basic multiTRACE equations
Update Equations

Delta Equations

A(t + 1) = A(t ) + ∆A

∆A = ( A + A I ) A V − Aθ L + AA θ C )V

F (t + 1) = F (t ) + ∆F

∆F = φ g AF − φ d F

S (t + 1) = S (t ) + ∆S
L(t + 1) =: L(t ) + ∆L

∆S = σ g AS − σ d S
∆L = 0.0
V=

v (S
exc

1

I=I

+ L) F

− I inh (expanded in text)

θl : unit loss
θc : inh. competition
v : normal factor
φg : fatigue growth
φd : fatigue decline
σg : STCS growth
σd : STCS decline

A: activity
F: neural fatigue
S: short-term connection
strength
L: long-term connection
strength
I: network input
* X denotes quantity (1 – X)

The multiTRACE model extends the cell assembly idea
by building models with collections of cell assemblies.
Sonntag originally created multiTRACE to study sequence
learning in the context of cell assemblies (1992). Chown
later extended the model to deal with other forms of learning, for example modeling the effects of the arousal system
on learning (1994). The development of multiTRACE has
been increasingly less abstract, starting from the very general problem of modeling sequences, to the current work
which addresses a very specific body of data.

Applicability to lexical priming
The multiTRACE framework provides a natural way to
model the lexical priming data presented in the previous
section. Each phoneme and lexical unit is represented by a
cell assembly as part of a hierarchical structure (Fig. 1).
Phonemes which are part of a word are strongly linked to
the lexical units at the higher level (e.g. the phoneme “b”
will be strongly linked to the cell assembly representing
“black” but not the one representing “flack”). The activation of the lexical units at the higher level corresponds to
perception and therefore the ability of the subject to repeat
the word. The theory is that competition between these
units accounts for the differences in timing.
This sort of perceptual competition forms the basis of a
number of connectionist models and stems from evidence
that similar concepts tend to interfere with each other more
than dissimilar ones as part of what Kinsbourne called “the
functional cerebral distance principle” (Kinsbourne, 1982).
This interference comes in the form of lateral inhibition
between cells near each other in the cortex. The idea is simple; words that are similar (e.g. “black” and “blast”) will be
stored in nearby locations in cortex, meaning that they will
greatly inhibit each other. As one becomes highly active
during perception it will naturally inhibit the other, making
perception a kind of winner-take-all proposition. In terms
of the brain, the cell assemblies underlying these representations will be close to each other. A given cell assembly will have a kind of inhibitory surround which will
typically prevent its close neighbors from being simultaneously active (Fig. 1).
In the context of a cell assembly model the interference
seen when the target word shares three phonemes with the
prime must come from competition, and the competition
must come from the prime word itself. Since the prime
word and the target word share three initial phonemes in
common they will be represented very near each other in the
brain, and therefore they will have a great deal of lateral

Figure 1: The two-tiered connectionist architecture. (Inhibitory output shown only for BLAST unit)
inhibitory connections. These data are very useful for extending cell assembly theory because they provide a number
of useful constraints on the temporal dynamics of cell assembly activation, as well as information on the general
layout of cell assemblies in the cortex.

The implementation
In the original implementations of multiTRACE it was
not necessary to explicitly model lateral inhibition as the
model was not applied to highly similar concepts as is the
case here. In updating the model we devised a scheme,
based upon Kinsbourne’s functional distance principle,
whereby the lateral inhibitory connections between cell assemblies was determined by the shared number of phonemes. This rule also reflects the spatial layout of inhibitory
processes in association cortex, as well as areas like the
early visual system, where lateral inhibition is widely
known to exist and has important functional implications,
such as enhancing contrast sensitivity.
The competition generated by lateral inhibition results
from an active cell assembly. Since the priming effects vary
according to the test conditions it is important to understand
the factors that affect the time course of activity in a cell
assembly. In Hebb’s original formulation the only was a
cell assembly’s capacity for reverberation (in the multiTRACE model this comes in the form of internal long term
connection strength or LTCS). Later through simulation it
was determined that inhibition was necessary as a control
mechanism (Rochester, et al., 1956). More recently, Kaplan
et al. (1991) did a series of simulations showing that with
the addition of two more biologically and theoretically motivated mechanisms – fatigue and short term connection
strength (STCS) – that it was possible to model different
time courses of activity corresponding to different parts of
the cognitive hierarchy. For example, cell assemblies near

the perceptual interface would be expected to have a high
refresh rate in order to be ready for the next input. On the
other hand cell assemblies that participate in long term planning would be expected to stay active for longer periods of
time. In our model we conceptually represent these differences as different hierarchical layers.
Although it is possible that hierarchy can emerge naturally in a flat network structure, we felt that such a network
design would quickly become confusing and therefore limiting. Additionally, our network structure reflects the layered
organization of human cerebral cortex. Groups of multiTRACE units were combined into layers in the current system, and static properties of individual units were inherited
from their “parent” layers. It is our conjecture that nearby
layers will have similar parametric properties (e.g. in the
perceptual layer cell assemblies will all tend to have high
refresh rates). The lexical priming data provides an excellent test of such conditions and the potential usefulness of
the cell assembly construct, since it can be applied to model
widely different types of cognitive functioning.
The basic structure of the simulation was based upon a
two-tiered network with each tier representing a different
level of the cognitive hierarchy. In this case, because each
layer is part of the perceptual interface, they have virtually
identical parameter settings (Table 2). The primary layer
contained units responsive to phonological stimuli theoretically produced by the primary and secondary auditory cortices. The secondary layer comprised of lexical units that
respond to the phonological structure of a spoken word, not
its meaning. For example, a lexical unit for “blast” received
equal vertical connections from the phonemic /b/, /l/, /a/, /s/,
and /t/ units. Because the data from Hamburger and
Slowiaczek was not concerned with the typicality effect, we
built in the assumption that all of the cell assemblies had the
same internal connection strength (1996). Differences in
typicality could easily be modeled by introducing variability
in connection strength within cell assembly units.
Table 2: Layer parameters and timings
Parameter
Fatigue growth
Fatigue decline
STCS growth
STCS decline
Activity duration
Fatigue recovery

Phonemic layer
0.15
0.04
1.0
0.2
300 ms
500 ms

Lexical layer
0.15
0.04
1.0
0.2
700 ms
950 ms

* STCS: Short-term connection strength

Despite both layers of units being similar in their static
properties, their differentiation in cognitive speed emerged
as a function of the hierarchical structure. The units in the
word layer received input from several phonemic units over
the course of time, depending on the length of the spoken
word. Since the mapping between layers was not one-toone, average unit durations were 300 ms and 700 ms for the
phonological and lexical layers, respectively (Table 2).
Fatigue recovery times, being dependent on activity, were
similarly proportioned.

The topological organization of the lexical layer was also
an important component of the current model. Interference,
as suggested by the Hamburger and Slowiaczek data (1996),
results from competition at the lexical level and is a function of word-form similarity. Therefore, the lexical map was
built using the amount of initial phoneme overlap between
lexical units as a distance approximation in cognitive space.
The amount of inhibition imposed on some target unit k is a
function of the distance to a neighboring unit j, as well as
this neighbor’s activity and fatigue level:

j: source unit
k: target unit
D: distance
t: Time
The net inhibitory input for a lexical unit then becomes
the combination of local inhibition and regional inhibition
imposed on the layer. This regional inhibition is a positive
feedback mechanism that controls the spread of activity in a
given region, in this case a layer, and is based upon the total
activity in that layer:

Table 3: Simulated experiment design
Condition
No relation
1-phoneme overlap
2-phoneme overlap
3-phoneme overlap

Prime
“dream”
“bind”
“blues”
“blast”

Target
“black”
“black”
“black”
“black”

In order to simulate an incoming stream of speech, the
phoneme units comprising the prime and target words were
activated in a serial manner, separated by an interval ranging from 20-40 ms, with a greater spacing reserved for
vowel sounds. Using this approximation method, the experiment was easy to simulate. The set of phonemes corresponding to the prime word were activated first, followed
by a the target phoneme string 500 ms after the prime sequence had concluded.
The simulations were expected to show that there is a
fundamental difference in processing between the high
similarity (3-phoneme overlap) and low similarity conditions (no relation and 1-phoneme overlap). That is, the response time of the target word unit represented at the lexical
level should be increased due to the earlier presentation of
the prime word stimulus.

Results
n: number of units in a layer
G: global inhibition factor (0.5)
L: lateral inhibition factor (2.0)
The excitatory input to a cell assembly in multiTRACE is
computed in a conventional connectionist manner. However, the sum of a unit’s long-term connection strength and
short-term connection strength to another unit serves as the
weight value (wij) typically seen in most connectionist models:

Our initial experiments show the relevant trends in the
data (Table 4); interference resulting from lexical competition was observed in the high-similarity conditions (2- and
3-phoneme overlap) and not in the low-similarity conditions
(0- and 2-phoneme overlap). To date we have not replicated the exact time-course for this interference that was
found in the behavioral evidence, but we have found that
the general trends are simple to generate in the model.
Since the model presented here is considerably simpler than
that of its human counterpart, and does not take into account
the effects of semantic top-down influence, for example,
which may also affect timing, we do not wish to spend too
much of our effort trying for an exact match at this stage.
Table 4: RT differences (experimental – control) in simulated and actual experiment

j: source unit
k: target unit
n: number of incoming connections for unit k

Simulation design and procedure
As in the original experiment, four prime conditions were
created: no relation and three degrees of phoneme overlap
(1-3). The representative words for each condition are presented in Table 3; the actual words were chosen arbitrarily
for demonstrative purposes.

Condition
No relation
1-phoneme overlap
2-phoneme overlap
3-phoneme overlap

Simulation (ms)
0
40
190

Actual (ms)
-4
-8
36

In the 3-phoneme overlap condition, the competition between “black” and “blast” is striking (Fig. 2). The time
course of the prime word’s activity is sufficiently slowed in
this condition as well as in that of the target’s. That is, be

0.8
0.7

Activity

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Blast

0.1

Black

0.0
0

500

1000

1500

2000

Time (ms)

Figure 2: Competition between the “black” and “blast”
lexical units
cause “blast” and “black” share three initial phonemes, each
unit receives considerable input from the incoming speech
stream. However, when the fourth segment of the speech
stream (/s/) is presented to the phoneme layer, the net input
for the “blast” unit begins to dominate over that of the
“black” unit (Fig. 3). This initial competitive advantage is
then reinforced by the increasing lateral inhibition “blast” is
imposing on “black,” effectively increasing the competitive
gap. However, the presentation of the target word 500 ms
later in addition to the fatigue of the “blast” unit will allow
“black” to win the second competition, albeit more slowly
than in the control condition.
0.4
0.2
Input

0
-0.2

0

500

1000

1500

2000

-0.4
Blast

-0.6

Black

-0.8
Time (ms)

Figure 3: Net input for “blast” and “black” units

For better or worse the dominant connectionist modeling
paradigm has long been back-propagation. In recent years,
however, interest has grown in recurrent models such as the
one presented in this paper. The development of such models will be predicated upon their ability to account for psychological data with a temporal component. This work
represents an important step in that direction. The data being modeled required incremental changes in an existing
model. As the goal of our continuing research is not to
alter previous work in order to support future data, this current work was successful in that components were identifiedlateral inhibition and layeringthat when inserted
into the existing model were able to support the new data.
Also, while these additions extend the modeling capabilities
of current cell assembly implementations, they do not accomplish this at the cost of simplicity. That is, lateral inhibition and hierarchy fit very naturally into the multiTRACE
model and are well supported theoretically.
With regards to the specific modeling task discussed here,
future work will involve observing the competition dynamics as the scale of the system is increased. The highsimilarity interference phenomenon was observed in a system constructed from roughly ten words, but now that the
architecture is in place it will be possible to see how robust
the effect will be as the number of words is increased. Another goal of this continued effort will be to reduce the
amount of manual network design, because that has resulted
in a more discrete representation of the lexical space under
study than may be desired to obtain truly generalized conclusions. At the time of publication, however, a sampling of
systems of roughly 160 to 200 words generated from a
normal distribution have produced statistically significant
effects similar to those discussed here (including lowsimilarity facilitation), and it has been shown that the
amount of inhibition at the lexical level is crucial to mimicking the behavioral evidence.
In addition to the artificial nature of the network construction, this discreteness in representation is also a byproduct of the necessary simplicity of the current multiTRACE model, in that individual network units represent
populations of neurons, thereby limiting our knowledge of
how the simulated assemblies can relate to one another in a
neurobiological sense. For example, it is not clear to what
degree cortical representations for words are distinct or if
they overlap. However, this simplicity in the model does not
damage its biological credibility. That is, because the internal representations of these simulated cell assemblies remains unspecified, theoretically this allows neurons to be
redundantly represented across several units in the model.

Conclusion

Acknowledgments

This work serves two purposes. First, we have presented
a biologically grounded model that addresses a key controversy in the psycholinguistics literature. Our results support
Hamburger and Slowiaczek’s theory that the lexical priming
results can be explained in terms of competition between
phonologically similar words. Second, their data provides
crucial constraints in exploring the temporal dynamics of
neural processing in cognition.

The authors would like to thank Louisa Slowiaczek for her
invaluable assistance in this project. The first author was
partially funded by a Hughes grant during the summer.

References
Amit, D.J. (1995). The Hebbian paradigm reintegrated:
Local reverberations as internal representations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18(4): 617-657.
Chown, E. (1994). Consolidation and learning: A connectionist model of human credit assignment. Doctoral dissertation. The University of Michigan.
Hamburger, M. & Slowiaczek, L.M. (1996). Phonological
priming reflects lexical competition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3(4): 520-525.
Hebb, D.O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. John
Wiley.
Goldinger, S. D., Luce, P.A., Pisoni, D.B., & Marcario, J.K.
(1992). Form-based priming in spoken word recognition:
The roles of competition and bias. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 18,
1211-1238.
Kaplan, S., Sonntag, M. & Chown, E. (1991). Tracing recurrent activity in cognitive elements (TRACE): A model
of temporal dynamics in a cell assembly. Connection Science, 3, 179-206.
Kinsbourne, M. (1982). Hemispheric specialization and the
growth of human understanding. American Psychologist,
37(4), 411-420.
Rochester, N., Holland, J.H., Haibt, L.H., & Duda, W.L.
(1956). Tests on a cell assembly theory of the action of
the brain, using a large digital computer. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-2:80—93.
Slowiaczek, L.M. & Hamburger, M. (1992). Prelexical
facilitation and lexical interference in auditory word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 18(6): 1239-1350.
Sonntag, M.. (1991). Learning sequences in an associative
network: A step towards cognitive structure. Doctoral
Dissertation. The University of Michigan.

