UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivating Base-Rate Sensitivity (Sometimes): Testing Predictions of the RCCL Framework

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76p3494c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Schunn, Christian
Ngo, Thuy L.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivating Base-Rate Sensitivity (Sometimes):
Testing Predictions of the RCCL Framework
Christian Schunn (schunn@gmu.edu) & Thuy L. Ngo
Department of Psychology; George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030 USA
Abstract
In choice situations, people are usually (but not always)
sensitive to the base-rates of success of the options, and
this base-rate sensitivity usually (but not always) goes up
when motivation levels are increased. The RCCL framework, which emphasizes what information is represented
by the individual and what strategies are used, provides an
explanatory framework for these types of effects. In particular, RCCL predicts that manipulations of motivation
levels should produce changes in the strategies being
used, which will not produce a change in base-rate sensitivity for dimensions not represented in the strategies.
This paper reports an empirical test of these predictions;
changes in strategy use and a lack of change in base-rate
sensitivity are found, as predicted by RCCL.

Introduction
In making optimal choices in an uncertain world, a problem-solver must pay attention to the base-rates of success of
each of the possible choices: the past success rates are usually good indicators of future success rates. For example,
travel routes that were generally congested in the past are
likely to be congested in the future. While one often finds
base-rate insensitivity when base-rates are presented verbally
in textual problems (e.g., Ginossar & Trope, 1987; Tversky
& Kahneman, 1982), one usually finds extremely good
base-rate sensitivity in experiential paradigms (e.g., Estes,
Campbell, Hatsopoulos, & Hurwitz, 1989; Maddox, 1995).
That is, when problem-solvers experience many decisions
during problem solving, they are typically very sensitive to
the base-rates of success that they have experienced. However, there are a few well-documented exceptions to this
general trend of good base-rate sensitivity (Goodie & Fantino, 1995; Goodie & Fantino, 1996; Medin & Edelson,
1988).
A challenge for cognitive science is to come up with
models that explain why and to what degree one observes
base-rate sensitivity (or base-rate neglect). Recently Lovett
and Schunn (1999) proposed RCCL (pronounced "ReCyCLe") as a framework for providing such an explanation.
RCCL specifies how task representations can influence
choice in experiential base-rate situations. The four main
stages of processing in RCCL are: (i) Represent the task,
(ii) Construct a set of action strategies consistent with that
task representation, (iii) Choose among those strategies according to their success rates, and (iv) Learn new success
rates for the strategies based on experience. The primary
theme underlying RCCL is that a task representation constrains the set of strategies an individual will use for taking

actions in the task environment. Making choices according
to the learned success rates of a certain set of strategies enables RCCL to produce base-rate sensitivity or base-rate
neglect in direct-experience situations; sensitivity arises
only when the constructed strategies include stimulus features that are important to success in the task. The RCCL
framework also includes re-cycling through the above processes when the current representation and strategies lead to
low success rates. This implies that an individual’s task
representation and strategy set need not be static but rather
can develop with experience.
At this level of description, the components of RCCL
may seem intuitive to the point of being obvious: how else
could it be done? However, the central contribution of
RCCL may be to forefront processes that are highly likely
to be going on yet have been ignored in previous accounts
of human choice processes. Moreover, there are accounts of
choice processes that do not invoke (and perhaps even deny)
the role of mental representations (e.g., Goodie & Fantino,
1995; Goodie & Fantino, in press).
Lovett and Schunn (Lovett & Schunn, 1999) described
two experiments that provided empirical support for the
RCCL framework. In one experiment they showed that people prefer representations and strategies that make use of
information predictive of successful problem solutions. In
the second experiment, they demonstrated that one could
change the superficial characteristics of the task environment
such that participants would prefer one representation or
another, and that this manipulation determined what baserates participants would learn.
The current paper seeks to further test RCCL specifically,
and strategy-based accounts of choice processes more generally (e.g., ACT-R). The insight is to examine the effects of
performance motivation on base-rate sensitivity in a problem-solving context.
To tease apart strategy and non-strategy-based accounts of
choice processes, one needs to distinguish between simple
and complex choice situations. In a simple choice situation
there is a direct, one-to-one mapping between the person's
strategies and external alternatives. That is, one can adequately describe the person's strategies in terms of simple
external choices. For example, when presented with a left
and right button to press, the person represents the choice
strategies as Select-Right and Select-Left. By contrast, in a
complex choice situation, there is not a simple mapping
between strategies and external alternatives. That is, a given
strategy might map onto different external alternatives on
different trials; two different strategies may map onto the
same external alternative on the given trial.

In very simple choice situations, strategy-based and nonstrategy-based accounts make very similar predictions about
the effects of motivation on base-rate sensitivity. The greater
the value of a success, the more participants (human or otherwise) will prefer the more successful choice (see Anderson,
Lebiere, & Lovett, 1998). In other words, greater motivation levels should produce higher base-rate sensitivity.
In complex problem-solving situations, however, RCCL
makes two novel predictions regarding the effects of motivation. First, RCCL predicts shifts in strategy choice as a
function of motivation changes when the strategies vary in
terms of effort and success. That is, it is the selection
among strategies (rather than externally defined alternatives)
that is directly influenced by motivation. This prediction is
easily formalized using various forms of expected utility
theory (e.g., see Anderson et al., 1998). However, intuitively this prediction can be understood as people becoming
more willing to put out the extra effort associated with a
more effortful but more successful strategy when they are
more motivated to succeed.
RCCL's second prediction is that this change in strategies
may produce increases or decreases in base-rate sensitivity
depending on whether the new or old strategies represent the
external alternative feature whose base-rate is being manipulated. As an abstract example (the next section presents a
concrete example), suppose there is a strategy S1 that does
represent an external feature F1 (i.e., S1 makes direct use of
feature F1 to make a choice) and a strategy S2 that does not
represent external feature F1 (i.e., S2 makes choices without
making use of feature F1). Then, when people use strategy
S1, they will be sensitive to the base-rates with which F1
predicts success, whereas when they use strategy S2, they
will not be sensitive to the base-rates with which F1 predicts success. Thus, if increasing motivation leads people to
move from S1 to S2, then base-rate sensitivity to F1 will
go down. By contrast, if increasing motivation leads people
to move from S2 to S1, then base-rate sensitivity to F1 will
go up. In general, for situations in which increases in motivation level cause a person to shift to a strategy that does
not represent the relevant base-rate, then RCCL predicts
decreases in base-rate sensitivity with increases in motivation level.
By contrast, non-strategy-based accounts would always
predict an increase in base-rate sensitivity with increasing
performance motivation. As the value of currently picking
the best option increases, one should find better base-rate
sensitivity (or even over-matching). Intuitively, the more
incentive one has to do well, the more one pays attention to
cues (e.g., base-rates) that will predict accurate choices.
The role of performance motivation in base-rate sensitivity and strategy adaptivity is also an important question for
other reasons. Recent research (Schunn & Reder, 1998) has
shown that there are individual differences in the degree to
which people adapt their strategies to shifting base-rates of
success, and that these base-rate sensitivity individual differences are correlated with individual differences in inductive reasoning skill. A remaining question, however, is
whether these individual differences in base-rate sensitivity
can also be partially explained by motivational differences
(i.e., are the more base-rate sensitive participants simply the

more motivated ones). The current research will show the
degree to which base-rate sensitivity is influenced by motivation levels and thus whether there is a potential confound
in the individual differences research in this area.

Methods
Participants
Ninety-two George Mason University undergraduates participated for course credit and were randomly assigned to
one of two conditions. Nine participants encountered technical difficulties with the computer setup, and their data is not
included in the analyses.

Building Sticks Task
In the building sticks task, participants are presented with 3
different-sized building sticks which they must choose
among to create a given goal stick. To achieve the goal
stick, participants add or subtract any combination of the
buildings sticks provided.
For a given BST problem, using one of two approaches
will result in the goal stick (Note, here I use the term "approach" to refer to an externally-defined alternative in contrast to a true strategy). Using the undershoot approach,
participants start with a stick shorter than the goal stick and
add to it to achieve the desired stick length. In the overshoot approach, participants pick a stick longer than the
goal stick and subtract from it until the goal stick is created.
Each problem is designed to be solved using one of the
approaches, but not both.
For example, if the goal stick provided is 8 units in
length and the 3 sticks A, B, and C, are 15, 6, 7, respectively, using the overshoot approach will solve this problem. To achieve the goal stick, participants start with stick
A and subtract stick C (15 – 7 = 8) to reach the solution.
Using the undershoot approach in this case would never
result in the desired stick length because picking stick B
and adding to it will not equal 8 (B + C = 6 + 7 = 13).
Note that participants in the task are not given numerical
lengths of the sticks. Instead, participants must estimate
stick lengths and determine which sticks would lead to the
goal stick before taking the appropriate steps. As a result,
participants were forced to implicitly apply an approach
(overshoot/undershoot) to solve each problem without
knowing in advance whether it would work.
Participants were given 80 BST problems to solve. Participants worked through each problem until the goal stick
was achieved. If a solution was not reached within 5 moves
or less, participants were asked to reset the problem and
start over again until the goal stick was reached. Each problem was designed to be solved by only one of the two approaches.
For the first 40 problems, the overshoot approach was biased to be more successful in solving the problems than the
undershoot approach, with 70% and 30% success rates for
each approach, respectively. For the second 80 problems,
the success rates were reversed, with the undershoot approach biased to be more successful 70% of the time. This
sequence was held constant across conditions. The degree to
which participants adapted their approach choices to this

base-rate manipulation is one of two primary dependent
measures.

Undershoot
Closer

Overshoot
Closer

desired:
current:
building:
a
b

c

desired:
current:
building:
a
b

c

Figure 1. Examples of Undershoot looking (top) and Overshoot looking (bottom) BST problems.
In addition, each problem was designed with a feature
pattern, called a relative length cue, which was predictive of
the correct approach to use for a given goal stick. One of the
3 building sticks was designed to appear closer in length to
the goal stick, suggesting a bias towards use of one approach over another. As shown in the top of Figure 1, stick
C looks closest in length to the goal stick. Therefore, participants are more likely to start with stick C (initiating the
undershoot approach) and adding segments until the desired
stick length is reached. In contrast, stick B in the bottom of
Figure 1 looks closer in length to the goal stick than sticks
A and C. Thus, participants will pick stick B and subtract
segments until the goal stick is achieved.
Of the 80 BST problems, 40 problems appeared biased
towards overshoot and 40 problems were biased towards
undershoot. This cue was manipulated to be successful 70%
of the time—the predictiveness of the relative length cue
remained constant across both conditions. Table 1 summarizes how problem types were manipulated over time for all
participants (in both conditions)—overshoot success rate
being changed over time, while the predictiveness of the
length cue was held constant over time.
Table 1. Overshoot success rate and predictiveness of the
length cue over blocks of trials (in both conditions).
Predictive cue
Trials 1-40 Trials 41-80
Overshoot success rate
70%
30%
Predictiveness of length cue
70%
70%
Consistent with the RCCL account, participants in the
BST tend to report a variety of strategies (Lovett & Schunn,
1999). The two most salient strategies are the hill-climbing
and exclusive strategies. In the hill-climbing strategy, participants compare the goal stick to the building sticks and
select the stick that most closely matches the length of the
goal stick. In the exclusive strategy, participants simply
select one approach, overshoot or undershoot, without regard to which appears to be closest to the goal. As long as
hill-climbing distance is predictive of solution success (as it

was in the current experiment), the hill-climbing strategy is
more likely to be successful than the exclusive strategy.
However, the hill-climbing strategy also involves more effort because of the visual comparison component. Which
strategy participants adopt across conditions will be the
second primary dependent measure.
This task is a complex problem solving situation (according to the definition given in the introduction) because there
is not a simple mapping between strategies and external
alternatives. Table 2 presents the choices that participants
would tend to make in each of the blocks under the hillclimbing and exclusive strategies. The exclusive strategy
should tend to select the most successful approach regardless of what the problem looked like. By contrast, the hillclimbing strategy should tend to select approaches according
to problem appearance, independent of the base-rate of success of each approach.
Table 2. Expected modal approach (O=overshoot,
U=undershoot) under each strategy in each block for
undershoot and overshoot biased problems.
Trials 1-40
Trials 41-80
Strategy
O-biased U-biased O-biased U-biased
Hill-climbing
O
U
O
U
Exclusive
O
O
U
U

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions. In the Unpaid condition (the control group), participants received course credit only. However, in the Paid condition (the motivated group), participants received compensation in addition to course credit. Payment was based on a
$10 scale and calculated according to the percentage of problems solved correctly within 5 steps or less. That is, participants who solved 80% of the problems in so few steps
received $8.00 while participants who solved 60% of the
problems in this way received $6.00.
At the beginning of the experiment, a computer tutorial
provided participants with step-by-step instructions to the
task, along with an animated demonstration of the undershoot and overshoot approaches. For participants in the Paid
condition, the last page of the instructions informed the
participants that they were being compensated for their participation based on their performance on the task. The instructor reiterated this to ensure participant motivation.

Predictions
The hill-climbing strategy is a more successful but more
effortful strategy than the exclusive strategy. Therefore,
RCCL predicts that the motivation manipulation should
increase the participants' use of the hill-climbing strategy.
Let us define base rate sensitivity as the difference in frequency of overshoot approach use from the first to second
halves of the experiment. Then, because the exclusive strategy is more sensitive to the base-rates of overshoot and undershoot, RCCL predicts no effect of the motivation manipulation (or perhaps a decrease) on base-rate sensitivity, at
least as defined in terms of external choices. By contrast,
non-representational accounts (and perhaps even common

Strategy Coding
At the end of the Building Sticks Task, participants were
asked about what strategies they used. Responses were classified into one of 5 categories: using whatever the problem
looked like (hill-climbing), always using one stick size first
(exclusive), using what worked previously (memory), randomly selecting sticks (trial and error), and other strategies
(miscellaneous). Based on a recoding of 20% of the data by
a second coder, the reliability for this coding scheme was
93%.

Results & Discussion
Verifying Differences in Strategy Features
The predictions of strategy shifts rest on assumptions about
the differential effort and success rates associated with the
various strategies. The assumptions were tested by examining the relationship between 1st mentioned strategy and participant mean success rates (across all blocks) and mean
time to make the first move on each trial (across all blocks).
Note that time to execute the strategy is used as an approximation of the effort required by a strategy. We expect
that the participants using the hill-climbing strategy should
be more successful and require less time to make choices.
However, given that participants in this task have been
found to typically each use several strategies during the
course of the session (Lovett & Schunn, 1999), one would
expect analyses averaging performance data across the whole
session to show diluted trends.

climbing strategies (n=46). This trend was consistent within
both conditions.
Overall, the timing data was more variable, with a nonsignificant overall effect of 1st strategy mentioned on the
mean times to make the first move F(2,54)=2.1,
MSE=1.31, p>.15 (see Figure 3). However, exclusive
strategies did show the expected lower mean times than did
hill-climbing strategies. This trend was consistent within
both conditions.
4

Time to make 1st move

sense) would suggest that the participants given the performance incentive should show greater base-rate sensitivity.

3

2

1

0
Hill-climbing

Exclusive

1st Mentioned Strategy
Figure 3. Mean time to make 1st move on each problem
(and SE bars) as a function of the 1 st mentioned strategy.
In sum, the assumptions about the differential effort and
success rates between the hill-climbing and exclusive strategies were at least qualitatively supported.

0.7

Mean success rate

Strategy Changes

0.6

0.5
Chance

0.4
Hill-climbing

Exclusive

1st Mentioned Strategy
Figure 2. Mean success rate (and SE bars) for the hillclimbing and exclusive strategies.
Overall, there was a significant effect of 1st strategy mentioned on the mean success rates, F(2,54)=8.8,
MSE=0.004, p<.005 (see Figure 2). Specifically, exclusive
strategies (n=10) showed lower success rates than hill-

Table 3 presents the frequency of mention of each strategy
type based on the first strategy mention. We see the predicted increase in the use of hill-climbing strategy and the
predicted decrease in the use of the exclusive strategy.
Note also that the Memory strategy, a relatively effort intensive strategy, showed an increase in the Paid condition,
and that the Trial & Error strategy, a relatively effort free
strategy showed a decrease in the Paid condition. The predicted increase in reliance on effortful strategies was statistically significant, t(81)=1.6, p<.05 (one-tailed).
While these effects were not large, it is important to note
that these analyses are likely to be an underestimate of the
effectsparticipants did not indicate how often they used
the mentioned strategies, and they do try multiple strategies.
Table 3. Proportion of participants mentioning
each strategy within each condition.
Strategy
Unpaid (N=42)
Paid (N=41)
Hill climbing
0.50
0.61
Exclusive
0.17
0.07
Memory
0.10
0.15
Trial & Error
0.17
0.15
Misc.
0.07
0.02

0.9

Overall Base-Rate Changes Over Time

Proportion Overshoot

Both groups showed a rise in the amount of Overshoot use
in the first half followed by a drop in the second half
F(3,243)=16.6, MSE=0.015, p<.0001 (see Figure 4). There
was no main effect of condition, F(1,81)<1, nor was there a
significant interaction, F(3,243)=1.0, MSE=0.015, p>.3.
To directly quantify the influence of condition on base-rate
adaptivity, one can define base-rate adaptivity as the amount
of drop in Overshoot use from the first half to the second
half (difference of half means). On that measure, both Paid
and Unpaid participants shifted exactly 7% in their use of
Overshoot over time. As Figure 4 reveals, if anything, Paid
participants were less sensitive to the base-rates. Thus, as
predicted by RCCL, motivation manipulations produced
changes in strategy use, not changes in base-rate sensitivity.
0.7
Paid
P

U
P

0.6

U

P
U

Unpaid

U
P

0.4

0.3
1-20

21-40

41-60

1
2

1
2
Overshoot biased

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Undershoot biased
1
2

1
2

0.1
0
Paid

Unpaid

Condition
Figure 5. Proportion of overshoot choices as a function of
problem appearance (Overshoot biased /Undershoot biased)
and condition (Paid/Unpaid), for the first (1) and second (2)
halves of the experiment.
This effect establishes that the payment manipulation did
have some influence on participants, and thus clarifies the
interpretation of the null effects on base-rate sensitivity.
This effect is also consistent with increases in hill-climbing
strategy use as a result of the manipulation.

General Discussion

U
P

0.5

0.8

Proportion Overshoot

Another important issue raised by RCCL is whether motivation has an impact on the degree of search for an optimal
strategy. Towards this end, we examined the effect of condition on number of different strategies mentioned. There was
no significant effect of condition on the number of strategies
mentioned, F(1,81)<1. Both the Paid and Unpaid participants mentioned a mean of 1.4 strategies per participant.

61-80

Trials
Figure 4. Proportion of overshoot choices within each set of
twenty trials within each condition.

Hill-climbing sensitivity
One can also analyze the effects of problem appearance
(whether the problem appearance was biased towards overshoot or biased towards undershoot) on solution method
and its interaction with condition and blocks. As one always finds in this task, there are large effect of problem
appearance on the proportion of overshoot selections,
F(1,81)=657.0, MSE=0.038, p<.0001. More interestingly,
there was also a significant interaction of appearance with
condition, F(1,81)=6.5, MSE=0.038, p<.02. In particular,
Unpaid participants showed a significantly lower sensitivity
to problem appearance than did the Paid participants (49%
versus 60% differences between overshoot-biased and undershoot-biased problem types).

This experiment found that increasing motivation levels can
produce strategy changes (as measured by self-report and
patterns in choice) without producing changes in base-rate
sensitivity. The changes in strategy choice were consistent
with a shift in motivation levels—a shift from lowersuccess/lower-effort strategies to higher-success/higher-effort
strategies. Thus, the key predictions of the RCCL framework with respect to the effects of motivation levels on
choice patterns were met. These findings are not consistent,
by contrast, with non-strategy-based theories of choice that
focus entirely on external alternatives rather than internal
representations and strategies.
It should be noted that RCCL is a general framework, not
a detailed model. With respect to the predictions regarding
the effects of motivation, there are several particular utilitybased strategy models of choice processes that could be used
to account for the obtained results, including ACT-R
(Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), SAC (Schunn, Reder, Nhouyvanisvong, Richards, & Stroffolino, 1997), and ASCM
(Siegler & Shipley, 1995).
Some of the results of the current experiment are potentially difficult to interpret because they involve null effects
of a manipulation. However, the manipulation did produce
some effects demonstrating that it was strong enough to
influence behavior. Moreover, it is somewhat rare to find a
case in which performance in a problem-solving task does
not improve when undergraduates normally taking part only
for course credit are suddenly paid for higher performance
levels.

Our experiment is also not the first to find no effect of
motivation manipulations on base-rate sensitivity. For example, Goodie and Fantino (1995) found no effect of a motivation manipulation on base-rate sensitivity. They also
used conditions of course credit and pay versus course credit
alone, although they paid their participants as much as $40.
While Goodie and Fantino did not explain their null result
(it was also not the focus of their experiment), RCCL provides a potential explanation. The key is to examine
whether the motivation manipulation produced changes in
strategy use rather than changes in choices at the level of
simple external alternatives. While the task used by Goodie
and Fantino was not a complex problem-solving task,
Lovett and Schunn (1999) established that participants do
use a wide variety of strategies during that choice task as
well.
Another consequence of the current experimental findings
is that they resolve a question about individual differences.
In particular, previous research on individual differences in
sensitivity to base rates (Schunn & Reder, 1998; Stanovich
& West, 1998) left open the possibility that the differences
were due to motivational differences. The current research
suggests that the observed individual differences in base-rate
sensitivity are not so easily attributed to motivational differences.
The current experimental findings also permit some refining of the RCCL framework. RCCL posits that people will
search for new representations and strategies when the success rates of the current alternatives are too low. An open
question was whether motivational levels entered into determining when a search for new representations and strategies was begun. The current findings suggest that motivation levels do not have a large role of in the amount of
search for alternative representations and strategies. Or, at
least, all of the participants were sufficiently motivated to
conduct such searches.
As a final note, the current experiment only manipulated
one kind of motivation: extrinsic motivation. There are
other types of motivation. For example, research (e.g., Button, Mathieu, & Zajac, 1996) has shown that people also
differ in terms of their performance motivation (the degree
to which they need to succeed) and learning motivation (the
degree to which people prefer to learn new things). It is an
open question whether those dimensions of motivation will
have similar influences on choices processes generally, and
base-rate sensitivity in particular.

Acknowledgments
Work on this project was supported by funds to the first
author from the Department of Psychology and the College
of Arts and Sciences at George Mason University. We
would like to thank Erik Altmann, Melanie Diez, Wai-Tat
Fu, Eliza Littleton, Lelyn Saner, and Susan Trickett for
comments made on an earlier draft.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). Atomic components
of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Anderson, J. R., Lebiere, C., & Lovett, M. (1998).
Performance. In J. R. Anderson & C. Lebiere (Eds.),
Atomic Components of Thought . Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Button, S. B., Mathieu, J. E., & Zajac, D. M. (1996). Goal
orientation in organizational research: A conceptual and
empirical foundation. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 67(1), 26-48.
Estes, W. K., Campbell, J. A., Hatsopoulos, N., &
Hurwitz, J. B. (1989). Base-rate effects in category
learning: A comparison of parallel network and memory
storage-retrieval models. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 556571.
Ginossar, Z., & Trope, Y. (1987). Problem solving in
judgment under uncertainty. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 52, 464-473.
Goodie, A. S., & Fantino, E. (1995). An experientially
derived base-rate error in humans. Psychological Science,
6, 101-106.
Goodie, A. S., & Fantino, E. (1996). Learning to commit
or avoid the base-rate error. Nature, 380, 247-249.
Goodie, A. S., & Fantino, E. (in press). Representing the
task in Bayesian reasoning: Comment on Lovett and
Schunn (1999). Journal of Experimental Psycholgoy:
General.
Lovett, M. C., & Schunn, C. D. (1999). Task
representations, strategy variability and base-rate neglect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128(2),
107-130.
Maddox, W. T. (1995). Base-rate effects in
multidimensional perceptual categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21, 288-301.
Medin, D. L., & Edelson, S. M. (1988). Problem structure
and the use of base-rate information from experience.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 6885.
Schunn, C. D., & Reder, L. M. (1998). Strategy adaptivity
and individual differences. In D. L. Medin (Ed.),
Psychology of Learning and Motivation (Vol. 38, pp.
115-154). New York: NY: Academic Press.
Schunn, C. D., Reder, L. M., Nhouyvanisvong, A.,
Richards, D. R., & Stroffolino, P. J. (1997). To calculate
or not to calculate: A source activation confusion model
of problem familiarity's role in strategy selection. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 23(1), 3-29.
Siegler, R. S., & Shipley, C. (1995). Variation, selection,
and cognitive change. In G. Halford & T. Simon (Eds.),
Developing cognitive competence: New approaches to
process modeling (pp. 31-76). New York: Academic
Press.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998). Who uses base
rates and P(D/~H)?: An analysis of individual differences.
Memory & Cognition, 26, 161-179.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1982). Evidential impact of
base rates. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky
(Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases . New York: Cambridge University Press.

