UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Path and Manner Priming: Verb and Event Recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tn97521

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Billman, Dorrit
Swilley, Angela
Krych, Meredyth

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

CogSci00

Path and Manner Priming: Verb Production and Event Recognition
Dorrit Billman ( d o r r i t . b i l l m a n @ p s y c h . g a t e c h . E d u )
School of Psychology; 274 Fifth St
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

Angela Swilley
School of Psychology; 274 Fifth St
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

Meredyth Krych ( krych@psych.stanford.Edu )
Psychology Department, Jordan Hall
Stanford, CA 94025 USA

Abstract
Path and manner are important organizing dimensions of
verb lexicons. We investigated how priming with path
verbs, manner verbs, or no priming might influence event
processing. Before watching a videotaped target event,
subjects were primed by path and manner verbs
accompanying other, unrelated events. We found effects of
priming verbs on the verbs subjects produced to describe
an unlabeled event. We found effects of verb produced on
subsequent recognition. We compare these effects from
self-generated verbs with effects from experimenterproduced verbs.

Introduction
Language and vision provide two powerful systems for
learning from the world. Information acquired from what we
see and what we are told is the basis for much of our
knowledge of the world (Jackendoff, 1987). How does
language influence processing of visually presented
information? Researchers have tested for effect of language
on nonlinguistic cognition within- and between- languages.
Tests for within-language effects vary the term or
expression accompanying nonlinguistic information and
look for effects of language on nonlinguistic cognition.
Typically, this research is motivated by questions about
effects of schema or expectations on memory, not questions
about language per se. For example, experiments from tests
of top-down effects (Carmichael, et al, 1932; Gentner &
Loftus, 1979; Schooler &Engstler-Schooler,1990) to tests
of eyewitness testimony (Hall, Loftus, & Tousignant, 1984;
Loftus & Palmer, 1974; McCloskey& Zaragoza, 1985) have
found effects of accompanying labels or descriptions.
Tests for between-language effects have been motivated by
the Whorfian (1956) hypothesis. Recent studies have found
effects of languages on a variety of cognitive tasks
(Gopnik&Choi, 1990, Hoffman, Lau, & Johnson, 1986,
Shatz,Martinez, Diesendruck & Akar, 1995; also noneffects
Malt et al, in press) including visual memory (Levinson,
1996). Most relevant to the domain we investigate is the

research on event representation, specifically path versus
manner information. Researchers have found betweenlanguage effects on how path versus manner is expressed
(Berman & Slobin, 1994; Naigles et al 1998) and affects
similarity (Naigles, personal communication).
Our research investigates within-language effects on event
memory for path versus manner information. Specifically,
we look at how alternative, descriptive verbs effects visual
recognition. We were particularly interested in how path and
manner verbs affect memory for path and manner
information because these aspects of events seem
particularly prominent and important.
Manner verbs refer to the way in which a figure carries
out a motion. “Hop,” “skip,” and “jump” are examples of
English manner verbs. Path verbs refer to the trajectory over
which a figure moves, typically with respect to another
reference object. “Rise,” “arrive,” and “cross” are examples
of English path verbs. Manner and path are two of only a
handful of aspects of motion events which are typically
conveyed by the verbs of a language. This privilege
suggests both aspects are central, important information in
other aspects of event cognition. Languages seem to select
one of these aspects to be normally conveyed by the verbs,
with other information typically carried by ‘satellite’
constructions outside the verb (Talmy, 1985). In English
the verb lexicon is organized around manner information and
path information is typically conveyed by expressions
outside the verb, specifically prepositional phrases. Many
other languages, including Romance languages, typically
convey path information in the verb and manner in
satellites. Nevertheless, within any one language there is
variation in verb meaning as well: English has a handful of
path verbs, most lower frequency and of Latinate origin
(Levin, 1993). Thus manner and path are two important
aspects of verb representation that are systematically
expressed in language, their method of expression differs
across languages, but there is also some variation within a
language.
Our previous research (Billman &Krych, 1998)
capitalized on within-language variation (verb choice) to
investigate how language information and visual
information might be coupled. We presented participants

CogSci00
with video-taped events accompanied by either manner or
path verbs. Participants returned for a visual recognition
test in which no verbs or labels were presented. The test
required discriminating the old items from new items with
changed manner of motion or else changed path of motion.
We found that type of verb initially spoken by the
experimenter interacted with the type of recognition errors.
Specifically, hearing a path verb (“exiting”) made
participants more likely to correctly reject a changed path
foil relative to hearing a manner verb (“skipping”) and
hearing a manner verb aided rejection of changed manner
foils relative to hearing a path verb.
The current experiment also looks for this disordinal
interaction of language at encoding with type of recognition
error. It also uses much the same presentation of events at
encoding and test. However, the language manipulation is
more indirect.
In the current experiment, the participant generated a verb
describing the target events and we looked for effects of this
participant-generated verb on recognition. We tried to
influence the participants' choice of verb by priming
(encouraged by other priming effects in language, Bock,
1990). Our primes were experimenter-provided manner or
path verbs for unrelated events shown before the target.
We look for 1) effects of priming condition on the type
of verbs generated, 2) effects of self-generated verbs on type
of recognition, and 3) also for a direct effect of priming
condition on type of recognition errors. We expected that
effects of labeling by self and by another would be similar,
and to this extent expected to replicate and extend our
previous findings. However, there might also be differences.
Listening to language generated by others might be more
likely to focus a listener on aspects of the event not already
attended to. Production processes might be more strongly
influenced by language-internal factors such a markedness,
frequency, and existence of alternative similar forms.

Method
Participants
Ninety-nine Georgia Tech students received course credit
for participation. Data from the 75 self-reported,
monolingual native English-speaking students are reported
here.

Procedure
On the first day participants viewed a series of everyday
events. In the Path and in the Manner Condition, some
events were labeled with a verb by the experimenter and
these labeled trials served as primes. In the No Language
(unprimed) Condition no events were labeled by the
experimenter. In all conditions there were a few target
events unlabeled by the experimenter, and for these the
participants were asked to generate their own descriptive
verb. On the second day participants returned for the
recognition test. No language was provided or generated for
any recognition trial. Participants judged whether a presented

scene was identical to one they had seen on the first day or
differed in any respect.
Encoding Session
Participants were told they would see a series of short
video-taped events and that they should watch these very
carefully. They were told that for some events the
experimenter would ask them to write down a verb
describing what was happening in the event and they would
be asked to do so by questions such as “what is the woman
doing?” presented right before the event began. In the
Manner and Path conditions the experimenter spoke a
descriptive verb or the question roughly four seconds before
the event began; in the No Language condition the
experiment said “next scene” to alert the participants, instead
of a descriptive verb. An unrelated filler task followed
encoding.
Recognition Session
On the next day participants took a difficult recognition
memory task viewing video clips with no accompanying
description. All items concerned the scenarios they had seen
the day before. Subjects judged whether each video was
“identical” to the original clip or differed in any way.
Participants responded by marking one end of six-point scale
for old items (“Sure Old”) and the other end for new items
(“Sure New”). Responses were scored as correct or incorrect
in the analyses here. After the recognition task, subjects
described events but this data is not reported here.

Stimuli
At both encoding and recognition, participants viewed
video clips of everyday events involving human agents.
They lasted 3 to 20 seconds with five seconds of black
between scenes. The critical events were designed in sets of
three: one original, target event and two foils. The Path Foil
changed the path along which the figure moved in the
original, target event, while the Manner Foil changed the
manner of movement of the figure. Two orders of encoding
and of recognition tapes were used.
Encoding Stimuli
The originally-presented target events were designed to be
good examples of both a path and a manner verb, for
example, a child skipping through a living room to exit
through the front door, or a woman crossing a road,
jogging. These were the items for which the participants
produced descriptive verbs. There were six target events:
skip/exit, jog/cross, tiptoe/ascend, float/rise, hop/enter, and
fly/descend. Immediately before a target scene, 2-3 priming
items were presented. Priming events illustrated unrelated
motion events. In the Manner Condition, the experimenter
labeled these priming events with English manner verbs
while in the Path condition, the experimenter labeled primes

CogSci00

Type
PATH

Table 2.
Verbs Produced for each Event
1
2
3
Ascend/
Exit/
Descend/
Enter/
Tiptoe
Skip
Fly
Hop
Ascend (1)
Leave(10)
Enter(22)
Gohome(1) Exit (1)
Arrive (3)

MANNER Walk(11)
Tiptoe(5)
Step(3)

Skip(56)
Frolick(1)
Hop(1)
Prance(1)
Tror(1)
Walk(1)

Fly (17)
Glide(1)

COMBO Climb(40)
SkipOut (1)
Climb...(6)
Go+Climb(1)
OTHER

Exercise(2)
Go(1)
Move(1)
Progress(1)
Hurt(1)

Play(1)

4

Walk (24)
Hop(5)

5

6

Cross/
Jog
Cross(5)

Rise/
Float
Rise(43)

Jog(43)
Run(22)

Float(24)
Fly(1)
Soar(1)

Exercise(5)

Move(1)
Stop(1)

WalkThru(1)

Land(57)

with English path verbs and in the No Language condition
they were unlabeled.
Thirty events were presented at encoding: 6 target events,
1 description-practice event, 15 priming events, and 8 fillers
(to increase the diversity of events presented). Target events,
the practice event, the filler events, and the priming events
which immediately preceded each target event were identical
across all three conditions.
Recognition Stimuli.
The 30-item recognition test presented old and new
versions of filler ( 8old/8new) and of the target events (6 old
and 12 new). Each original target event had a foil with a
changed path and a foil with a changed manner. The changes
in these foils were designed to be great enough so that the
verb originally generated to describe the original event (e.g.,
“skipping”) would not describe the foil event. For example,
in the manner foil for the skip/exit scene the child galloped
rather than skipping and in the path foil the child stopped in
the door rather than exiting.
Table 1.
Design of Target and Foils for Recognition Test
Target
Exit
Skip
Path foil
Approach (not
Skip
exit)
Manner
Exit
Gallop (not
foil
skip)

Design
Encoding Condition (Manner Verb Prime/ Path Verb
Prime/ No Language Prime), a between-subject variable was

Knock(6)
Visit(5)
Move(3)
Go(1)
Pretend(1)

crossed with Recognition Item Type (Path Foil/ Manner
Foil/ Old), a within-subject factor.

Results
We asked how priming affected verb production, how verb
production affected recognition, and whether there was a
direct effect of priming on recognition. Data analyses
throughout are done by-item. Although this gives us small
n, it allows a stable unit of analysis both for effects of
condition and for conditionalized effects of verb produced.

Figure 1.
Condition Differences in Verbs Produced
0.7

Path Prime
0.6

Manner Prime

0.5

No Lang Prime
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Path Verbs

Manner Verbs

(by-item analysis)

Verbs Produced.
Details of the verbs produced are shown in Table 2.
Events varied in the variety of verbs produced and degree of
concentration in a few dominant responses. The scenes had
been designed to be good illustrations of specific verbs
(listed as the event identifier), but they might also be

CogSci00
described by other verbs. The descend/fly scene was the
most homogeneous, with 98.7% or responses in the two
most dominant verbs, “fly” and “land." Interestingly, the
plane did not in fact land in the original scene, but was very
widely classified in terms of the normal activity in the
scenario. The enter/ hop and ascend/tiptoe scenes were the
most varied with 64% and 72% of responses in the two
most dominant verbs. These were also the most varied in
terms of numbers of different verbs used and use of phrases.
These scenes also evoked verbs focused on additional or
more abstract aspects than the simply the movement of the
figure.
Effects of Priming on Verb Type Produced.
We were particularly interested in whether priming with
path or manner verbs would alter the proportion of path and
manner verbs produced. Figure 1 shows how the proportion
of manner and path verbs produced was influenced by the
priming condition. (The proportion of verbs classified either
as Combination or as Other was between 28% and 31%
across the three conditions). Since we have other response
categories, numbers of manner and numbers of path verbs do
not necessarily trade off and can be analyzed as two levels of
the production variable.
The interaction of priming condition with type of verb
produced was significant (F[2,10]=8.33, p=.007). Pathpriming produced more path verbs and fewer manner verbs
than either Manner-priming or no verb priming, which look

0.5

similar. Overall, there was not a main effect of priming
condition on proportion of combined path or manner
responses; 71% of produced verbs were manner or path in
the Path-Primed condition compared to 72% in MannerPrimed and 69% in No Verb Priming (F<.01). Overall,
49% of responses were manner verbs and 21% were path
verbs. Although this preference for manner verbs seems
large, items are highly variable and the difference is not
significant in a by-item analysis (F[1,5] = 2.20, p =.20).
Effects of Producing Path vs. Manner Verbs on
Recognition. Given that a manner or path verb was
produced, is this production related to subsequent recognition
judgments? Figure 2 shows that producing a path versus
manner verb benefits recognition in path foils and old items,
with a small harmful effect on manner foils. A 2x3
ANOVA (by-item) found that the type of verb produced
interacted with type of recognition item in influencing
number correct (F[2,8]=6.59, p=.020). [Reduced df reflect
loss of one event where no path verbs were produced]. The
effect of item type was also significant (F[2.8]=6.66, p=.02)
with the highest error rates coming from false manner
recognition, but in this test there was no overall effect of
verb produced because of the tradeoff on path versus manner
foils. Follow-up analyses localized the effect. A 2x2
ANOVA including manner and path foils but not old items,
now showed a significant effect of item type, F[1,4]=7.10,
p=.056, and a significant interaction F[1,4]=10.75, p=.031,

Figure 2.
All Manner vs All Path
produced path verb

0.4

produced manner
verb

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Old Item

Path Foil
(by-item analysis)

Manner Foil

CogSci00
but no main effect of verb produced. Further, paired t-tests
showed an advantage of producing a Path Verb for reducing
errors on Path Foils (p=.017) and on Old Items (p=.035),
but not on Manner foils.
Effects of Producing Dominant ‘Path’ or
Manner Verb on Recognition. A second analysis
complemented the Manner/Path Produced analysis reported
above. The Manner/Path analysis above mixed very
different types and frequencies of verbs for each event.
Further, for two of the events it excluded the most frequently
used verb conveying path information. These two events had
common verb responses which carried path information but

0.5

Figure 3.
Dominant Manner vs Dominant Path

0.4

produced dominant
'path' verb

0.3

produced dominant
manner verb

0.2
0.1
0.0
Old Foil

Path Foil

Manner Item

(by-item analysis)

which were not simple path verbs and hence were not
included in the Manner-Path Verb analysis. For the
“descend/fly” event, no true path verbs were produced and
“land” (classified in the Other verb type) was by far the
dominant response. For the “ascend/tiptoe” event, “climb”
(classified as Combination) was the dominant response,
which includes manner as well as path information. Since
the path component of these two verbs was clearly the
relevant aspect for these scenes, we designed these ‘pathverbs’ for a supplemental analysis. In this Dominant
‘Path’-Manner analysis, we looked at the effect of two verbs
for each event: the one most frequently used ‘path’ or the
one most frequently used manner-verb. This analysis
includes more data than the first, but fewer verbs.
The results parallel the first analysis. In the 3 (Item
Type) x 2 (Dominant Verb Produced) ANOVA (by-item),
item type was significant, F[2,10]=6.70, p=.014, the
interaction of item type and dominant verb produced was
significant, F[2,10]=7.25, p=.011, but not the effect of verb
produced F[2,10]=3.85, p=.107.
Direct Effect of Priming on Recognition Type.
We also measured whether the subjects primed with path
or manner (or unprimed) differed in recognition error types,
not considering what sort of verb they generated, as shown
in Table 3. The interaction of condition and item type was

not significant, nor was condition, F's < 1, but item type
was, F(2,71]=31.8, p<.001.
Table3. Proportion Errors by Condition & Item Type
ERRORS
Old Items
Path Foil
MannerFoil
Path Primed
.07
.13
.38
Manner Primed .11
.14
.32
No Language
.12
.13
.32

Conclusion
Summary
We found an effect of priming condition on what verbs
subjects produced to self-describe events. Manner verbs were
produced more often in the manner-primed than path-primed
condition; path verbs were produced more often in the pathprimed than manner primed condition. The unprimed
condition looked similar to the manner-primed condition.
The fact that we are able to produce this priming in verb
use suggests that the linguistically analyzed dimensions of
manner and path may be "psychologically real" and
influence on-line performance tasks, such as verb generation.
We found that the nature of the descriptive verb
produced by participants predicted their later recognition.
Errors on manner foils were more likely when a path rather
than manner verb had been produced and errors on path foils
were more likely when a manner rather than path verb had
been produced.
The pattern of results here replicates and extends our
earlier studies with experimenter-provided verbs.

Interpretation
These findings extend our understanding of how
language is implicated in the perception and memory for
events. Linguists have analyzed the verb lexicon as
organized around distinctions of manner and path (Talmy,
1985). We found that use of path versus manner verbs
primes different path or manner verbs used in describing
unrelated scenes. This suggests that the dimensions relevant
to a formal analysis of the verb lexicon also guide access and
verb choice. Manner and path may act as psychological
dimensions, perhaps both guiding access in the lexicon and
attention in event perception.
The similarity between the recognition findings in this
experiment and our prior findings suggests that whether
someone hears or produces a verb, the effect is similar:
distinctions in meaning carried by that verb influence
recognition.
Future Work
Additional analyses of this data will investigate verb
frequency and verb discrimination. Performance with path
verbs departs from performance with manner verbs or no
language and we are interested in understanding the possible
variety of factors which produce this asymmetry between
manner and path.

CogSci00
Sometimes participants generated verbs which
discriminated the target and foil event and sometimes the
verbs did not discriminate. For example, if a participant said
"running" this would apply to both to the original jogging
scene and to the dash manner-foil, hence not discriminating
target from foil. Analyzing effect of whether a path or
manner verb does or does not distinguish foil from target
will help identify how the verbs have their effect.
We are also interested in identifying what information
about an event is made more memorable by different verbs,
and what the mechanism of influence is. Verbs might exert
their influence in guiding attention at encoding, in providing
a more structured or integrated representation, or in serving
as a separate retrieval cue during recognition.

References
Berman, R. A. & Slobin, D. I. (1994). Relating Events
in Narrative: a Crosslinguistic Developmental Study.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
Bekerian, D.A. & Bowers, J.M. (1983) Eyewitness
testimony: Were we mislead? Journal of Experimental
Psychology:Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 1, 139145.
Billman, D.O., & Krych, M. (1998). Path and manner
verbs in action: Effects of”Skipping” or “Exiting” on
event memory. In Program of the Twentith Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum:
Hillsdale, NJ.
Bock, K. (1990). Structure in language: Creating form in
talk. American Psychologist , 45, 1221-1236.
Carmichael, L., Hogan, H.P., & Walter, A.A. (1932). An
experimental study of the effect of language on the
reproduction of visually perceived forms. Journal of
Experimental Psychology , 15, 73-86.
Choi, S. & Bowerman, M. (1992). Learning to express
motion events in English and Korean: The influence of
language specific lexicalization patterns. In Lexical and
Conceptual Semantics, B. Levin & S. Pinker (Eds.)
Elsevier/Blackwell: Cambridge, MA.
Gentner, D. & Loftus, E. (1979). Integration of verbal
and visual information as evidenced by distortions in
picture memory. American Journal of Psychology ,
92(2), 363-375.
Gopnik, A. & Choi, S. (1990). Do linguistic differences
lead to cognitive differences? A cross-linguistic study of
semantic and cognitive development. First Language,
10, 199-215.
Hall, D.F., Loftus, E.F., & Tousignant, J.P. (1984).
Postevent information and changes in recollection for a
natural event. In G.L. Wells & E.F. Loftus (Eds.)
Eyewitness Testimony. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.

Hoffman, C., Lau, I. & Johnson, D. R. (1986). "The
Linguistic Relativity of Person Cognition:
An
English-Chinese Comparison." Attitudes and Social
Cognition .
Jackendoff, R. (1987). On beyond zebra: The relation of
linguistic and visual information. Cognition , 26, 89114.
Kay, P. (1996) Intra-speaker relativity. In Rethinking
Linguistic Relativity , J.J. Gumperz & S.C. Levinson
(Eds). Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations:
a Preliminary Investigation.
U. Chicago Press:
Chicago.
Levinson, S.C.. (1996) Relativity in spatial conception
and description. In Rethinking Linguistic Relativity ,
J.J. Gumperz & S.C. Levinson (Eds.). Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.
Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., &
Wang, Y. (in press). Knowing versus naming:
Similarity and the linguistic categorization of artifacts.
Journal of Memory and Language.
McCloskey, M. & Zaragoza, Z. (1985) Misleading post
event information and memory for events: Arguments
and evidence against memory impairment. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 3-18.
Munnich, E., Landau, B., & Dosher, B. A. (November,
1997). Universals of spatial representation in language
and memory. Poster session presented at the 38th
Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Philadelphia, PA.
Naigles, L. R., Eisenberg, A. R., Kako, E. T., Highter,
M., & McGraw, N. (1998). Speaking of motion: verb
use in English and Spanish. Language and Cognitive
Processes
Schooler, J.W. & Engstler-Schooler, T.Y. (1990). Verbal
overshadowing of visual memories: Some things are
better left unsaid. Cognitive Psychology , 22, 36-71.
Shatz, M. J., Martinez, I. M., Diesendruck, G., & Akar,
D. (SRCD March 30- April 2, 1995--Indianapolis).
"The Influence of Language on
Children's
Understanding of False Belief."
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms.
In T. Shopen (Ed.),
Language Typology and Syntactic Description, vol. 3:
Grammatical Categories and the Lexicon. Cambridge
University Press.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, Thought and Reality:
Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. T. B.
Caroll (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

