UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phrases as Carriers of Coherence Relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1f08m2xd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Schauer, Holger
Hahn, Udo

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phrases as Carriers of Coherence Relations
Holger Schauer and Udo Hahn
LIF

Computational Linguistics Division
Freiburg University
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
http://www.coling.uni-freiburg.de/

Abstract
Coherence relations have mainly been studied as a mechanism
for the representation of text structure based on the analysis
of clauses and larger text fragments. A closer look at textual
data reveals, however, that adjuncts, typically cued by prepositions, also have a coherence establishing function. We discuss
empirical evidence for this claim, and outline a framework that
integrates the semantic interpretation and recognition of coherence relations covert in prepositional phrases.

Introduction
Single sentences encode one or more propositions, the semantic content of an utterance. When sentences are grouped together to form a text, this does not just constitute a bag of
such propositions. Rather texts are characterized by the property of being coherent.
The glue out of which coherent texts are made is typically attributed to so-called coherence relations. Basically,
these relations link low-level propositions by causal connections, motivational links (e.g., relating a goal to a sequence of
actions intended to accomplish that goal), property descriptions, and argumentative roles. This linkage between several
propositions is crucial not only for simple fact retrieval from
memory but also for other high-level cognitive tasks. Hence,
making coherence relations available lies at the heart of any
cognitively plausible approach to modeling human text comprehension and automatic text understanding, as well.
Given the importance of coherence relations for adequate
text understanding, the question arises how these relations
can be determined by explicit criteria and how this may be
achieved by automated systems. The currently dominating
approach derives coherence relations directly from particular
cue words (i.e., sentence connectives such as ‘because’, ‘alternatively’, etc. [Knott and Dale, 1994, Marcu, 1998]).
In line with one of the most prominent approaches to coherence, Rhetorical Structure Theory
[Mann and Thompson, 1988], such approaches typically
take clauses as the elementary coherence bearing units,
ignoring the role of more smaller units, i.e., phrases. We
will argue that such interclausal coherence analysis should
be complemented by an analysis of intraclausal coherence,
in order to obtain more accurate results, both with respect to
completeness as well as with respect to correctness of the
analyses performed.

When phrases are considered as the origin or target of
coherence relations, it becomes evident that intraclausal coherence relations are explicitly cued (by prepositions or adverbs), but they also depend on implicit inferences at the
semantic level, with references to the underlying commonsense or domain knowledge. While this finding coincides
with commonly held views in the cognitive science community [Black, 1985, Meyer, 1985], usually no concrete specifications are supplied for how to compute coherence relations
under these assumptions. In this paper, we will first present
empirically supported arguments for phrases as the smallest
units of coherence analysis, and then discuss explicit nonlexical, i.e., inferential criteria for deriving coherence relations
from them.

Arguing for Phrases as Discourse Units
Intraclausal Coherence Phenomena
The main claim we make is that coherence relations not only
have to be addressed at the interclausal but also at the intraclausal level of discourse analysis. Unless this finer grain
size for discourse units is chosen, we will argue in the following that some coherence relations will not be identified at all,
or some of them will be identified but are invalid. Accordingly, we will treat at least some phrase types, viz. prepositional and adverbial phrases, as discourse units. Consider the
following example:1
(1) a. Mit dem P6LXZ-A wird Elitegroup aber kaum neue
Kunden gewinnen.
[With the P6LXZ-A – Elitegroup will hardly attract
new customers.]
b. Mit einem PCI-Slot bietet das Motherboard zu wenig
Platz für Erweiterungen.
[With one PCI slot – the motherboard provides not
enough space for extensions.]
A straightforward coherence analysis with relations from
Rhetorical Structure Theory [Mann and Thompson, 1988]2
takes (1-b) as a single unit and links it to (1-a), probably via an
1
In the translations, important phrases keep the syntactic position
of the original German sentences and are therefore separated with
dashes.
2
Relations referring to Rhetorical Structure Theory (henceforth
referred to as RST) will appear emphasized and Capitalized.

Evidence
Explanation
Cause
Interpretation
Means

The Satellite, the not so important unit, provides evidence for the situation in the important unit, the Nucleus.
The Satellite, which is typically independent of the will of an animate object, explains the Nucleus.
The situation in the Satellite causes the situation in the Nucleus.
The situation presented in the Satellite interprets (presents a different perspective on) the Nucleus and
constitutes the opinion of the writer of the situation in the Satellite.
The Satellite explains the means by which the Nucleus was done.
Table 1: Relations from Rhetorical Structure Theory.

Evidence relation, see Table 1.3 Paraphrasing sentence (1-b)
reveals, however, a plausible decomposition into two basic
discourse units:
(2) a. The motherboard has but one PCI slot,
b. so it does not provide enough space for extensions.
Obviously, (2-a) gives an Explanation for (2-b).4 From a
methodological point of view it cannot be justified to analyze Sentence (2) as being composed of two elementary units,
while the prepositional phrase “with one PCI slot” should be
an indistinguishable part of the whole Sentence (1-b).
Besides missing essential coherence relations by not looking at phrases as discourse units, we also have indications
that even wrong analyses may result. Consider the following
sentences:
(3) a. Floptical Disks lassen sich nicht wie Festplatten
ansprechen.
[Floptical disks cannot be addressed in the same way
as ordinary hard disks.]
b. Diese Beschränkung ist aufgrund technischer Unterschiede notwendig.
[This restriction is – because of technical particularities – necessary.]
One might argue, granting the interpretative force of ‘because
of ’, that (3-b) gives a Cause for (3-a). On a closer look, however, this seems to be mistaken, because (3-b) can be said to
Interpret (3-a). Its main assertions consist of an assessment
of (3-a) as being a “restriction” and as being “necessary”.
Obviously, the embedded prepositional phrase (“because of
. . . ” ) specifies just the Cause for the necessity of the restriction, and is not related to sentence (3-a).

Criteria for Phrases as Discourse Units
Given that, on the one hand, at least some phrases should be
analyzed as discourse units in their own right and that, on the
other hand, certainly not all of them figure as discourse units,
the question arises which criteria should be set up in order to
single out true candidates for discourse units from spurious
3
In order to avoid a lengthy introduction to RST, the definitions
are taken from the manual coming with the tool that we used for our
analyses [Marcu et al., 1999]. It makes available an extension of the
original RST relations [Mann and Thompson, 1988].
4
This analysis reflects the impact of the cue word “so” in
(2-b). More generally, whenever an implicit coherence relation
can be made explicit by a paraphrase incorporating a specific
cue word, then this coherence relation is always assumed to hold
[Martin, 1992, p.184].

ones. While [Grote et al., 1997] recognize that “prepositional
phrases are the most compact form” to establish a coherence
relation, [Marcu et al., 1999] are among the first who propose
to consider those phrases as elementary discourse units that
“are unequivocally the nucleus or the satellite of a rhetorical
relation that adds some significant information to the text.”
However, the restrictions provided by this criterion proved to
be too liberal for the choice of possible candidates.
Focusing on the role of prepositional phrases (PPs) in our
paper, we propose a mix of two criteria. First, the syntactic criterion requires only those PPs to be candidates for discourse units, which are not syntactically mandatory complements of a governing syntactic head, for which we assume a
subcategorization frame or a valency list. Phrases which do
not match such a schema of their governing syntactic head
are syntactic elements we refer to as adjuncts.
For example, the PP starting Sentence (1-b), “with one PCI
slot”, figures as an adjunct. It gives optional information,
since the remainder still forms a complete grammatical sentence, “the motherboard provides not enough space for extensions”. This stands in contrast to example (4), which contains
a true complement:
(4) We have to stop pointing our fingers at these kids, he said.
In Sentence (4), neither should the PP “at these kids” be
treated as a discourse unit, nor should any other mandatory
phrase, such as the subject “we”.
At the semantic level we formulate the second major criterion. It is based on the assumption that semantic specifications of lexemes, independent of the specific semantic
theory one subscribes to, are confined to “typical” properties, e.g., events are characterized by agents, patients, instruments, locations, time frames, etc. Since any straightforward semantic interpretation must account for these attributes, they should not be part of analyses targeting on coherence relations. Whenever nontypical, unpredictable information pieces have to be accounted for, coherence relations
may capture their value-adding semantics. Therefore, only
those PPs should be considered as discourse units
whose straightforward semantic interpretation is precluded
because they refer to nontypical properties;
or whose semantic interpretation partially refers to typical
properties, but the intended meaning is not fully covered
by them; only additional computations – inferences taking
the preliminary semantic interpretation as a starting point
– completely account for the intended meaning.

We will illustrate the main criteria which determine
whether a PP should be treated as a discourse unit or not by
contrasting the sample sentences (1-a) and (1-b). In Sentence
(1-a), the PP specifies an instrument for attracting new customers. As it seems entirely reasonable to consider “instrument” as a typical property of “attraction” events, this example should straightforwardly be dealt with by standard semantic interpretation — the conceptual correlate of P6LXZ-A will
be assigned as the value of a corresponding “instrument” attribute. In particular, this analysis need not take recourse to
any notion of coherence relation, although the proponents of
RST might consider a Means relation as being appropriate.
This typicality consideration does not carry over to an “explanation” of events, which is our interpretation of “with one
PCI slot” from Sentence (1-b). Rather than being missed
at the representational level, accounting for this information
adds valuable, ‘heavy’ knowledge. Such a relation, however,
can only be computed by additional inferences relating to the
underlying domain knowledge base.

From Prepositional Phrases to Coherence Relations
We now briefly sketch a coherence analysis based on the considerations discussed in the previous section. To make this
discussion more concrete, it is embedded in the framework
of S YN D I KAT E, a text analysis system under development
in our lab [Hahn and Romacker, 1999b]. After being submitted to a syntactic analysis the dependency graph for Sentence
(1-b) (cf. Figure 1) contains a prepositional adjunct (ppadj)
subgraph which holds the phrase “Mit einem PCI-Slot”. (This
analysis results from the valency specification for the main
verb “bietet”.) In order to compute a semantic interpretation
for Sentence (1-b) (assuming the framework of description
logics [Woods and Schmolze, 1992]), the conceptual correlates of its content words are checked for role compatibility.
In this case, the major interpretation constraints derive
from the main verb “bietet” (provide) which is represented as
the concept P ROVIDE (cf. Figure 2). It has three major conceptual roles, PROVIDE - PATIENT, PROVIDE - CO - PATIENT,
and INSTRUMENT. The PROVIDE - PATIENT and PROVIDE CO - PATIENT roles can be filled by some instance of M OTH ERBOARD and S IZE , respectively, in the semantic interpretation phase. This causes conceptual interpretation processes to
be triggered linking S IZE and M OTHERBOARD (cf. Figure 2)
via the role SIZE - OF.

.

propo:
bietet

ppadj:
Mit

subj:

pobj:

PCI-Slot
spec:
einem

obj:

Motherboard
Platz
spec:
spec:
ppatt:

das

wenig

für

Figure 2: Semantic Interpretation for (1-b)
Focusing on the analysis of the PP, each preposition specifies semantic constraints, see [Hahn and Romacker, 1999a].
In the case of “mit” (with) they allow an interpretation of
the dependency relation ppadj in terms of the conceptual
INSTRUMENT role, so the corresponding role of S HOWF EATURE is filled with PCI-S LOT during semantic interpretation. Conceptual interpretation, in addition, triggers
the computation of a specialization of the PART- OF relation
(SLOT- OF) between PCI-S LOT and M OTHERBOARD.
At this stage, we check whether the preposition might give
rise to the computation of coherence relations. Corresponding discourse constraints of a preposition specify a set of
possible coherence relations it may signal. These constraints
were determined empirically, see Section (4). The constraints
of permitted coherence relations are checked, taking the already computed semantic interpretation as a starting point.
For “mit” (with) an Explanation may be signaled whenever
the filler of the INSTRUMENT role stands in a PART- OF relation to the PROVIDE - PATIENT. As SLOT- OF is one of the
subroles of the PART- OF relation, an Explanation relation is
established.
Figure 2 also shows a PURPOSE relation linking instances
of P HYSICAL -S IZE and E XTENSION that is due to semantic
interpretation, in line with considerations which will be presented in the next section.

Evaluation of Coherence Data
The basic claim we try to back up by empirical analysis is that
focusing on intraclausal coherence leads to more adaquate
analyses, with respect to both completeness and correctness.
In the following we will set out to validate the principal assumptions and criteria and not their implementation. For this
task it is necessary to a) closely consider how many and which
PPs can be seen as discourse units in their own right (i.e.,
checking the proposed criteria), b) how many of them have
been missed in mainly clause-based analyses, and c) how
many of these analyses could be judged as incorrect (similar to example (3)).

Distribution of Prepositional Phrases in the Corpora
pobj:

Erweiterungen

With one PCI-slot the motherboard provides little space for extensions.

Figure 1: Dependency Analysis for (1-b)

The textual data for our study were taken from two sources – a
German-language corpus of test reports from the information
technology domain (31 texts, with approximately 7,700 text
tokens), and a small set of English texts from the MUC corpus [MUC-6, 1995] (9 texts, with approximately 5,100 text
tokens) for comparison purposes.

For our empirical study we used RSTT OOL, a workbench
for annotating texts in terms of their underlying coherence
relations. The tool makes available an extension of the set of
original RST relations. Both the tool and the English texts
were kindly supplied by D. Marcu, see [Marcu et al., 1999].
The English texts were already analyzed and contained 795
discourse units connected by 379 relations. We re-analyzed
these texts only with regard to prepositional phrases, modifying the original discourse analyses where appropriate. As the
German texts were all analyzed with such a focus, we provide
the distribution of units and relations in the next subsection.
Our analyses were performed in joint work by one of the
authors and one student. During the discourse annotations,
for each new clause to be segmented and related, we first
determined the syntactic role of prepositional phrases, i.e.
whether an identified PP should be seen as an adjunct or
mandatory complement of its governing head. Next, when
a coherence relation was unequivocally identifiable, the PP
was taken as an elementary discourse unit and related with
the coherence relation. As a result, we determined for each
preposition the set of coherence relations it may give rise to.5
Otherwise, we just recorded its likeliest interpretation. Obviously, the annotators needed to know about the hypothesis
that (prepositional) phrases might trigger coherence relations.
Therefore, the data presented below needs to be validated further.
Overall, we determined a total of 611 PPs in the German
and 501 PPs in the English corpus. Table 2 lists their syntactic distribution, distinguishing between adjuncts and complements. The leftmost column indicates the syntactic head
of the PP, either a nominal or verbal phrase, or an adjective/adverb.

NP
VP
Adj

Adjuncts
German English
192
98
176
128
10
5

Complements
German English
60
154
159
109
14
7

Table 2: Syntactic Distribution of PPs in the Corpora
Distinguishing certain and dubious judgements, Table 3
shows the distribution of PPs that were solely analyzed by semantic interpretation, i.e., either no coherence relation could
be determined or a semantic interpretation seemed entirely
sufficient. We found that in those cases in which a Means
or Manner relation might be used, the interpretation of the
PPs just amounted to the assignment of values to reasonable
and typical properties, see Example (1-a). Hence we felt that
these cases should be dealt with by proper semantic interpretation and not be counted as coherence relations at all, just
like locative/spatial and temporal information.
With regard to Attribute/Restriction, we found that many
PPs that are adjuncts of NPs can be interpreted as specifying
5

This set can then be used to specify the discourse constraints
mentioned in the previous section.

attributes (such as “the Matrox Millenium graphics card with
4 MByte SDRAM” ) or as stating restrictions for the interpretation of the NP (such as “a computer with a Pentium is fast
enough” , where the PP picks a specific set of “computers” ).
Interpretation
Locative/Spatial
Temporal
Means
Manner
Attribute/Restriction
Others

German
Cert. Dub.
37
16
16
0
44
3
22
0
205
0
181
1

English
Cert. Dub.
25
0
31
1
4
0
4
1
226
0
167
0

Table 3: PPs Not Considered as Discourse Units
Those cases that could neither be addressed by one of the
given categories nor be treated as discourse units are listed as
Others. Mostly these are cases in which the PP is a mandatory complement whose preposition has an almost idiomatic,
at least a highly collocational status, see example (4). These
phenomena are more adequately dealt with by lexicalized
encodings covering the particular reading of the preposition
rather than being treated by the general interpretation mechanism for prepositions.

PPs as Discourse Units in the Corpora
Table 4 summarizes the interpretation of PPs in terms of true
coherence relations. For the German texts, we found 66 cases
for which coherence relations were unequivocally identifiable, plus 20 dubious cases. In 63 cases, the prepositonal
phrase appears in the middle of a clause. In this case, two
units result from the remainder of the clause that need to
be related by an artifical Same-Unit relation. Overall, the
66 identified PPs are responsible for 129 relations, including 63 Same-Unit relations. For the German texts, a total of
1713 units connected by 869 relations were identified. This
means that 14.8% of coherence relations were of the intraclausal type.
Our re-analyses of the English texts consisted only of additions and modifications of coherence relations due to PPs.
This results in 884 units connected by 421 relations. Overall,
40 PPs give unequivocally rise to 51 coherence relations, plus
2 dubious cases. The 40 certain cases of coherence bearing
PPs account for 12.1% of the coherence relations.
From those 40 PPs we considered as discourse units in the
English texts, only 3 phrases were also analyzed by Marcu.
This indicates that the common focus on clauses and larger
fragments tends to provoke a certain analytical bias, just as we
expected. So, the completeness of coherence analysis seems
to benefit from the focus on adjuncts.
With regard to the syntactic criterion, almost all certain
cases of discourse units (61 out of 66 in the German texts, 39
out of 40 in the English texts) are due to PPs that we judged
as being adjuncts. In contradistinction, most of the dubious
cases (15 of 20 for the German texts, 0 out of 2 for the English texts) coincide with the PP in a syntactically mandatory

Relation
Analogy
Attribution
Background
Cause
Circumstance
Condition
Consequence
Elaboration
Evaluation
Explanation
Purpose
Reason


German
Adjuncts
Complements
Certain Dubious Certain Dubious
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
1
25
1
1
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
1
0
20
4
3
9
0
0
0
0
61
5
5
15

English
Adjuncts
Complements
Certain Dubious Certain Dubious
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
11
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
39
2
1
0

Table 4: Prepositional Phrases Treated as Discourse Units
position. So the distinction between adjuncts and complements can be seen as a valid indicator for phrases that can be
analyzed as discourse units.
With regard to the second criterion, it is necessary to explain the dubious cases. These often coincide with syntactically mandatory complements. As a result, it is often not clear
whether the PP should be analysed semantically, although an
interpretation in terms of a coherence relation would be possible. As an example, consider the next example, in which the
prepositional phrase could be analysed as stating a Purpose
for the graphics card.
(5) Für die nächste Generation an Spielen sind Grafikkarten
wie die Spea V7 nötig.
[For the next generation of games – graphics cards such
as the Spea V7 are required.]
In contradistinction, for those PPs we unequivocally considered as discourse units, an interpretation solely in semantic
terms is usually hard to imagine, see Example (1).
Commenting on the correctness of the original English
analyses, we found no cases of errors caused by overlooked
PPs, contrary to our expectation. This may be explained by
the fact that those cases in German are mainly triggered when
the phrase occurs inside a clause – e.g., example (3-b). We
found no corresponding example in the English data.
Finally, commenting on the quantitative distribution of coherence relations in Table 4, the large number of Condition
and Purpose relations might largely be attributed to the chosen domain (information-technology). In this domain, judgements are often valid only under certain assumptions and conditions. Also, nearly all actions serve some purpose and are
evaluated against it. One might be challenged then to treat
Condition and Purpose as “typical” in this domain; hence
they should probably even be treated by the standard semantic
interpretation (as already assumed in Figure 2).6
6

See [Linden and Martin, 1995] for an account of the Purpose

Related Work
The notion of coherence relations is dealt with by a variety of
approaches — structural ones in which linear text fragments
are bracketed and organized in discourse trees by rhetorical
relations [Mann and Thompson, 1988], logical ones in which
metapredicates provide the inferential basis for linking basic
predicate-argument structures [Lascarides et al., 1992], psychological ones in which the level of micropropositions is
clustered in terms of conceptually coherent macropropositions [Kintsch and Dijk, 1978, Black, 1985]. Since none of
these approaches incorporate syntactic considerations into
their analyses (a syntactic analysis is assumed to deliver appropriate text chunks or propositions), they are unable to account for coherence relations encoded via PPs.
There are a few attempts to incorporate the role of cue
words in computational approaches to determine coherence relations. These are based on the RST framework
[Marcu, 1998], logical interpretations [Hobbs et al., 1993], or
extensions of sentence grammars [Webber et al., 1999]. But
in these approaches, the level of intraclausal analysis is not
an issue. A recent study mentions the role of PPs as carriers
of coherence relations [Grote et al., 1997], but only for the
purposes of text generation.
Our distinction between semantic and discourse constraints
looks similar to the semantic/pragmatic distinction found in
[Sanders et al., 1992, Knott and Dale, 1994]. Their distinction, however, addresses the intended effects coherence cues
have on the reader, while in our work discourse constraints
establish interpretations beyond ‘typicality’ limits.
Another distinction relates to the role of empirical arguments related to coherence relations. Our study deals with
the quantitative distribution of a set of coherence relations as
encoded by various PPs, while in [Sanders et al., 1992] the
plausibility of certain coherence relations fulfilling a set of
relation in instructional texts that also acknowledges the role of
intraclausal coherence.

criteria is judged by a number of subjects.

Conclusion
We have presented an approach in which the computation of
coherence relations is made dependent on the semantic interpretation of a particular class of prepositional phrases, viz.
adjuncts. The notoriously difficult distinction between complements and adjuncts has been resolved in a pragmatic way
such that the syntactic notion of complements is associated
with typicality considerations at the semantic level, and, similarly, adjuncts are associated with nontypical properties.
Text interpretation then proceeds via a two-step procedure.
First, proper semantic interpretation is concerned with matching parsed utterances to (conceptual) representations in the
lexicon. If a match is found (i.e., complements refer to typical properties/relations), one checks, in addition, whether inferential criteria for coherence relations are fulfilled. If no
match can be found, an adjunct has been determined which,
by definition, constitutes a possible discourse unit and has to
be checked for more specific criteria for coherence relations.
One focus of our paper was on finding empirical evidence
for the claim that PPs are important at all for coherence analysis. Indeed, we have detected a significant subset of coherence relations encoded as PPs (for the English data roughly
12%, for the German data 15%). These would have been lost
if a cue-phrase-only approach were followed, since prepositions cannot be considered reliable predictors of (specific) coherence relations. They would, however, also have been lost
with an inference-only approach, since each preposition may
signal only some coherence relations. Therefore, they do not
seem to be derivable from conceptual representations alone.
Given that this argument is valid, the computation of coherence relations must incorporate both the syntactic and semantic level, as well as inference rules which determine those
knowledge structures which have to be superimposed by coherence relations.
Acknowledgements. Holger Schauer is a member of the
Graduate Program Human and Machine Intelligence at
Freiburg University, Germany, funded by DFG.

References
[Black, 1985] Black, J. (1985). An exposition on understanding expository text. In Britton, B. and Black, J.,
editors, Understanding Expository Text, pages 249–267.
Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
[Grote et al., 1997] Grote, B., Lenke, N., and Stede, M.
(1997). Ma(r)king concessions in English and German.
Discourse Processes, 24(1):87–118.
[Hahn and Romacker, 1999a] Hahn, U. and Romacker, M.
(1999a). Incrementality and locality of language comprehension. In Proc. Cognitive Science 99, pages 202–207.
[Hahn and Romacker, 1999b] Hahn, U. and Romacker, M.
(1999b). S YN D I KAT E – generating text knowledge bases

from natural language texts. In IEEE SMC’99, volume 5,
pages V–918–V–923. IEEE Press.
[Hobbs et al., 1993] Hobbs, J., Stickel, M., Appelt, D., and
Martin, P. (1993). Interpretation as abduction. Artificial
Intelligence, 63(1/2):69–142.
[Kintsch and Dijk, 1978] Kintsch, W. and Dijk, T. (1978).
Toward a model of text comprehension and production.
Psychological Rev., 85:363–394.
[Knott and Dale, 1994] Knott, A. and Dale, R. (1994). Using linguistic phenomena to motivate a set of coherence
relations. Discourse Processes, 18(1):35–62.
[Lascarides et al., 1992] Lascarides, A., Asher, N., and
Oberlander, J. (1992). Inferring discourse relations in context. In Proc. ACL’92, pages 1–8.
[Linden and Martin, 1995] Linden, K. V. and Martin, J. H.
(1995). Expressing rhetorical relations in instructional
texts: A case study of the purpose relation. Computational
Linguistics, 21(1):29–59.
[Mann and Thompson, 1988] Mann, W. and Thompson, S.
(1988). Rhetorical Structure Theory: toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.
[Marcu, 1998] Marcu, D. (1998). The Rhetorical Parsing, Summarization and Generation of Natural Language
Texts. PhD thesis, U Toronto.
[Marcu et al., 1999] Marcu, D., Amorrortu, E., and Romera,
M. (1999). Experiments in constructing a corpus of discourse trees. In Proc. ACL’99 Workshop ‘Standards and
Tools for Discourse Tagging’, pages 48–57.
[Martin, 1992] Martin, J. (1992). English Text. Philadelphia:
J. Benjamins.
[Meyer, 1985] Meyer, B. (1985). Prose analysis: purposes,
procedures, and problems. In Britton, B. and Black, J., editors, Understanding Expository Text, pages 11–64. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
[MUC-6, 1995] MUC-6 (1995). Proceedings of the 6th Message Understanding Conference. Columbia, Maryland,
November 6-8, 1995. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
[Sanders et al., 1992] Sanders, T., Spooren, W., and Noordman, L. (1992). Towards a taxonomy of coherence relations. Discourse Processes, 15:1–35.
[Webber et al., 1999] Webber, B., Knott, A., Stone, M., and
Joshi, A. (1999). Discourse relations: A structural and
presuppositional account using lexicalised TAG. In Proc.
ACL’99.
[Woods and Schmolze, 1992] Woods, W. and Schmolze, J.
(1992). The K L -O NE family. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 23(2/5):133–177.

