UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Problem Representation in Experts and Novices: Part 1. Differences in the Content of
Representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vp5b66h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Yarlas, Aaron S.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Problem Representation in Experts and Novices: Part 1. Differences in the Content
of Representation
Aaron S. Yarlas (yarlas.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science and School of Teaching & Learning, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
School of Teaching & Learning and Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Abstract
Two experiments examined the content of novice and expert
representations for both surface and deep structural elements
of arithmetic equations. Experiment 1, which used a forcedchoice categorization task in which surface features of equations (e.g., digits) competed with deep structural principles of
mathematics (associativity and commutativity), found that experts were more likely to focus on principles in their judgments than were novices, who focused more often on surface
elements. Experiment 2, using a similar task, introduced trials
in which only principled elements varied. Novices were able
to focus on principled elements in this case, but failed to
transfer these representations when surface features were reintroduced. These findings indicate that novices had knowledge of the principles, but that they did not attend to them
when competing surface features were present.

Introduction
It has been well established that in various knowledge
domains (e.g., physics, mathematics, or chess) experts approach problems in a manner different from that of novices
(Chase & Simon, 1973; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981;
Larkin, 1983; Simon & Simon, 1978; Reed, Ackinclose, &
Voss, 1990). In particular, while experts are more likely to
focus on hidden relational properties of a problem, novices
are more likely to focus on less important surface features of
a problem. However, while there is some understanding of
the content of mental representation (i.e., of which aspects
of information are likely to be represented and which are
likely to be left out), the process of construing the representation remains largely unknown. Do people attend to and
encode those aspects that are left out, but then discard them,
or do they fail to attend to and encode these "irrelevant"
aspects?
The current paper (Part 1) focuses both on establishing
differences in content of representation for experts and novices within a simple domain (arithmetic) and testing a number of viable explanations that could account for these differences. A subsequent paper (Part 2) focuses on examining
differences in the process of construing representations for
experts and novices.
There is a large body of literature indicating that in problem solving, reasoning, learning and transfer, and problem

categorization, novices tend to focus on surface features
rather than on deep relational properties. These effects have
been demonstrated in a variety of knowledge domains, including chess (Chase & Simon, 1973), mathematics (Blessing & Ross, 1996; Schoenfeld & Herrmann, 1982; Bassok,
1996, 1997; Novick, 1988; Reed, et al, 1990; Silver, 1981),
physics (Chi, et al 1981; Simon & Simon, 1978; Larkin,
1983; Larkin, McDermott, Simon, & Simon, 1980), and
computer programming (Adelson, 1984). Similar effects
have been observed in a variety of knowledge-lean domains,
such as deductive and inductive inference. When presented
with deduction problems, untrained reasoners often tended
to ignore the argument's logic (i.e., its deep structure) while
relying on the argument's surface features, such as content
and believability (Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). When presented with induction
and analogy problems, novices and young children also often ignored deep relational structure while relying on the
surface features (Gentner, 1989; Holyoak & Koh, 1987).
While there is little disagreement that novices focus on
surface features, it remains unclear why novices tend to focus on surface features and not on deep relational properties.
One possible explanation of novices' tendency to represent
surface features is that novices merely have little knowledge
of deep structural relations. However, while this possibility
is capable of explaining expert-novice differences in extremely knowledge-demanding domains, such as medical
diagnostics, chess, or advanced physics, it falls short of explaining these differences in fairly simple domains, such as
elementary mathematics and physics. For example, researchers examining novices' representations in mathematics
and physics often drew examples from students' textbooks,
thus reasonably assuming that students should be familiar
with the deep structure underlying these problems (Chi, et
al, 1981; Larkin, 1983; Novick, 1988). The credibility of the
lack of knowledge explanation is further undermined by
findings that even those novices who receive instruction in a
domain often continue to focus on surface features rather
than the deep structure of a problem. These has been demonstrated across a variety of knowledge domains, including
mathematics (Morris & Sloutsky, 1998) and physics (Kaiser,
McCloskey, & Proffitt, 1986; McClosskey, 1983). Finally,
the fact that findings on novices' representations in knowledge-lean domains are compatible with those in knowledge-

rich domains makes the low knowledge explanation even
less plausible. At this point, however, lack of knowledge
cannot be ruled out as an explanation for differences in
problem construal by experts and novices. It is also possible
that surface features are used more frequently by novices,
and, as a result, they are more available than deep relational
properties (cf. Anderson, 1990). Henceforth, we will refer to
this possibility as the availability explanation.
Another possibility that appears more credible is that even
when novices know about deep relations and are capable of
extracting these relations, they still fail to represent these
relations because surface features are more prominently present in the problem. In failing to represent relational features, they may either fail to encode relations, or these relational features may lose attentional competition to more salient surface features. However, this representational processing explanation can only be tested if the above-described
explanations are eliminated as possibilities. In the current
paper, then, the focus is on establishing difference in content
of representations of experts and novices within the domain
of arithmetic, and then testing the knowledge and availability explanations. If differences between experts and novices
are found, and the data are inconsistent with the predictions
of the alternative explanations, then the way is cleared to test
the representational process explanation.
The goal of the current studies, then, is to establish why
experts and novices differ in the content of their problem
representations. To achieve this goal, we deemed it necessary to control for knowledge factors, while manipulating
representational factors. In controlling for knowledge factors, we (a) used simplified tasks and (b) selected only those
deep properties that were well familiar to a wide range of
participants. In particular, we selected the commutative and
associative properties of arithmetic, because these principles
are learned in the elementary school and revisited in the
beginning of the middle school (Everyday Mathematics:
Teacher's Reference Manual, 1998), and therefore are likely
to be familiar to the majority of middle school students and
college undergraduates.
In this paper, we present two experiments. In Experiment
1, experts and novices in mathematics were asked to group
arithmetic equations. These groupings could be based either
on the commonality of surface elements (e.g., digits used,
the number of constituent elements in the equations) or on
the commonality of a deep mathematical relation (principles
of commutativity or associativity). In Experiment 2, we introduced a two-phase grouping task. During the first phase,
deep relations were "unmasked," such that surface elements
were not varied among the compared equations. During the
second phase, the deep relations were "masked" again by
reintroducing competing surface elements.

Experiment 1
The goal of this experiment was to validate the principles
in question and to eliminate the possibility that expertnovices differences stem from differences in overall intelligence (or age) between novices and experts.

Method
Participants Five samples were selected for the current
experiment. The first group, which will be referred to as the
“younger children”, contained 20 first- and second-graders
taken from an elementary school (M = 7.26 years, SD =
0.59; 8 girls and 12 boys). The second group, which will be
referred to as the “older children”, contained 16 sixthgraders taken from a middle school (M = 12.10 years, SD =
0.38; 5 girls and 11 boys). Both of these groups were selected from schools located in an upper middle-class suburb
of Columbus, Ohio.
The third group of participants consisted of 25 undergraduates in an introductory psychology course at a large
Midwestern university who participated for course credit.
This group had an average age of 19.78 years (SD = 1.38),
with 11 women and 14 men.
These three groups of mathematics "novices" were contrasted with a group of mathematics "experts". This group
consisted of 20 graduate students in a Mathematics department at the same university who participated for payment of
ten dollars. This group had an average age of 28.88 years
(SD = 6.05), with 7 women and 13 men.
However, differences between "experts" and "novices"
were not limited to expertise. Experts were also older and
they might represent a self-selected group with respect to an
overall ability. Therefore, we deemed it necessary to select a
matching group that would be similar to experts in terms of
age and overall ability, while differing in the level of expertise. This matching group consisted of 16 graduate students
in a History department at the same university who participated for a payment of ten dollars. This group had an average age of 29.93 years (SD = 4.67), with 8 women and 8
men.
Materials Five features of arithmetic equations were used in
Experiment 1. Two of these features were considered "principled properties", in that they represented deep, relational
principles of mathematical operations: the associativity and
commutativity principles. The former states that for addition, subtraction, and multiplication, constituent parts can be
decomposed and recombined in different ways (e.g., a + b =
[a – c + c] + b). The latter states that the order of elements is
irrelevant for addition and multiplication (e.g., a + b = b +
a). The other three features were nonprincipled surface features that occur in arithmetic equations: (1) digits (e.g., 6,
3); (2) sign (e.g., -, +); and (3) the number of constituent
terms in an equation. The numerical solutions of equations
were controlled for by making these solutions either all
equal or all equivalently different for each trial.
A forced-choice similarity paradigm was used in this experiment. Participants were presented with three cards at a
time, a target card and two test cards, each which had
printed on it an arithmetic equation. Participants were instructed to match the problem on the target card to one of
the test problems with which they believed it was most
similar. Each of the two test problems shared one feature
with the target problem, and differed on the feature that the
target shared with the other test problem, with all other fea-

tures held constant. All five features were pitted directly
against each other, with the exception of the two principled
features, yielding a total of nine feature comparisons. For
example, on one of the trial in which commutativity competed with digit, the Target problem was 6 + 3 + 4 = 3 + 4 +
6, the digit test problem was 6 + 3 + 8 = 3 + 4 + 10, and the
commutativity test was 7 + 2 + 8 = 8 + 2 + 7.
There were four exemplar arithmetic equations representing each of the nine comparison sets, resulting in a total
of 36 trials presented to participants. The numbers used in
the arithmetic equations ranged from 1 to 15, and the operations used included addition, subtraction, and multiplication.
Procedure All participants were run individually by a male
experimenter into a small, quiet room. Participants were
instructed that they would be presented with math problems
for which they were to group together problems that were
similar. A warm-up trial was used to acquaint participants
with the task. For the warm-up trial, the participant was presented with cards containing Gelman and Markman’s (1986)
blackbird-flamingo-bat figures. The target card, which depicted a blackbird that looked similarly to the bat and dissimilarly from the flamingo, was placed equidistantly below
the flamingo and bat cards, which were the test items. The
experimenter pointed to each of the two test items, and
asked the participant “which of these is more like this,” after
which the experimenter pointed to the target item. After
participants chose one of the test items, the experimenter
asked the participant “why did you choose that one?” After
the participant's verbal explanation (either based on physical
similarity or the commonality of species), the experimenter
pointed out that the other test item could have also been
chosen based on the other attribute, and made the point that
similarity can simultaneously occur across multiple dimensions. All participants showed understanding of this concept
and of the task.
Four trials for each of the nine features-principle comparisons resulted in a total of 36 trials, which took approximately 30 minutes. Trial order was determined using a block
randomization procedure. The positioning of the test items
in relation to the target (i.e., left or right) was counterbalanced across comparison type.

Results and Discussion
The main goal of this experiment was to examine participants' knowledge of principles in question. To achieve this
goal, we considered as choices indicating knowledge only
those for which the participants’ explanation of the choice
was consistent with the principle. This was done because
participants could select principled test stimuli for a reason
that might have nothing to do with the principle in question.
Only explanations directly referring to the principle in questions were considered choice-consistent. The proportion of
consistent choices for each principle is the dependent variable used in the forthcoming analyses.
The degree to which participants in each sample made explanation-consistent principled choices was analyzed using a
one-way ANOVA for each principle across samples. Table 1
presents overall percentages of explanation-consistent prin-

cipled choices aggregated across trials by principles and age
groups. The ANOVA for explanation-consistent associativity choices yielded a significant difference among the samples in the proportion of choices made, F (4, 92) = 30.72,
MSE = .07, p < .001. The percentage of explanationconsistent associativity choices increases monotonically
across the five samples. The ANOVA for explanationconsistent commutativity choices also indicated that there
was a significant difference among the samples in the proportion of choices made, F (4, 92) = 23.61, MSE = .08, p <
.001. As shown in Table 1, the percentage of explanationconsistent commutativity choices also increases monotonically across the five samples.
Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses)
for percentage of explanation-consistent principled choices
in Experiment 1.
--------------------------------------------------------------------Principle
---------------------------------------------Sample
Associativity
Commutativity
--------------------------------------------------------------------Younger children 0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)
Older children
2.08 (6.04)
9.03 (17.32)
Undergraduates
10.66 (26.15)
20.44 (30.71)
History grads
26.39 (38.89)
36.81 (35.54)
Math grads
80.00 (36.34)
77.22 (35.95)
--------------------------------------------------------------------Bonferroni post-hoc tests (with α = .05) were used to
compare the mean proportion of explanation-consistent
principled choices for each sample. These tests yielded
identical patterns for both the associativity and commutativity principles, indicating that there were not significant differences in the proportion of explanation-consistent principled choices by younger children, older children, and undergraduates, that History graduate students made significantly
more explanation-consistent principled choices than younger
children, and that Mathematics graduate students made significantly more explanation-consistent principled choices
than each of the other four samples.
Results from Experiment 1 point to several important
regularities. First, experts were found to consistently represent principles when categorizing arithmetic equations,
whereas novices were more likely to focus on surface features rather than on principles; even when novices did focus
on principles, they did so inconsistently. Second, very few
younger children exhibited knowledge of principles in question. Third, expert-novice differences were not limited to
age or general intelligence: history graduate students and
math experts, equally aged groups with similar levels of
overall intelligence, exhibited large differences in using
deep principled features. Thus the experiment allows us to
eliminate the possibility that general ability or development
account for expert-novice differences.
However, Experiment 1 left an important question unanswered: it remains unknown why many novices failed to
focus on deep principled features. One possibility is that
novices merely lack knowledge of these principles. A sec-

ond possibility is that surface elements are more available
than deep relational features due to a more frequent use of
the former. The goal of Experiment 2 is examine the two
possibilities.

Experiment 2
To accomplish the main goal of this experiment (i.e., to
distinguish among the above mentioned possibilities), it was
necessary to observe whether novices represent principled
features when these features do not compete with surface
elements. In the current study, then, participants were given
a number of trials in which the target problem shared a principled feature with one of the test problems, and shared no
unique surface features with the other test problem. We refer
to these trials as “unmasked” since principled features are no
longer attentionally “masked” by surface elements.
In addition, in the current experiment the “unmasked” trials are followed by “masked” trials equivalent to the trials in
Experiment 1, in which the surface elements are reintroduced to compete with principled features in participants’
similarity judgments. This will enable the examination of the
degree to which representations of principled features will
be maintained, or whether the surface features will draw
attention away from principled features, such that there is no
transfer of representation due to the positive learning set. If
the former is true, then it is expected that participants’ explanation-consistent principled choices will be more frequent for the subsequent “masked” trials than they were in
Experiment 1; if the latter is true, then there should be no
difference between the frequency of these choices.
If novices are more likely to make explanation-consistent
principled choices in "unmasked" trials, it indicates that they
have knowledge of the principles in question, thus undermining the lack of knowledge explanation. If novices are
more likely to represent principles in “unmasked” trials but
there is no transfer to “masked” trials, this finding would
undermine the availability explanation.

Method
Participants Three samples were selected for Experiment 2,
each representing a different age group. Two of the groups,
the “younger children” and the “older children” used the
same participants from Experiment 1; Experiment 2 was
conducted approximately four months after Experiment 1 for
both samples. The third group of participants consisted of 19
undergraduates in an introductory psychology course at a
large mid-western university who participated for course
credit. This group had an average age of 21.79 years (SD =
6.49), with 12 women and 7 men.
Materials and Procedure The same principled features
(i.e., associativity and commutativity) and surface features
(i.e., digit, sign, and number of elements) used in Experiment 1 were used in Experiment 2. The same nine comparisons used in the previous experiment were again used here
for the last 27 trials (three trials for each of the nine comparisons). In addition, in the current experiment, the first

eight trials consisted of ‘unmasked’ comparisons, thus leading to a total of 35 trials.
For the “unmasked” trials, each of the two principled
features (i.e., commutativity and associativity) was compared four times against ‘control’ problems. For these trials,
the two test problems were equivalently similar to the target
on nonprincipled features, while one test problem shared a
principled feature with the target problem. For example, for
an unmasked-commutativity trial, the target equation was 2
+ 6 + 8 = 6 + 8 + 2, the commutativity Test equation was 11
+ 1 + 5 = 5 + 1 + 11, and the control Test equation was 3 +
9 + 5 = 12 + 4 + 1.

Results and Discussion
We first analyze performance in "unmasked" and "masked"
trials across the three groups of novices. For purposes of
clarity, we will refer to "masked" trials in Experiment 1 as
Masked 1, whereas "masked" trials in Experiment 2 will be
referred to as Masked 2. Again, when analyzing performance, we will focus on the proportion of choices made by
participants for only the trials in which mathematical principles were present, and we will consider only those choices
for which the participants’ explanation of the choice was
consistent with the principle. We first present the analyses of
Unmasked and Masked 2 trials, followed by comparisons
across Masked 1, Unmasked, and Masked 2 conditions.
The degree to which participants in each sample made explanation-consistent principled choices in the Unmasked
comparisons was analyzed using a one-way ANOVA for
each principle across the three samples. The ANOVAs for
explanation-consistent associativity and commutativity
choices revealed significant differences among the samples
in the proportion of choices made, Fs (2, 51) > 5.42, ps <
.01. As evidenced in Table 2, the percentage of explanationconsistent principled choices increased monotonically with
age.
Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for
percentage of explanation-consistent principled choices in
Experiment 2.
--------------------------------------------------------------------Trial Type
--------------------------------------Sample
Unmasked
Masked 2
--------------------------------------------------------------------Associativity
Younger Children
0.00 (0.00)
1.17 (5.10)
Older Children
20.31 (29.18)
6.94 (15.11)
Undergraduates
27.63 (36.22)
18.13 (27.27)
--------------------------------------------------------------------Commutativity
Younger Children
15.79 (30.29)
1.75 (7.65)
Older Children
67.19 (29.89)
15.28 (22.18)
Undergraduates
90.79 (20.77)
35.09 (36.71)
--------------------------------------------------------------------Bonferroni post-hoc tests (with α = .05) were used to
compare the mean proportion of explanation-consistent
principled choices for Unmasked trials for each sample. For
associativity trials, this test indicates only one statistically

100

Percentage of explanation-consistent
principled choices

significant difference among samples, that undergraduates
made more explanation-consistent associativity choices than
younger children. However, for commutativity trials, all
between-sample comparisons were statistically significant.
Aggregated across both principles, less than 10% of the
younger children's responses were principle-based, while
almost 50% of older children's responses and over 60% of
undergraduate students' responses were principle-based.
It should be noted that there were large differences in the
proportion of participants focusing on commutativity and
associativity, with the former being greater than the latter.
However, even for associativity, where effects were smaller
than for commutativity, around 50% of older children and
undergraduates provided at least one explanation-consistent
principled choice, thus exhibiting knowledge of the principle
in question.
The degree to which participants in each sample made explanation-consistent principled choices in the Masked 2
comparisons was also analyzed using a one-way ANOVA
for each principle across samples. The ANOVAs for explanation-consistent associativity and commutativity choices
yielded a significant difference among the samples in the
proportion of choices made, Fs (2, 51) > 4.1, ps < .05.
Again, as evidenced in Table 2, the percentage of explanation-consistent principled choices increases monotonically
with age.
Bonferroni post-hoc tests (with α = .05) were again used
to compare the mean proportion of explanation-consistent
principled choices for Masked 2 trials for each sample. For
both principles, this test indicates only one statistically significant difference among samples that undergraduates made
more explanation-consistent principled choices than did
younger children. These data in conjunction with the results
of the Unmasked condition suggest that even when participants knew the principle in question, they often focused on
surface features.
Overall proportions of explanation-consistent principled
choices in Masked 1, Unmasked, and Masked 2 trials aggregated across the principles and broken down by sample are
presented in Figure 1. Participants’ explanation-consistent
principled choices on Unmasked trials generally increased in
comparison to their choices on Masked 1 trials. Younger
children gave more explanation-consistent commutativity
choices for Unmasked trials than for Masked 1 trials (t =
2.27, p < .05), though there was not a significant difference
in the amount of explanation-consistent associativity
choices, which is due to a floor effect. Older children gave
more explanation-consistent principled choices for Unmasked trials than for Masked 1 trials for both principles (t
= 2.65, p < .02 for associativity, and t = 9.8, p < .001 for
commutativity). Undergraduates gave more explanationconsistent commutativity choices for Unmasked trials than
for Masked 1 trials (t = 8.59, p < .001), though there was a
marginally significant difference in the amount of explanation-consistent associativity choices (t = 1.81, p = .078).
These differences indicate that unmasking increased the
proportion of principled choices in all samples.

90
80

Experiment 1 - Masked 1
Experiment 2 - Unmasked
Experiment 2 - Masked 2

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Younger Children

Older Children

Undergraduates

Sample

Figure 1. Percentage of explanation-consistent principled
choices for each sample for unmasked” and “masked” trials
in Experiment 2, and “masked” trials in Experiment 1.
Participants’ explanation-consistent principled choices on
Masked 2 trials generally decreased in comparison to their
choices on Unmasked trials. Younger children gave more
explanation-consistent commutativity choices for Unmasked
trials than for Masked 2 trials (t = 2.37, p < .05), though
there was not a significant difference in the amount of explanation-consistent associativity choices, which is due to a
floor effect. Older children gave more explanationconsistent principled choices for Unmasked trials than for
Masked 2 trials for both principles (t = 2.74, p < .02 for associativity, and t = 8.15, p < .001 for commutativity). Undergraduates gave more explanation-consistent commutativity choices for Unmasked trials than for Masked 2 trials (t =
7.23, p < .001), though there was a marginally significant
difference in the amount of explanation-consistent associativity choices (t = 1.81, p = .078). These differences indicate
that there was not pure transfer of representations from Unmasked to Masked 2 trials: once principled features had to
compete again with surface features, the number of explanation-consistent principled choices decreased markedly.
An important question is whether the transfer led to a significant increase of explanation-consistent principled
choices compared to when participants were never exposed
to Unmasked trials. That is, whether being exposed to a
positive learning set significantly increased subsequent attention to principles. To answer this question, we compared
participants’ explanation-consistent principled choices on
the Masked 1 and Masked 2 trials. While the proportions of
explanation-consistent principled choices are somewhat
larger for each sample and each principle on Masked 2 trials
than for Masked 1 trials (as evidenced in Figure 3), t-tests
for each comparison revealed that none of these differences
are statistically significant. Thus, the positive learning set of
the Unmasked trials had a nonsignificant effect on the degree to which participants represented principled features of
mathematics problems.
Overall, results of Experiment 2 indicate that 94% of the
middle school participants and 100% of the undergraduate
participants exhibited knowledge of principles in question

(i.e., provided an explanation-consistent principled choice
on at least one trial), focusing on these principles in Unmasked trials. This finding severely undermines the lack of
knowledge explanation. At the same time, the increase in
younger children's principled choices due to "unmasking"
was rather small, which points to a lack of knowledge. However, even in the two older groups, once nonprincipled features were reintroduced, representation of principled properties attenuated to levels similar to Experiment 1, a finding
that undermines the availability explanation.

Conclusion
The results of the two reported experiments establish a
difference in the content of expert and novice representations for arithmetic problems. These results suggest that the
observed differences do not stem from a lack of knowledge
of deep principles by novices. The results further suggest
that differences in content of problem representations in
experts and novices may stem from different processing
mechanisms underlying the construal of problem representations in experts and novices. The research presented in
Part 2 will focus the examination of the processes of construal of problem representations by expert and novices.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by a grant from James S.
McDonnell Foundation to the second author.

References
Adelson, B. (1984). When novices surpass experts: The difficulty of a task may increase with expertise. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 10, 483-495.
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bassok, M. (1996). Using content to interpret structure: Effects on analogical transfer. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5, 54-58.
Bassok, M. (1997). Two types of reliance on correlations
between content and structure in reasoning about word
problems. In L. D. English (Ed.), Mathematical reasoning: Analogies, metaphors, and images. Mahwah: NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blessing, S. B., & Ross, B. H. (1996). Content effects in
problem categorization and problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 22, 792-810.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. G., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E.; Byrne, R. M. J. (1993).
Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction. Hove,
England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Everyday Mathematics: Teacher's Reference Manual
(1998). Chicago, IL: Everyday Learning.

Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition, 15,
332-340.
Johnson-Laird, P., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kaiser, M. K., McCloskey, M., & Proffitt, D. R. (1986).
Development of intuitive theories of motion: Curvilinear
motion in the absence of external forces. Developmental
Psychology, 22, 67-71.
Larkin, J. (1983). The role of problem representation in
physics. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Larkin, J. H., McDermott, J., Simon, D. P., & Simon, H. A.
(1980). Models of competence in solving physics problems. Cognitive Science, 4, 317-345.
McClosskey, M. (1983). Naïve theories of motion. In D.
Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Morris, A. K., & Sloutsky, V. M. (1998). Understanding of
logical necessity: Developmental antecedents and cognitive consequences. Child Development, 69, 721-741.
Novick, L. R. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem similarity, and expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 14, 510-520.
Reed, S. K., Ackinclose, C. C., & Voss, A. A. (1990). Selecting analogous problems: Similarity versus inclusiveness. Memory & Cognition, 18, 83-98.
Schoenfeld, A. H., & Herrmann, D. J. (1982). Problem perception and knowledge structure in expert and novice
mathematical problem solvers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 8, 484-494.
Silver, E. A. (1981). Recall of mathematical problem information: Solving related problems. Journal of Research in
Mathematics Education, 24, 117-135.
Simon, D. P., & Simon, H. A. (1978). Individual differences
in solving physics problems. In R. S. Siegler, (Ed), Children's thinking: What develops? Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

