UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Regularity and Irregularity in French Inflectional Morphology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c84c1kp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Meunier, Fanny
Marslen-Wilson, William

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Regularity and Irregularity in French Inflectional Morphology
Fanny Meunier (fanny.meunier@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit;
Cambridge, UK

William Marslen-Wilson (william.marslen-wilson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit;
Cambridge, UK

Abstract
Can regular and irregular verb forms be accommodated by a
single representational mechanism or is a dual mechanism account required? In a first experiment, we used a cross-modal
repetition priming paradigm to investigate the mental representation of regular and irregular verb forms in French. Subjects heard a spoken prime (such as aimons) immediately
followed by lexical decision to a visual probe (such as aimer).
We contrasted four types of French verbs, varying in the
phonological and morphological regularity of their verb form
inflection. These were (i) regular verbs (aimons/aimer) (ii)
verbs that undergo predictable phonological changes
(sèment/semer) (iii) verbs to which sub-rules apply
(teignent/teindre) and (iv) irregular verbs with idiosyncratic
alternations (vont/aller). The infinitive forms of these verbs
were presented as target in three prime conditions: preceded
either by a regular form, an irregular/modified form (except
for the regular verbs), or a control unrelated prime. Morphologically related primes, whether regular or irregular, significantly facilitated lexical decision responses for all four verb
classes. The same pattern of results was observed in a second
experiment using a masked priming paradigm. These results
contrasted with English, where regularly inflected verbs
prime their stems but irregular verbs do not. We argue that
the pattern observed in French reflects the decomposability of
French irregular forms.

Introduction
Psycholinguistic models have proposed a distinction between information that can be obtained through rules and
information that must be recalled from a list. On the one
hand, distributed approaches argue for a single mechanism
underlying the representation and processing of both regular
and irregular items (Plunkett & Marchman, 1993) and, on
the other hand, symbolic approaches argue for a dual
mechanism account, where regular forms are generated by
rule but irregular forms are stored as rote-learned whole
forms (e.g. Pinker, 1991). Many studies tackle this issue by
trying to determine whether the co-occurrence of regular
and irregular verb forms in a given language can be accommodated by a single representational mechanism or
whether a dual mechanism account is required.
In English, verbs have only three types of morphological
processing contexts: 3rd person singular, past tense and
progressive forms (jumps, jumping, jumped). This inflec-

tional system offers a sharp contrast between a single,
dominant, regular process of past-tense formation (adding
the regular affix –ed to an unchanged stem) and a small,
heterogeneous group of irregular past-tense forms (mostly
of an idiosyncratic nature).
Several sources of evidence suggest that the linguistic differences between regular and irregular forms lead to differences in the way these forms are represented in the English
mental lexicon. A major source of evidence is research using repetition priming tasks, where a test word is preceded
by a related prime word. The target word walk, for example,
is preceded either by a morphologically related word (e.g.
walked), or an unrelated word (e.g. goal). Previous research
done in English shows diminished or absent priming between irregular tense and the stem (drove/drive) versus a
strong priming effect between regular pairs such as
walked/walk (Kempley & Morton, 1982; Napps, 1989;
Stanners, Neiser, Hernon & Hall, 1979). Pinker (1991)
claimed that these results support the dual mechanism dichotomy. Convergent results have been observed using the
cross-modal paradigm, where the prime is presented auditorily (Marslen-Wilson, Hare & Older, 1995). Again significant priming is only observed for regular inflected forms
(such as walked/walk) and not for irregular ones (such as
dug/dig).
In this framework, priming is explained as reflecting the
fact that regular forms share a representation with their
stem, and both inflected and non-inflected forms of a given
verb map directly onto the representation of the stem at the
level of the lexical entry. The morphological priming effect
results from the repeated activation of the same morpheme
by prime and target. On the contrary, an irregular form will
have a separate form representation from the stem to which
it is related and this may lead to a reduction of priming between the two items, under specific testing conditions. This
may be due either to competition between the two representations (stem and irregular form) or as a consequence of
the blocking function assigned to the listed irregular form
(the presence of a lexical entry for the irregular form will
prevent the application of the default suffix).
One problem with English, however, as a basis for generalisations about regularity and irregularity, is that the English past-tense forms do not differ simply in regularity, but
also along a number of dimensions, including contrasts in

basic morphological procedure (suffixation versus stem
change), the absence versus presence of phonological constraints on morphological processes, and high versus low
type frequency of classes of past forms. In order to disentangle potential evidence about the general properties of
morphological systems from the possible idiosyncrasies of
English past tense formation, it is necessary to conduct parallel experiments in other languages which exhibit comparable but cleaner contrasts between regular and irregular
procedures.
One language that we have looked at already in this light
is Italian. This is a much richer inflected language (with
many different types of tense and person suffixes) where
there are a number of irregular past-tense forms that obey
similar criteria for irregularity as the English irregulars, but
where they occur in a morphologically more structured and
phonologically more predictable linguistic environment.
Using a cross-modal priming paradigm, Orsolini and Marslen-Wilson (1997) observed the same amount of priming
when the prime was regular and when it was irregular. They
suggest a possible account that attempts to capture the subregularities of the verb forms through an explicit system of
rules rather than relying on an analogical network to represent them implicitly.
Here we report an extension of this research to French,
which, like Italian, has a richer inflectional system than
English, and which allows us to explore a wider range of
types of irregularity. In French, verbs are organised into
three basic morphological classes, called conjugations.
These distinctions use as first criteria the infinitive form and
as second the imperfect form. The major class is conjugation 1, containing verbs with infinitives ending in –er (such
as aimer, voler..). This is the most productive class and fully
regular. Conjugation 2 is formed by verbs that have an infinitive in –ir and imperfect in –iss- (such as finir, salir…).
It is a smaller class than conjugation 1 and it is no longer
productive, but it is fully regular. Conjugation 3 contains
verbs with infinitives ending in –ir (and that do not have an
imperfect in –iss-), -oir, -re (such as dormir, boire, peindre…) and the verb aller. Verbs contained in this group are
highly irregular.
In our experiment we used four types of verbs. The first
condition was wholly regular verbs from the first conjugation such as aimer; the second condition was regular verbs
from the first conjugation but that in a few forms have a
phonologically triggered surface change, such as ameneramène. These types of phonological changes (reflecting a
high/low alternation) are also observed in the case of gender
marking (fermier-fermière). We will call this condition the
morphophonological constraint group. The third group consisted of irregular verbs from conjugation 3 but where the
irregularities were common to at least 10 verbs such as teindre-teignent, peindre-peignent. Verbs in this group are closest to the ones used in the Italian experiment; we will refer
to it as the sub-regularity group. The fourth group, more
similar to the type of irregularity found in English was made
up of highly idiosyncratic suppletive alternations such as
aller-vont.
If the patterns of results observed in English and in Italian
are not language specific but are due to the type of irregu-

larities then in French we should observe the same amount
of priming when the prime is regular and in the morphophonological and sub-regularity irregular conditions. On the
contrary, when the prime is an idiosyncratic form, we may,
as in English, observe no or less priming than with a regular
form. Priming effects in this experiment are evaluated by
comparing reaction times when the prime is related versus
unrelated to the target, and also by comparing response latencies when the related prime is regular and when it is irregular.

Experiment 1
Method
Material and Design We used a cross-modal paradigm.
The prime was auditorily presented and immediately followed by a visual presentation of the target-item. Subjects
made a lexical decision response to the visual target, which
was preceded by a regular or irregular related or unrelated
prime.
Ninety-six verbs falling in four categories were selected,
as described earlier, and examples are listed in Table 1 below. We used as the target the infinitive form of the verb.
We chose for each verb of each category, three types of
prime (verb forms): A regular form, an irregular form and a
control (or baseline) word matched on the regular form. To
keep the design balanced, regular verb targets were preceded by two different regular targets. Targets were between 4 and 11 letter long.
Table 1: Examples of stimuli.
Verb Type

Infinitive
Target

Forms
Regular
aimerons
aimons

Irregular

Regular

aimer

n/a

Morphophonologic
constraints

semer

semons

sème

Sub regularity

teindre

teindra

teignent

Idiosyncratic

aller

allons

iront

For each of the 96 regular primes, we selected a control
word that was matched to the regular experimental prime
for surface frequency, number of syllables and tense and
person of the verb form. None of the neutral condition
words were morphologically, semantically or phonologically related to the target. We also constructed filler pairs in
order to reduce the proportion of related pairs within the
list. We added 64 pairs in which the target was a word (such
as calculons/partir), and 160 pairs in which the target was a
non-word (such as marchera/enteler). Each prime list was
composed of 96 experimental words (of which 64 were related to the target and 32 were not), 64 words with an unrelated target word, 160 words with a nonword target (64

pairs in which prime and target shared formal features and
96 primes followed by a nonword target which was unrelated). To sum up, we had 160 word-word pairs and 160
word-nonword pairs.
In order to avoid the repetition of a given target for a
subject, we constructed 3 experimental lists of 320 items
each. A given target appeared only once in each list: with a
regular related prime in one list, an irregular related prime
in the second list and a control prime in the third one. In
each list, 2/3 of the experimental prime-target pairs were
morphologically related (64 pairs). The number of pairs of
each experimental condition was equal (8) in each list. Each
subject heard only one list so that each saw a third of the
items with a regular related prime, a third with an irregular
related prime and a third with a control prime. The list of
targets was the same for all subjects, only prime lists varied.
To give a break to the subjects we split up each list. Experimental pairs of each condition were equally distributed
in each segment of the list. Each part of the list started with
10 items that were not experimental ones. Before starting to
hear the list itself, the subject had training with 20 primetarget pairs. The experimental session lasted 25 minutes.
Procedure A French female native speaker recorded primes
on a DAT. Each prime was then digitized at a rate of 22kHz
and stored on computer hard disk. Each word was isolated
in a single independent file. This allowed us to control the
time between the end of the prime and the presentation of
the target. The prime was binaurally presented to the subject
and was immediately followed (ISI 0ms) by the presentation
of the target. This latter was written on a CRT screen in
front of the subject. The target stayed on the screen until the
subject made a response. The task of the subject was to push
one of the two buttons on a response box (one for word, the
other for non-word), as fast as he or she could. Subjects
were alone in the testing room.

p<.000; F2(1,92)=2.05, n.s.) but no interaction between
these two factors (F1<1; F2<1). Comparing irregular conditions with control conditions, we observed an effect of morphological
priming
(F1(1,35)=80.43,
p<.000;
F2(1,92)=142.33, p<.000) and an effect of type of verb
(F1(3,105)=7.04, p<.000; F2(1, 92)=2.26, p=.09) but no
interaction between the two (F1(3,105)=1.31, n.s.;
F2(3,92)=1.83, n.s.). Comparing regular and irregular conditions, we observed no effect of type of priming
(F1(1,35)=2.98, n.s.; F2(1,92)=1.01, n.s.), an effect of verb
types per subject (F1(3, 105)=4.31, p<.007; F2(1,92)=1.13,
n.s.) but again no interaction (F1<1; F2<1).
These results show that irregular and regular verb forms
prime their infinitive form equally, and that these priming
effects do not vary with the type of verb (irregular vs.
regular).
Table 2: Results of Experiment 1
Type of verbs Primes
Regular
aimerons
aimons
porterons
Morphosemons
phonologic
sème
constraints
votons
Sub regularity teindra
teignent
nichera
Idiosyncratic
allons
irons
tenons
Note: ** p < .05

Targets RT(ms)
aimer
523
530
567
semer
539
545
596
teindre
553
551
613
aller
544
545
593

Priming
effect
44**
37**
57**
51**
60**
62**
49**
48**

Discussion
Participants Thirty-six students of Psychology at the University Paris V - René Descartes took part to the experiment. All were native French speakers and they were between 18 and 30 years old.

Results
Reaction times higher than 1500 ms were eliminated from
the statistical analyses; less than 1% of reaction times were
suppressed with this criterion. There were 2% of errors on
experimental words. Analyses of variance were conducted
on the inverse reaction time data. This allowed outliers to be
included without unduly affecting the estimates of condition
mean (Ratcliff, 1993; Ulrich & Miller, 1994). Two analyses
have been run: one across subject (F1) and the other across
item (F2). Reaction times per conditions are presented in
Figure 2. This also gives the priming effects and their associated significance values.
First, comparing regular conditions and control conditions, we observed an effect of morphological priming
(F1(1,35)=103.17, p<.000; F2(1,92)=119.45, p<.000) and
an effect of type of verbs per subjects (F1(3,105)=9.19,

This cross-modal priming experiment presented a pattern of
results which was very clear cut: a massive morphological
priming effect and no interaction between this effect and the
type of primes (regular vs. irregular) or the type of verbs.
These results show that in French there is no difference in
the amount of priming produced by a regular verb form and
the one produced by an irregular verb form on the identification of their infinitive.
A major concern in cross modal experiments is to determine if the priming effects observed for morphologically
related pairs are due to shared morphemes in a morphologically structured mental lexicon, or if they are due to the
semantic relationships between the morphologically related
pairs. Given the across-the-board priming effects in Experiment 1, and given that all the primes and targets were
highly semantically as well as morphologically related, we
decided to run the same materials in a second experiment
using a masked priming technique developed by Forster and
Davis (1984). The masked priming technique has been
shown to be highly sensitive to overlap at the level of form
(Forster, Davis, Schoknecht, & Carter, 1987; Forster and
Taft, 1994), but not of meaning. Although masked priming

effects for associatively related pairs have been observed
(Sereno, 1991), no pure semantic effect had been reported.
In masked priming a forward pattern mask is presented immediately before the prime and the prime is then covered by
the target item: this latter is used as a backward mask. The
temporal interval between the onset of the priming stimulus
and the subsequent target stimulus is very brief (47 ms in
our experiment). At these short prime durations, the combination of forward and the backward masking prevents the
subject from consciously seeing the prime. The consequence of this is that the participant's responses are not influenced by a conscious appreciation of the relationship
between the prime and the target. This reduces the possibility that any priming effect is due to the fact that the participant realises that the prime and the target often share a
common morpheme.

Experiment 2
Method
Material and Design Our second experiment used a
masked-priming paradigm with the same stimuli as the previous experiment. We added two additional controls: a semantic condition, where the prime and the target were semantically related, to check that the masked priming paradigm was not picking up semantic effects; and a orthographic condition where the prime and the target orthographically overlapped to the same degree as the related
pairs but had no semantic or morphologic relationship. We
selected 24 target-words. For each target word in this condition (such as mâcher), one prime was semantically related
to the target (broyait), one prime was phonologically related
to the target (machine) and the third type of prime was an
unrelated control (progrès). As a consequence of these
changes we removed 24 word/word filler pairs to keep the
balance between word and nonword answers. As a result
this gave us the same number of items in each list as for the
previous experiment.
Procedure The same hardware and software were used as
in the previous experiment. Each trial consisted of three
visual events. The first was a forward pattern mask consisting of a sequence of ‘#’. The second event was the display
of the prime word for 47 ms. The third event was the presentation of a target word or nonword for 500ms. The prime
was in lower case and the target in upper case to make sure
that the former was appropriately masked. Subjects were
asked to make a quick and accurate lexical decision about
the target by pressing a ‘word’ or ‘nonword’ key. The experiment lasted about 30 minutes and started with 10 practice trials followed by 10 warm-up pairs and then the experimental trials. There were breaks as in the previous experiment. No subjects reported any awareness of the presence of a prime.

Participants Another 42 native French speakers of the
same age and from the same population as before took part
in the experiment.

Results
Reaction times higher than 1500 ms were eliminated from
the statistical analyses; less than 1% of reaction times were
suppressed with this criterion. There were 2% of errors on
experimental words. Analyses of variance were conducted
on the inverse reaction time data both across subject (F1)
and item (F2). Reaction times per condition are presented in
Table 3. This also gives the priming effects and their associated significance values.
Table 3: Results of Experiment 2
Conditions
Regular

Primes

aimerons
aimons
porterons
Morpho-phonologic semons
constraints
sème
votons
Sub regularity
teindra
teignent
nichera
Idiosyncratic
allons
irons
tenons
Semantic and
broyait
Orthographic
machine
Controls
progres
Note: ** p < .05

Targets RT
ms
aimer
551
552
570
semer
569
566
588
teindre 564
578
596
aller
560
578
592
macher 587
599
592

Priming
effect
19**
18**
19**
22**
32**
18**
32**
14**
5
-7

Comparing first regular conditions and control conditions,
we observed an effect of morphological priming
(F1(1,41)=36.74, p<.000; F2(1,92)=59.06, p<.000) and an
effect of type of verb per subject (F1(3, 123)=4.73, p<.004;
F2<1) but no interaction between the two factors (F1<1;
F2<1). Comparing irregular conditions with control conditions, we observed an effect of morphological priming
(F1(1,41)=22.03, p<.000; F2(1,92)=30.96, p<.000) and an
effect of type of verb per subjects (F1(3, 123)=7.84, p<.000;
F2(1, 92)=1.152, n.s.) but no interaction (F1<1; F2<1).
Comparing regular and irregular conditions, we observed no
effect of the type of priming (F1(1,41)=2.16, n.s.;
F2(1,92)=2.09, n.s.), an effect of type of verb per subject
(F1(3, 123)=4.81, p<.003; F2<1) but no interaction
(F1(3,123)=1.31, n.s; F2(3,92)=1.18, n.s.). In the control
condition we found no effect of semantic priming
(F1(1,41)=1.8, n.s.; F2(1,21)=1.05, n.s.) and no effect of
orthographic overlap (F1(1,41)<1; F2<1), allowing us to
rule out accounts of the results in terms of simple form
overlap between prime and target.
These results confirmed the results observed in the crossmodal experiment and show that irregular and regular verb
forms prime their infinitive form equally, and that these

priming effects do not vary with the type of verb (irregular
vs. regular). The fact that these effects are found in a task
which is generally insensitive to semantic relations between
prime and target - and where the semantic control condition
showed no priming - is good evidence that these are genuinely morphological effects, reflecting repeated access to
the same underlying morpheme. This morpheme seems to
be accessed equally effectively, regardless of the degree or
type of irregularity on the prime word.

General Discussion
The question asked here was whether French regular and
irregular inflected forms show different priming patterns, in
the same way as English. The dual mechanism hypothesis
postulates a rule-based symbolic processor that supports the
representation and generation of regular forms, while an
associative rote-memory system is required to account for
irregular forms. Pinker (1991) claimed that the different
priming effect observed in English for regular and irregular
forms support the dual mechanism dichotomy. Using
French we found no such difference. The priming generated
by regular inflected words did not differ from the priming
generated by irregular forms. The facilitatory effects of
morphologically related primes are just as strong whether
they involve the same or different underlying roots as their
targets. Pairs like aimons/aimer prime just as well as pairs
like buvons/boire. These findings seem inconsistent with the
predictions of the dual mechanism hypothesis for the processing behaviour of listed forms in a repetition priming task.
In the framework of the dual mechanism account, because
Conjugation 3 verbal forms are completely idiosyncratic
and unpredictable, they will use rote-learning of irregular
stems and they will be stored as independent but linked
forms in a pattern-associative memory. For a priming task,
this predicts reduced priming between prime/target pairs
involving different underlying roots, a prediction confirmed
in earlier research in English. The results obtained in French
contrast with those obtained in English.
The pattern of results observed in French could be explained in terms of connectionist distributed networks, operating sub-symbolically and without syntax (Rumelhart &
McClelland, 1986; MacWhinney & Leinbach, 1991; Plunkett & Marchman, 1993). Indeed, the absence of interaction
between priming effects observed with regular forms and
priming effects observed with irregular forms seems to go
against the dual mechanism hypothesis. We could argue that
English speakers use rules because the contrast between
regular and irregular verbs is sharp, which is not the case in
French. In French irregular verbs may often have regular
forms in many cases and irregular forms only for particular
tenses and persons. As an example table 4 presents the different forms of the irregular verb aller for three different
tenses and all persons. So for the verb aller, while imperfect
forms are fully regular (such as allais), future forms are all
irregular (such as irai) and the present forms are both regular and irregular, depending of the person (such as allons
and vont). This complexity and the lack of clear-cut distinction between regular and irregular verbs could discourage

the system from relying on rules. However, the idea that the
cognitive system would not be able to use regularities because of the complexity of the verbal system lacks plausibility given the complexity of other processes involved in
language understanding.
Also, the result profile observed in French might not, by
itself, be an insuperable problem for the dual mechanism
account. One possibility is that the processing architecture
of French differs from that of English in ways which allow
listed allomorphs to prime each other. The idea would be
that even if regular forms are retrieved by rule decomposition and not irregular ones, the behavioral output observed
(in this case, the priming effect) would be the same even if
the underlying processes are different.
Table 4: Verbal forms of the verb aller for the three indicative tenses and the three singular and plural persons.
aller
Present Imperfect
Future
(infinitive form)
je (1 sing.)
vais
allais
irai
tu (2 sing.)
vas
allais
iras
il/elle/on (3 sing.)
va
allait
ira
nous (1 plur.)
allons
allons
irons
vous (2 plur.)
allez
allez
irez
ils/elles (3 plur.)
vont
allaient
iront
Note: sing.: singular; plur.: plural; 1: first person (I or we);
2 : second person (you); 3: third person (he/she or they).
Perhaps a more important difference between the idiosyncratic verbal forms in French and the irregular forms in
English is that French forms are decomposable while English forms are not. English irregular forms such as drove or
gave are not only irregular but also cannot be further morphologically decomposed. They must be learnt and represented as unanalysable whole forms. In French, even idiosyncratic irregular forms like buvait (from boire) undergo a
regular suffixation procedure: ‘-ait’ is the regular affix for
the imperfect third person form. Irregular forms in French
are composed of a changed stem plus a regular affix. The
irregularity is in the choice of the stem used but the regular
suffix procedure applies anyway.
Marslen-Wilson et al. (1995) explain the English results
in terms of the inhibitory consequences during acquisition
of having to learn, for each irregular stem, to block the application of the default regular suffix. If indeed in English
the two possible stems compete with each other during
identification in order to block the decomposition process
(in case the form that has to be identified is the irregular
one), such a process would not be necessary in French. For
French irregular verbs, two types of stem would be possible
but even if the form presented is irregular there would not
be the same type of competition because in both cases decomposition would be necessary to reach identification of
the verbal form. Both regular and irregular forms would
follow the same processing pathways - which is arguably
not the case for regular and irregular forms in English (Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1998). If regular and irregular forms
can co-exist in this fashion, then both can be linked to the

underlying verbal morpheme without competition from the
other - and without the requirement to postulate distinct
types of computational procedure to support the generation
and analysis of each type of form.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Medical Research Coucil (U.K). The research of Fanny Meunier has been made
possible by fellowships from the Fyssen Foundation and the
French Foreign Office (Bourse Lavoisier). We thank Juan
Segui for his hospitality during testing and Matthew Brett
for his comments.

References
Forster, K.I., & Davis, C. (1984). Repetition priming and
frequency attenuation in lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 680-698.
Forster, K.I., Davis, C., Schoknecht, C., & Carter, R.
(1987). Masked priming with graphemically related
forms: Repetition or partial activation? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 39, 211-251.
Forster, K.I., and Taft, M. (1994). Bodies, antibodies, and
neighborhood density effects in masked form-priming.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 844-863.
Kempley, S.T., & Morton, J. (1982). The effects of priming with regularity and irregularity related words in
auditory word recognition. British Journal of Psychology, 73, 441-454.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., Hare, M. & Older, L. (1995).
Priming and blocking in the mental lexicon: The English
past tense. Paper presented at the Meeting of the Experimental Psychology Society, London, January.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., & Tyler, L. K, (1998) Rules, representations, and the English past tense. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 428-435.
MacWhinney, B., & Leinbach, J. (1991). Implementations
are not conceptualizations: Revising the verb learning
model. Cognition, 40,121-157.
Napps, S. (1989). Morphemic relationships in the lexicon :
Are they dinstincts from semantic and formal relationships ? Memory and Cognition, 17, 729-739.
Orsolini, M. & Marslen-Wilson, W.D., (1997). Universals
in Morphological Representation: Evidence from Italian.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 12(1), 1-47.
Pinker, S. (1991). Rules of language. Science, 253, 530535.
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning
to system building: Acquiring verb morphology in children and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Ratcliff, R. (1993). Methods for dealing with reaction time
outliers. Psychological Bulletin, 114(3), 510-532.

Rumelhart, D.E., & McClelland, J.L. (1986). On learning
the past tenses of English verbs. In D.E. Rumelhart &
J.L McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume
2. Psychological and biological models (pp. 216-271).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sereno, J. A. (1991). Graphemic, associative, and syntactic
priming effects at a brief stimulus onset asynchrony in
lexical decision and naming, Journal of Experimental
Psychology : Learning, Memory and Cognition, 17(3),
459-477.
Stanners, R.F., Neiser, J.J., Hernon, W.P. and Hall, R.
(1979). Memory representation for morphologically related words. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 339-413.
Ulrich, R., & Miller, J. (1994). Effects of truncation on reaction time analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 123(1), 34-80.

