UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representational Scaffolding During Scientific Inquiry: Interpretive and Expressive use of
Inscriptions in Classroom Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3xq4s91z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Toth, Eva Erdosne

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representational Scaffolding During Scientific Inquiry: Interpretive and Expressive
use of Inscriptions in Classroom Learning
Eva Erdosne Toth (etoth+@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology; 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
External representations (inscriptions) such as tables,
visualizations, graphs and diagrams have been widely studied
to determine their cognitive effects. However, a researchbased pedagogy for their classroom use is yet to be offered.
The two independent studies presented here are conceived
from the same standpoint: the cognitive effects of inscriptions
are influenced by the mode of their use (interpretive or
expressive). The results of these studies indicate that the
interpretive and expressive use of different external
representations during scientific inquiry influenced students’
(1) understanding the logic of designing experiments and
their (2) ability to coordinate experimental data with theories.
Representational scaffolding with collaboratively shared
evidential-consistency maps helped students overcome
traditional “inquiry traps” such as confirmation bias. These
results show that representational scaffolding can provide an
effective pedagogy for cognitively-based instructional
interventions to teach scientific inquiry skills.

Introduction
Representing knowledge with inscriptions such as pictures,
diagrams and maps is a pivotal aspect of scientific practice.
These external representations can be tools to think with for
the clarification of ideas while designing experiments,
analyzing data, and formulating theories. They can also be
tools to talk with, aiding communication between a
community of scientist-peers. Increasingly, everyday
decisions are based on information presented with external
representations found in textbooks, newspapers and even on
breakfast cereal boxes. Today it is considered part of basic
education to be able to understand and communicate with
external representations. Arguably, external representations
are at the center of both scientific and everyday reasoning.
Thus a study of how one learns to make sense of and reason
with representations has great significance.
For the purpose of research on learning, external
representations should be differentiated from the internal
products of one's thinking, often also described with the
terminology "representations" (Kotovsky & Simon, 1990). I
use the word "inscriptions" (Latour & Woolgar, 1979;
Lehrer & Schauble, 1998) interchangeably with "external
representations" and with both I refer to artifacts of thinking
existing outside of one's head. My primary aim with this
article is to describe the potential use of these external
representations of thinking to scaffold learning. First, I
describe the theoretical grounding of my overall approach to
the understanding and use of inscriptions in classroom

learning. Next, I detail two studies, which describe the
effects of inscriptions on two crucial aspects of scientific
inquiry: (a) the logical process of setting up informative (unconfounded) experiments and (b) the reasoning associated
with making sense of empirical observations by building
evidential-consistency relationships between experimental
data and theories. Finally, I describe the implications of
these results for learning and teaching scientific inquiry
skills and outline future research to further develop a
cognitively-based pedagogy built on representational
scaffolding.

Theoretical grounding
My analysis of the educational benefit of various forms of
external representations starts with a framework outlining
the cognitive value of inscriptions. Developed by Collins
and Ferguson (1993), this framework states that each form
of external representation carries with it a methodology or
heuristic for its use. External representations function
through two mechanisms. They can (a) narrow the space of
information search by localizing the most important
message into perceptually salient, jointly displayed chunks
(Larkin & Simon, 1987). They can also (b) provide a way
for previously obscured information to become available (to
“emerge”) during the development and interpretation of
inscriptions (Koedinger, 1992). That is, external
representations scaffold activity by making certain aspects
of inquiry salient (Stenning & Oberlander, 1995) and by
constraining the user to certain activities (Suthers, 1999).
With such mechanisms external representations provide
representational scaffolding during classroom learning.
For example, students provided with the table shown in
Figure 1a can clearly see that the most important variables
to consider when determining what makes balls roll farther
down ramps are the steepness of the ramp, the length of run,
the surface of the ramp and the type of ball. No other
variable is deemed important by the developer of this table,
thus students’ thinking is constrained to these essentials.
One salient piece of information from this table is that all
four of these variables should be considered for each
apparatus of a simultaneous comparison (for both ramp A
and ramp B).
Another salient component of experimental design
emerges when students fill this table out. If students neglect
to pay attention to any of the variables on one of the ramps
the missing information becomes salient – as indicated by

the empty cells in Figure 1b. Thus, representational
scaffolding can provide an innovative instructional
methodology to teach students how to design informative
(un-confounded) experiments.
VARIABLES
Surface
Steepness
Length of run
Type of ball

RAMP A

RAMP B

Representational scaffolding during scientific
experimentation
Subjects and Procedures

Figure 1a. Representational scaffolding by constraining
students' thinking to the focal elements of
experimentation.
VARIABLES
Surface
Steepness
Length of run
Type of ball

in the further refinement of an instructional methodology
that is built on representational scaffolding.

RAMP A
Smooth
High
Long
Golf

RAMP B
Rough
High

Figure 1b. Representational scaffolding by the salience
of empty cells drawing students' attention to variables
that may have been ignored during experimental testing.
With few exceptions (Lehrer & Schauble,1998) however,
the full potential of the use of inscriptions in classroom
science learning environments has not been examined.
There are two modes of using inscriptions: interpretive
and expressive. These two modes are inherently combined
during the development and the use of external
representations in scientific practice. In classroom
environments, however, students usually use inscriptions
interpretively: they are given a teacher-developed external
representation to make sense of by observing parts or by
completing, “filling it out” – as shown in Figure 1.
Expressive use of inscriptions entails the active generation
of a form of external representation with the aim of
communicating an idea. While students’ active generation
and manipulation of their own knowledge is considered
important under the currently dominant constructivist
pedagogy, inscriptions are rarely used expressively by
students during classroom learning.
The study of inscription use in classroom learning
environments is best approached by the examination of
students’ difficulties with each of these modes of using
inscriptions. The first study described here shows how
students used inscriptions both interpretively and
expressively while designing and conducting scientific
experiments and recording data results. The second study
describes the effects of a software tool that eases students'
way into working with external representations. Both of
these studies illustrate the value of learning with inscriptions
and indicate which student difficulties should be considered

Two classrooms of 28, 4th grade students experimented in
small groups of 3-4 to determine what makes balls roll
farther down on ramps. The instructional goal was to teach
valid experimentation skills, specifically the control of
variables strategy or CVS. The task of each student group
was to design experiments with a pair of physical ramps and
record their experiments in laboratory notebooks. The
outcome of the research-based methodology to teach valid
experimentation skills from this study was detailed in Toth,
Klahr & Chen (in press). The present paper focuses on the
effects of using inscriptions during scientific inquiry in the
classroom. Two slightly different procedures were
employed by the classroom teacher, each allowing a focused
view at either the interpretive or the expressive use of
inscriptions.
During the first week of instruction student groups
learned how to create controlled comparisons with pairs of
ramps and filled out a teacher-specified table of dependent
and independent variables to indicate their experimental
setup. This table representation was similar to that in Figure
1, with the exception that the two possible values for each of
the four variables were already provided in the cells of this
table. The students' role was simply to circle the variable
value of their choice to map their ramp setup onto the table.
Prior to experimentation, students were specifically taught
how to conduct this mapping activity. This interpretive use
of inscriptions was intended to help students as well as the
teacher keep track of the experimental designs used over
time. The researcher's classroom observation notes recorded
student's activities and their difficulties.
During the second week of the study - after two weeks of
spring break – the students applied the previously learned
skill of designing controlled experiments to learn more
about ramps. This time they designed experiments using one
ramp at a time. They were asked to record each of their
experiments into any external representations of their choice
(expressive use). Data sources included videotapes of
classroom experimentation, laboratory notebooks recorded
by students and the researchers’ observation notes. Students'
expressive use of inscriptions was scored using a modified
version of a quantitative coding scheme suggested by
Kosslyn (1989). The scoring included attention to how the
inscription communicated the logical design of experiments
and the clarity of reasoning inherent in it.

Results and Discussion
Interpretive use of inscriptions Classroom observations of
the interpretive use of inscriptions (first week) indicated that

as soon as students looked at the teacher-developed table
and tried to fill it out, they wanted to go back to the physical
ramps and make changes to the setup of the variables. They
indicated that they wished to set their tests up "better" or
"differently." While this intent of the students created a
slight problem for the experimenters – who at the time were
interested in documenting students’ developing knowledge
of experimentation strictly adhering to a prior protocol
developed during laboratory studies (Chen & Klahr, 1999) –
this observation soon lead to the realization that the
interpretive use of the pre-developed table representation
may have helped students abstract the overall structure of
the experiment and thus aided their understanding of the
design of un-confounded experiments. I hypothesize that as
students filled out their teacher-defined table an important
characteristic of scientific inquiry may have become salient
to them: the criteria that all important variables of an
experimental setup should be considered during
experimental design. As outlined above (Figure 1) this table
constrained students' thinking to the most important
variables, but also made student errors in designing
informative (controlled) experiments salient to them. If one
of the variables was not attended, this omission became
obvious (“emerged”) during the work with the
representation. Similarly, if two variables were changed
instead of one between experiments (a confounded
experiment was created) this oversight was made
perceptually salient. Thus information previously not
available to students became obvious through the
representational scaffolding provided by the use of this
inscription.
After a week of focused experimentation and instruction,
students learned the strategy of creating controlled
experiments from which they could tell with certainty the
effect of any focal variable under investigation (Toth, Klahr
& Chen, in press). Having learned to overcome systemic
error with the use of the control of variables strategy (CVS)
during experimentation, students were presented with a new
challenge: to record their experiments with inscriptions of
their own choice (expressive use) while they continued
applying CVS to learn more about variables associated with
ramps. The subsequent analysis of the student-developed
inscriptions from this second week of study revealed various
student difficulties.
Expressive use of inscriptions Two characteristics of the
expressive use of inscription were noticeably difficult for
students: (1) using the common techniques of developing
inscriptions (using labels and data correctly in a coordinated
way) and (2) reasoning scientifically with inscriptions.
Various problems resulting from the lack of experience with
a common representational technique were identified.
Common problems included missing labels, missing data
content and insufficient alignment of data with labels.
Students’ laboratory notebooks fell into three specific
patterns in terms of reasoning scientifically about

experiments through inscriptions: (a) showing incorrect
CVS only, (b) showing a combination of correct and
incorrect CVS over time, (c) indicating a possible search for
interaction of variables without clear CVS design
These effects were found even after students were
documented to have learned the control of variables strategy
(Toth, Klahr and Chen, in press). That is the effect found
here can be attributed to either students' inability to use
external representations or the lack of transfer of the CVS
strategy to situations slightly changed from the condition of
learning.
Overall it appears that the interpretive use of a wellselected external representation (Figure 1) can positively
influence student’s understanding of skills associated with
scientific inquiry. This effect is due to the representational
scaffolding inherent in any form of inscription. This
characteristic makes certain inscriptions especially fitting
for a learning task while not appropriate for others. In this
example, a table representation appears to be fitting for the
interpretive task of abstracting and combining the logical
components of scientific experimentation. However, the
expressive use of inscriptions is more problematic as it
should consider the structure of the domain, the goal of the
activity as well as the cognitive state of the interpreter. It is
hypothesized that innovative pedagogies such as
collaborative reflection and discussion conducted through
external representations may help students learn the skills of
developing effective inscriptions.
The next study describes a software tool called Belvedere
(Suthers et al., 1997) that eases students’ way into working
with external representations. It also details the effects of
representational scaffolding by different forms of
representations and suggests a reflective methodology to
support the use of inscriptions in classroom learning
environments.

Representational scaffolding while
coordinating data with theories
Subjects and Procedures
Four classrooms of 9th grade students (N = 73) participated
in a 2X2 research design in which the effects of two
different external representations (evidence mapping vs.
prose writing) was studied. As part of their science class–
taught by their regular science teacher–the students
participated in problem-based-learning. They were
presented with a set of scientific challenges to which no
known solutions existed at the time. Their task was to
explore web-based information sources – a set of researcher
developed1, hypertext materials – and to find a solution to a
scientific challenge such as mass extinctions, the evolution
of marine iguanas or the sudden appearance of a mysterious
1

The materials used in this study were developed primarily
by Arlene Weiner with assistance from the author.

disease. Evidence mapping entailed using a shared, whiteboarding software tool, BELVEDERE, to diagram evidential
consistency relationships between hypotheses and data.
BELVEDERE's
main menu provided epistemological
categories that included object-shapes for hypotheses
(rounded rectangle shapes in Figure 2), data (rectangle
shapes in Figure 2) and links to indicate consistency ("for"
links), inconsistency ("against" links) and conjunction
("and" links) between data and hypotheses (Figure 2).

reflection as well as during final assessment of performance.
Students who did not use the explicit reflection were only
implicitly prompted about the criteria by which their work
will be evaluated. It was expected that this implicit
prompting would result from the structure of the challenge
materials and the nature of the inquiry activity.
Thus each of the four classrooms was randomly assigned
to one of the following treatments: Map&Reflect, MapNoReflect, Prose&Reflect, Prose-NoReflect (Figure 3).
Treatment

Materials

Representation

Reflection

Map &
Reflect

HyperMedia

Mapping

Reflection

Map NoReflect

HyperMedia

Mapping

NoReflection

Prose &
Reflect
Prose NoReflect

HyperMedia
HyperMedia

Prose

Reflection

Prose

NoReflection

Figure 3. Elements of experimental design for study two.

Figure 2. Example evidence map created with the
BELVEDERE software tool.
The diagramming activity started with explorating the webbased materials for information and continued with
recording ideas using the software tool. In order to make
this record with the mapping tool students needed to
categorize the currently considered information as data or
hypothesis, select from the appropriate shape from the menu
pallet and copy the information being considered into the
selected object-shape. Similarly students could choose links
from the menu to indicate evidential consistency
relationships between data and hypotheses (Figure 2.)
Students not using the software tool for mapping used
prose writing to record their thinking during inquiry. Prose
writing consisted of using a word-processor to write a prosebased account of exploring the web-based materials and
solving the challenge problem. Students were instructed to
record the main aspects of their inquiry: both data and
hypotheses and detail how they decided on a conclusion. In
addition, one of the classrooms in each condition (mapping
and prose) was given a method of explicitly reflecting on
the process of their inquiry by using a paper-based handout
of specific inquiry criteria detailing optimal performance
during inquiry. These so-called “reflective assessment
rubrics” were used from the beginning of inquiry for

The effects of representational scaffolding on students'
inquiry skills was analyzed from students' inquiry artifacts the products of their work (maps or pose). Though students
conducted many units of problem-based-learning, the results
discussed here are from the first unit only. This unit was
chosen with the expectation that the use of inscriptions in
the early stages of inquiry would provide intricate details of
representational scaffolding inherent in these inscriptions. It
was expected that this software tool will ease students’ into
reasoning about data and hypotheses with inscriptions, as it
scaffolds the development of evidence-map representations
with pre-defined categories that can be flexibly used to
allow students’ to actively generate and manipulate their
own scientific knowledge.
As an indicator of students’ effectiveness during inquiry
three scores were analyzed: (1) the number of information
units (hypotheses and data) recorded and correctly
categorized, the (2) number of inferences recorded
(indicating correct relationships between data and
hypotheses) and the (3) the quality of final conclusions
drawn by students in each condition.

Results and Discussion
Groups in the prose writing condition recorded about the
same number of hypotheses and data as groups in the
evidence mapping condition. However, analysis of the
amount of information that was correctly categorized by
students revealed that the mapping groups categorized
significantly more of their recorded information as
hypothesis and data compared to the prose writing groups.
Since in either condition (mapping or prose) the percentage
of incorrectly categorized information units was minimal

(<10%) it is reasonable to argue that it was the effect of the
mapping representation that scaffolded students’
categorization efforts. That is, the evidential consistency
mapping, with its pre-defined epistemological categories,
prompted students to consider the meaning of these
categories and to organize the outcome of their
investigations based on these categories. Unlike the
mapping activity, the prose writing was a familiar mode of
communication for students. However, the prose
representation did not make the categories of scientific
inquiry perceptually salient
throughout
students’
investigation, resulting in the lower number of information
pieces categorized by the prose writing groups. There was
no significant effect of the type of reflection on either the
number of information units recorded nor on the
categorization of these records.
Interesting representational scaffolding effects were found
during the analysis of the inferences recorded by student
groups in the different conditions. The mapping groups
recorded significantly higher number of inferences
describing relationships between data and hypotheses
compared to the prose writing groups (Figure 4).

14
12
10
8

Reflect
No-Reflect

6
4
2
0
Prose

Mapping

Figure 4. The effects of representational scaffolding and
explicit reflection on the number of inferences between data
and hypotheses recorded by students
The use of explicit reflection also significantly influenced
student’s ability to express inferences indicating the
relationship of their data and hypotheses. The Map&Reflect
groups performed significantly higher than any other group,
including the Map-NoReflect group on this measure.
Analysis of the types of inferences (consistency,
inconsistency and conjunction) revealed that the difference
between the Map&Reflect groups compared to the MapNoReflect groups was in the frequency of inconsistency
("against") relationships recorded (Figure 5). This is a
crucial finding that indicates the value of both mapping and
explicit reflection and their combined effect helping
students overcome confirmation bias during the evaluation
of scientific hypotheses based on empirical data.

8
7

6
5

Map&Reflect
Map-NoReflect

4

Prose&Reflect
Prose-NoReflect

3
2

1
0
"For"

"Against"

"And"

Figure 5. Sub-scores of information evaluation by groups in
the four treatment condition.
Furthermore, when students’ final reasoning with prose
conclusions were analyzed there were no significant
differences between prose and mapping groups in the
quality of the final conclusions. Since these conclusions
were written in prose by students in both conditions
(mapping or prose), this finding indicates the lack of
efficiency in transferring the inquiry skills learned by the
mapping groups from the mapping activity to prose writing.
Further instructional interventions are necessary to ensure a
more effective transfer.
Overall it appears that the evidence mapping provide
better scaffolds for students during scientific inquiry when
the goal of activity is to categorize information and evaluate
scientific hypotheses based on evidence. Explicit reflection
on the specific criteria of scientific inquiry was found to
support the evidence mapping activity, but not traditional
prose writing.

Conclusion and Educational Significance
External representations of thinking can play a pivotal role
in the learning of scientific inquiry skills. The studies
presented here detailed the effects of inscriptions during two
important processes of scientific inquiry: (1) designing and
conducting experiments and (2) coordinating experimental
evidence with domain theories. The classroom studies
described here yielded evidence for two methods of using
inscriptions: interpretive and expressive. Interpretive use of
a teacher-developed table representations was found to
scaffold students’ progress of inquiry by making the
variables of an experiment salient and by perceptually
constraining the students’ attention to abstract the
characteristics of correct experimentation. However, during
the expressive use of inscriptions students were found to
have difficulty with using the common techniques of

developing inscriptions and with indicating their reasoning
during experimentation. While the lack of transfer of CVS
skills has been clearly documented since this study (Toth &
Klahr, 2000) further instructional interventions and studies
can reveal how a reflective pedagogy based on
representational scaffolding may help with this transfer
difficulty. The results of study two indicate that such
methodology may be very effective.
While evaluating experimental data against theories, the
representational scaffolding effect provided by evidential
consistency mapping (compared to prose writing) was
confirmed. Evidence mapping was found to be a successful
instructional methodology to teach how to categorize and
label scientific information and to teach students how to
evaluate hypotheses based on empirical data. The findings
also suggested that reflective assessment (by the use of the
explicit criteria for maximum performance in rubrics
format) was an effective instructional manipulation to
support the scaffolding effect of external representations.
In collaborative classroom learning environments there
has been a need for a methodology that combines cognitive
effectiveness with the social circumstances of collaborative
learning. The effects of collaborative reflection over shared
representations seem to be promising and should be further
refined. One such study is currently under way by the author
to explore how the social circumstances of the anticipated
peer-interpretation of inscriptions influence students’
expressive use. Further research should also consider the use
of software tools in the shared activity of expressively and
collaboratively using various forms of inscriptions.

Acknowledgements
Funding for study one was provided by the James S.
McDonnell Foundation to David Klahr and Zhe Chen of the
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University.
Funding for study two was provided by the Presidential
Technology Initiative to Dan Suthers, Eva Toth and Arlene
Weiner who worked under the leadership of Alan Lesgold at
the University of Pittsburgh Learning Research and
Development Center (LRDC). Many thanks to colleagues
David Klahr, Jennifer Schnackenberg, Anne Siegel, Rose
Russo and Jolene Watson for their contributions.

References
Collins, A. and Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and
epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guide
inquiry. Educational Pscyhologist, 28(1) pp 25-42.
Chen, Z., and Klahr, D. (1999) All other things being equal:
Children's acquisition of the control of variables strategy.
Child Development 70(5), 1098 – 1120.
Koedinger, K. R. (1992). Emergent properties and structural
constraints: Advantages of diagrammatic representations
for reasoning and learning. Symposium of the American
Association for Artificial Intelligence. Stanford
University.

Kotovsky, K., and Simon, H.A. (1990). What makes some
problems really hard: Explorations in the problem space
of difficulty. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 143-183.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1989). Understanding charts and graphs.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 3, 185-226.
Latour, J., and Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: The
social construction of scientific facts. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Larkin, J. H., and Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a picture
(sometimes) is worth then thousand words. Cognitive
Science, v. 11 pp 65-99.
Lehrer, R., and Schauble, L. (1998). Inventing data
structures for representational purposes: Elementary grade
students’ classification models. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Educational Research
Association annual convention, San Diego, CA.
Roth, M.W. and McGinn, M. K. (1998). Inscriptions:
Towards a theory of representing as social practice.
Review of Educational Research, 68 (1), 35-59.
Stenning, K. and Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory
of graphical and linquistic reasoning: Logic and
implementation. Cognitive Science 19(1), pp 97-140.
Suthers, D., Toth, E., and Weiner, A. (1997). An Integrated
Approach to Implementing Collaborative Inquiry in the
Classroom. Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning, pp. 272-279.
Suthers, D. D. (1999). Representational support for
collaborative inquiry. Proceedings of the 32nd Hawai'i
International Conference on the System Sciences January
5-8, 1999, Maui, Hawai'i
Toth, E. E., Klahr, D., and Chen, Z. (in press). Bridging
research and practice: A cognitively-based classroom
intervention for teaching experimentation skills to
elementary school children. Cognition and Instruction.

