UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulation of Self-affirmation Phenomena in Cognitive Dissonance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78t7t7t6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Shultz, Thomas R.
Lepper, Mark R.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulation of Self-affirmation Phenomena in Cognitive Dissonance
Thomas R. Shultz (shultz@psych.mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology; McGill University
Montreal, QC H3C 1B1 Canada

Mark R. Lepper (lepper@psych.stanford.edu )
Department of Psychology; Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Abstract
The consonance constraint-satisfaction model, which has
simulated the major paradigms of classical cognitive dissonance theory, is here extended to deal with more contemporary findings concerning self-affirmation phenomena in dissonance reduction. The key addition to the model, which has
also figured in recent simulations of arousal phenomena, is to
lessen activity level within the neural network model in selfaffirmation conditions. These and other simulations continue
to show that dissonance phenomena can be explained in terms
of constraint satisfaction.

Introduction
One of the fundamentally important theories in social psychology is cognitive dissonance theory, which has generated a literature of more than 1000 studies over the past 40
years (Festinger, 1957; Thibodeau & Aronson, 1992). We
have recently modeled a number of the central dissonance
phenomena using constraint-satisfaction neural networks
(Shultz & Lepper, 1996, 1998a&b, 1999a&b). Our so-called
consonance model covered insufficient justification, free
choice, arousal, and some self-concept phenomena. The
model also predicted new free-choice effects that were subsequently confirmed by further psychological experimentation (Shultz, Léveillé, & Lepper, 1999). In this paper, we report on an extension of the model to deal with a prominent
self-concept effect in dissonance called self-affirmation.
Dissonance is hypothesized to occur when behavior is inconsistent with self-concept (Steele, 1988; Thibodeau &
Aronson, 1992). Because most people have a positive selfconcept, behaviors such as lying or trying to persuade others of a position that one does not agree with arouse dissonance and lead to attitude change that reduces the dissonance. However, if important aspects of the self-concept
have been recently affirmed, even aspects irrelevant to an
experimentally induced inconsistency, there may be no need
to reduce dissonance via attitude change. Steele (1988) presented experiments in which fairly subtle self-affirmation
manipulations eliminated dissonance effects. Some of these
experiments concern insufficient justification via forced
compliance, and others deal with free choice. We return to
these experiments after reviewing the consonance model
used in the simulations.

The Consonance Model
The consonance model holds that dissonance reduction is a
constraint satisfaction problem. The motivation to reduce
dissonance stems from the various soft constraints on the
beliefs and attitudes that an individual holds. A consonance
network corresponds to a person's representation of the
situation created in the conditions of a dissonance experiment. Activations of network units represent the direction
and strength of a person's cognitions. Weights between
cognitions represent psychological implications. These unit
activations and weights may vary across the different conditions of a single experiment.
Consonance is the degree to which similarly evaluated
units are linked by excitatory weights and oppositely valued
units are linked by inhibitory weights. More formally, consonance in a network is defined by
consonance = ∑ ∑ w ij a i a j
i

j

where wij is the weight between units i and j, a i is the activation of the receiving unit i, and a j is the activation of the
sending unit j.
Activation spreads over time cycles by two update rules:
ai (t + 1) = ai (t ) + net i (ceiling − ai (t ) ) when net i ≥ 0

ai (t + 1) = ai (t ) + net i ( ai (t ) − floor ) when net i < 0
where a i(t+1) is the activation of unit i at time t + 1, a i(t) is
the activation of unit i at time t, ceiling is the maximum activation, floor is the minimum activation, and neti is the net
input to unit i, defined as:
net i = resist i ∑ w ij a j
j

where resisti refers to the resistance of receiving unit i to
having its activation changed.
At each time cycle, n units (normally the number of units
in the network) are randomly selected and updated. The update rules ensure that consonance increases or stays the
same across cycles. Consonance increases because positive
net inputs drive unit activations toward the ceiling and negative net inputs drive them toward the floor. Consonance increases until units reach extreme values or net inputs fall to
0. When consonance reaches asymptote, updating stops.

Method
Network specifications for the three conditions are shown in
Table 1. There are two relevant cognitions, attitude and es-

Human

Simulation

12

0.45
0.35

10

0.25
8
0.15
6
0.05
4

Mean Simulated Attitude

Forced Compliance
Forced compliance is the most popular dissonance technique within the most prominent dissonance paradigm of
insufficient justification. Insufficient justification concerns
cases in which a person does something inconsistent with
his or her attitudes without much justification. The less the
justification, the more cognitive dissonance is created.
In a forced-compliance experiment (Steele, 1988, p. 272),
college students were selected for their strong opposition to
an increase in tuition fees. They were then persuaded to
write essays supporting a substantial tuition increase. In one
condition, they were given a choice about whether to write
the essay; in another condition, they were given very little
choice about whether to write the essay. When a person
freely agrees to argue against personal beliefs, this creates
dissonance, which can be reduced by changing attitudes in
the direction of the argument. There should be little or no
dissonance when one is pressured to make such arguments.
Before measuring post-experimental attitudes, some participants were first asked to complete the political sub-scale
of the Allport-Vernon Study of Values. One-half of them had
been previously assessed as having a strong economicpolitical value orientation, whereas the others did not have
this value orientation. Completing the political value scale
was supposed to affirm a valued self-concept only for those
students with a strong economic-political value orientation.
As shown by the solid line in Figure 1, there was the familiar dissonance effect of more attitude change under high
choice than under low choice. Moreover, as predicted, selfaffirmation eliminated attitude change, even under high
choice conditions. Two other experiments with minor variations yielded similar results (Steele, 1988).

say, and relations between them. As in our previous simulations, each cognition is implemented with a pair of negatively related units, one to represent the positive aspect of
the cognition and the other to represent the negative aspect.
Net activation for a cognition is computed as activation on
the positive unit minus activation on the negative unit. Positive relations between cognitions are implemented by positive weights between their positive units and between their
negative units, and negative weights between the positive
unit of one cognition and the negative unit of the other cognition. All weights are bi-directional.

Mean Human Attitude

Consonance networks are hand-built to implement particular dissonance experiments using a set of five principles
that map dissonance theory to the consonance model:
1. A cognition is implemented by the net activation of a
pair of negatively connected units, one of which represents the positive aspect and the other the negative aspect of the cognition.
2. Cognitions are connected to each other based on their
causal implications.
3. Dissonance is the negative of consonance divided by
the number of nonzero inter-cognition relations.
4. Networks settle into more stable, less dissonant states
as unit activations are updated.
5. Unit activations, but not connection weights, are allowed to change, and some cognitions are more resistant to change than others. In particular, beliefs, behaviors, and justifications are more resistant to change
than are evaluations and attitudes.
Additional details about the consonance model and its assumptions are available in our previous papers (Shultz &
Lepper, 1996, 1998a).

-0.05

2

-0.15
Choice

Low Choice

Affirmation

Condition

Figure 1: Mean attitude following forced compliance.
All weights and initial unit activations are assigned either
high (0.5) or low (0.1) values, according to the five mapping
principles described earlier and the descriptions of the experiments being modeled. The floor parameter is 0; the ceiling parameter for positive units is set to 1, and that for negative units is set to 0.5. A cap parameter is set to -0.5. This
corresponds to the value of the weight between each unit
and itself and it prevents activations from growing to ceiling.
The resist parameter is set to 0.5 for low resistance, and 0.01
for high resistance. These parameter settings are standard
across all our dissonance simulations, and some justification
for them is provided in our longer papers, (Shultz & Lepper,
1996, 1998a, 1999a).
Table 1: Network specifications for forced compliance.
Condition
Choice
Low Choice
Affirmation

Attitude
-0.5
-0.5
-0.25

Essay
0.5
0.5
0.25

Relation
0.5
0.1
0.25

In this experiment, there is a positive relation between attitude and essay because the more positive one's attitude
toward tuition increases, the more likely one would be to

agree to write an essay in favor of tuition increases. This
relation is high in the choice condition and low in the lowchoice condition. Initially, attitude is given a high negative
value to reflect students' initial attitudes; and essay is given
a high positive value because the essay was indeed written
by all students. An activity-level scalar of 0.5 (the same
value used in our other simulations of arousal and self concept) reduces initial activations and weights in the selfaffirmation condition, relative to the no-affirmation conditions. The theoretical justification for using a scalar in this
way is that self-affirmation is hypothesized to reduce the
importance of a dissonant situation (Steele, 1988, p. 292).
All initial unit activations and weights are randomized for
each network by adding or subtracting a random proportion
of their initial amounts. The three proportion ranges in which
additions or subtractions are randomly selected under a uniform distribution are .1, .5, and 1. This increases psychological realism because not everyone can be expected to share
the same parameter values. It also allows a test of robustness of the model. Twenty networks were run in each condition at these three different levels of parameter randomization. Networks were run for 30 cycles, which was sufficient
to approach asymptotic activation levels.

Results
Mean attitude toward the view espoused in the essay is presented, in the dashed line in Figure 1, for networks at the .5
level of parameter randomization. As with Steele's (1988)
subjects, attitudes are more positive under choice than under the other two conditions. An ANOVA with condition as
the single factor revealed significant main effects of condition, F(2, 57) = 67, p < .001. A contrast F with weights of +2
for choice, -1 for low choice, and -1 for self-affirmation is
significant F(1, 57) = 135, p < .001, with no significant residual, F(1, 57) < 1. Proportion of total variance accounted for
by this F is .99.
0.3

Mean Dissonance

Choice
0.2

Low Choice

0.1

Affirmation

0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
0

10

20

30

Cycles

Figure 2: Mean dissonance following forced-compliance.
Mean dissonance scores over time cycles, for networks
run at .5 parameter randomization for the three conditions,
are shown in Figure 2. Dissonance starts high in the choice

condition and is greatly reduced over time. In contrast, there
is minimal dissonance in the other two conditions and very
little dissonance reduction. Similar results were obtained at
parameter randomization levels of .1 and 1.

Discussion
The consonance networks provide a good fit to the attitude
change data reported by Steele (1988). There is considerable
attitude change in the choice condition, but very little in the
low-choice and self-affirmation conditions. There is also a
close correspondence between amount of attitude change
and plots of dissonance reduction in that the condition with
sharp dissonance reduction is also the one with the most
attitude change. Examination of dissonance plots is a bonus
of computer simulations -- there is no known way to measure
dissonance directly in humans. Such plots of simulated dissonance can help to understand the more indirect attitudechange effects that occur as a way of reducing dissonance.

Free Choice
Steele (1988, p. 276) also presents a free-choice experiment
that shows self-affirmation effects. Participants rated and
ranked 10 music albums and were then given a choice to
keep either their fifth- or sixth-ranked album. Choosing between qualitatively distinct objects creates dissonance because the chosen object is less than perfect and the rejected
object has some desirable features that are forgone when an
irreversible choice is made. The dissonance arising from a
free choice is typically reduced by increasing evaluation of
the chosen object and decreasing evaluation of the rejected
object (Brehm, 1956; Shultz et al., 1999).
In Steele's experiment, one-half of the participants had
been previously selected for having a strong scientific-value
orientation and for indicating that a lab coat symbolized
these values. The others did not share these values. Onehalf of the participants in each of these groups were asked to
wear a lab coat for the rest of the experiment, during which
they rated the albums again, after making their choices.
Post-decisional spread of alternatives was measured by
adding the increase in the value of the chosen item and the
decrease in the value of the rejected item. There were three
control conditions, one with participants not having a science orientation and not wearing a lab coat, another with
participants not having a science orientation but wearing a
lab coat, and a third with participants having a science orientation but not wearing a lab coat. There were identical dissonance effects in all three control conditions, but not for the
self-affirmed, scientifically-oriented students wearing a lab
coat. Mean spread of alternatives was higher in the control
conditions than in the self-affirmation condition, as shown
by the solid line in Figure 3. Once again, apparently irrelevant self-affirmation precluded dissonance reduction.

Method
Network specifications for these two groups of conditions
are shown in Tables 2 and 3. There are three cognitions: a
decision and evaluations of the chosen and the rejected objects. Because the decision is public and irreversible, it has

high resistance and high initial activation; the two evaluations have low resistance. Initial evaluation of the chosen
object is somewhat higher than that for the rejected object
because people generally choose items that they rate higher.
Human

tions, it drops only in the control condition. Similar results
were found at parameter randomizations of .1 and 1.
Table 3: Relations between cognitions for free choice.

Simulation

Relation of
chosen to
Decision
Rejected

Mean Spread of Alternatives

1.2
1.0

Condition
Control
Affirmation
.50
.25
-.50
-.25

Discussion

0.8

Consonance networks yield greater separation of alternatives in the control than in the self-affirmation condition, as
found with human participants (Steele, 1988). Dissonance
reduction is also greater in the control than in the selfaffirmation condition, consistent with the idea that attitude
change is driven by dissonance reduction.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Control

Affirmation

0.05

Figure 3: Mean spread of alternatives following free choice.
The relation between the decision and the chosen object
is positive because the better-liked object is chosen. The
two objects are negatively related because they compete for
an exclusive choice. Both relations have high values in the
control condition. To implement self-affirmation, initial activations and weights are scaled by .5. Networks in each condition were run for 40 cycles, which was sufficient for saturation. As is customary in our simulations, all weights and
initial unit activations were randomized at up to .1, .5, or 1 of
the values shown in Tables 2 and 3. Other parameter settings
are also the same as in our other dissonance simulations.
Table 2: Initial net activations for free choice.

Cognition
Chosen
Rejected
Decision

Condition
Control
Affirmation
.30
.15
.20
.10
.50
.25

Results
Spread between evaluations of the two choices was computed as in Steele (1988). Change in evaluation of each object is the difference between initial evaluation and evaluation after 40 cycles. Spreading of alternatives is the sum of
the increase in evaluation of the chosen alternative and the
decrease in evaluation of the rejected alternative. Mean
spreading of the alternatives is plotted, on the dashed line in
Figure 3, at the .5 level of parameter randomization. There is a
larger spread of the alternatives in the control than in the
self-affirmation condition, F(1, 38) = 76, p < .001.
Mean dissonance scores across time cycles in networks at
.5 parameter randomization are shown in Figure 4 for the two
conditions. Although dissonance starts low in both condi-

Mean Dissonance

Condition
-0.05

Control
Affirmation

-0.15

-0.25
0

10

20

30

40

Cycles

Figure 4: Mean dissonance following free choice.

General Discussion
These simulations extend the consonance model to rather
subtle aspects of dissonance reduction involving the selfconcept, using the same conventions, mapping principles,
and default parameter values as in previous simulations. In
all of these cases, dissonance arises when constraints between simultaneously held cognitions are unsatisfied. Dissonance is reduced as the constraints are satisfied, typically
by changing evaluations of entities in the situation defined
by the dissonance experiment. The self-affirmation phenomena considered here had not previously been simulated and
were not generally seen as being closely related to other
contemporary dissonance phenomena on emotional arousal.
As in earlier simulations, the consonance model is here
shown to be robust against parameter variation, as revealed
by the fact that even a high degree of parameter randomization does not affect the pattern of overall results.
A key, unifying concept in simulating contemporary dissonance phenomena in self-concept and arousal is that of
activity level. An activity scalar adjusts the overall level of
activation in networks that represent dissonant situations. In
the present simulations, the activity-level scalar operates

much like a tranquilizing drug in arousal simulations (Shultz
& Lepper, 1999b), by decreasing activation of the representation of the dissonant situation.
Self-affirmation manipulations are thus hypothesized to
decrease the relative importance of being in a dissonant
situation. When you feel good about yourself, being in a
dissonant situation is not nearly so bothersome, and you
become immune to the effects of dissonance reduction. This
reveals a somewhat unexpected theoretical communality
between arousal and self-concept effects.
This analysis is consistent with recent results on trivialization as a mode of dissonance reduction (Simon, Greenberg, & Brehm, 1995). Merely making salient to participants
asked to write counter-attitudinal essays the contrast between issues they believe to be of great consequence and
the less important topic of their own essays reduces attitude
change in the direction of the position advocated.
At the level of the brain or an artificial neural network, the
key theoretical notion is that of activity level. Dissonance
effects are enhanced by increases in activity level and
dampened by decreases in activity level. There are a variety
of ways to modulate activity level, including general manipulations such as drugs (Cooper, Zanna, & Taves, 1978)
and specific manipulations such as attention to particular
cognitions (Read & Miller, 1998a). Consequently, activity
level has the potential to unify theoretical understanding of
several apparently different dissonance phenomena.
The general success of the consonance model enables a
theoretical reinterpretation of dissonance that stresses commonalties with other psychological phenomena that result
from constraint satisfaction. Phenomena such as analogical
reasoning, person perception, schema completion, attitude
change, and dissonance reduction can all be understood in
terms of the dynamics of constraint satisfaction (Holyoak &
Thagard, 1989; Read & Miller, 1998a, b; Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton, 1986; Spellman & Holyoak, 1992;
Spellman, Ullman, & Holyoak, 1993; Thagard, 1989).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant to the first author
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada and by grant MH-44321 to the second author from
the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health.

References
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Post-decision changes in the desirability
of choice alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 52, 384-389.
Cooper, J., Zanna, M. P., & Taves, P. A. (1978). Arousal as a
necessary condition for attitude change following forced
compliance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1101-1106.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Read, S. J., & Miller, L. C. (1998a). On the dynamic construction of meaning: An interactive activation and competition

model of social perception. In S. J. Read & L. C. Miller
(Eds.). Connectionist models of social reasoning and social behavior (pp. 27-68). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Read, S. J., & Miller, L. C. (Eds.). (1998b). Connectionist
models of social reasoning and social behavior. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rumelhart, D. E., Smolensky, P., McClelland, J. L., & Hinton,
G. (1986). Schemata and sequential thought processes in
PDP models. In D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.),
Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 7-57). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Constraint satisfaction
modeling of cognitive dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review, 103, 219-240.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1998a). The consonance
model of dissonance reduction. In S. J. Read & L. C. Miller
(Eds.), Connectionist models of social reasoning and social behavior (pp. 211-244). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1998b). A constraintsatisfaction model of Machiavellianism effects in cognitive
dissonance. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 957-962).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1999a). Computer simulation
of cognitive dissonance reduction. In E. Harmon-Jones &
Mills, J. (Eds.), Cognitive dissonance: Progress on a pivotal theory in social psychology (pp. 235-265). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1999b). Consonance network
simulations of arousal phenomena in cognitive dissonance. Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 659-664).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R., Léveillé, E., & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Free choice
and cognitive dissonance revisited: Choosing "lesser
evils" vs. "greater goods." Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 40-48.
Simon, L., Greenberg, J., & Brehm, J. (1995). Trivialization:
The forgotten mode of dissonance reduction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 247-260.
Spellman, B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). If Saddam is Hitler,
then who is George Bush? Analogical mapping between
systems of social roles. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 62, 913-933.
Spellman, B. A., Ullman, J. B., & Holyoak, K. J. (1993). A coherence model of cognitive consistency: Dynamics of attitude change during the Persian Gulf war. Journal of Social Issues, 49, 147-165.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp.
261-302). New York: Academic Press.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12, 435-502.
Thibodeau, R., & Aronson, E. (1992). Taking a closer look:
Reasserting the role of the self-concept in dissonance
theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18,
591-602.

