UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strategies and Tactics in Sentential Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/48g8n66w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Yang, Yingrui
Henst, Jean-Baptiste van der
Johnson-Laird, P.N.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

CogSci2000

Strategies and Tactics
in Sentential Reasoning
Yingrui Yang ( y i n g r u i y @ p r i n c e t o n . e d u )
Princeton University, Department of Psychology;
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

Jean-Baptiste van der Henst ( jvanderhenst@caramail.com )
Princeton University, Department of Psychology;
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

P. N. Johnson-Laird ( p h i l @ p r i n c e t o n . e d u )
Princeton University, Department of Psychology;
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

Abstract
We propose a theory of the spontaneous reasoning
strategies that individuals develop. These strategies depend on component tactics based on mental models.
Reasoners vary their use of tactics in ways that are not
deterministic. This variation leads different individuals
to assemble different strategies, which include constructing incremental diagrams corresponding to mental
models, and pursuing the consequences of a single
model step by step. The number of models required by
the premises predisposes reasoners towards certain
strategies, e.g., multiple models tend to elicit incremental diagrams. Similarly, the connectives in premises also bias reasoners towards certain strategies, e.g.,
conditional premises tend to elicit reasoning step by
step from a single model.

Introduction
Psychologists have tended to neglect the strategies that individuals develop spontaneously to make complex inferences
(cf. Schaeken, De Vooght, Vandierendonck, and d'Ydewalle,
2000). By a strategy, we mean a systematic sequence of
elementary mental steps, i.e., tactics, that an individual follows in making an inference. Pioneering studies of strategies examined relational reasoning in which the task is, say,
to infer who is tallest in a series of individuals. The results
suggested that reasoners develop a variety of strategies (e.g.
Wood, 1969; Quinton and Fellows, 1975). However, there
has been a dearth of studies of strategies in sentential reasoning, which hinges on negation and connectives such as "if",
"or", and "and". Some theorists have argued that sentential
reasoning relies on a single deterministic strategy based on
formal rules of inference (cf. Rips, 1994; Braine and
O'Brien, 1998). We suspect that theorists have postulated a
single deterministic strategy because their experiments have
used too simple premises for strategies to differ, and because
they have failed to gather evidence about reasoner's strategies. Indeed, we and our colleagues have proposed that naïve
reasoners generally develop a variety of strategies (e.g. John-

son-Laird and Byrne, 1990; Byrne and Handley, 1997; Bucciarelli and Johnson-Laird, 1999).

Experiment 1: A taxonomy of strategies
How can experimenters best observe the strategies that reasoners use in sentential reasoning? In our view, studies of
strategies should examine inferential problems that are sufficiently time-consuming to force the participants to think,
but not so difficult that they make many errors. We therefore used sentential problems based on three premises, but
each set of premises was compatible with only two alternative possibilities. The task was to evaluate a given conclusion and to think aloud (cf. Ericsson and Simon, 1984).
Here is a typical example of a problem:
Either there is a blue marble in the box or else there is a
brown marble in the box, but not both. Either there is a
brown marble in the box or else there is white marble in
the box, but not both. There is a white marble in the
box if and only if there is a red marble in the box. Does
it follow that: If there is a blue marble in the box then
there is a red marble in the box?
Henceforth, we use the abbreviations: "iff" for biconditionals
of the form "if and only if", "ore" for exclusive disjunctions
of the form "either _ or else _, but not both", and "or" for
inclusive disjunctions of the form "_ or _, or both".
Our theory of strategies is based on mental models (Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 1991), and each mental model represents a possibility. All the problems in the experiment
called for two mental models. The premises of the example
above yield the following two models of the possible contents of the box, shown on separate lines:
blue
white
red
brown
As the models show, the putative conclusion follows from
the premises.

CogSci2000

Method. Eight Princeton undergraduates, who had no
training in logic, carried out twelve inferences, which each
had a conclusion to be evaluated. The problems were based
on three or four premises. Half of them had valid conclusions and half of them had invalid conclusions. The premises were mainly biconditionals and exclusive disjunctions,
and the conclusions were conditionals except for two problems, which had exclusive disjunctions as conclusions. As
in the example above, the contents of the problems concerned different colored marbles. The problems were presented in a different random order to each participant.
The participants were allowed to use pencil and paper.
They were told to think aloud as they tackled each inference,
and we video-recorded what they said, wrote, and drew. The
camera was above them and focused on the paper on which
they wrote, and they rapidly adapted to its presence.
Results. None of the participants made any errors in
evaluating the given conclusions, though they were not always right for the right reasons. We transcribed the tapes
verbatim apart from repetitions of words, filled pauses, and
hesitations. These protocols also included a record of the
step by step drawings of diagrams. We were able to make
sense of almost all of what the participants said, drew, and
wrote. Most participants used two or more distinct strategies, but two of them stuck to the same strategy throughout
the experiment. What the protocols did not reveal were
either the processes in developing a strategy, or the mechanisms underlying the tactical steps. We were able, however, to categorize the protocols from every participant for
every problem into one of the strategies in the taxonomy in
Table 1 below.
The taxonomy distinguishes five main strategies. It is
based on all our experiments, but it may be necessary to add
further strategies: no-one can ever know when the classification is complete. The five strategies were:
1. The incremental models strategy. Reasoners draw a
diagram that integrates all the information from the premises. The diagram corresponds to a set of models (see the
example above). Some participants drew the models in
vertical columns down the page. Others arranged them
horizontally. One participant merely drew circles around
the propositions in the premises themselves to pick out one
of the two models. Participants work through the premises
in an order that allows them to increment their diagrams.
2. The step strategy. Reasoners pursue the step by step
consequences of either a categorical proposition or a supposition. They accordingly infer a sequence of what logicians
refer to as “literals”, where a literal is a proposition that does
not contain any sentential connectives: it may be an atomic
proposition, A, or its negation, not A. Consider the following problem, stated in an abbreviated from:
Pink iff black.
Black ore gray.
Gray iff blue.
Does it follow that if not pink then blue?

One participant's complete verbatim protocol, illustrating
the strategy, is:
Assuming we have no pink:
There is no pink.
[He crosses out “pink” in premise.]
So there is no black. [Crosses out “black” in premises.]
There is gray.
[Circles “gray” in premise.]
There is blue. Yes. [The conclusion follows.]
3. The compound strategy. Reasoners take two compound
assertions, i.e., assertions containing a sentential connective, and draw a compound conclusion from them, e.g.:
Pink ore brown.
[Reads premise]
Pink and white.
[Points to diagram of premise:
pink → white]
If brown then not white.[A compound inference.
Writes: brown, white]
White ore brown.
[The required conclusion]
The strategy consists in a sequence of such compound inferences that yield an ultimate conclusion.
4. The chain strategy. Reasoners construct a chain of
conditionals leading from one constituent of a compound
conclusion to its other constituent. They make an immediate inference from any premise that is not a conditional to
convert it into an appropriate conditional (see Richardson
and Ormerod, 1997). Here is an example of a protocol:
[Crosses out terms in diagrams:
If not pink then not green.
pink = green
If not green then red.
green or red
If red then white.
red = white
Yes.
[I.e. If not pink then white]
The valid use of the strategy to prove a biconditional or exclusive disjunction calls for two chains, but reasoners usually rely on just a single chain.
5. The concatenation strategy.
Reasoners sometimes
concatenate the premises to form a complex intermediate
conclusion. They then draw an immediate inference from
it to the required conclusion. For example, one participant
concatenated the premises:
A and B.
B iff C.
C iff D.
to yield : A and (B iff C iff D). She then made an immediate inference to the required conclusion: A and D.
For the twelve problems in Experiment 1, we calculated
the total number of times each strategy occurred in the protocols, and then expressed these numbers as percentages of
the total number of occurrences of strategies. The results
were as follows:
Incremental models strategy:
34% of overall use.
Supposition and step strategy: 21% of overall use.
Compound strategy:
19% of overall use.
Chain strategy:
25% of overall use.
Concatenation strategy:
0% of overall use.
The most salient feature of the protocols was that different
participants used different strategies.

CogSci2000

A theory of reasoning strategies
A deterministic process is one in which each step depends
solely on the current state of the process and whatever input
it may have (Hopcroft and Ullman, 1979).
Following
Harman (1973), however, we assume that reasoning is not a
deterministic process that unwinds like clockwork. Our
first assumption is accordingly:
1. The principle of nondeterminism: thinking in general
and sentential reasoning in particular is governed by constraints, but there is seldom just a single path it must follow. It varies in a way that can be captured only in a
nondeterministic account.
Experiment 1 corroborated the principle of nondeterminism,
and it did so at two levels. At a high level, the participants
developed diverse strategies. At a low level, there was considerable variation within strategies.
Our second assumption is:
2. The principle of strategic assembly: naïve reasoners assemble reasoning strategies bottom up as they explore
problems using their existing inferential tactics. Once
they have developed a strategy, it can control their reasoning in a top-down way.
A corollary of the principle is that individuals are most unlikely to develop a reasoning strategy working “top down”
from a high-level specification. Granted the principle, it
also follows that the space of possible strategies is defined
by the different ways in which inferential tactics can be sequenced in order to make inferences. Hence, an exhaustive
enumeration of tactics provides the recursive basis for all
possible strategies.
If the mechanism underlying reasoning depends on mental
models, then each inferential tactic must be based on models. We therefore postulate a third assumption:
3. The principle of model-based tactics: inferential tactics
are based on mental models.
The mechanisms for constructing models are, in turn, constrained by the nature of the human mind, which reflects
innate constraints and individual experiences.
Our first test of the three principles was to show that
mental models can underlie all the strategies and tactics in
our taxonomy. The incremental models strategy is isomorphic to the cumulative construction of a single set of models
based on the premises. The step strategy is based on a
categorical premise or a supposition. Although the strategy
is similar to the one strategy that Rips (1994) proposes, the
model theory allows a greater freedom in the use of suppositions – a freedom that corresponds to their use by naïve reasoners. The main inferential step is to use a literal to update a set of models based on a premise in order to draw another literal as a conclusion. A premise, such as: Black ore
gray, yields two models:
black
gray
and the supposition, Not black, eliminates the first model
and yields the literal conclusion: gray. The compound

Table 1: The model-based tactics underlying each of the five
strategies: + indicates the use of a tactic, and (+) indicates its
optional use.
The five strategies
Tactics
Make a
supposition
Concatenate
premises
Construct
models
Update
models
Immediate
inference
from models
Formulate
intermediate
conclusion
from models
Evaluate or
formulate a
conclusion
from models

Increment
models

Step

(+)

+

Compound

(+)

(+)

+

+

+

+

+

+

(+)

+

(+)
+

+

+

+

Chain

Concate
nation

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

strategy relies on a series of compound inferences based on
models. The chain strategy depends on the construction of
a chain of conditionals. The chain has one explicit mental
model and one implicit mental model. To prove a conditional of the form:
If A then D.
individuals can construct a chain leading from D to A, e.g.:
If D then not-C.
If not-C then B.
If B then A.
Such a strategy is invalid. So, why do reasoners construct
this chain? The answer is that the conclusion holds in the
mental models of the chain:
d
¬c
b
a
. . .
Hence, mental models underlie the strategy. The concatenation strategy appears at first sight to rely on purely syntactic
operations, and therefore to violate the principle of modelbased tactics. In fact, the strategy depends critically on
mental models. Given a pair of premises of the form:
A iff B.
B ore C.
there are two ways in which to concatenate a conclusion:
1.
(A iff B) ore C.
and:
2.
A iff (B ore C).
Which of these two conclusions follows from the premises?
In fact, neither conclusion is valid. Yet, eight out of the
eight participants in Experiment 3 who concatenated conclusions from the relevant premises generated conclusion 2. It
is the one conclusion that has the same mental models as
the premises. Ten participants in Experiment 2 used the
tactic of concatenating a conclusion on one or more occasions. On 82% of occasions, the resulting conclusions
were compatible with the mental models of the premises,
and nine of the ten participants concatenated more conclu-

CogSci2000

sions of this sort than not (Sign test, p < .02). Concatenation is not blindly syntactic. It tends to be accepted only if
it yields the same mental models as the premises. Table 1
presents the taxonomy of strategies and their underlying
model-based tactics.

Experiment 2: Development of strategies
The theory predicts that the nature of the inferential problems given to reasoners should influence their development
of strategies. According to the principle of strategic assembly, the characteristics of particular problems should trigger
certain strategies “bottom up”. One instance of this prediction concerns the effects of number of models. Problems
that include a categorical premise or a conjunction of them
yield a single model. Hence, individuals can use a categorical premise as the starting point of their reasoning, and the
step strategy is the easiest way to proceed because it places a
minimal load on working memory. With multiple-model
problems, the optimal way to keep track of the possibilities
is to use the incremental models strategy. Multiple models,
however, should also yield a greater number of errors. The
aim of the present experiment was to test these predictions.
Method. Twenty Princeton undergraduates acted as their
own controls and evaluated given conclusions to 36 problems presented in three blocks: twelve one-model inferences,
twelve two-model inferences, and twelve three-model inferences. Typical problems were of the form:
One-model
Two-model
Three-model
A and B.
A iff B.
A iff B.
B ore C.
B ore C.
B iff C.
C iff D.
C iff D.
C or D.
A and not D? A iff D?
A or D?
The participants evaluated the conclusions, and we used the
same think-aloud and video-recording procedure as before.
Table 2: The percentages of the different strategies for the
three sorts of problems in Experiment 2. The balances of the
percentages (5%) were uncategorizable strategies.

One-model
premises
Two-model
premises
Three-model
premises

The strategies
Incremental Step
models
21
69

The other
strategies
3

26

56

15

49

45

2

Results. As the model theory predicts, errors increased
with the number of models: there were 8% of errors with
one-model problems, 15% of errors with two-model problems, and 20% of errors with three model problems (Page’s
L = 251.5, p < 0.05, one-tailed). Table 2 presents the percentages of the different strategies for the different sorts of
problem. The participants were sensitive to the properties

of the particular problems. As the theory predicts, they
relied increasingly on the incremental models strategy as the
problems required a greater number of models (Page’s L =
254.5, p < .05, one-tailed). They tended to use the step
strategy with one-model problems, but the use of the strategy declined with an increasing number of models. The
results accordingly corroborated the principle of strategic
assembly: reasoners develop strategies “bottom-up” depending on the sort of problem that they encounter.

Experiment 3: Formulating conclusions
This experiment was similar to Experiment 2, except that
the participants had to draw their own conclusions.
Method. Twenty four Princeton undergraduates acted as
their own controls and carried out four one-model inferences,
four two-model inferences, and four three-model inferences,
in counterbalanced orders. For each problem, they wrote
down their answer to the question, “What, if anything, follows?” and we used the same procedure as before.
Results. The participants developed diverse strategies,
and the realization of any particular strategy varied from trial
to trial even for the same participant. As the model theory
predicts, the percentages of invalid conclusions, modal conclusions about possibilities, and conclusions that failed to
take into account all the premises, each increased significantly with the number of models. Table 3 presents the percentages of the different strategies in the experiment. As
predicted, the use of the incremental models strategy increased with the number of mental models required by the
premises. With one-model problems, the participants were
likely to use the step strategy, but there was an increase in
the use of the incremental models strategy with multiplemodel inferences. This trend was reliable (Kendall’s coeffi2
cient of concordance, W = 0.228, Χ = 10.94, p < .01, twotailed).
Strategies should influence the form of the conclusions
that reasoners draw. With incremental models, it is difficult
to see what is common to a number of alternative possibilities, and so reasoners should tend to describe each possibility
separately and to combine these descriptions in a disjunction. The other strategies, however, are unlikely to yield
conclusions of this sort. These strategies focus on a single
possibility, such as a supposition. We examined this prediction by dividing the participants in Experiment 3 into two
post hoc groups. In the model group (9 participants), more
than half of the participants’ identifiable strategies yielding
conclusions were the incremental models strategy. In the
non-model group (15 participants), more than half of the
participants’ identifiable strategies yielding conclusions were
some other sort. For the model group, 63% of the problems solved with the model strategy had a conclusion that
was a disjunction of possibilities, but for the non-model
group only 11% of the problems solved with a non-model
strategy had such a conclusion (Mann-Whitney test, z =
2.87, p < .005 one-tailed). Different strategies do yield
different sorts of conclusion.

CogSci2000

Table 3: The percentages of the different strategies for the
three sorts of problems in Experiment 3. The balances of
the percentages (11% overall) are uncategorizable strategies.

One-model
premises
Two-model
premises
Three-model
premises
Overall

The strategies
Incremental Step
Compound
models
14
80
5

Chain

Table 4: The percentages of the different strategies for (a) the
disjunctive problems and (b) the conditional problems in
Experiment 4. The balances of the percentages are trials
with erroneous responses or uncategorizable strategies.
(a) Disjunctive
problems

3

33

22

20

9

36

25

14

7

28

41

13

7

Presented first
Presented second
Overall
(b) Conditional
problems

Experiment 4: Strategies and premises
The principle of strategic assembly implies that the form of
the premises should influence the development of strategies.
A way to elicit the incremental models strategy should be
use to disjunctive premises, which are naturally represented
as sets of possibilities. A way to elicit the step and chain
strategies is to use conditional premises, which have only a
single explicit model required by these strategies. These
effects should occur even when the premises are otherwise
logically equivalent. Once individuals have developed a
strategy, it should have a “top down” residual effect on their
subsequent performance. It should be used for problems
that would not normally trigger its use. The experiment
tested these predictions.
Method. Twenty Princeton undergraduates acted as their
own controls and drew their own conclusions to two sets of
problems: four disjunctive problems and four logically
equivalent conditional problems. Half the participants received the four disjunctive problems in a random order followed by the four conditional problems in a random order;
and half the participants received the two blocks of problems
in the opposite order.
Results. Table 4 presents the percentages of the different
strategies for the two sorts of problems, and it gives the data
separately for the two blocks of trials. As the theory predicts, the participants were more likely to use the incremental models strategy (56%) for the disjunctive problems
than for the conditional problems (23%; Wilcoxon test T =
66, n = 11, p < .0005). The table shows that the participants who first carried out the conditional problems rarely
developed the incremental models strategy (10% of these
problems), but their use of the strategy increased reliably for
the disjunctive problems (55% of problems, Sign test, p <
.02, two tailed). In contrast, those who first carried out the
disjunctive problems often developed the incremental models
strategy, and did not reliably reduce its use with the conditional problems. This difference between the two groups
was reliable (Mann-Whitney U = 21, p < .05, two tailed).
An obvious explanation for the differential transfer is that
the incremental models strategy is simpler to use with any
sort of sentential connective, whereas the step and chain
strategies call for additional immediate inferences to convert

Presented first
Presented second
Overall

The strategies
Incremental
models
58
55
56

Step, Compound,
and Chain
35
35
35

The strategies
Incremental
models
10
35
23

Step, Compound,
and Chain
90
60
75

disjunctive premises into conditionals.
The experiment corroborated the principle of strategic assembly. The nature of the sentential connectives biases reasoners to adopt particular strategies. The incremental models strategy, though it places a greater load on working
memory, is more flexible than the other strategies, which
are more finely tuned to conditional premises.

General Discussion
Unlike some cognitive domains, such as arithmetic (Lemaire
and Siegler, 1995), accounts of sentential reasoning have
neglected strategies (for reviews, see Evans, Newstead, and
Byrne, 1993; Garnham and Oakhill, 1994). Studies have
failed to use appropriate methods to discover strategies; and
in consequence theorists have often assumed that reasoners
rely on a single deterministic strategy. We have tried to
remedy the neglect and to advance a new theory of strategies
in reasoning. Naïve reasoners use at least five distinct strategies. As the theory predicts, each strategy is built from
tactical steps that rely on the manipulation of models (see
Table 1). The incremental models strategy keeps track of
all the mental models compatible with the premises. The
step strategy pursues the step by step consequences of one
model – either one derived from a categorical assertion in a
premise or one created by a supposition. The compound
strategy combines the models of compound premises to infer
what is necessary or possible. The chain strategy pursues a
model in a sequence of conditionals, which may be inferred
from the premises, leading from one constituent of a conclusion to another. The concatenation strategy forms a conclusion by concatenating the premises, but normally only if
the resulting conclusion has the same mental models as the
premises. Because it relies on mental models, it gives rise
spontaneously to illusory inferences (cf. Johnson-Laird and

CogSci2000

Savary, 1999; Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird, 2000; JohnsonLaird et al., 2000; Yang and Johnson-Laird, 2000).
The model theory explains how people develop reasoning
strategies. They are equipped with a set of inferential tactics. As they reason, the variation in their performance,
leads them to assemble these tactics in novel ways so that
they yield a reasoning strategy. As a result, they develop
different strategies. All their strategies, however, depend on
tactics based on mental models. The properties of inferential problems can accordingly influence the development of
particular strategies. The problems in Experiments 2 and 3
called for one, two, or three models. As the theory predicts,
the participants tended to use the conjunction in one-model
problems as the starting point for the step strategy, which
places a minimal load on working memory. As the number
of models increased, they were more likely to use the incremental models strategy, which keeps track of the different
possibilities compatible with the premises. Experiment 4
also bore out the theory's account of strategic assembly.
Disjunctive premises, as predicted, tended to elicit the incremental models strategy, whereas conditional premises
tended to elicit other strategies. The participants increased
their use of incremental models on switching to disjunctive
premises, but they did not decrease its use on switching to
conditional problems. Although incremental models load
working memory, the strategy is more flexible than those
that are optimal for conditional premises.
What would have refuted our theory? At the lowest level,
that of inferential mechanisms, the theory would have been
refuted if there had not been an increase of difficulty with the
number of models required by the problems. This phenomenon has been observed in previous studies (see Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 1991), but not before in inferences
based on three sentential connectives. At the tactical level,
the theory would have been refuted if reasoners used tactics
incompatible with manipulations of models. Suppose, for
example, that the concatenation had not been sensitive to the
mental models of the premises, then a tactic would have
been controlled purely by syntactic considerations, and it
would have been contrary to the theory. At the strategic
level, the theory would have been refuted if reasoners had
uniformly developed a single deterministic strategy (cf.
Rips, 1994). The moral of our results is clear. They support the three principles of the model theory of reasoning
strategies.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Fabien Savary for carrying out Experiment 1. They are grateful for the helpful comments of
Bruno Bara, Patricia Barres, Victoria Bell, Monica Bucciarelli, Ruth Byrne, Gino De Vooght, Zachary Estes, Vittorio Girotto, Yevgeniya Goldvarg, Paolo Legrenzi, Maria
Sonino Legrenzi, Patrick Lemaire, Juan Madruga, Hansjoerg
Neth, Mary Newsome Walter Schaeken, Vladimir Sloutsky,
Patrizia Tabossi, and André Vandierendonck.

References
Braine, M.D.S., and O’Brien, D.P., Eds. (1998) Mental
Logic. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bucciarelli, M., and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1999) Strategies
in syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 23, 247-303.
Byrne, R.M.J., and Handley, S.J. (1997) Reasoning strategies for suppositional deductions. Cognition,62, 1-49.
Ericsson, K.A., and Simon, H.A. (1984) Protocol Analysis:
Verbal Reports as Data. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Evans, J.St.B.T., Newstead, S.E., and Byrne, R.M.J. (1993)
Human Reasoning: The Psychology of Deduction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Garnham, A., and Oakhill, J.V. (1994) Thinking and
Reasoning. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Goldvarg, Y., and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2000) Illusions in
modal reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 28, 282-294.
Harman, G. (1973) Thought. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hopcroft, J.E., and Ullman, J.D. (1979) Formal Languages
and Their Relation to Automata. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. and Byrne, R.M.J. (1990) Meta-logical
problems: Knights, knaves, and Rips. Cognition, 36,
69-81.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., and Byrne, R.M.J. (1991) Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., and Savary, F. (1999) Illusory inferences: A novel class of erroneous deductions. Cognition,
71, 191-229.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., and Le
grenzi, M. (2000) Illusions in reasoning about consistency. Science, 288, 531-532.
Lemaire, P., and Siegler, R.S. (1995) Four aspects of strategic change: Contributions to children’s learning of multiplication. Journal of Experimental Psychology, General,
124, 83-97.
Quinton, G. and Fellows, B.J. (1975). 'Percepual' strategies
in the solving of three-term series problems. British Journal of Psychology, 66, 69-78.
Richardson, J., and Ormerod, T.C. (1997) Rephrasing between disjunctives and conditionals: Mental models and
the effects of thematic content. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 358-385.
Rips, L.J. (1994) The Psychology of Proof. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Schaeken, W., De Vooght, G., Vandierendonck, A., and
d'Ydewalle, G. (2000) Deductive Reasoning and Strategies. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wood, D.J., (1969). Approach to the study of human reasoning. Nature, 223, 102-103
Yang, Y., and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2000) Illusory inferences with quantified assertions: How to make the impossible seem possible, and vice versa. Memory & Cognition, in press.

