UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Syntactic Priming in German Sentence Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9p24506k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Scheepers, Christoph
Corely, Martin

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Syntactic Priming in German Sentence Production
Christoph Scheepers (chsc@coli.uni-sb.de)
Department of Computational Linguistics
Saarland University, 66041 Saarbrücken, Germany

Martin Corley (Martin.Corley@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology and Human Communication Research Centre
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK
Abstract
Current theories of language production tend to differentiate
between a (syntactic) functional level and a (surface) positional level in the generation of sentences, where functional
selection precedes and constrains positional processing. In
this paper, we present evidence from a syntactic priming study
in German, where position, function, and type of constituent
are orthogonally specified for monotransitive and ditransitive
verbs. In contrast to findings for English (in which these factors are confounded) we show that previous generation of a
ditransitive structure can inhibit the production of a further
ditransitive when the order of potential arguments differs between prime and target. Our results suggest that positional processing must at the least interact with functional processing in
production, and point to the importance of cross-linguistic evidence in the formation of models of language processing.

Syntactic Priming is the name given to the tendency that people have to re-use syntactic structure that they have just generated. For example, Bock (1986) demonstrated that, having
read aloud a sentence such as The rock star sold some cocaine to an undercover agent, participants are more likely
to describe a picture with a phrase such as The girl handed
a paintbrush to the man rather than with the alternative The
girl handed the man a paintbrush. Current interpretations of
these findings tend to emphasise a functional level of sentence
production, at which syntactic information (such as subcategorisation properties of verbs) is specified and syntactic roles
(such as subject or object) are assigned. The eventual positions of constituents in the utterance are determined by subsequent processes which take as their input the representations
built at the functional level (e.g., Bock & Levelt, 1994).
Evidence supporting the existence of a functional level in
production has been found in a series of studies by Bock and
colleagues (Bock, 1986, 1989; Bock & Loebell, 1990).
(1a) The secretary baked a cake for her boss.
(1b) The wealthy widow drove her Mercedes to the
church.
(1c) Susan brought a book to study.
Taking X primes Y to mean that utterance Y is more likely
to be produced by participants who have just produced utterance X, it has been demonstrated that The girl handed a paintbrush to the man is primed by (1a) (individual lexical items

do not affect priming) and by (1b) (the priming of a prepositional phrase is not affected by its thematic role). However,
(1c) does not prime The girl handed a paintbrush to the man
(prosodic similarity does not affect production).
Starting with this evidence, Pickering and Branigan (1998,
henceforth P&B) have recently argued for the specification of
syntactic verb information within the production lexicon. Using a localised network model of the production lexicon derived from Roelofs (1992, 1993) they argue that lemma nodes
for verbs are linked to additional nodes representing syntactic features such as tense and aspect. These nodes in turn link
to ‘lexeme nodes’ on a separate stratum, which represent potential lexical forms of verbs. If the verb lemma <GIVE>
and both a past tense node and a perfective aspect node are
active, a likely articulation through the lexemic level would
be gave. The syntactic feature nodes are unique, such that
any verb which can be expressed in the past tense is linked to
the same past tense node as is <GIVE>. Importantly, P&B
also assume that verb lemmas are linked to ‘combinatorial’
nodes which express the constructions in which a verb can be
used. <GIVE> would have links to (at least) two combinatorial nodes, representing ‘NP NP’ (give the dog a bone) and
‘NP PP’ (give the bone to a dog) combinations. It is worth
noting that (at least) two types of information traditionally
described as subcategorisation information are combined by
these nodes, since they encode not only the types (syntactic
category and case) of arguments used, but also the number of
arguments (i.e., the verb’s valence).
Using standard assumptions about decaying activation,1
the priming of The girl handed the paintbrush to a man by
The rock star sold some cocaine to an undercover agent is accounted for by suggesting that the ‘NP PP’ node retains some
activation and thus reaches threshold more easily when making the second utterance. P&B provide support for this model
by adopting a novel methodology (see also Branigan, Pickering, Liversedge, Stewart, & Urbach, 1995), in which participants provide written completions for partial sentences. The
prime sentences are pragmatically constrained such that the
most likely completion is of a given form (e.g., The racing
1 P&B’s

model deviates from more traditional activation models in that
some links, as well as nodes, retain activation over time. However the detail
of the model has no bearing on the functional/positional dichotomy to which
we address ourselves in this paper.

driver gave the torn overall
vs. The racing driver gave
) but the target sentences end after
the helpful mechanic
). In line with
the matrix verb (e.g., The patient showed
P&B’s predictions, subjects are more likely to produce target
sentences with the same syntactic structures as the primes.
Moreover, the priming effect becomes stronger when the verb
is repeated between prime and target (when activation from
both lemma and combinatorial nodes is assumed to contribute
to the effect). Finally, syntactic priming is unaffected by differences between prime and target in the verb’s tense, aspect,
or number, supporting the idea that syntactic feature information is separate from the representations involved in syntactic
priming (i.e. lemmas and combinatorial nodes).
However, P&B’s evidence lends itself to alternative interpretations. Firstly, it might be possible to account for their
findings in terms of positional rather than functional processing: in English, the positions of the two arguments of a ditransitive verb such as give are confounded with the different
syntactic structures that are required to realise each possible
sequence (‘NP NP’ vs. ‘NP PP’). The same line of reasoning
applies to Bock’s research: it might even be argued that the irrelevance of thematic role assignment to PP-priming militates
against a view where constituents are stipulated at a lexical
(argument structure) level, and for a model in which particular constituents like ‘NP’ or ‘PP’ are more likely to be reproduced ‘in the same linear position’. Evidence for the view
that the order of constituents can be primed (where the underlying syntactic representation remains constant) has been
recently demonstrated in Dutch (Hartsuiker, in preparation;
Hartsuiker & Kolk, 1998b).
Secondly, P&B’s experimental findings might be accounted for if they simply reflected the propensity of the
production system to reuse particular types of syntactic constituents (for example, PPs). This hypothesis has the attraction of providing a more natural explanation for the priming of The girl handed a paintbrush to the man by sentences
including optional arguments or modifiers (Bock & Loebell,
1990).2 Because the experiments do not contain a baseline
condition, it is impossible to tell whether both ‘NP NP’ and
‘NP PP’ primes have an effect on the sentence produced, or
whether, for example, it is only an ‘NP PP’ prime which affects the standard distribution of responses (see Hartsuiker &
Kolk, 1998a, for a similar argument). If previous findings
can be accounted for by a mechanism which is simply more
likely to use a particular type of constituent, then people may
be equally likely to produce sentences where the verb has a
different number of arguments but a particular constituent is
reproduced, provided that there are no constraints on the verb
produced in the target sentence. To make this concrete, consider a situation in which the prime sentence is The man gave
a toy to the child (which has an ‘NP PP’ form). If syntactic
priming simply reflects the probability of reusing particular
constituents (say, a PP), then in the absence of a constraining
verb in the target sentence, people may be as likely to produce The man sang in the bath as The man put the soap in its

holder (since both contain PPs).
German provides an interesting opportunity to explore the
issues outlined above more fully. In German, ditransitive
verbs such as geben (to give) take two case-marked arguments: the object given has accusative case, and the recipient has dative case. Importantly, the order of these arguments
is (almost) arbitrary, so that Ich gab dem Mann das Buch and
Ich gab das Buch dem Mann are both translated as “I gave the
man the book”. Therefore, it is possible to explore priming
effects at the positional level (as in studies on Dutch: Hartsuiker, in preparation; Hartsuiker & Kolk, 1998b). A second
feature of German is that monotransitive verbs (which take a
single object) can subcategorise for either accusative or dative
case objects, providing an opportunity to test whether certain
types of arguments (designated by case rather than syntactic
category) are reused over consecutive trials. Taken together,
this results in a system where number of arguments (1 or 2),
type of arguments (accusative or dative NP), and (for ditransitives) order of arguments are orthogonally specified.

A Completion Experiment on the Internet
The aim of the current study is to exploit these features of
German to provide a fuller investigation of syntactic priming,
using the sentence completion method pioneered by Branigan
et al. (1995) and Pickering and Branigan (1998). In this study,
primes consist of ditransitives in each of the possible configurations (which we will refer to as dat<acc and acc<dat)
as well as monotransitives which subcategorise for single accusative (acc) or dative (dat) arguments. As well as these four
primes, we include a baseline condition (where the prime is
unrelated to the type of target that can be generated, given
experimental constraints). Finally, because we are interested
not only in the order of arguments but also in the numbers
and types of arguments generated, participants are left free to
choose the verb for the target sentence fragment, in contrast
to previous studies.
Participants The experiment was administered via the
World Wide Web. Participants were recruited through advertisements in Usenet newsgroups as well as through links
from other web pages. Fifty-eight participants from different
regions of Germany, Austria, and Switzerland completed the
experiment. All of them acquired German as their first language, and most of them (83%) were university graduates or
students of different scientific subjects. Participants’ average
age was 28.5 years, ranging from 18 to 54 years. Thirty-six
of them were male, 22 female.

Materials The experiment had a two-factor (52) design,
using a syntactic priming paradigm in which both primes and
targets consisted of sentence fragments for completion. Participants had to complete one of two types of target fragments
2 P&B

provide an alternative account of this finding by suggesting that
‘combinatorial’ nodes encode syntactic rules (such as VP
NP PP) rather
than subcategorisation information.

)

after having completed one of five types of priming constructions.
The targets consisted of pairs of VP-head-final sentence
represents the
fragments of the forms in (2) below (where
missing material that was to be provided by the participant).
(2a) accusative target

NP[nom] hat NP[acc]

wollen.

(2b) dative target

NP[nom] hat NP[dat]

wollen.

Each target could be completed in one of two ways. The
fragments could be completed using a monotransitive verb
(i.e., a verb which takes a single object NP in the accusative
or dative case for (2a) and (2b) respectively). Alternatively,
the completion could consist of a second object NP followed
by a ditransitive verb. For instance, an accusative target like
wollen (The man has the[acc]
Der Mann hat den Freund
friend
wanted, cf. (2a)) might be completed with treffen
(to meet) which subcategorises for a single accusative object
NP. Alternatively, a phrase like seinem Kollegen vorstellen
(to introduce to his colleague) might be used, resulting in a
ditransitive construction. Likewise, a dative target like Der
wollen (The man has [to] the[dat]
Mann hat dem Freund
friend
wanted, cf. (2b)) could legitimately be completed
using helfen (to help), which takes a single dative object NP,
as well as with a phrase like seinen Kollegen vorstellen (to
introduce his colleague) as a ditransitive completion. Note
that ditransitive completions of examples of the form of (2b)
imply a canonical dat<acc ordering of the object NPs. For
(2a), on the other hand, ditransitive completions result in less
common (though acceptable) acc<dat sequences.
(3a) acc<dat
or

NP[nom] hat NP[acc]
V[ppl; <dat,acc>] .
NP[dat] V[ppl; <dat,acc>] .
NP[nom] hat

(3b) dat<acc
or

NP[nom] hat NP[dat]
V[ppl; <dat,acc>] .
NP[acc] V[ppl; <dat,acc>] .
NP[nom] hat

(3c) acc

NP[nom] hat

(3d) dat

NP[nom] hat/ist

(3e) baseline

NP[nom] war

V[ppl; <acc>] .

which were selected on the basis of their subcat-specifications
from the CELEX German Database: for (3a) and (3b), we selected strictly ditransitive predicates, like gezeigt (showed),
which subcategorise for both a dative and an accusative object; in (3c), predicates which require a single accusative object, like untersucht (examined), were used; and for (3d), we
chose predicates taking a single dative object like begegnet
(came across).3 The copula-verb baseline condition (3e) implied none of these verb frames.
Thirty different item-sets were generated, each comprising two target fragments (cf. (2)) and ten priming fragments
(cf. (3)). There were two sentence fragments per priming condition and one sentence fragment per target condition in each
item-set, so that the sentence fragments could be arranged in
triplets of two primes of the same condition followed by one
target. The sentence fragments used for each of the triplets
were semantically unrelated.
All possible combinations of priming and target fragments
were used, resulting in ten different triplets per item-set. The
resulting 300 triplets were randomly allotted to ten treatments
such that each treatment contained an equal number of triplets
of each type. Each item-set appeared exactly once per treatment, but in a different condition than in the other treatments.
A set of 90 filler fragments was also generated—these included intransitives, passives, or copula-verb constructions
similar to (3e). The set of fillers was added to each treatment,
resulting in a total of 180 sentence fragments per treatment.
Table 1 shows an example triplet consisting of two priming fragments of type (3a), followed by a target fragment of
type (2b).
Table 1: Example material set corresponding to
conditions (3a) and (2b).
prime 1

Die Mutter hat das Kind

prime 2

Der Dekan hat
vorgestellt.

target

Der Junge hat dem Mädchen

V[ppl; <dat>] .
als NP[nom] .

The sets of five priming materials were constrained such
that the most likely completion would be an object NP (in
(3a–d)) or a comparative (in (3e)) (the latter, equivalent to
than NP2’, served as the baseline
the English ‘NP1 was
condition). Materials modelled on (3a)—where, in an equal
proportion of trials, either the dative or the accusative object was missing—were constructed such that the most likely
completion would result in a ditransitive construction with
(non-canonical) acc<dat argument order. Condition (3b) was
similar to (3a), but a canonical dat<acc ditransitive was the
most likely outcome. (3c) and (3d) were most likely to be
completed as monotransitive constructions with either a single accusative (3c) or a single dative (3d) object NP. A major constraining factor of the priming materials was the verbs,

anvertraut.

dem Professor

wollen.

Procedure Materials were presented using the WebExp
experimental toolkit (Keller, Corley, Corley, Konieczny, &
Todirascu, 1998).4 Each sentence fragment was presented
3 Some

dative-object verbs in German select a form of sein (to be) rather
than haben (to have) as their perfect tense auxiliary (cf. (3d)). While this
kind of restriction can be useful to elicit the intended response in some of the
priming constructions, it needs to be eliminated from the targets. Therefore,
we used a modal auxiliary like wollen at the end of each target fragment,
so that any type of infinitival main verb (instead of a participle) could be
inserted. Informed by P&B, we considered the resulting syntactic feature
differences between prime and target verbs irrelevant for the priming effects
of interest.
4 A demo is available at http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/web_exp/

(via a web browser) in a text box, with a series of dashes
representing the missing portion: participants were instructed
to type one or more words into a second text box such that
an acceptable sentence was formed from the fragment and
the word or phrase that they supplied, where acceptable was
defined as grammatically correct and reasonably plausible.
There were no further restrictions on how participants completed the sentences, other than their being asked to avoid
proper names if possible. Further instructions emphasised
that participants should rely on first impressions rather than
trying to create witty or original completions.
The WebExp software rotated through the ten sets of materials, so that each new participant saw a different treatment.
Within each treatment, the materials were randomised such
that each prime-prime-target triple was preceded by three
fillers, drawn at random from the ninety available. Completion of an item (by pressing RETURN) resulted in the immediate display of the following item; participants were not able
to re-inspect items or responses once they had been recorded.
Responses were timed (on the participant’s computer) by
recording the time taken to make the first keystroke of any
response, as well as the time to press RETURN at the end of
a response. Completions were required for all 180 items in a
given set of materials. At the close of the experiment, participants were thanked for their time and promised a debriefing
once the experiment was complete (debriefs were later sent
by email).
Two independent judges categorised the responses made
to both prime and target fragments, recording the orders and
cases of arguments, and the subcategorisation properties of
the verbs chosen. The categories were later conflated into
correct or incorrect for primes (reflecting whether the desired response had in fact been elicited) and into monotrans,
ditrans or other for targets (reflecting mainly the subcategorisation properties of the verbs chosen). In the few cases where
participants had selected a ditransitive verb without including an additional object NP (resulting in an ‘implicit argument’ construction), target responses were scored as monotrans. Grammatically incorrect responses (most of which
included wrong case assignments) and responses involving
prepositional complements were categorised as other.
Analysis Effects were examined by testing hierarchical loglinear models (see Howell, 1997, for an overview), adjusting observed cell counts to factor combinations of prime type
(cf. (3)), target type (cf. (2)), completion type (monotrans vs.
ditrans vs. other),5 and either participants or items. The analyses including participants or items as random factors are
reported as LR 2 (subj) and LR 2 (item) respectively; a further
statistic, LR 2 (marg) , refers to an analysis in which the effect
itself (i.e., its constituting factor combination) serves as the
saturated model, ignoring additional random factors. Technically, the first two statistics represent so-called partial associations, whereas the third refers to the marginal association
of an effect. For main or simple effects only marginal associations (LR 2 (marg) ) will be reported, as the partial associations

are redundant in these cases.

Predictions
Priming Effects Due to the exploratory nature of this experiment, we will skip discussing hypothetical priming effects in favour of a discussion of the theoretical implications
of the observed data at the end of this paper. Therefore, we
turn our attention to predictions of baseline effects in the following section.
Baselines We assumed that the standard distribution of the
target responses would be influenced by (at least) two factors:
Firstly, the availability of different subcategorisation frames,
and secondly, canonical argument ordering constraints. The
former was assumed, as a rough estimation, to be a function of the relative sizes of different verb classes in German,
given that participants have to choose from these to generate
their responses. According to the CELEX German Database,
about 63% of the ‘common’ verbs in German (i.e. verbs with
a lemma frequency of at least 10 per million) are monotransitives requiring a single accusative object NP; 23% are ditransitives, taking both an accusative and a dative object NP; and
only 4% are monotransitives subcategorising for a single dative object NP (the remaining 10% are either intransitives or
verbs requiring other types of complements). Given this distribution of available verb frames (and because participants
may avoid generating non-canonical orderings if possible) we
predicted that monotrans completions should be predominant
for accusative targets like (2a). For dative targets like (2b),
however, we expected ditrans responses to be most frequent,
as the set of verbs which take a single dative object NP is
relatively small.

Results
Data from seven participants were excluded from analysis:
in five cases, because the proportion of other responses was
greater than 25% (this may, in some cases, reflect dialectal
variations), and in two cases, because median response latencies were extremely slow (at > 20 sec). Target data points
from the remaining 51 subjects were excluded if: (a) the immediately preceding prime was categorised as incorrect; (b)
the time between the onset of a response to the immediately
preceding prime and the onset of the target response lay outwith the participant-specific interquartile range. These criteria resulted in the exclusion of 13% of the trials from analysis.
Consequently, the results reported are based on a total of 1334
data points.
The frequency of correct trials varied considerably across
priming conditions (acc<dat: 68.5%; dat<acc: 88%; acc:
95%; dat: 90%; baseline: 95%), mainly reflecting the fact
that participants were more reluctant to produce the intended
completion in the non-canonical (acc<dat) priming condition. For the targets, there were 889 (66.6%) monotrans, 341
5 Note

2 test).

that the ‘dependent variable’ is treated as a factor (as in a standard

100

% responses

100
monotrans
baseline

90

90

80

80

70

70

monotrans
ditrans

60

60
50

monotrans

50

40

ditrans

40

30

30

20

20

10

ditrans
baseline

0

(a)

% responses

acc<dat

dat<acc

acc

dat

ditrans
baseline
monotrans
baseline

10
0

(b)

acc<dat

dat<acc

acc

dat

Figure 1: percentages of monotrans and ditrans completions for (a) accusative and (b) dative targets,
by type of correctly completed prime.

(25.6%) ditrans, and 104 (7.8%) other responses in total. Interestingly, participants reused a verb from one of the preceding primes in less than 0.5% of the target completions.
Figure 1 shows the frequencies of monotrans and ditrans
responses (in proportion to the total number of responses per
condition) separately for accusative targets (Fig. 1a) and for
dative targets (Fig. 1b). Dashed lines indicate baseline response rates. The remaining four prime conditions are represented by data columns.
Baselines In the baseline prime condition, the predicted
biases were confirmed: for accusative targets, monotrans
completions were clearly predominant (91%, ditrans = 3%,
other = 6%); for dative targets, however, ditrans responses
were the most frequent (52%, monotrans = 38%, other =
10%). In fact, irrespective of prime type, there was a significant overall interaction between target type and completion type (LR 2 (subj, item, marg) > 500; df = 2; p < .001) which
replicates the pattern found in the baseline condition: for accusative targets, monotrans completions were the most frequent (93%; ditrans = 0.5%, other = 6.5%: LR 2 (marg) >
600; df = 1; p < .001); for dative targets, ditrans completions
were the most frequent (51%; monotrans = 40%, other = 9%:
2
LR  (marg) > 9.950; df = 1; p < .002).

Priming Effects
The prime type  target type  completion type interaction was significant, at least by tests adjusting for subject
and item variation (LR 2 (subj, item) > 27.0; df = 8; p < .001;
2
LR  (marg) = 15.295; df = 8; p = .054). Unfortunately, the
strong monotrans bias in the accusative target condition (there
were virtually no ditrans responses) rendered any further statistical exploration in this target condition infeasible. Therefore, only the dative target condition was examined in detail. This was done by partitioning the prime type factor into
‘monotransitive’ and ‘ditransitive’ primes.6
Dative Targets In order to examine the effects of ‘monotransitive’ primes on the distribution of responses in the da-

tive target condition, a reduced model comprising only the
acc, dat, and baseline conditions was generated. Testing
this model revealed no significant interaction between prime
type and completion type (LR 2 (subj, item, marg) < 0.7; df = 2;
p > .70). Testing ‘ditransitive’ primes via a model including the acc<dat, the dat<acc, and the baseline condition revealed a reliable impact of prime type on completion type
(LR 2 (subj, item, marg) > 7.930; df = 2; p < .02): as can be seen
in Figure 1b, the tendency to produce ditrans completions
was more pronounced after canonical dat<acc primes; the
reverse tendency, i.e., to produce monotrans rather than ditrans completions, was found in the non-canonical acc<dat
priming condition. Statistically, the proportion of monotrans
and ditrans target completions clearly differed between the
two ‘ditransitive’ priming conditions (LR 2 (subj, item, marg) >
6.950; df = 1; p < .01). Contrasts with the baseline condition were confirmed as statistical trends (acc<dat vs. baseline: LR 2 (subj) = 1.903; df = 1; p < .17; LR 2 (item) = 4.758;
df = 1; p < .03; LR 2 (marg) = 3.210; df = 1; p < .08; dat<acc
vs. baseline: LR 2 (subj) = 3.638; df = 1; p < .06; LR 2 (item) =
2.058; df = 1; p < .16; LR 2 (marg) = 4.100; df = 1; p < .05).

Discussion
The observed data pattern (at least as established in the dative target condition) bears some interesting implications for
the representation of combinatorial information in sentence
production (cf. Pickering & Branigan, 1998), and may even
challenge some architectural assumptions about the human
language production system: it appears that subcategorisation properties of verbs per se (in terms of verb valence and
case of arguments) are not subject to syntactic priming. This
is highlighted by the fact that (a) ‘monotransitive’ primes
(acc and dat) have no significant impact on the distribution of
6 These

analyses considered only the distributions of monotrans and ditrans completions, as the proportion of other responses was totally unaffected by prime type in the dative target condition (LR 2 (subj, item, marg) < 1;
df 4; p > .95).

=

the (dative) target completions, and (b) ‘ditransitive’ primes
(acc<dat and dat<acc) have facilitatory as well as inhibitory
effects on the relative proportions of ditrans to monotrans responses, dependent on the sequence of arguments specified in
the prime. As the latter indicates, there is clear evidence for
the importance of positional information in syntactic priming, comparable to recent results from Dutch (cf. Hartsuiker,
in preparation; Hartsuiker & Kolk, 1998b).
With respect to representational aspects of a production model, the results could be interpreted as suggesting that combinatorial nodes in the verb lexicon encode
subcategorisation information as well as information about
the (canonical/non-canonical) sequencing of arguments, i.e.,
something similar to what is encoded in traditional context
free grammar rules (cf. P&B). Unfortunately, our data remain unclear regarding the precise nature of these representations, since the accusative target condition was uninformative (due to a massive bias towards monotransitive responses
in this condition): the observed ordering effects could be
due to ‘canonical vs. non-canonical’ argument ordering (i.e.,
ditransitive verb-frames become more easily retrievable after canonical primes, but less easily retrievable after noncanonical primes) or to a ‘match vs. mismatch’ in (implied)
argument order between prime and target. At this point, we
leave this as a question for future research.
Our data do however greatly constrain the range of plausible architectural assumptions about sentence production. Our
findings can be taken as strong evidence against a model
which claims that processes at the functional level (i.e., verb
retrieval and syntactic function assignment) necessarily precede, and therefore determine, positional processing, but not
vice versa (e.g., Bock & Levelt, 1994). It appears that positional processing can, under certain circumstances, determine
the outcome of processes at the functional level, in such a way
that the ease of retrieving a ditransitive verb (in a target trial)
is dependent on the argument order specified in a preceding
ditransitive priming construction. Note that the retrievability
of the verb (or of its corresponding subcategorisation frame)
in the prime cannot account for this evidence, since strictly
ditransitive prime verbs had already been presented to participants (unlike the target verbs which participants were free
to choose). Thus, it must have been the linear order of the
arguments that had to be produced in a correctly completed
prime that affected the increased or decreased availability of
a ditransitive verb frame in the target trials. This is clearly
incompatible with (at least) models which claim that there is
no feedback from the positional to the functional level of sentence planning (e.g., Bock & Levelt, 1994).
In general, the results of this and other experiments highlight the importance of cross-linguistic research for refining,
and possibly revising, existing theories of human language
processing, most of which were developed on the basis of
English data. The Internet may provide the ideal medium for
this kind of research.

Note The order of the authors is arbitrary. We wish to thank
Ulf Reips, Bernad Batinic, Axel Theobald, and John Krantz
for kindly providing links to our web experiment from their
host pages. We are especially grateful to Frank Keller for his
technical support.

References
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355–387.
Bock, J. K. (1989). Closed-class immanence in sentence
production. Cognition, 31, 163–186.
Bock, J. K., & Levelt, W. J. (1994). Language production: Grammatical encoding. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.),
Handbook of psycholinguistics. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Bock, J. K., & Loebell, H. (1990). Framing sentences. Cognition, 35, 1–39.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., Liversedge, S. P., Stewart,
A. P., & Urbach, T. P. (1995). Syntactic priming: Investigating the mental representation of language. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 489–506.
Hartsuiker, R. J. (in preparation). Determination of word
order in written and spoken sentence production.
Hartsuiker, R. J., & Kolk, H. H. J. (1998a). Syntactic facilitation in agrammatic sentence production. Brain and
Language, 62, 221–254.
Hartsuiker, R. J., & Kolk, H. H. J. (1998b). Syntactic persistence in Dutch. Language and Speech, 41, 143–184.
Howell, D. C. (1997). Statistical methods for psychology (4
ed.). Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press.
Keller, F., Corley, M., Corley, S., Konieczny, L., & Todirascu,
A. (1998). WebExp: A Java toolbox for web-based psychological experiments (Technical Report No. HCRC/TR99). Human Communication Research Centre, University
of Edinburgh.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming in language
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 633–
651.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of lemma
retrieval in speaking. Cognition, 42, 107–142.
Roelofs, A. (1993). Testing a non-decompositional theory of
lemma retrieval in speaking: Retrieval of verbs. Cognition,
47, 59–87.

