UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Talking Through Graphics: An Empirical Study of the Sequential Integration of Modalities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vn6m3cm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Umata, Ichiro
Shimojima, Atsushi
Katagiri, Yasuhiro

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Talking Through Graphics:
An Empirical Study of the Sequential Integration of Modalities
Ichiro Umata (umata@mic.atr.co.jp) 1
ATR Media Integration & Communications Research Laboratories;
Seika Soraku Kyoto, 619-0288 Japan
Atsushi Shimojima (ashimoji@jaist.ac.jp)
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology;
1–1 Asahi Tatsunokuchi Nomi Ishikawa 923-1292 Japan
Yasuhiro Katagiri (katagiri@mic.atr.co.jp)
ATR Media Integration & Communications Research Laboratories;
Seika Soraku Kyoto, 619-0288 Japan
Abstract
An empirical investigation was conducted on the characteristics of language use in graphics communication settings.
Graphics communications, such as dialogues using maps,
drawings, or pictures, provide people with two independent
systems of representation, spoken language and graphics.
Drawing on our dialogue data, we will show that the presence
of a graphical representation significantly changes the way the
spoken language is used, extending its expressive capacity in
most cases. As two remarkable uses of language affected in
this way, we will report the phenomena of mediated reference
and dual description, illustrating them with actual examples
from our data. Finally, a quantitative analysis of our data will
show that these special uses of language are indeed as common
as conventional uses of language in the presence of graphical
representations.

Introduction
Conversational exchanges that involve external graphical representations are quite common in our daily lives. People often
give and ask directions by referring to maps, or they might
draw a floor plan in discussing where to place furniture in a
living room. Now, linguistic expressions denote objects and
relations in the world. This denotation relation is governed
by conventions inside the language. An utterance of a linguistic expression carries unique information about the world
through these conventions. This is what the standard view of
the semantics of language tells us. However, when we look
at speech in conversational exchanges involving graphics, regardless of the language used, we will immediately notice
utterances that do not conform to this standard picture.
This paper is a detailed examination of the impact of graphics on the use of language. Our data consist of actual twoparty dialogues where participants draw or consult a map during verbal exchanges. We will focus on two remarkable uses
of language, called “mediated reference” and “dual description,” that we found through an examination of our data. Both
phenomena are clearly specific to dialogues involving some
graphical representation, or at least, some external representation other than speech.
Briefly, mediated reference is a case where a linguistic expression reaches its “final” referent due to the fact that its
“immediate” referent has a referential connection to this final
one in the system of graphics. For example, our subjects often
use the indexical “kore” (this) to refer to a building or some
other landmark, although its immediate referent is clearly an
icon on the map; the icon refers to the landmark in the system
1

Also with Kobe University.

of map, and this fact somehow enables the indexical expression to do so too. We will discuss more examples of mediated
reference later, and introduce three more varieties of the phenomenon.
Dual description is a case where a declarative sentence is
used to describe a fact that holds in the graphic as well as the
corresponding fact in the situation represented by the graphic.
Suppose, when asked about the number of stations between
two particular stations, one counts the number of icons on a
railroad map and says, “There are three stations in-between
them.” Is this report concerned with the map itself, or with
the mapped railroad? Is it reporting that the railroad map has
three station icons between two particular station icons, or
that the railroad system has three stations between the two
stations? Whichever the answer may be, it seems clear that
the speaker has managed to describe both facts with this sentence. Note that, on the semantics associated with the railroad
map, the first fact means the second fact, and this semantic
relation somehow underwrites the duplicative use of the sentence.
Both uses of language are so natural and common in a dialogue involving a graphical representation that people may
not even be aware of the phenomena. In fact, their frequent
occurrence in such settings suggests that they are not a deviant but rather a perfectly legitimate use of language. Yet the
empirical research on the integration of linguistic and graphical representations has focused on the issue of how speech
is used to disambiguate a graphic (Neilson and Lee 1994) or
how a graphic is used to disambiguate speech (Lee and Zeevat
1990). The linguistic-graphic integration has been also studied from a logical point of view, but the focus has been on
how a graphic expresses what cannot be easily expressed by
a linguistic representation (Barwise and Etchemendy 1996,
Shimojima 1999). For both views, the fundamental form of
linguistic-graphic integration is a parallel one, where each
mode of representation expresses information in its own way,
but since one mode of representation expresses what the other
form does not, they may work complementarily to each other.
In contrast, the two phenomena that we are highlighting in
this paper point to a rather different form of integration,
where the presence of one mode of representation extends
the expressive capacity of the other by affecting the way it is
used. Our goal is to draw due attention to this sequential form
of graphic-linguistic integration by demonstrating that the instances of that type of integration are commonly observed in
actual human dialogues, as opposed to mere logical possibilities.
In the next section, we will describe the methods through

which we collected our dialogue data. The two subsequent
sections are, respectively, qualitative descriptions of the phenomena of mediated reference and dual description, where
we illustrate each phenomenon with examples of language
use drawn from our dialogue data. In these sections, the
phenomenon of mediated reference is classified into four different types, and the mechanism underlying dual description
is analyzed. The final section is devoted to a quantitative
description of the two phenomena, where we use “content
phrasal unit” to quantify the frequency of mediated reference
and dual description in the dialogue process. As it turns out,
these graphic-oriented uses of language occur as frequently as
standard uses in our dialogue data, indicating that the speakers are quite ready to exploit the graphical representations at
hand to extend the expressive capacity of their language.

Data
The conversational data analyzed in this paper were gathered from a series of graphical communication experiments,
which were conducted for a larger research project investigating the interactions between cognitive/communicative factors
and graphical representations2. Our data consist of 19 taskoriented dialogues, with a total length of 116 minutes. Of
these dialogues, 14 involve “a map sketching task” while the
other 5 involve “a GRE task.”
Map Sketching Task In this task, two subjects were asked
to work together as partners to draw a map showing four
landmarks in Nara (a local town) as accurately as possible.
The subjects were seated in separate, soundproof rooms and
worked together using a shared virtual whiteboard and a full
duplex audio connection. All inputs to the screen were by
stylus, and any writing or erasing by one participant would
appear simultaneously on their partner’s screen. The subjects
were video-taped during the task.
GRE Task In this task, two subjects were asked to solve a
logical reasoning problem from the Graduate Record Examination (GRE). The problem was on possible route selections
in a hypothetical truck delivery area. The subjects were again
required to work on the problem together and it was suggested
that drawing a diagram on the screen might help them to answer the question. All pairs drew diagrams and eight pairs
among the nine drew map-like ones. The communication environment of the subjects was the same as that in the map
sketching task. The GRE task differed from the Map Drawing task in that the subjects had to not only draw an accurate
map, but also use it for problem solving.

Mediated Reference
Studies on the use of multimodal information in reasoning
and communication have mostly focused on the complementary or parallel form of integration and have not closely examined the sequential form of integration of multiple modalities. Particularly, little is known about the directionality and
the systematic nature of such integration. In our data, two
directions were observed in referring to entities through the
2

These experiments were designed by Patrick G.T. Healey, Nik
Swoboda, Ichiro Umata and Yasuhiro Katagiri.

sequential integration: mediated references via a representation system (a sketch map, a diagram, etc.) to the world and
mediated references via the world to a representation system.
We will call the former a forward mediated reference, and
the latter a backward mediated reference. Further, mediated
references can be observed between not only individuals but
also relations. We will examine, in this section, the phenomena of mediated references observed in our graphical communication experiments. Figure 1 shows four possibilities of
mediated references.

Individual Mediated Reference
Consider the following utterances:
(1) (From the map data, pointing to a part of the map with the
stylus)
Deiri-Sutoa-ga-ne,
de,
koko-ni-ne, tasika
and, here-DAT,
probably, Daily Store-NOM,
atta.
kono kado-ni
this
corner-DAT was.
“And I think there’s Daily Store on this corner.”
(2) (From the GRE data, pointing to a path on the map with
the stylus)
100 desuka?
kore-ga
this-NOM 100 is
“This is 100km, isn’t it?”
In (1), the speaker was pointing to a part of the map, and
the linguistic expression “koko (here)” and “kono kado (this
corner) literally denoted a part of the map. However, there
was just a blank space on this part of the map and there were
no symbols that could be regarded as an icon of a store. If we
assume that the speaker was talking about the map, this utterance would be regarded as simply meaningless or at most
false. In this task setting, it is unlikely that the speaker was
talking nonsense or lying. Therefore, this utterance was a
statement not based on the map but on the real world. Here,
the linguistic expressions “koko” and “kono kado” referred to
some place in the world via the place on the map. Similarly,
no signs showing the distance could be seen on the diagram
in the case of utterance (2), and no suitable properties for the
referent of the expression “100” could be found on the diagram. Consequently, this utterance was also a description of
some situation regarding the delivery route, not a part on the
diagram. In these cases, the reliable correspondence between
the spatial configuration of a map and a place in the world
enabled forward mediated references: references to places in
the world through places on the map.
We can also find examples of backward mediated references in the data. Some of them are as follows:
(3) (From the map data, pointing to the icon of Nara Park on
the map)
ja, kore, moo-tyotto
koen okkiku suru?
So this
a-little-more park big
make
“So, shall we make this park a little bigger?”
(4) (From the map data, after realizing that they made a mistake)

speech

speech

"koko"
"kono kado"

"sita"

forward

Todaiji icon

.
a location
on map

Todaiji

.

.

.

Daily Store

.

under

to the south of

.

Kasuga icon

representation

representation

Kasuga

representation

world

speech

speech

"koen"

"kita"

backward
.

.

Nara park icon

Nara Park

Hanna

.
.

.

above

.

Nara station icon

representation

world

individual

representation

to the north of

Nara Station

world

relation

Figure 1: Four categories of mediated reference
aa, soko zutto
ue nobotteiku-to,
a
jaa kesimasyoo Teramati
Kita
well so
erase
Teramati-town Kita-town
Yes there straight up go
“Well, so, let’s erase the Teramati-Kita route.”
nyugakusiki-no
toko
dayo.
entrance ceremony-GEN place is
The linguistic expression “koen (park)” in utterance (3) lit“Yeah, if you go straight up there, you can find the
erally denoted a real park. However, one cannot usually make
place where we had the entrance ceremony.”
a real park bigger, so this utterance cannot be regarded as a
statement about the world. Rather, utterance (3) was a stateIn dialogue (5), the speaker intended to show the listener
ment about some operation on the map, and “koen” referred
where Kasuga-shrine was. However, since there were no
not to the real Nara Park but rather to the icon on the map.
Kasuga-shrine icons on the map, the subjects were talking
Similarly, utterance (4) was a suggestion to erase the path on
about a real-world situation via the map. However, the linthe diagram. They could not erase the delivery route itself beguistic expression “sita,” which roughly means under or because it was not assumed to be in the situation described by
low, cannot be regarded as referring directly to real world
the GRE problem. In both statements, the objects in the world
relations; in the real world, Kasuga shrine is not under Toplay an intermediate role, and the linguistic expressions refer
daiji temple but south of it. Here, “sita” referred to the real
indirectly to the icons on the map.
world relation (i.e. to-the-south-of) indirectly via the relation on the map (under). This was based on the semantic
Relation Mediated Reference
correspondence established between the map and the world.
So far, we have concentrated on mediated references between
Similarly, in the case of utterance (6), there were no icons for
individuals. However, there are also examples of mediated
“nyugakusiki-no toko” (the place where we had the enreferences between relations in our data. Consider the foltrance ceremony) on the map. Therefore, this utterance was
lowing examples:
describing a state in the real world, and the expression “ue”
referred to the spatial relation in the real world (i.e. to the
(5) (From the map data, pointing to a part of the map with the
north) via the relation on the map (i.e. up) in (6).
stylus)
Excerpt (7) includes an example of a backward mediated
reference to a relation, as well as examples of individual
kokorahen-ni
Toodaiji-ga
aru
backward references.
around-here-DAT Todaiji-temple-NOM is
hoo-kana?
kara,
kono sita-no
(7) (From the map data, revising the position of the Nara Stabecause this
below-GEN direction-I wonder
tion icon)
“Because Todaiji is around here, it (Kasuga-shrine) is
ittya
Hanna Way-no
yori kita-ni
probably below this, isn’t it?”
Hanna Way-GEN than north-DAT go
(6) (From the map data, looking at his partner’s drawing on the
akan?
map)
no good-Q

“So, we can’t draw it north of Hanna Way?”

(8) A: kazoemasukanee?
(Shall we count?)

B: soosuruto.
Since one cannot change the place of the real train station, utterances in (7) were about the situation on the map. Thus, the
linguistic expression “Hanna Way” in (7) referred backwardly
to the icons on the map, not to a real world object. Similarly,
the linguistic expression “kita-ni” (to the north of) makes a
backward mediated reference to the relation of the places on
the map (i.e. above) via the real world relation to the north
of in this utterance3. Due to the preservation of the configurational constraints between the map system and the world,
such mediated references to spatial relations are quite natural
and are commonly found in conversations in which maps are
used.

Informational Duality
Thus, when a map accompanies a dialogue, speakers can
make a wide variety of indirect references, either individual
or relational, forward or backward, through the systematic semantic relations established between the map and the mapped
area. From the speaker’s point of view, this means increased
freedom of reference with a limited vocabulary, but from the
listener’s point of view, this might mean an increased likelihood that an utterance will become ambiguous in regards to
the map itself or the mapped region. For we cannot settle this
issue simply by assessing the literal referents of the expressions used, due to the possibility of indirect reference. Purely
semantic disambiguation of this sort is generally not applicable.
Fortunately, listeners can often rely on pragmatic cues to
resolve such ambiguity, as we have seen in the cases of (1)–
(7). Generally, listeners can reject an interpretation of a statement if, on that interpretation, an utterance is to perform a
speech act that is not felicitous in that context, such as (i)
describing or checking the current position of an object not
on the map, or (ii) requesting or otherwise discussing an operation on the mapped region that is impossible to address.
The examples (1), (2), (5), and (6) correspond to (i), and thus
they were considered not to be about the map, while (3), (4),
and (7) correspond to (ii), and they were considered not to be
about the mapped region.
However, our data also contain a number of utterances not
subject to even such disambiguations. In the following, we
will consider some of those examples and analyze the informational and functional structures of such utterances.

An Example
The following dialogue from our GRE data was conducted
soon after the partners drew a graph-like map showing the
routes connecting various towns, including Kawabata, Kitamati, and Hasimoto. The speakers are concerned with how
many towns a truck driver can pass through in one day.
3
The subjects erased the old icon and were just starting to draw
a new one, so “iku (ittya)” in this utterance expresses the movement
of the icon on the map.

(If we do so, then....)

A: kazoeruto 3-tu kanaa. 4-tu-wa tyotto muridesuyonee.
(On my counting, it is three, I suppose. Four is not feasible,
is it?)

B: uun.
(Hmm)

A: Kawa toka dattara, kore moo sudeni 300 toka dakara,
moo, Kita, kotti, Kita-ni
(If this is Kawa or something, and if this is already 300 or so,
well, Kita, here, to Kita [Mumbling indistinctively.])

Kawa-kara Kita-ni itte Hasi-de, kore 3-tu desuyone.
(Going from Kawa to Kita and then to Hasi, that’s three, isn’t
it?)

The case in point is the last utterance of speaker A, which is
underlined. On the one hand, one may well regard the names
“Kawa,” “Kita,” and “Hasi” to denote the icons for Kawabata town, Kitamati town, and Hasimoto town. In this interpretation, the entire utterance concerns the map, and the
speaker is reporting the following information:
(9) There are three town icons on the path: the Kawa
icon, the Kita icon and the Hasi icon.
The icons for Kawabata town, Kitamati town, and Hasimoto town already exist on the map, connected by a particular path on the map. Thus, reporting the number of town
icons on this path, such as reporting (9), is a speech act that
the speaker may well perform at this point. In fact, the above
excerpt shows that prior to this utterance, the subjects have
explicitly agreed to do such counting. Thus, one cannot reject the interpretation of the utterance as concerned with the
map for any obvious reason.
On the other hand, it is also natural to regard “Kawa,”
“Kita,” and “Hasi” as indirectly denoting the real towns, and
if so, the utterance conveys the following information about a
traffic route in the mapped region:
(10) There are three towns on the route: Kawabata
town, Kitamati town and Hasimoto town.
Recall that the present problem for the subjects is the maximum number of towns that a truck driver can pass through
within one day. The reporting in (10) is directly relevant to
the solution to this problem, and hence is a speech act quite
likely to be performed at this point. Thus, the interpretation
of this utterance as being about the mapped region cannot be
rejected, either.
As we will see shortly, our data contain a number of examples of this type, where an utterance is as likely to be about
the map as to be about the mapped region. Upon reflection,
this type of utterance seems frequent in everyday dialogue
involving some graphical representation—we do not always
clearly explain this to listeners, or even to ourselves, whether
our assertion or report is about the picture at hand or about
the situation the picture depicts. So the question is: how can
we understand such utterances? Are they ambiguous in the
sense that: although such utterances are “really” concerned
with either the map or the mapped region, they fail to provide
sufficient cues to distinguish between them? If we frequently
use such ambiguous utterances, how can we ever be successful in communication?

Analysis
On these questions, we propose that such utterances are not
concerned with either the picture or the depicted situation
exclusively. Rather, they are concerned with both, and thus
handle information about the picture as well as information
about the pictured situation. Such utterances are therefore
not ambiguous in the above sense. The problem of ambiguity occurs only when we assume that such an utterance is
concerned with only one subject matter. Here we explicitly
discard this assumption for the kind of utterances in question.
For example, the subject matter of the underlined utterance in
(8) is not single, but dual, and the utterance reports the number of the town icons on a particular path on the map, as well
as the number of the towns on the corresponding route on the
mapped region.
But how is it ever possible for a single utterance to have
such dual informational contents? Briefly, this is possible because representation is a transitive relation. Due to this principle, whenever an utterance represents a picture having a property α, and this property α on the picture in turn represents the
depicted object having property β, the original utterance will
also represent this object having property β. In the present
case, the underlined utterance in (8) represents the map having the structural property of (9), and due to the semantic
convention associated with the maps, a map with the property (9) represents the mapped region as having the structural
property (10). Thus, by transitivity, the utterance also represents the mapped region having the property of (10). This is
how a single utterance carries two pieces of information: one
about the map and the other about the mapped region.
This mechanism may be made clearer by using the analogy
of a copy machine. Suppose you make a copy d0 of a document d, and then make a copy d00 of the copy d0 that you just
made. The copy d,00 being a copy of the copy d,0 acculately
represents d0 more or less, and carries information about d.0
Notice that this copy d00 also carries information about the
original document d—we can look at the second copy d00 and
learn what the original document d is like. (In fact, this is usually the main use of the second copy: we look at it in order to
get information about the original document, often forgetting
that it also carries information about the first copy.) Thus, the
second copy d00 carries two pieces of information, one about
the first copy, and the other about the original document. The
second copy d00 carries the latter via the first copy, thanks to
the transitivity of representation. 4
Our claim is that the same thing happens in the case of the
utterance in (8), where the mapped region in the truck delivery area is the original document d, the map of it is the first
copy d0 of d, and the utterance is the copy d00 of d0 . The utterance in (8) carries information about the mapped region in the
truck delivery area via the map, just as d00 carries information
about d via d0 . The utterance carries depicted information (9)
and (10) about the map and the mapped region, just as d00
carries duplicated information about d0 and d.
There are two major advantages to this claim. First, it
avoids attributing ambiguity to utterances of this type that are
4
The idea that the carrying of information is a transitive relation
is called “the Xerox Principle” by Dretske (1981); this idea has been
a focus of interest in situation theory (Barwise and Perry 1983) and
was subsequently developed in qualitative information theory (Barwise and Seligman 1997).

found in spoken dialogues employing graphical representations. Therefore, such utterances are not particularly prone to
misinterpretation, which is why these types of utterances can
occur frequently without hindering smooth communications
among speakers.
The second advantage of our analysis is that it gives us a
way to capture a set of mechanisms provided by those “dual”
utterances to facilitate problem solving processes involving
the use of graphical representations. Recall, from our discussion on example (8), that a dual utterance occurs in a context
where two different communicative acts are likely: one concerned with the picture and the other concerned with the depicted situation. In our reckoning, the speaker is considered
to perform both acts with the utterance, without skipping or
suppressing either act. A dual utterance effectively works as
a bridge, and both the speaker and the hearer can engage in
joint problem solving by matching and transferring information between the graphics domain and the problem domain.
To clarify this point, let us suppose that utterance (8) was ambiguous and actually carried only one piece of information.
If it was on the situation in the diagram, then the utterance
itself would not convey the information about the world and
would not directly lead to the answer to the question. If it
was on the world situation, then it would show the answer but
have no grounds for it. Under the assumption of dual information, the utterance provides both the answer and the basis
for it at the same time: the information on the world based
on the information on the graphics. Thus, in general, our proposal offers a more natural explanation of the use of such dual
utterances in graphics communication, compared to theories
that attribute a single informational content to it.

Quantitative Analysis
We have demonstrated that a combination of graphical representation and linguistic representation in a graphical communication setting provides us with a novel sequential method
for integrating of the linguistic and graphical modalities in
the form of mediated and dual references. Our analysis so
far has been concerned with classifications and functions of
instances of these new types of references.
In order to further establish that the sequential integration
actually provides us with a viable and effective mechanism
for communication, we conducted a quantitative analysis on
the relative frequencies of the “new” forms of references,
both mediated and dual references; we performed comparison with “conventional” direct references within our data obtained in our Map and GRE experiment. Furthermore, the
different characteristics of each task were expected to result
in a different distribution of the final referents of linguistic
phrases. The Map corpus was expected to have more instances referring solely to the object in the graphics domain,
because the aim of the task was to complete a map. On the
other hand, the GRE corpus was expected to include fewer
of such instances, because the aim was to solve the problems
of the world domain and the graphics simply assist in that
purpose.
Our corpus consists of 14,011 words (9,179 for the Map
and 4,832 for the GRE), and the number of content phrasal
units5 was 5,325 (3,394 for the Map and 1,931 for the GRE).
5

A content phrasal unit is a minimum phrasal unit that has a con-

Dual
36%

Indirect
7%

AA
AA
AA

Conclusion
Direct
57%

Figure 2: Relative usage frequencies of the direct, mediated
and dual references)
GRE

MAP
Dual
0%

50%

100%

Graphics
Target

Figure 3: Distributions of final target domains of references
for the Map and GRE data
Of them, 4,667 units were the ones describing the situations
of the graphics and/or the world domain (2,875 for the Map
and 1,792 for the GRE). We classified these units into the
three categories shown above: direct, mediated and dual references.
Figure 2 shows the relative usage frequencies of the three
types of references: direct, mediated and dual. Of all the reference occurrences, 57% were instances of direct references
and 43% were instances of either mediated or dual references.
This clearly shows that mediated and dual references are not
mere theoretical possibilities or exceptional phenomena, but
rather are mundane mechanisms routinely employed in actual
communication.
Task characteristics of the Map sketching task and the GRE
task can also be captured in quantitative terms. Figure 3
shows the distribution of final target domains of reference for
the two tasks. A direct reference to the world and a forward
mediated reference through the graphics to the world share
the world as their final target domain of reference. Similarly,
a direct reference to the graphics and a backward mediated
reference through the world to the graphics eventually refer to
the graphics as their final target domain. A dual reference is
indeterminate as to its final target domain. The final target domains exhibit significantly different distributions between the
two tasks (χ2 (4) = 595.60, p < .001). More concretely, (1)
the Map data had more instances of graphic-only references,
(adjusted residual: Map = 23.75, GRE = − 23.75); (2) the
GRE data had more instances of world-only references, (adjusted residual: Map = − 6.27, GRE =6.27); (3) the GRE
data had more instances of dual references (adjusted residual:
Map = − 16.02, GRE = 16.02). Thus the assumption that the
GRE data would have more world referents and fewer graphic
referents than the Map data was supported. Furthermore, it is
likely that dual references are strongly related to inferences
on graphics, given the abundant instances of dual references
in the GRE data.
tent word as its head.

Based on the data of spontaneous spoken dialogues involving graphic representations, we have analyzed the impacts
of the presence of a graphic on the use of spoken language.
We found (1) a pre-established semantic relation between a
graphic and the situation depicted by it provides the speaker
with rich possibilities of mediated references, including forward individual, backward individual, forward relational, and
backward relational references; (2) the same semantic relation also lets the speaker use a declarative sentence to express
dual pieces of information; (3) mediated reference and dual
description are not exceptional but rather mundane mechanisms routinely employed in actual communication; (4) the
characteristics of communicative contexts affect the distributions of the final referents of linguistic phrases. We further
suggested that the use of dual descriptions is strongly related
to inferences on graphics.
These findings indicate that in spontaneous human communications, spoken language and a graphic representation
may be used in the sequential composition, where the latter
affects the usage of the former to extend its expressive capacity. This is in stark contrast to the common view of the
interaction between linguistic and graphic modalities, where
the integration is made only at the level of multiple pieces
of information expressed by the two modalities in individual
manners. A parallel composition of this type is not the only
form of the graphic-linguistic integration, and probably, not
even a dominant form.

References
Barwise, J., and E. Etchemendy (1995). Heterogeneous
Logic. In Glasgow, J. I., Narayanan, N. H., and B.
Chandrasekaran (Eds.) Diagrammatic Reasoning: Cognitive and Computational Perspectives, 211–234 Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Barwise, J., and J. Perry (1983). Situations and Attitudes.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Barwise, J., and J. Seligman (1997). Information Flow: The
Logic of Distributed Systems. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press
Lee, J., and H. Zeevat (1990). Integrating Natural Language
and Graphics in Dialogue. In Diaper, D., Gilmore, D.,
Cockton, G. and B. Schackel. (Eds.) Human Covmputer
Interaction—INTERACT’90, 211–234 Amsterdam:
Neilson, I., and J. Lee (1994). Conversations with Graphics:
Implications for the Design of Natural Language/Graphics
Interfaces International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 40, 509–541.
Shimojima, A. (1999). The Graphic-Linguistic Distinction:
Exploring Alternatives Artificial Intelligence Review 13,
313–335.

