UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
Title
Teaching and Supporting the Use of Qualitative and Quantitative Concepts in Classical Mechanics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3dg4w68k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Ploetzner, Rolf
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Teaching and Supporting the Use of Qualitative and Quantitative
Concepts in Classical Mechanics
Rolf Ploetzner
ploetz@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
Department of Psychology; University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Sieghard Beller
beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
Department of Psychology; University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
Though very often quantitative problem solving is accentuated
in physics instruction, psychological as well as educational
research indicates that this emphasis is misleading. In an
experimental study, we compared physics instruction with a
focus on quantitative problem solving to physics instruction
with a focus on qualitative problem solving. Initially, students
were taught quantitative as well as qualitative concepts of classical mechanics by means of concept maps. Thereafter, the
students attempted to solve four problems whose solutions
demanded the coordinated application of knowledge about
quantitative and qualitative concepts. During problem solving,
the students received support from tutors. While one group of
students was supported in qualitative problem solving, the
other group was supported in quantitative problem solving.
Before and after the problem solving, the students worked on
tests. In accord with our expectations, students who were supported in qualitative problem solving improved significantly
more from the pretest to the posttest than students who were
supported in quantitative problem solving.

Introduction
Very often, students are not able to successfully approach
problems in classical mechanics by means of the knowledge
they have acquired during physics instruction. Classical
mechanics embodies concepts and relationships between
concepts which allow for the description, explanation and
prediction of motion. Many concepts and relationships
between concepts involve qualitative as well as quantitative
information.
Quantitative information is frequently expressed by means
of laws which are formalized as algebraic or vector-algebraic
equations. Students frequently approach problems which ask
for a quantitative solution by only making use of their
knowledge about quantitative information. Usually, they
start from the variable whose value is in question. Afterwards, they attempt to apply dynamics and kinematics laws
in order to determine the variable’s value. Very often, however, the students get lost in a muddle of algebraic equations
with no means at hand in order to guide their application
effectively and efficiently (e.g., Chi, Feltovich & Glaser,
1981; Larkin, 1983).
In contrast to students, experts make use of both their
knowledge about qualitative and their knowledge about
quantitative information. Initially, they attempt to qualitatively identify the concepts relevant to the problem posed.

Subsequently, they take advantage of the qualitative information in order to select the appropriate dynamics and kinematics laws which quantitatively relate the identified concepts to
each other (e.g., Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; Larkin,
1983). Finally, they apply the selected dynamics and kinematics laws in order to determine the value in question.
While experts seem to possess knowledge structures in
which knowledge about qualitative and quantitative information is closely related, students’ knowledge frequently is not
only fragmentary and weakly related but also includes conceptualizations which are inconsistent with the concepts
taught during physics instruction (cf. Pfundt & Duit, 1994).
Due to these deficiencies, students seem not to be able to
take advantage of their knowledge in the same way that
experts do. As a consequence, students have to fall back on
so-called weak problem solving methods such as operator
subgoaling and means-ends analysis (cf. VanLehn, 1996).
These methods, however, provide little guidance for solving
problems in classical mechanics.
How can students be supported to acquire and to flexibly
apply both knowledge about qualitative and quantitative
information on classical mechanics? Though very often the
emphasis in physics instruction is on quantitative problem
solving, this emphasis seems to be misleading (e.g.,
Hestenes, 1987; Reif & Heller, 1982). Because very often
successful quantitative problem solving presupposes qualitative understanding, physics instruction with an emphasis on
qualitative problem solving might be more beneficial (e.g.,
Ploetzner, 1995; White, 1993).
In this paper we present an experimental study in which
physics instruction with a focus on quantitative problem
solving is compared to physics instruction with a focus on
qualitative problem solving. Because psychological research
(e.g., Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; Larkin, 1983), educational research (e.g., Hestenes, 1987; Reif & Heller, 1982) as
well as research in artificial intelligence (e.g., de Kleer,
1977) indicate that successful quantitative problem solving
presupposes qualitative understanding, we hypothesize that
emphasizing qualitative problem solving is more effective
than emphasizing quantitative problem solving.

Knowledge about Qualitative and Quantitative
Concepts in Classical Mechanics
The application domain is made up of textbook problems
which refer to one-dimensional motion with constant accel-

eration. The knowledge investigated is on qualitative and
quantitative information involved in concepts of dynamics
(e.g., gravitational and normal force) and kinematics (e.g.,
displacement, velocity and acceleration).
With respect to qualitative information, the focus is on the
conditions under which concepts are applicable, the
attributes possessed by concepts and the values which concept attributes might have. For instance, knowledge about
the kinetic friction force might comprise the qualitative
information that a kinetic friction force acts on a body,
whenever a normal force acts on the body and the body is
moving on a surface which is not frictionless.
With respect to quantitative information, the emphasis is
on dynamics and kinematics laws which are formalized as
algebraic or vector-algebraic equations. For example, knowledge about the kinetic friction force might comprise the
quantitative information that the magnitude Ff of the kinetic
friction force on a body equals the magnitude FN of the normal force on the same body times the coefficient of friction f:
Ff = FN • f.
Qualitative and quantitative information can be conceptualized as complementary information (e.g., de Kleer, 1977).
Qualitative information refers to essential features to be
taken into account as well as to important distinctions to be
drawn. While quantitative information frequently helps to
resolve ambiguities inherently involved in qualitative information, the appropriate use of quantitative information very
often seems to presuppose the utilization of qualitative information.
Ploetzner (1995) implemented formal representations of
qualitative and quantitative information on classical mechanics in a simulation program. If the program is applied to the
formal representation of a problem, it simulates how a qualitative problem representation can be taken advantage of to
guide the construction of a quantitative problem representation. The program coordinates qualitative and quantitative
problem representations in two different ways. Firstly, the
information included in a qualitative problem representation
is partially transformed into algebraic expressions in order to
construct additionally required quantitative information.
Secondly, the information contained in a qualitative problem
representation is exploited to constrain the use of already
available quantitative information.

Method
Design
The study comprised two groups of students and was made
up of five sections.
In the first section, all students worked on an introduction
to concept maps as well as on an introduction to a computerized concept mapping tool. In the second section, all students
studied the same instructional unit which described qualitative and quantitative information on classical mechanics by
means of concept maps. In the third section, all students
worked on a multi-component test which assessed the
knowledge about qualitative and quantitative information the
students had acquired during the study of the instructional
unit.

In the fourth section, the students attempted to solve four
problems which demanded the coordinated use of knowledge about qualitative and quantitative information. During
problem solving, the students took advantage of the computerized concept mapping tool. In addition, the students
received support from tutors. While one group of students
was supported in qualitative problem solving, the other
group of students was supported in quantitative problem
solving.
Finally, all students worked on a parallel multi-component
test which assessed the knowledge about qualitative and
quantitative information the students had acquired due to the
support from tutors.

Materials
Introduction to Concept Maps To be knowledgeable in a
domain means to know the relevant concepts as well as the
relationships between them. This structural aspect of knowledge can be represented by means of concept maps (e.g.,
Jonassen, Beissner & Yacci, 1993). Concept maps form an
external representation in which information is structured by
means of graphs. Individual nodes represent concepts; the
directed and undirected links between the nodes represent
relationships between the concepts. In an earlier study, Ploetzner, Fehse, Kneser and Spada (1999) demonstrated that
concept maps can be equally well employed to teach qualitative as well as quantitative concepts in classical mechanics.
Because qualitative and quantitative information on classical mechanics were taught to the students by means of concept maps, in the first section of the study, the students
worked on an introduction to concept maps in order to learn
how concept maps are structured. The concepts addressed in
the introduction referred not to classical mechanics but to
well-known household furniture.
Computerized Concept Mapping Tool When concept
maps are constructed by paper and pencil, they are frequently difficult to extend and to modify. Furthermore, the
construction of concept maps can hardly be reconstructed by
conventional observation methods. The use of a computerized concept mapping tool, however, allows one to overcome
these drawbacks. Therefore, whenever the students had to
construct concept maps, they took advantage of such a tool
(cf. Ploetzner, Hoppe, Fehse, Nolte & Tewissen, 1996).
In a computerized concept mapping tool, the concepts and
relationships relevant to the domain under scrutiny may be
made available to the students in advance by means of
menus, for example. If needed, the students may fill in additional concepts and relationships at run time. Complete concept maps as well as parts of concept maps may be selected
by the mouse and subsequently be moved, copied or deleted.
Concept maps are easily re-arranged as well as saved and reloaded. In addition, every step taken to construct, extend or
modify a concept map can be saved for later analysis.
In order to learn how to use the computerized concept
mapping tool, in the first section of the study, the students
worked on an introduction to the tool. As in the introduction
to concept maps, the concepts addressed in the introduction
to the concept mapping tool referred not to classical mechanics but to well-known household furniture.

Instructional Unit We designed an instructional unit to
teach the students qualitative and quantitative information on
classical mechanics by means of concept maps. It was made
up of three parts. In the first part, coordinate systems and
vectors as well as the addition and resolution of vectors were
described. In the second part, qualitative and quantitative
information on kinematic concepts such as displacement,
velocity and acceleration was presented. In the third part,
qualitative and quantitative information on dynamic concepts such as gravitational force, normal force, friction force
and resultant force was delineated.
The qualitative and quantitative information on the different concepts was described by means of concept maps. One
or more concept maps were followed by several examples
and exercises. The solutions to the exercises were also presented. In 100 pages total, the unit comprised 30 concept
maps, 18 examples and 20 exercises along with their solutions.
The students worked on the instructional unit in the second
section of the study. In a first step, they attempted to elaborate the information included in a concept map. In a second
step, the students had the opportunity to consider an example. It illustrated the consequences of applying the information included in a concept map to a certain arrangement. In a
third step, the students themselves exercised the application
of the information included in a concept map to other
arrangements. While some of the exercises asked for the
construction or completion of diagrams, other exercises
asked for the construction of concept maps. The students
always constructed diagrams by paper and pencil. Concept
maps were always constructed by taking advantage of the
computerized concept mapping tool. Finally, the students
were allowed to compare their solution to an exercise with
the solution presented in the instructional unit.

Strategies Applied by the Tutors In the fourth section of
the study, the students attempted to solve the four problems
with support from tutors. While one group of students was
supported in qualitative problem solving, the other group of
students was supported in quantitative problem solving. Two
physics students from the School of Education at Freiburg
served as tutors. Both were trained to support the students in
either qualitative or quantitative problem solving by means
of two different problem solving strategies. The strategies
are described in Table 1. The strategy to support qualitative
problem solving focused on the construction and interpretation of free-body diagrams. The strategy to support quantitative problem solving addressed the systematic use of
algebraic equations.

Problems to be Solved with Support from Tutors Four
different problems for problem solving with support from
tutors were set up. For example:

Strategy to support quantitative problem solving
1. Identifying the given and sought variables:
• Identify the variables whose values are given!
• Identify the variables whose values are sought!
2. Selecting an algebraic equation:
• Select an equation which includes a variable whose value is
sought!
• Attempt to apply Newton’s second law ΣF = m • a!
3. Applying an algebraic equation:
• Identify the variables whose values are known!
• Identify the variables whose values are unknown!
• If the values of all variables in an equation are known except the value which is sought, then substitute the variables
for their values and compute the value which is sought!
• Otherwise, select equations which include variables whose
values are unknown and determine the unknown values!
• After applying an equation, verify the units!

A sledge of mass m = 10 kg moves on a horizontal
surface with a velocity of v0 = 4.8 m/s. The coefficient of friction between the runners of the sledge and
the surface equals f = 0.12. After which distance r has
the sledge’s velocity reduced to v = 0 m/s?
By making use of a simulation program of qualitative and
quantitative problem solving in classical mechanics (Ploetzner, 1995), the problems were designed in such a way that –
relative to the information presented in the instructional unit
– their solutions demanded the coordinated application of
knowledge about both qualitative and quantitative information. In order to design the problems, the simulation program
was equipped with formal representations of the qualitative
and quantitative information which was presented in the
instructional unit. Afterwards, the simulation program was
applied to formal representations of the four problems.
When the simulation program was furnished with either
qualitative or quantitative information, its problem solving
attempts failed. The problem solving attempts succeed only
when the simulation program was furnished with both qualitative and quantitative information.

Table 1: The strategies applied by the tutors
Strategy to support qualitative problem solving
1. Drawing a sketch:
• Identify the body!
• Is the body in contact with the surface?
• Draw a sketch!
2. Determining the resultant force:
• Determine the forces on the body!
• Draw an arrow for each force!
• Determine the resultant force on the body!
• Describe the resultant force algebraically!
• Is it possible to simplify the algebraic description?
• Draw a coordinate system!
• Describe the magnitude of the resultant force relative to the
coordinate system!
3. Relating the resultant force to the acceleration:
• How is the resultant force related to the body’s acceleration?
• Determine the direction of the body’s acceleration!
• Determine the direction of the body’s velocity!
• How does the acceleration affect the velocity?

Initially, the tutors explained and demonstrated the problem solving strategy they supported. Thereafter, the students
attempted to solve the four problems. They worked on each
problem in two phases. In the first phase, the students
approached a problem on their own. To describe a problem’s
solution, the students constructed diagrams by paper and
pencil as well as concept maps by taking advantage of the
computerized concept mapping tool.
In the second problem solving phase, the students received

support from the tutors. The tutors assisted the students after
they completed the first problem solving phase or when they
did not show any further progress in their problem solving
attempts. If the students raised questions which concerned
problem solving steps addressed by the tutors’ problem solving strategy, the tutors delineated the problem solving steps
and encouraged the students to carry them out. If the students were not able to accomplish this, the tutors explained
and demonstrated the problem solving steps. Afterwards, the
students had to reproduce the tutors’ explanation using their
own words.
The tutors also encouraged the students to explain their
partial or complete solution to a problem. Whenever a problem solving step addressed by the tutors’ problem solving
strategy was correct, the tutors provided affirmative feedback
to the students. Whenever a problem solving step addressed
by the tutors’ problem solving strategy was incorrect or
missing, the tutors indicated the error or omission to the students. Thereafter, the tutors encouraged the students to correct or add the problem solving step. Again, if the students
were not able to accomplish this, the tutors explained and
demonstrated the step. Afterwards, the students had to reproduce the tutors’ explanation using their own words.
Multi-Component Tests In the third as well as in the fifth
section of the study, the students worked on a multi-component test which assessed their knowledge about qualitative
and quantitative information on classical mechanics. Each
test was made up of three different components and comprised 16 problems in total. In order to design the problems,
we again took advantage of the simulation program of qualitative and quantitative problem solving in classical mechanics (cf. Ploetzner, 1995).
The first component comprised four problems which
assessed knowledge about qualitative information on classical mechanics. These problems were designed in such a way
that – relative to the information presented in the instructional unit – their solutions only demanded the application of
knowledge about qualitative information on classical
mechanics. Correspondingly, the second component comprised four problems which only required the application of
knowledge about quantitative information. The third component was made up of eight problems whose solutions
demanded the coordinated application of knowledge about
both qualitative and quantitative information.
Both tests comprised parallel problems. Each pair of parallel problems were designed in such a way that the same
knowledge was applied by the simulation program of qualitative and quantitative problem solving to solve them. However, non-structural features such as the involved entities and
numerical values varied across parallel problems. Within
each test, the problems were arranged in random order.
The design of the tests allows one to hypothesize which
problem solving performance should be observable in the
three test components of the pre- and posttest.
With respect to the first test component on qualitative
information, we predict that many problems can already be
solved in the pretest after studying the instructional unit.
While the qualitatively supported students should further
improve from the pre- to the posttest, the quantitatively sup-

ported students should not do so.
With respect to the second test component on quantitative
information, we also hypothesize that many problems can
already be solved in the pretest. While the quantitatively supported students should further improve from the pre- to the
posttest, the qualitatively supported students should not do
so.
In contrast, with respect to the third test component on the
coordination of qualitative and quantitative information, we
predict that only few problems can already be solved in the
pretest. Both qualitatively and quantitatively supported students should improve from the pre- to the posttest. We especially hypothesize, however, that qualitatively supported
students improve considerably more than quantitatively supported students.

Subjects
Twenty-four tenth graders, 11 girls and 13 boys, from three
different high schools volunteered for the study. While the
group of students which was supported in qualitative problem solving comprised 6 girls and 6 boys, the group of students which was supported in quantitative problem solving
comprised 5 girls and 7 boys.
Before the study was conducted, the students’ general
ability was assessed by means of the Advanced Progressive
Matrices Test (Raven, 1976). Subsequently, two students
who had received the same or almost the same test scores
were assigned to different groups. While the average test
score of the students who received support in qualitative
problem solving was 24.33 (SD = 3.60), the average test
score of the students who received support in quantitative
problem solving was 23.92 (SD = 3.85). Students from different schools also were equally distributed among the two
groups. Furthermore, in each group of students, one half of
the students received support from one tutor and the other
half received support from the other tutor. The students were
paid for their participation.
Because in German high schools Newtonian mechanics is
commonly taught to eleventh graders, none of the students
had attended classes on Newtonian mechanics as it was
addressed in this study.

Procedure
The students were investigated individually for four days
running. On the first day, they worked on the introduction to
concept maps, on the introduction to the computerized concept mapping tool, and on the first part of the instructional
unit. On the second day, the students worked on the remaining parts of the instructional unit and on the pretest. On the
third day, the students attempted to solve the first two problems with support from tutors. Finally, on the fourth day, the
students attempted to solve the remaining two problems with
support from tutors and worked on the posttest.

Results
Times Spent
On average, both groups spent virtually the same amount of

Problem Solving Performance
The average relative solution frequencies in the first test
component, which assessed knowledge about qualitative
information on classical mechanics, are displayed in Figure
1. In accordance with our expectations, the students had
acquired considerable knowledge about qualitative information by studying the instructional unit. With respect to the
first test component, although statistically not significant,
only the qualitatively supported group improved a little from
the pretest to the posttest.
Average rel. solution frequency

100

with respect to this test component, the students exhibited
rather poor performance after studying the instructional unit.
On average, both groups improved significantly from the
pretest to the posttest (F(1, 22) = 46.48, p < .01). Furthermore, the interaction Test x Group indicates that the qualitatively supported group improved significantly more from the
pretest to the posttest than the quantitatively supported group
(F(1, 22) = 4.47, p < .05).
100
Average rel. solution frequency

time on the different sections of the study (M = 73 vs.
M = 75 minutes on the introduction, M = 221 vs. M = 219
minutes on the instructional unit, M = 78 vs. M = 85 minutes
on the pretest, M = 154 vs. M = 159 minutes on problem
solving and M = 88 vs. M = 86 minutes on the posttest).

80

Support in quantitative
problem solving

60

Support in qualitative
problem solving

40

Support in quantitative
problem solving

20
0

Support in qualitative
problem solving

80

60

Pretest

Posttest

Figure 3: Problem solving performance in the test
component on qualitative and quantitative information.

40

Problem Solving Approach
20
0
Pretest

Posttest

Figure 1: Problem solving performance in the test
component on qualitative information.

With respect to the third test component, which assessed the
coordinated use of knowledge about qualitative and quantitative information on classical mechanics, it was also analyzed
how frequently the students approached these problems
qualitatively and quantitatively.

The average relative solution frequencies in the second test
component, which assessed knowledge about quantitative
information on classical mechanics, are shown in Figure 2.
Again, as expected, the students had acquired substantial
knowledge about quantitative information by studying the
instructional unit. Furthermore, on average, the qualitatively
as well as the quantitatively supported group improved significantly from the pretest to the posttest (F(1, 22) = 27.72,
p < .001).
Figure 3 displays the average relative solution frequencies
in the third test component which assessed the coordinated
use of knowledge about qualitative and quantitative information on classical mechanics. In accord with our expectations,
Support in qualitative
problem solving
Support in quantitative
problem solving

Average rel. solution frequency

100
80
60
40
20
0
Pretest

Posttest

Figure 2: Problem solving performance in the test
component on quantitative information.

Average rel. frequency

100
Support in qualitative
problem solving

80
60
40
20

Support in quantitative
problem solving

0
Pretest

Posttest

Figure 4: Qualitative problem solving approaches.
The average relative frequencies of qualitative and quantitative problem solving approaches are shown in Figure 4 and
5. The average relative frequency of qualitative problem
solving approaches increased significantly from the pretest
to the posttest (F(1, 22) = 54.68, p < .01). Due to the support
from tutors, the students who were supported in qualitative
problem solving drew more frequently a free-body diagram
than the students who were supported in quantitative problem solving (F(1, 22) = 28.73, p < .01). The interaction Test
x Group further demonstrates the consequences of the support from tutors. While the qualitatively supported group
largely increased the number of qualitative problem solving
attempts from the pretest to the posttest, the quantitatively
supported group even decreased the number of qualitative

Average rel. frequency

problem solving attempts (F(1, 22) = 103.38, p < .01).
The average relative frequency of quantitative problem
solving approaches also increased significantly from the pretest to the posttest (F(1, 22) = 17.75, p < .01). As expected,
however, with respect to the use of algebraic equations the
qualitatively supported group did not differ significantly
from the quantitatively supported group. There is also no statistically significant interaction Test x Group.

tive problems the necessity to make use of quantitativenumerical information seems to be obvious to the students,
the necessity of applying qualitative-conceptual information
needs again and again to be pointed out to the students as
well as its use needs to be encouraged and supported.

Acknowledgements

60

This research was supported by the German National
Research Foundation (DFG) under contract PL 224/2-2. We
thank Frank Tewissen, Andreas Loesch and Ulrich Hoppe
from the research group COLLIDE at the University of
Duisburg (Germany) for making their computerized concept
mapping tool available to us.

40

References

100

Support in qualitative
problem solving

80

Support in quantitative
problem solving

20
0
Pretest

Posttest

Figure 5: Quantitative problem solving approaches.

Discussion
We presented an experimental study which started from the
hypothesis that physics instruction with an emphasis on
qualitative problem solving is more effective than physics
instruction with an emphasis on quantitative problem solving. The focus of our analysis was on the solution of problems which demand the coordinated application of
knowledge about qualitative and quantitative information on
classical mechanics.
In such a context, the support of qualitative reasoning as
well as the support of quantitative reasoning should enhance
the students’ problem solving performance. However, while
quantitative information frequently helps to guide the use of
qualitative information, the appropriate use of quantitative
information very often seems to presuppose qualitative
understanding (e.g., Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; de Kleer,
1977; Ploetzner, 1995). Without qualitative understanding,
the duality of the physical situation under scrutiny and the
quantitative structure set up gets easily lost. Therefore, we
expected that the support of qualitative reasoning improves
the students’ problem solving performance more than the
support of quantitative reasoning.
The results are in accord with our expectations. Both the
support of qualitative reasoning and the support of quantitative reasoning significantly improved the students’ problem
solving performance. Especially, students who were supported in qualitative problem solving improved significantly
more than students who were supported in quantitative problem solving.
Our results also underline an observation repeatedly made
in psychological and educational research on problem solving in formal sciences such as physics. When problems have
to be solved which ask for a precise quantitative solution,
students strongly tend to focus on the use of quantitativenumerical information and to neglect the use of qualitativeconceptual information. While in the presence of quantita-

Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts
and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
de Kleer, J. (1977). Multiple representations of knowledge in
a mechanics problem-solver. Proceedings of the Sixth
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(pp. 299-304). San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Hestenes, D. (1987). Toward a modeling theory of physics
instruction. American Journal of Physics, 55, 440-454.
Jonassen, D. H., Beissner, K., & Yacci, M. (1993). Structural
knowledge - Techniques for representing, conveying, and
acquiring structural knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Larkin, J. H. (1983). The role of problem representation in
physics. In D. Gentner, & A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental
models (pp. 75-98). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Pfundt, H., & Duit, R. (1994). Bibliography: Students’ alternative frameworks and science education (4th ed.). Kiel:
Institute for Science Education.
Ploetzner, R. (1995). The construction and coordination of
complementary problem representations in physics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 6, 203-238.
Ploetzner, R., Fehse, E., Kneser, C., & Spada, H. (1999).
Learning to relate qualitative and quantitative problem representations in a model-based setting for collaborative
problem solving. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8,
177-214.
Ploetzner, R., Hoppe, H. U., Fehse, E., Nolte, C., & Tewissen,
F. (1996). Model-based design of activity spaces for collaborative problem solving and learning. In P. Brna, A. Paiva,
& J. Self (Eds.), Proceedings of the European Conference
on Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 372-378). Lisbon: Colibri.
Raven, J. C. (1976). Advanced Progressive Matrices, Sets I
and II. London: Lewis.
Reif, F., & Heller, J. I. (1982). Knowledge structures and
problem solving in physics. Educational Psychologist, 17,
102-127.
VanLehn, K. (1996). Cognitive skill acquisition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 47, 513-539.
White, B. Y. (1993). ThinkerTools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education. Cognition and Instruction, 10, 1-100.

