UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Representational Effect in Complex Systems: A Distributed Representation Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/51j5j68w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Chuah, Johnny
Zhang, Jiajie
Johnson, Todd R.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Representational Effect in Complex Systems: A Distributed
Representation Approach
Johnny Chuah (chuah.5@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University
204 Lazenby Hall, 1827 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Jiajie Zhang (jiajie.zhang@uth.tmc.edu)
Todd R. Johnson (todd.r.johnson@uth.tmc.edu)
University of Texas at Houston
7000 Fannin, Suite 600, Houston, TX 77030, USA

Abstract
The representational effect refers to the phenomenon that
different isomorphic representations of a common structure
can generate dramatically different representational
efficiencies, task difficulties, and behavioral outcomes. This
paper presents a study of applying distributed
representations to systematically analyze the representational
effect in complex real world systems. Distributed
representation is a representational system that is composed
of internal and external information that is processed in a
dynamic, interactive, and interwoven manner. The
representational effect is observed and studied in a series of
experiments involving various navigational instruments used
in aviation. The cognitive task was decomposed into its
components and the information distribution across internal
and external representations for each component was
identified. The experimental results showed that the task
difficulties of different instruments correlate positively with
the amount of external information for the component tasks,
as predicted by the distributed representation analysis.

Introduction
The information necessary for the performance of almost
any everyday task is distributed across information
perceived from the external world and information
retrieved from the internal mind. These tasks are known as
distributed cognitive tasks (Zhang & Norman, 1994). The
external representations constructed from the information
extracted from external objects (such as written symbols)
and the internal representations in the mind (such as
schemas) dynamically integrate and interweave to result in
a rich pattern of cognitive behavior. The principle of
distributed representations is that a distributed cognitive
task involves a system of distributed representations that
consists of internal and external representations (Zhang &
Norman, 1994, 1995). The task is neither exclusively
dependent on internally nor exclusively dependent on
externally processed information, but rather on the
interaction of the two information spaces formed by the
internal and external representations.

In the aviation industry, there are a wide variety of
navigational systems. Among them there is a set of very
basic navigational instruments. These instruments are
selectively tuned to transmitting radio stations on the
ground. The received signals are then presented in a
display in the cockpit for the pilot to interpret. There is
only so much information that a navigation instrument
needs to display: azimuth or directional information, and
distance information. However, different instruments
present these two pieces of information differently and
result in different degrees of precision and efficiency as
interpreted by the pilot.
Cockpit information displays are examples of
distributed
representation
systems.
Navigational
information in a cockpit information system can and is
represented through a variety of isomorphic navigation
instruments. Although these instruments are isomorphic
and provide the same information, they vary in their
relative degrees of directness and efficiency in their
representation of scale information (Narens, 1981; Stevens,
1946; Zhang, 1995). The scale information of the
orientation and distance dimensions in a cockpit
information display is represented across internal and
external representations and can dramatically affect the
representational efficiency of the display and the
navigator’s behavior (Zhang, 1997). This research
examines the cognitive properties of the representations
that such instruments produce. The specific assumption to
be tested is that with the most direct system, scale
information is maximally represented externally, resulting
in higher efficiency, faster and more direct responses.

Distributed representations
External representations are the representations formed
from information gathered from the external environment.
External representations include physical objects and/or
symbols, relations and constraints between physical objects
and their configurations relative to each other, and external
physical rules, such as laws of physics. Through the human
perceptual processes, the information necessary to form
external representations is picked up by the sensory and

perceptual systems. External representations are
characterized as providing information that is directly
perceived and applied toward a cognitive task without
being explicitly interpreted. External representations
contribute information that is otherwise unavailable from
representations internally generated from memory, or from
representations that are internalized from perceptual
information (Zhang, 1997). Perceived information from
within the external environment that must be represented
internally in order for cognition to operate on it is, by
definition, recreated as internal representations.
Internal representations are the representations that
originate from within the mind and are not initiated from
the perception of external stimuli. These internal
representations are in the form of, but not limited to,
mental images, propositions, production rules, and
schemata. Cognitive processes retrieve information from
long-term memory. This information may be selectively or
incidentally retrieved, and is then employed to formulate
internal representations.
Internal and external representational spaces together
form a distributed representational space, which is where
the representation of the task (its abstract structures and
properties) resides. External representations are not rerepresented redundantly as internal representations. In
combination with internal representations, external
representations can directly activate and provide perceptual
information necessary for responses and actions.

Representational effect
The representational effect is the phenomenon that
different isomorphic representations of a common structure
can generate dramatically different representational
efficiencies, task difficulties, and behavioral outcomes
(Zhang & Norman, 1994). It is ubiquitous in problem
solving, reasoning, and decision making across many task
domains.

Navigational Displays
The cockpit informational displays in this experimental
study are navigational instruments that that provide
directional guidance. As the experimental task is a
position-fixing task, only the instruments that have the

1A. VOR

1B. ADF

necessary information were provided and will be discussed
here briefly. (A more in-depth review of cockpit
navigational displays is provided in Zhang, 1997.). VOR
(very high frequency omni-directional range), ADF
(automatic direction finder), RMI (radio magnetic
indicator), and the Moving Map display are four of the
more prevalent navigation systems used for such a position
fixing task. The generic moving map display refers to the
more advanced cathode ray tube displays found in newer
airlines that provide multiple information sources over a
moving map within one display.

VOR indicator
The VOR equipment in the aircraft receives and
interprets transmitted radio signals from the ground and
shows directional information of the aircraft in relation to
the VOR station on the ground. The VOR indicator is
usually used to show the intended course of the aircraft and
the lateral position of the aircraft in relation to that
intended course. The VOR indicator in Figure 1A shows a
selected 315º course. The TO indication at the right of
center of the display indicates that proceeding on such a
course will lead the aircraft to the station. The vertical
needle (CDI, course deviation indicator), when in the
center as shown, indicates the aircraft is on that selected
course. If the CDI pivots to the left, this will indicate to the
navigator that the aircraft is off the 315º course and needs
to make a correction by navigating the aircraft towards the
left to get back on course. The VOR indication (course
selected) is independent of the heading of the aircraft.
The VOR indicator can also be used to determine the
location of the aircraft relative to the VOR station. By
tuning the VOR until the CDI centers with a TO indication,
the displayed course will be the magnetic bearing of the
aircraft to the VOR station. Likewise, by tuning the VOR
until the CDI centers with a FROM indication, the
displayed course will be the magneticbearing of the aircraft
from the VOR station.

ADF indicator
The ADF indicator in the aircraft can also be used for
directional guidance to or from the radio station, or position
fixing to determine one’s location. The ADF indicator

1C. RMI

Figure 1: The four navigation instrument displays.

1D. Moving Map Display

shows the orientation of an aircraft relative to the radio
station (see Figure 1B). It only displays the relative bearing
of the aircraft to the station, which is the angular distance
between the lateral axis of the aircraft and the course to the
station. In order to obtain a magnetic indication, which is
necessary to navigate or determine one’s position, the
relative bearing indication must be summed with the
magnetic heading of the aircraft (obtained off another
instrument not shown). This sum is the magnetic bearing to
the station; in order to derive the magnetic bearing from the
station, the pilot would need to determine the reciprocal.

RMI indicator
The RMI indicator is similar in its display to that of
the ADF indicator. The major difference between the ADF
and RMI indicators is that the ADF display is fixed and the
RMI display rotates as the aircraft changes direction. The
RMI display is essentially the aircraft’s heading indicator
with the RMI pointer(s) providing navigational information
(see Figure 1C). As a consequence, the RMI provides
angular distance, and orientation of the aircraft relative to
the radio station as magnetic indications. It is unnecessary
for the navigator to do any computations to obtain magnetic
bearing information.

Moving Map display
The primary navigational display mode of a Moving
Map display shows a map of the immediate surrounding
environment of the aircraft, as well as the radio stations.
Magnetic bearing information is displayed alongside lines
extending from the center to the radio stations. Angular
distance is also provided.

Experimental Study
The experimental hypothesis is that although the four
navigation instruments provide the same and all the
necessary information, the different distributions of the
same information across internal and external
representations make some instruments harder to use while
make others easier to use, with the easiest one the
instrument that has most external information.
Experimental participants were provided with bearing
information as displayed by the instruments, and were then
required to determine the current position of the aircraft on
a map.

Representational study of experimental task
A representational analysis of the experimental task
identifies the abstract structures of the task and the
representational properties that are responsible for the
representational effect. To successfully perform the
position-fixing task with the given bearing information, it
is necessary to perform a triangulation using the radio
stations as end points and extending from them along the
bearings. The intersection of the bearings indicates the
current position of the aircraft relative to the radio stations.
The four types of instruments have different
representational spaces. The representational system with
the largest amount of external information will be more
efficient and direct (Norman, 1993; Hutchins, 1995; Zhang
& Norman, 1994). Furthermore, the position-fixing task
requires a triangulation method to determine the aircraft
position. Both the VOR and RMI provide the necessary
magnetic bearing information immediately. It is not
necessary to represent the information internally. The ADF
does not provide the information readily, and it is necessary
to derive the magnetic bearing information through mental
calculations using the heading information with the relative
bearing information provided by the instrument.With the
moving map display, the magnetic bearing information is
also readily available. Furthermore, the information is
presented in a graphical and spatial layout, with the
instrument displaying the position of the aircraft relative to
the radio stations. There is little effort required in
comparing the displayed spatial relations with the map and
determining the aircraft position. The other three
instruments require cognitive effort in subtending bearing
lines extending from the radio stations to create an
intersection in order to determine aircraft position.
Table 1: Properties of the navigation systems.

Figure 2: The experimental task display.

Type of navigation system
Information readily
available (externally
VOR ADF RMI Mov.
represented)
Map
Aircraft heading
√
√
Magnetic bearing
√
√
√
Orientation
√
√
√
Angular distance between
√
√
√
aircraft and radio station
Spatial and graphical
√
layout of information

The prediction is that the moving map display will
outperform the other three instruments because it provides
the largest amount of external information and graphically
and spatially presents the information in such a manner
where the operation of determining the location of the
aircraft is also provided externally. The representational
effect will be that the experiment participants within that
navigation instrument condition will outperform the other
navigation instrument conditions. Table 1 summarizes the
properties of the four navigation systems. For the other
instruments, RMI should be easier than ADF, which should
be in turn easier than VOR.

Method
Subjects. Eighty-five participants participated in the
experiment for course credits in an introductory psychology
course at The Ohio State University.
Materials and Equipment. Three Pentium computers
were used with 17-inch monitors set at similar SVGA
resolutions. The displayed image consisted of a large map
covering most of the screen area, an instrument panel with
the navigation instruments unique to each experimental
condition, and a control panel that served as the experiment

interface. The map area displayed two radio stations and a
square icon that represented the aircraft. The positions of
the radio stations and aircraft were randomized at every
trial. Figure 2 shows a screen capture of an experimental
trial.
Design and Procedure. The experiment was a betweensubject design with four conditions, one navigational
instrument for each condition. Each participant had 24
trials in the experiment. For each trial, the navigation
instruments were displayed, providing the necessary and
essential information. The participants would then read and
interpret the navigation information and, by clicking and
dragging the square aircraft icon, re-position it to where
they believed the actual position of the aircraft was. They
would commit their decision by clicking on the OK button.
If the participants were correct to within a radius of 5% of
the screen diagonal dimension, they moved on to a new
trial. If they were incorrect, they were given two more
attempts to locate the position.
Due to the complexity of the experimental task, the
instructions were carefully administered, which limited the
number of participants for each experimental session to
two. Participants were first given a set of written
instructions, then the experimenter provided with verbal
explanations and further instructions. Each participant was

Figure 3: Performance data regressions.

given at least 3 trials to demonstrate his/her comprehension
of the task prior to the start of the experiment. As the
experiment required some manual dexterity to maneuver
the computer pointer over the monitor screen, the computer
mouse was configured for left-handed participants when
necessary.

Results and Discussion
The performance data from all subjects were averaged
by trial within each of the four conditions. Regressions
were then performed for each condition.
There was an observation of a dramatic and robust
power curve of learning for each condition that
corresponded with the standard power law of practice.
Figure 3 shows each condition with its raw averaged data
and its best-fit regression. The variation in the VOR
condition is the largest, as indicated by the lowest

participants were expected to be the slowest to complete the
experimental task.
As the data show, there were significant differences
between the four conditions at four of the five trials used for
analyses in the ANOVA test. A post-hoc analysis
performed using the Tukey test for multiple comparisons
revealed that there were significant differences in task
completion times (alpha level = 0.05) between the ADF and
RMI conditions and between ADF and Moving Map
conditions, with the ADF times higher than either of the
other two conditions.
Performances levels of the four conditions got closer
after 24 trials, although there was a significant difference
between the ADF and Moving Map conditions. The
individual power curves of learning between all four
conditions resulted in this performance convergence. After
24 trials, the performance times between the conditions
followed the predicted trend.

Discussion

Figure 4: Regression comparison.
regression fit (r-squared value = 0.44). The other conditions
have higher fits to raw data (r-squared values: ADF = 0.78,
RMI = 0.57, Moving Map = 0.84).
Figure 4 shows all four regressions within one graph
for easy comparison. Table 2 below summarizes the task
completion times for a trial set that was used for analyses.
Table 2: Comparison of mean times.
Trial 1
Trial 6
Trial 12
Trial 18
Trial 24

VOR
92.6
68.1
54.2
41.8
42.7

ADF
104.7
82.1
99.3
52.9
63.4

RMI
78.1
64.1
60.9
44.9
41.2

Mov. Map
62.3
51.1
40.4
43.0
28.0

sig.
0.04
0.05
0.01
0.60
0.00

The prediction was for participants in the Moving Map
condition to outperform all other conditions, to be followed
with the RMI and ADF conditions, and the VOR condition

According to the hypothesis, the representational effect
observed will favor the performance of the Moving Map
over that of the RMI, ADF, and VOR. This assumption
arose from the representational analysis that decomposed
the cognitive task and identified the components and
properties that would be responsible for such a
representational effect. It was identified that the Moving
Map navigation display provides all the necessary
information externally and in a spatial and graphical layout
and other displays provide more information that needs to
be represented and computed internally, with a high
cognitive cost. All the necessary information for the task is
available as directly perceptible forms of external
representations for the Moving Map condition.
Furthermore, the information is provided in an instrument
display that maps directly to the map displayed on the
monitor since the instrument itself is a map. None of the
instrument components has to be represented or rerepresented in an internal representation, thus reducing
mental workload and increasing task efficiency.
The RMI condition posted consistently faster times
against the ADF condition, with significance for trials 12
and 24. The RMI displays bearing information to the user
in the magnetic compass scale, as opposed to the ADF
instrument that provides the information in a relative
degree scale. As a result, the navigator avoids costly mental
workload by obtaining more of the information from the
external representational space.
The VOR task completion times were not expected to
be as fast as the Moving Map display. It was anticipated
that VOR times would be slightly slower than ADF times.
But there were no significant differences between the VOR
and ADF. The difference, if it existed, might be too small
to be observed. Additionally, there is an obvious and
noticeable learning process that is occurring, as the
participants become more proficient and familiar with the
instruments and the task itself. This may be attributed to
simple skill acquisition or familiarization of the interface.

Conclusion
The experimental results were generally consistent with the
predictions of the distributed representation analysis. The
prediction was that the instrument with more external
information would be easier. This prediction was supported
by
the
observed
representational
effect.
The
representational effect predicted that isomorphic
representations could produce different behaviors due to the
variant
distributions
of
internal
and
external
representational information.
The resulting behavior variance from the experiment
indicates that some representations are more ‘efficient’ in
extending the necessary information for a task. Although
the different isomorphic representations result in different
initial levels of performance and learning curves,
performances appear to converge after a sufficient period of
learning.
One argument can be made about the learning
behavior: learning and practice may eliminate the
representational effect after enough trials. However, further
research needs to be done in more complex and dynamic
settings. The current experimental task was a simple
position-fixing task in a very controlled and static
environment. In an unpredictable and complex
environment such as that of the cockpit of an aircraft, the
representational effect could be more pronounced and a
possible regression to initial performance levels should be
studied. Another issue that is worth of further study is
whether the converged performance after learning for
different representations will diverge again under extreme
conditions such as high cognitive workload and time
pressure.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Grant N00014-96-1-0472
from the Office of Naval Research, and a 1997 Summer
Fellowship Research Award from the Center for Cognitive
Science at The Ohio State University.

References
Hutchins, E., (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speed.
Cognition Science, 19, 265-288.
Narens, L., (1981). On the scales of measurement. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 24, 249-275.
Norman, D. A., (1993). Things that makes us smart.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Stevens, S. S., (1946). On the theory of scales of
measurement. Science, 103, 677-680.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in
Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognition Science, 18, 87122.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1995). A representational
analysis of numeration systems.Cognition, 57, 271-295.
Zhang, J., (1997). Distributed representation as a principle
for the analysis of cockpit information displays.
International Journal of Aviation Psychology , 7(2), 105121.

Precursors to Number: Making the Most of Continuous Amount
Peter Drake
pedrake@cs.indiana.edu
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington; Lindley Hall 215
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Kelly Mix
kmix@indiana.edu
Department of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington; 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Melissa Clearfield
mclearfi@indiana.edu
Department of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington; 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
May 6, 2000
Abstract
How does our understanding of number develop? There is
evidence suggesting that even infants have primitive concepts
of “more”, “less”, and “the same”. Some researchers have
concluded that humans have an innate number sense, present
from birth. In this paper, we present a two-part model which
explains these results in terms of continuous amount. The first
part is a quantitative model addressing the results of infant
habituation studies. The second, more tentative part of the
model addresses object individuation, subitizing, and number
estimation.

Amount vs Number
In this paper, we use the word amount to refer to the total
area of the objects in view; this is a continuous quantity.
Number, a discrete quantity, refers to how many objects are
present. As shown in Table 1, these two aspects can be varied independently.
A complete model would have to take into account other
features, such as total contour length (edge length), shape,
and color. Except where otherwise stated, we disregard
these details.

Table 1: Amount vs Number. Both pictures in each column have the same total area.
Large Amount

Large Number (3)

Small Number (2)

Small Amount

Habituation Studies on
Infant Numerical Abilities
Three studies are addressed directly by the first part of our
model: Starkey & Cooper (1980), Antell & Keating (1983),
and Clearfield & Mix (1999). All three studies use the same
habituation paradigm, described below.
An infant is shown a series of images of black circles or
squares on a white background, such as those in Table 1.

The infant is shown several more images. They may differ
in arrangement, but they are the same on some critical
dimension, such as the number of dots. If the infant habituates (stops looking at new images as long), this is taken as
evidence that the infant detected the invariant property and
became bored with it.
After habituation, the infant is shown a test image which
differs on the critical dimension. If the infant dishabituates

