UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Direct Route: Mediated Priming in Semantic Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tf6q71r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Lowe, Will
McDonald, Scott

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Direct Route: Mediated Priming in Semantic Space
Will Lowe

 
Center for Cognitive Studies
Tufts University; 11 Miner Hall
Medford MA 02155 USA
Scott McDonald

    
Institute of Adaptive and Neural Computation
University of Edinburgh; 2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW UK
Abstract
McKoon and Ratcliff (1992) presented a theory of mediated
priming where the priming effect is due to a direct but weak
relatedness between prime and target. They also introduced a
quantitative measure of word relatedness based on pointwise
mutual information (Church and Hanks, 1990), and showed
that stimuli chosen with the measure produced graded priming
effects as predicted by their theory. Using stimuli from Balota
and Lorch (1986), Livesay and Burgess (1998a,b) replicated
the mediated priming effect in humans, but found that in HAL,
a corpus-derived semantic space (Lund et al., 1995), mediated
primes were in fact further from their targets than unrelated
words. They concluded from this that mediated priming is not
due to direct but weak relatedness. In this paper we present an
alternative semantic space model based on earlier work (McDonald and Lowe, 1998). We show how this space allows a)
a detailed replication of Ratcliff and McKoon’s experimental
results using their stimuli and b) a replication of Livesay and
Burgess’s human experimental results showing mediated priming. We discuss the implications for theories of mediated priming.

Mediated Priming
Mediated priming is an important test for theories of semantic memory (Neely, 1991). According to spreading activation theory (e.g. Anderson, 1983), when a word is presented
it activates its representation in a network structure in which
semantically related words are directly connected; more generally, the semantic similarity of two words depends on the
number of links that must be traversed to reach one to the
other. The level of activation controls the amount of facilitation received by the corresponding word. Although ultimately every word can be reached from any location in the
network, activation decays during memory access so only a
few of the most related words are facilitated. Spreading activation theories predict that a prime word should facilitate
pronunciation or lexical decision on a target word directly,
for example when “tiger” facilitates “stripes”. Spreading activation theory also predicts that “lion” will facilitate “stripes”
when activation spreads from the representation of “lion” to
that of “stripes”, via the related concept of tiger (de Groot,
1983; Neely, 1991).
Small but reliable mediated priming effects have been
demonstrated for pronunciation tasks though they are less reliable for lexical decision (Balota and Lorch, 1986). Spreading activation theory explains the size of the priming effect by
arguing that “lion” and “stripes” are only indirectly related in
semantic memory so that activation has decayed significantly
by the time activation from “lion” reaches “stripes”.

Theories that do not assume the existence of activation or
a network structure in semantic memory, e.g. compound cue
theory (Ratcliff and McKoon, 1988; McKoon and Ratcliff,
1998), cannot take advantage of either of the priming explanations above. In compound cue theory, direct priming is explained roughly as follows: the prime and target are joined in
a compound cue that is compared to representations in longterm memory. The comparison process generates a ‘familiarity’ value which controls the size of the priming effect.
The essential feature of this explanation is that, unlike spreading activation theory, there is no mention of the intermediate
representation “tiger” when explaining how “lion” facilitates
“stripes”. But is less clear how compound cue theory should
explain mediated priming.
In response to this difficulty, McKoon and Ratcliff (1992)
have argued that the mediated priming effects are not due
to activation spreading through an intervening representation,
but are the result of direct but weak relatedness between the
prime and target words. To address the issue of priming effect
magnitude they provided a quantitative method for generating
prime target pairs with various degrees of relatedness. The
method is based on pointwise mutual information (Church
and Hanks, 1990) computed over a corpus. McKoon and Ratcliff’s (1992) Experiment 3 showed that their method produced stimuli that reliably generated a range of priming effect sizes, and that the effect sizes could be controlled. They
then argued that mediated priming is simply a special case of
graded priming.
Livesay and Burgess (1998a,b) replicated the mediated
priming effect in human subjects using a pronunciation task,
but had less success with lexical decision (the same situation
that was reported in Balota and Lorch’s original paper). In
an attempt to understand the nature of the priming mechanism they found that mediated primes from the Balota and
Lorch stimuli could be divided heuristically into contextually
appropriate and contextually inappropriate word pairs. Subsequent analysis revealed that only contextually appropriate
pairs were responsible for generated a priming effect.
They then compared distances between each type of prime
(direct or mediated) and their targets in HAL, a semantic
space model (Lund et al., 1995). Burgess and colleagues
have argued that distances in HAL reflect semantic relatedness; shorter distances reflect greater semantic relatedness
(Burgess et al., 1998). Directly related primes were on average closer to their targets than the corresponding unrelated
primes, so HAL successfully replicated the direct priming effect. However, both contextually appropriate and contextu-

ally inappropriate mediated primes were further from their
targets than unrelated controls. Thus distances in HAL predict that the mediated primes should slow responses to their
targets, relative to an unrelated word baseline. Subsequent
analysis showed that even for contextually consistent primes,
greater distance correlated 0.6 with larger priming effects.
Livesay and Burgess concluded that mediated priming
could not be due to direct but weak relatedness between mediated primes and their targets on the grounds that HAL predicted the wrong effect. They then explored the possibility, suggested in McKoon and Ratcliff’s paper, that mediated
priming is determined by raw co-occurrence frequencies between prime words and their targets, but found no significant
correlations.
Below we present replications of two priming experiments
using a semantic space model. In Experiment 1 we replicate
human performance on the stimuli generated by McKoon and
Ratcliff using pointwise mutual information. We will refer
to these stimuli as the mutual information stimuli. These results demonstrate that McKoon and Ratcliff’s direct theory
of mediated priming is consistent with explanations of priming based on semantic space. In Experiment 2 we tackle mediated priming directly by replicating the results of Livesay
and Burgess’s mediated priming experiment. From these two
experiments we argue that our semantic space constitutes a
model of mediated priming that is ‘direct’ in the way that
McKoon and Ratcliff suggested.

Experiment 1
Materials
In this experiment we use materials from McKoon and
Ratcliff’s Experiment 3. Each target (e.g “grass”) has a
prime taken from association norms (“green”), a high-t prime
(“acres”) and a low-t prime (“plane”). High and low-t primes
were chosen by first calculating a measure of lexical association based on the T-statistic between each target word and a
large number of candidate primes (Church and Hanks, 1990,
see Appendix A for details). McKoon and Ratcliff divided the
candidate primes for each target into those with high values of
the T-statistic (high-t primes) and low values (low-t primes).
Unrelated primes were related primes from another target.
Methods
We constructed a semantic space from 100 million words of
the British National Corpus, a balanced corpus of British English (Burnage and Dunlop, 1992). Word vectors were generated by passing a moving window through the corpus and collecting co-occurrence frequencies for 536 of the most reliable
context words within a 10 word window either side of each
stimulus item. Appendix B describes the method of choosing reliable context words. We used positive log odds-ratios
to measure the amount of lexical association between each
context word and each of the experimental stimuli.
A brief justification of the positive log odds-ratio as a measure of lexical association is appropriate at this point: Table 1
describes the true co-occurrence probabilities for a stimulus
word t and context word c. p  c  t is the probability of seeing c with a word other than t. The odds of seeing t rather than
some other word when c is present are p  c  t ! p  c " t and the
odds of seeing t in the absence of c are p # c  t ! p # c  t , so
if the presence of c increases the probability of seeing t then

Table 1: The true probabilities of seeing combinations of
words t and c in text. p  c  t is the probability of seeing words
c and t together in a window. p  c  t is the probability of
seeing c together with a word that it not t.
Target

Non-target

Context

p  c t

p  c  t

Non-context

p # c  t

p  c  t

the odds ratio
θ  c  t %$

p  c  t ! p  c  t
$
p  c  t ! p   c  t

p  c  t p # c " t
p  c   t p  c  t

is greater than 1. When θ & 1 c and t are said to be positively
associated. In contrast, if the presence of c makes it less likely
that t will occur then θ ' 1 and c and t are negatively associated. Finally, when the presence of c makes no difference
to the probability of seeing t then θ $ 1 and we can conclude
that c and t are distributionally independent.
An important advantage of the odds ratio for measuring lexical association is that takes into account differing
marginal word frequencies. For example, consider two target words t1 and t2 that have baseline occurrence probabilities p  t1 and p  t2 . For simplicity we assume that cooccurrences are counted in a window extending exactly one
word to one side of stimulus. When neither word is related
to a context word c then all three words will distributionally
independent. Under distributional independence the expected
values of co-occurrence counts f  c  t1 and f  c  t2 depend
only on their occurrence probabilities:
E ( f  c  t1 *)+$
E ( f  c  t2 *)+$

p  c p  t1 N
p  c p  t2 N

where N is the number of words in the corpus1. If p  t1
is much larger than p  t2 then the expected co-occurrence
counts may differ substantially, despite the fact that c has no
relation to t1 or t2 . In other words if raw co-occurrence counts
are used to measure lexical association then a more frequent
target word will be judged more strongly associated with c
than a less frequent target word, whether or not they are actually related. Also, the fact that vector elements for two target
words with different frequencies will be tend to have different
magnitudes will bias the Euclidean distance measure to treat
target words from different frequency bands as further away
from each other than those in the same band. This occurs because the measure depends on squared differences between
vector elements.
The odds ratio is well-known to be a measure of association
that takes chance co-occurrence into account (Agresti, 1990).
When t1 and c are distributionally independent then p  t1  c ,$
1 Strictly

speaking N is the number of bigrams in the corpus,
which is one less than the number of words.

p  t1 p  c . The odds ratio is
θ  c  t1 %$

p  c p  t1 p # c p # t1
$ 1
p  c p  t1 p # c p  t1

and it is clear that the value of θ  c  t1 does not depend on
target and context word frequencies.
θ  c  t1 is estimated from a corpus by setting the elements
of Table 1 to their Maximum Likelihood values. The odds
ratio estimate can then be computed using only occurrence
and co-occurrence frequencies (see e.g. Agresti, 1990)
θ̂  c  t -$

f  c  t f  c  t
f  c "  t f  c  t /.

We log the odds ratio to make the measure symmetric
around 0 (denoting distributionally independent words) and
set all negative odds-ratios to zero. This reflects our belief that information about the whether a word occurs with
another more often than chance is psychologically salient,
whereas the knowledge that a word tends not to occur with
some other word (one of, say, 60,000 others in the lexicon) is
not psychologically salient and need not be represented in the
model. Empirical studies show that neither logging nor truncation of the basic odds-ratio measure make much difference
to the results presented below. The most important step seems
to be taking into account chance when using co-occurrence
to quantify lexical association. The g-score (Dunning, 1993)
is another useful measure for this purpose (McDonald and
Lowe, 1998).
We created vectors for each of the experimental stimuli
by calculating lexical association values between it and each
context word. Unrelated primes were primes from the previous target word2 . We use the cosine of the angle between
word vectors as a similarity measure corresponding to semantic relatedness (McDonald and Lowe, 1998).
When modeling priming experiments, the cosine between
a prime and its target should be inversely proportional to the
corresponding reaction time. The size of a priming effect is
calculated by subtracting the cosine between the unrelated
prime and target from the cosine between the related prime
and target. Cosines are entered directly into analyses of variance.
Results
McKoon and Ratcliff’s subjects responded fastest to target
words preceded by an associated prime, next fastest to a hight prime, slower to a low-t prime and slowest of all to an unrelated prime (see Table 2, line 1.) Priming effects were reliable
in all except the low-t condition.
The cosine similarity measure shows similar results (see
Table 2, line 2). The following analyses are for items only
since there are no subjects. The prime conditions were significantly different, F(3,156)=33.32, p ' .001 so we performed
pairwise analyses of variance to examine the differences more
closely, correcting for multiple comparisons according to the
Bonferroni method. There was a reliable associative priming effect: associated pairs were significantly more related
2 Since the stimuli have no inherent ordering, this will not produce any spurious effects. Other methods of choosing primes have
been tested and give equivalent results.

than non-associated pairs (0.412 vs. 0.078), F(1,78)=80.645
p ' .001 and high-t pairs were significantly more related than
unrelated pairs (0.216 vs. 0.078), F(1,78)=19.727 p ' .001.
The mean value for low-t pairs was higher than the unrelated baseline (0.139 vs. 0.078), but this was not significant
F(1,78)=5.268 p $ .024.
Table 2: Mean reaction times in msec. (line 1) and cosines
on (line 2) for the mutual information stimuli (from McKoon
and Ratcliff, 1992)
M&R
Space

Related
500
0.412

High-t
528
0.216

Low-t
532
0.139

Unrelated
549
0.078

Discussion
Experiment 1 shows a close fit to human reaction time data.
The experiment also demonstrates that semantic space models are capable of representing the kind of weak but direct
relatedness that McKoon and Ratcliff argue underlies mediated priming. If we can also account for mediated priming
data, we will not only have uncovered additional evidence
that direct but weak relatedness is sufficient to explain mediated priming, but also have found a ‘direct’ alternative explanation for the apparent mediation process. We address mediated priming in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
Materials
Materials for Experiment 2 are taken from Balota and Lorch’s
(1986) paper. Each target (e.g. “stripes”) has a directly related prime (“tiger”) and a mediated prime (“lion”). One
target had to be discarded because it had a prime with very
low frequency in the corpus. A randomly chosen prime target
combination was discarded from each of the other two prime
conditions to maintain balance.
Method
The semantic space was the same as in Experiment 1.
Results
In the pronunciation task both Balota and Lorch and Livesay
and Burgess’s subjects showed direct and mediated priming
(see Table 3, lines 1 and 2). The semantic space measure
for related, mediated and unrelated pairs is shown in Table 3, line 3. The prime conditions were significantly different F(2,132)=12.065 p ' .001 and we performed pairwise
analyses of variance to examine the differences in more detail.
There was a reliable direct priming effect (0.212 vs. 0.085),
F(1,88)=24.105 p ' .001 and also a reliable mediated priming effect of smaller magnitude (cosines 0.164 vs. 0.084),
F(1,88)=13.107 p ' .001.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 show that it is possible to model
mediated priming using a semantic space. The experiment
also demonstrates the plausibility of McKoon and Ratcliff’s
theory that direct but weak relatedness underlies mediated
priming phenomena. There is no mediation mechanism in

Table 3: Mean reaction times in for the pronunciation experiments of Balota and Lorch (B&L, line 1) and Livesay and
Burgess (L&B, line 2) in msec. Similarity measures for the
same materials are on line 3.
B&L Pron.
L&B Pron.
Space

Related
549
576
0.212

Mediated
558
588
0.164

Unrelated
575
604
0.084

the space, so the most parsimonious explanation of mediated
priming is that it is due to direct relatedness.
On the other hand, Livesay and Burgess’s distinction between contextually consistent and contextually inconsistent
prime target pairs suggests an alternative view. Perhaps only
some of the mediated priming stimuli are causing priming,
and the rest are unnecessary.
Unfortunately the distinction between contextually consistent and inconsistent pairs appears to resist characterization
in quantitative terms, e.g. in terms of distance in HAL. To
investigate the possibility that a subset of primes were carrying the mediated priming effect we examined the distribution of differences between a) cosines between unrelated
primes and their targets and b) mediated primes and their targets. The larger these differences are, the larger the mediated
priming effect. If only a subset of materials carry the priming effect then we might expect that some targets have larger
differences than the rest. However, we found that differences
clustered symmetrically around the mean effect size. Ideally
we would correlate priming effect size in milliseconds to the
cosine measure to identify a subset of relevant primes; this is
further work.
In an attempt to understand why HAL does not produce
mediated priming, we attempted to replicate its behaviour on
the mediated priming stimuli by changing the parameters of
our semantic space. First, we used co-occurrence counts for
the 536 reliable context words to create vectors for the Balota
and Lorch materials and computed Euclidean distances between each prime and target combination. There were no
significant differences between conditions, F(2,132)=0.043
p=.958. We then performed the same analysis with vectors normalized to length 1 to offset the effects of large cooccurrence counts. The conditions were still not reliably different F(2,132)=1.257, p=.288. However, in this case the
model hinted at a direct priming effect and a smaller mediated effect. Finally we constructed vectors from 500 higher
frequency context words3 , in case our choice of context words
had adversely affected the measure. We used normalized vectors because they had previously given a slightly better match
to the priming magnitudes. Again there was no significant
difference between the conditions F(2,132)=0.493 p=0.612,
but the model suggested a larger direct than mediated priming effect.
In conclusion, we were not able to replicate HAL’s behaviour by changing the parameters of our model, so it is
3 The context words had rank frequencies from 200 to 700. Occurrence frequencies ranged between 61926 to 220 occurrences per
million.

not easy to explain why the cosines in the space replicate human mediated priming effects while distances in HAL do not.
It is possible that relevant differences between the space and
HAL depend on HAL’s method of choosing context words, or
its window weighting function for collecting co-occurrence
counts. Comparisons between the space and HAL are the
subject of ongoing work.

Conclusion
In Experiments 1 and 2 we have presented detailed replications of human performance on graded and mediated priming
stimuli using a semantic space. Since there is no mediation
mechanism in the space we have argued that direct but weak
relatedness, as reflected by the cosine measure in our space,
is sufficient to yield a mediated semantic priming effect. This
result supports McKoon and Ratcliff’s contention that weak
relatedness, rather than spreading activation, underlies mediated priming effects.
The results presented here stand in marked contrast to
HAL’s failure to generate mediated priming effects. However, we were not able to replicate HAL’s behaviour in our
model, so it is presently unclear why the HAL model does
not work for this data.
We conclude by noting that graded and mediated priming
can now be added to the list of psycholinguistic phenomena
which may be accounted for by semantic space models.

Acknowledgments
WL is grateful to the Medical Research Council for funding,
and to Daniel Dennett and the Center for Cognitive Studies at
Tufts for providing a supportive and stimulating research environment. SM acknowledges the support of NSERC Canada
and the ORS Awards Scheme.

References
Agresti, A. (1990). Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley
and Sons.
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The Architecture of Cognition. Harvard University Press.
Balota, D. A. and Lorch, R. F. (1986). Depth of automatic
spreading activation: Mediated priming effects in pronunciation but not in lexical decision. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, (12):336–
345.
Burgess, C., Livesay, K., and Lund, K. (1998). Explorations
in context space: Words, sentences, discourse. Discourse
Processes, (25):211–257.
Burnage, G. and Dunlop, D. (1992). Encoding the British National Corpus. In Papers from the Thirteenth International
Conference on English Language Research on Computerized Corpora.
Church, K. W. and Hanks, P. (1990). Word association norms,
mutual information, and lexicography. Computational Linguistics, (16):22–29.

de Groot, A. M. B. (1983). The range of automatic spreading
activation in word priming. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, pages 417–436.
Dunning, T. (1993). Accurate methods for the statistics
for surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics,
(19):61–74.
Finch, S. (1993). Finding Structure in Language. PhD thesis,
Centre for Cognitive Science, University of Edinburgh.
Livesay, K. and Burgess, C. (1998a). Mediated priming
does not rely on weak semantic relatedness or local cooccurrence. In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 609–614.
Livesay, K. and Burgess, C. (1998b). Mediated priming in
high-dimensional meaning space: What is mediated in mediated priming? In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science
Society, pages 436–441.
Lund, K., Burgess, C., and Atchley, R. A. (1995). Semantic and associative priming in high-dimensional semantic
space. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, pages 660–665. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Manning, C. and Schütze, H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press.
McDonald, S. and Lowe, W. (1998). Modelling functional
priming and the associative boost. In Gernsbacher, M. A.
and Derry, S. D., editors, Proceedings of the 20th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 675–680,
New Jersey. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McKoon, G. and Ratcliff, R. (1992). Spreading activation
versus compound cue accounts of priming: Mediated priming revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, (18):1155–1172.
McKoon, G. and Ratcliff, R. (1998). Memory-based language
processing: Psycholinguistic research in the 1990s. Annual
Review of Psychology, (49):25–42.
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word
recognition: A selective review of current findings and theories. In Besner, D. and Humphreys, G. W., editors, Basic
processes in reading: Visual word recognition. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Ratcliff, R. and McKoon, G. (1988). A retrieval theory of
priming in memory. Psychological Review, (95):385–408.

Appendix A
The pointwise mutual information or association ratio between a target word and candidate prime is
AR

$

log2

p  prime and target
p  prime p  target 0.

The numerator is estimated by normalizing the number of
co-occurrences between prime and target words over the corpus. The denominator is estimated from the occurrence frequencies of the prime and target words separately. When
prime and target words are distributionally independent AR
should, like the log odds-ratio, take the value zero. When
the prime word is occurs with the target more than would
be expected by chance AR is positive with greater magnitude for greater levels of association. The T-statistic may
used to determine whether the ratio is significantly different
than 0, although Church and Hanks (1990) use the the value
of the statistic itself as a lexical association measure. The
AR measure is called pointwise mutual information in analogy to mutual information, a information theoretic measure
which is the expectation of AR with respect the distribution
p  prime and target . Manning and Schütze 1999 discuss uses
and shortcomings of pointwise mutual information as an association measure.

Appendix B
We assume that the ease that two words can be substituted for
one another in text reflects their semantic similarity. Substitutability in context, defined over word pairs or targets, is the
underlying continuous quantity that a semantic space model
needs to capture (Finch, 1993). Measuring substitutability in
context entails holding linguistic context constant and swapping in targets. This is equivalent to holding targets constant
and examining possible surrounding linguistic contexts because targets that are easily substitutable are those that occur
in similar contexts.
Any large balanced corpus, such as the BNC, realizes a
subset of the possible linguistic contexts that can surround a
target. Given sufficient target instances the subset will be representative because the number of times a context surrounds
a target is proportional to how meaningful the resulting sentence is. We represent contexts using finite set of context
words. The linguistic contexts that surround a target are represented by the number of times each context word occurs
within a 10 word window surrounding the target. These cooccurrence counts and the marginal frequencies of each context word and the target are used to create vectors of positive
log odds ratios. To represent linguistic context adequately
context words should be reliable.
To quantify reliability we treat context words like human
raters and use standard ANOVA methods to assess their reliability: First, we choose several thousand candidate context
words from the high frequency portion of the BNC (excluding
stop words). Second, we pick randomly another set of words
called meta-context words, and compute log odds ratios as described above for each context and meta-context word combination over k disjoint sections of the corpus. The resulting
k matrices can be seen either as sets of column vectors describing the positions of the meta-context words in a space
defined by the candidate context words, or as a set of row vectors describing the positions of the candidate context words in
a space given by the meta-context words. The meta-context
words are so-called because they are context words for the
candidate context words. Each candidate context word is then
associated with k vectors. We consider the vectors to be the
results of k rating tasks and use a within subjects ANOVA to

test whether each context word generates significant variation
in vector elements between the k tests. Context words that are
reliable have k vectors with similar values so their rating do
no vary significantly across corpus sections. Context words
for which we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no variation
between corpus sections are retained.
In these experiments we chose k=4 sections from the BNC,
each containing 10M words, and used the rather conservative
critical significance level 0.1. The procedure generated 536
context words.

