UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Mental Imagery in Understanding Unknown Idioms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7m25d988

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Janyan, Armina
Andonova, Elena

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Mental Imagery in Understanding Unknown Idioms
Armina Janyan (ajanyan@cogs.nbu.acad.bg)
Elena Andonova (elena@cogs.nbu.acad.bg )
Department of Cognitive Science, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1635 Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
In studies of the cognitive processing of idioms, the role of
mental imagery in understanding idioms remains a
controversial issue. Cacciari and Glucksberg (1995) conducted
an experimental study to investigate whether generating
mental images of idioms can facilitate their comprehension.
Their results appeared to reject both the possible connection
between the literal mental image of an idiom and the
figurative meaning of the idiom, and the facilitatory effect of
mental imagery on comprehension. Our study aims at
exploring the facilitatory role of mental images in
understanding unknown idioms. We used a paraphrase
verification task for transparent and opaque unknown idioms
translated from foreign languages into Bulgarian. The results
demonstrate that literal mental images of transparent unknown
idioms can facilitate their comprehension in terms of error
scores in a simple paraphrase verification task. No facilitation
effect for opaque unknown idioms was obtained. This points
towards a link between the literal mental images of transparent
idioms and their figurative meanings.

Introduction
The bulk of cognitive research on idioms is devoted to
comprehension processes. Some have investigated the
contribution of the literal and figurative meanings of idioms
in the comprehension process, and whether both meanings
are computed serially or in parallel (Needham, 1990;
Estill&Kemper, 1982; Glass, 1982; Swinney&Cutler, 1979);
other studies have shown that at some recognition point
literal processing stops and the figurative interpretation
becomes
available
(Cacciari&Tabossi,
1988;
Tabossi&Zardon, 1993; Titone&Connine, 1994). Another
research area explores the tenet that conceptual metaphors
constrain or mediate our understanding of idioms
(Gibbs&O’Brien, 1990; Nayak&Gibbs, 1990; Gibbs, 1992).
Finally, researchers have also studied the strategies that
people use to understand tropes and idioms, for example,
using the semantics of the constituent words, analogies,
metaphorical extensions, etc. (Cacciari, 1993; Flores
d’Arcais, 1993). However, relatively little attention has been
paid to the role of mental imagery in the process of
understanding figurative language. In some theoretical
frameworks, imagery is regarded as an important component

in discovering the figurative meaning of tropes and idioms
(Lakoff, 1994; Paivio&Walsh, 1998), although experimental
studies
have
produced
contradictory
results
(Gibbs&O’Brien, 1990; Cacciari&Glucksberg, 1995).
Following Lakoff and Johnson’s framework (1980), Gibbs
and O’Brien (1990) argue that the meanings of idioms are
motivated by conceptual metaphors. For example, the idiom
spill the beans is motivated by the CONDUIT metaphor which
specifies the conceptual mapping that THE MIND IS A
CONTAINER and IDEAS ARE ENTITIES. Their claim is that
people have conventional images and knowledge for the
meanings of idioms. To test this, in Gibbs and O'Brien's
experiment, subjects were asked to form a mental image of
an idiom and describe it verbally. The results suggest that
these images have a dynamic nature and people are able to
determine the causes and consequences of the actions in
them. The data obtained also confirm the expectation of a
high degree of consistency in mental images for idioms with
similar figurative meanings. Thus, Gibbs and O’Brien
(1990) emphasize that conventional images are
“unconscious, automatic, and independent of modularity”
(p. 39). They do not propose any algorithm of constructing
mental images for idioms but they investigate “the products
of speakers’ mental images for idioms as a way of
discovering the knowledge and information that potentially
motivate the figurative meaning of idiomatic phrases in
English” (ibid.). Finally, they do not claim that people use
mental imagery during ‘normal’ idiom comprehension given
that idioms are processed very rapidly. It is children and
non-native speakers of a language but not experienced
speakers that may form mental images as a way of
understanding idioms.
Contrary to the findings of Gibbs and O’Brien (1990),
Cacciari and Glucksberg (1995) claim that the images
associated with idioms do not reflect their meanings,
moreover, forming mental images does not facilitate the
comprehension of idioms. They argue that people cannot
bypass the literal meaning when processing idioms and
forming a mental image, and that it is much easier to form a
literal image of an idiom than a figurative abstract one. In
this case the images that reflect the literal meaning of an
idiom could not refer to the underlying conceptual

metaphors and should interfere with the comprehension of
the figurative meaning of an idiom. Thus, these “wrong”
literal images would make comprehension more difficult.
Note, however, that Lakoff (1994) does not claim that these
conventional images must be figurative; on the contrary,
they are rather “literal” and include our general knowledge
about the world which maps onto the knowledge of the
corresponding conceptual metaphor.
Cacciari and Glucksberg's (1995) study includes three
experiments. In the first experiment, subjects were asked to
give a paraphrase of the idiom, to form a mental image and
describe it. Results showed that of the two -- literal vs.
figurative -- predominantly images reflecting the literal
meanings of the phrases were generated.
Cacciari and Glucksberg's (1995) second experiment
explored the issue whether literal images can facilitate
comprehension. They reason that if literal images reflect
somehow conceptual analogies, then such images would
facilitate comprehension; otherwise, if literal images are
unrelated to figurative meanings, they would interfere with
comprehension or, at the very least, make it more difficult.
Cacciari and Glucksberg (1995) used a sentenceverification task. Subjects were presented with a sentence
which they read and then presented with a second sentence
that was either a paraphrase of the first sentence or not. In a
between-subject design, subjects either performed the
verification task while also generating an image of the first
sentence; or without generating images. The results show
that verification times were longer when influenced by
imagery. In addition, the longer times were not associated
with a reduction of errors. It is worth noting here that the
rate of errors for idioms did not exceed 3% in any of the
conditions, although they used four different types of
idioms: familiar transparent, familiar opaque, unfamiliar
transparent, and unfamiliar opaque. One possible
explanation for the strikingly low rate of comprehension
mistakes may be that all idioms were in fact highly familiar
since in the familiarity pre-test, subjects were explicitly
asked to rate their frequency and not familiarity;
alternatively, the idioms were semantically transparent.
Overall, Cacciari and Glucksberg's (1995) results
obtained suggest that mental imagery interferes with
comprehension and does not facilitate it whether measured
by reaction time or by error rate, and literal images of
idioms have nothing in common with figurative meanings.
In our view, however, forming literal mental images may
facilitate the understanding of completely unknown idioms.
If images involve general knowledge of the world, if they
can be involved in understanding metaphors alongside
linguistic knowledge, then understanding may be an
interaction of several processes such as applying
knowledge, reasoning, mapping, associations. This
combination of processes does not necessarily mean that
they entail an equally active participation in comprehension.
The degree of involvement may depend on the idiom that is
being perceived and its properties, as well as on individual
experience and contextual factors.

Let us consider the cognitive processing of an unknown
idiom. If the unknown idiom reflects a well-known
situation, or if it requires reasoning, applying knowledge, or
making associations, then it may be that a literal mental
image of the idiom can facilitate the comprehension process.
For example, consider the Russian idiom плавает как
топор (“swims like an axe”). One possible way to
understand it is to imagine an axe in water and “see” the axe
sinking immediately. The next step could be realizing that
the idiom could be referring to a person who cannot swim.
So, the concrete-literal mental image can, in principle, lead
to an abstract-figurative meaning.
This path from the literal image of an unknown idiom to
its figurative meaning, may certainly depend on what kind
of idiom it is. Not all idioms have a literal meaning, hence, a
literal image that could be created. Moreover, even if such
images are easy to produce, not all imageable unknown
idioms could thus be understood. For instance, it is hard to
understand the Armenian idiom if a donkey falls, it will
break all its teeth although it is absolutely cartoonimageable but not transparent in meaning (the idiom refers
to ‘a very rocky area’). So, if foreign/unknown idioms are to
be understood, they should be semantically transparent and
may include some culturally shared concepts. This study
attempts to answer some of these controversial issues.
The main aim of the study is to investigate whether
generating a literal image of an unknown foreign idiom can
facilitate its comprehension. Facilitation here is measured by
the error rate and not differences in processing speed.
Cacciari and Glucksberg's (1995) line of reasoning that the
two phrases to be compared would need to have the same
coded representation is indeed convincing. Here an error is
defined as failure to recognize the paraphrase of an idiom.
Another purpose of the study is to examine the differences
(if any) in comparing an idiomatic meaning with either a
literal paraphrase or with an idiomatic equivalent. Such
differences may arise because a literal phrase is much more
concrete and clear than an idiom. In the case of idioms,
often the exact meaning is known but sometimes difficult to
put into words, to explain in a succinct and precise form in a
short period of time (an analogy with the recognition and
naming of a picture). Moreover, idiomatic meanings are
often semantically much richer than literal phrases, and
idioms can readily map onto much more diverse situations
than literal phrases. Hence, comparing the meaning of a
known (or the possible meaning of an unknown) idiom to
the overall idiomatic meaning of its equivalent would be
different from comparing the meaning of an idiom with a
literal paraphrase in terms of reaction times (RTs) and/or in
terms of the error rate (in percentages).
This experiment examines the on-line processes of
generating images, understanding idioms and comparing
meanings with two kinds of paraphrases: literal and
idiomatic. The method is similar to that used by Cacciari
and Glucksberg (1995). The main difference is that
unknown foreign idioms were used as target phrases. These
idioms were translated from Armenian and Russian word-

by-word into Bulgarian. Subjects had to verify paraphrases
under two main conditions, one with, and the other without
forming a literal mental image of the target idiom (in a
within-subject design). The following is an example of the
experimental material (the set) and its translation.
target idiom
чета проповед в ухото на глух
(to read a sermon into a deaf person's ear)
paraphrases:
related
idiomatic phrase преливам от пусто в празно
(to pour from one empty place to another)
literal phrase правя усилия безполезно
(to make useless efforts)
unrelated
idiomatic phrase хвьрлям последния си коз
(to throw down one's last trump card)
literal phrase не си вьрша задьлженията
(to not complete one's duties)

Method
Subjects A total of 80 subjects (28 males and 52 females)
participated in the experiment. All were native Bulgarian
speakers, university students. The age range was from 17 to
28. Subjects were paid for their participation.
Design and Stimuli A factorial 2x2x2x2 design was used,
with RTs and rate of errors as dependent variables. The
within-group factors were Imagery task (Imagery, Nonimagery), Source Language of the target idiom (Foreign,
Bulgarian), Type of Paraphrase (Literal, Idiomatic),
Relatedness of paraphrase to the target (Related, Unrelated).
The stimuli consisted of the word-by-word translations of 30
foreign target idioms (16 Armenian and 14 Russian) and 30
Bulgarian target idioms. All target idioms had the form
V(PP)NP, and the verb-form was in the first person,
singular, present tense. 30 literal and 30 idiomatic
paraphrases for the targets were used in the Related
paraphrase condition, and 30 literal and 30 idiomatic phrases
were used as "false" paraphrases, i.e., unrelated to the target.
The average length (in words) of target phrases was 4.2, of
literal paraphrases - 2.9, and of idiomatic paraphrases - 3.7
words. The selected foreign target stimuli did not include
similes, and paraphrases did not include words semantically
related to the targets.
All 150 Bulgarian idioms were selected after a pre-test
with independent familiarity and frequency ratings using a
5-point scale (5 -- most familiar or most frequent,
respectively). A total of 28 subjects participated in the pretest. The age range was from 18 to 30. None of them
participated in the main on-line experiment later. The idioms
thus selected from the pre-test had the mean value of 4.3 for
familiarity and of 3.2 for frequency of use.
Procedure 16 randomized lists of 60 sets of stimuli each
were constructed so that each subject was presented with all
the 60 target idioms and one out of four paraphrases. The

experiment was divided into two main parts, named Nonimagery and Imagery, after the two tasks. Every subject was
run on both parts. In the first Non-imagery condition the
procedure was the following. The target idiom appeared on a
white background, at the center of the screen. Subjects had
to read the idiom, decide whether they know it or not
(familiarity decision) and press a corresponding button (Yes
or No). Immediately after the response (zero inter-stimulus
interval), a paraphrase appeared on a light grey background.
Subjects then performed a phrase-verification task, i.e., they
had to decide whether the meaning of the paraphrase
matches the meaning of the target idiom, and press the
corresponding button (Yes or No). Each trial began with a
central black fixation marker (‘+’) for 500 ms and the intertrial interval was 3 sec. The reaction time was measured
from the onset of the stimulus (paraphrase) till the subject's
response. After the first Non-imagery condition, subjects
had a 5-minute break. In the second, Imagery condition,
subjects had to read the target idiom, imagine it as a
"picture" and press a Yes button immediately afterwards.
The remaining procedure was the same as in the first
experimental condition (Non-imagery), i.e., subjects
performed a phrase verification task. Both experimental
conditions started with 8 practice trials.
Every 60-trial list of stimuli was randomly divided into
two subsets, consisting of 30 paired stimuli for each of the
two experimental conditions (Imagery and Non-Imagery).
The assignment of Yes and No values to the buttons was
counterbalanced across subjects. The experiment lasted
approximately 30-40 min. Subjects were tested individually
in a sound-proof room. A Power Macintosh 6400/200
equipped with PsyScope software controlled stimuli
presentation, timing, and response collection.

Results and Discussion
The analysis was carried out by items averaged over
subjects. RTs and responses for the phrase verification task
were analyzed in a 2 (Imagery vs Non-imagery) X 2
(Foreign vs Bulgarian targets) X 2 (Literal vs Idiomatic
paraphrases) X 2 (Related vs Unrelated paraphrases)
analysis of variance.

Analysis of Phrase Verification Task
effects
for
all
four
Reaction Times (RTs) Main
independent variables on RT were obtained. There was a
significant main effect of Imagery (F(1,420)=37.91; p<0.00);
the phrase-verification task took longer to complete in the
imagery condition (mean response time of 2475 ms,
SD=589) than in the non-imagery condition (mean RT=2179
ms, SD=537). This may mean that the mental image of the
target idiom interferes with the linguistic representation of
the paraphrase which replicates the results of Cacciari and
Glucksberg (1995).
A main effect of Source Language was also obtained
(F(1,420)=77.46; p<0.00). For Bulgarian target idioms,
paraphrase verification took less time (MRT=2116 ms,
SD=506) than for Foreign targets (M=2539 ms, SD=578).

Thus, phrase verification was significantly faster for the
familiar-familiar pairs than for the unknown-familiar pairs.
The main effect of the Type of Paraphrase also reached
significance (F(1,420)=8.16; p<0.00). The mean RT for
verification of literal paraphrases was shorter (2259 ms,
SD=617) than for idiomatic paraphrases (2396 ms,
SD=542). This may be due to the different lengths of the
paraphrases and/or the less ambiguous meaning of the
literal phrase compared with the idiomatic one.
The main effect of Relatedness of Paraphrase was also
significant (F(1,420) =14.72; p<0.00). The mean RT for the
Related Paraphrase condition was faster (2235 ms, SD=602)
than for Unrelated (2420 ms, SD=552).
A significant interaction between Source Language and
Relatedness (F(1,420) =18.60; p<0.00) was also found, i.e. the
main effect of Relatedness of Paraphrase was not observed
in the Foreign condition. Mean response times are presented
in Table 1.
Table 1: Mean RTs (ms) for Source Language by
Relatedness

Related
Unrelated

Bulgarian
1917 ms
2314 ms

Foreign
2551 ms
2537 ms

The main effect of Relatedness is visible in these results
as well in that the phrase verification task took less time
when there was a real paraphrase (the phrase was related to
the target). Note, however, that this effect holds only for the
familiar Bulgarian targets. Relatedness did not make a
difference to the processing of the semantic comparison
between paraphrases and unfamiliar targets. Not
surprisingly, the task was performed overall faster with
familiar than with unfamiliar targets.
Error Rate (%) Three main significant effects were found.
In the main effect of Source Language the familiarity
(Bulgarian target) advantage was obtained (F(1,420)=50.20;
p<0.00); the error rate was lower for Bulgarian targets
(12.5%) than for foreign ones (24.6%). The main effect of
Type of Paraphrase (F(1,420)=16.87; p<0.00) showed the
advantage of literal paraphrases (15.3% error rate) over
idiomatic ones (21.9%). The main effect of Relatedness
(F(1,420)=37.40; p<0.00) revealed fewer comprehension errors
for unrelated paraphrases (13.6% of "false alarms") vs.
related ones (24.0% of "misses"). These results may be
partly explained by the fact that unrelated literal paraphrases
were concrete and unusual to serve as possible paraphrases
of idioms. Subjects may have chosen a strategy to reject
these cases due to their obvious unrelatedness to the target
idioms. No significant overall main effect of the Imagery
factor was found.
The only significant interaction obtained was that between
Relatedness and Source Language (F(1,420)=5.06; p<0.03).
Mean rates of errors are presented in Table 2.

Table 2: Mean Percentage of Errors for Source Language by
Relatedness

Related
Unrelated

Bulgarian
16 %
9%

Foreign
32 %
18 %

Significant differences across all combinations of the four
conditions were found (except for Bulgarian Related and
Foreign Unrelated conditions). In both cases unrelated
paraphrases were verified with better success than related
ones. This again may by partially explained by the way the
unrelated literal paraphrases were selected. Overall,
paraphrases for Bulgarian target idioms were verified with a
lower error rate than the foreign ones.
Separate analysis by Source Language, Error Rate (%)
In order to reveal the contribution of imagery, a separate
analysis over the two levels of Source Language was
conducted. For Bulgarian target idioms, no effect was found
but for Foreign target idioms, there was a main effect of
Imagery (F(1,215)=3.94; p<0.05). The Imagery condition
showed an advantage (only 22% of errors) over the Nonimagery condition (27% error rate). The absence of the
imagery effect on Bulgarian targets showed that imagery
had no facilitatory effect on the processing of familiar idiom
but it did on unfamiliar ones.
To explore the nature of the Imagery effect further, a posttest on the levels of transparency of foreign idioms was
carried out.
Post-test The 30 foreign idioms were randomly assigned to
two separate questionnaire lists, with each idiom placed on a
separate sheet of paper. Subjects were 26 native Bulgarian
speakers who were asked to guess the meanings /
paraphrases of these unfamiliar idioms. There was no time
limit in completing the task. The responses were evaluated
for accuracy by two independent judges and averaged as the
percentage of correct answers for each idiom. On this basis,
idioms were categorized as transparent (correct guesses
exceeding 60%) and opaque (lower than 60%). As a result,
15 transparent (Mean=74%, SD=14) and 15 opaque
(mean=20%, SD=14) idioms were identified.

Analysis of Phrase Verification for Foreign targets
only
Responses and RTs for items averaged over subjects for the
phrase verification task were analyzed in a 2 (Imagery vs
Non-imagery) x 2 (Transparent vs Opaque) x 2 (Literal vs
Idiomatic paraphrases) x 2 (Related vs Unrelated) analysis
of variance.
Reaction Times (RTs) The overall main effect of imagery
on RT was repeated here as well (F(1,207)=19.79; p<0.00)
with subjects being faster in the Non-imagery condition
(2375 ms, SD=503) than the Imagery (2706 ms, SD=601)
one. A significant two-way interaction of Transparency and

Relatedness (F(1,207)=15.22; p<0.00) was also found. Mean
response times are presented in Table 3.

Table 4: Mean Error Rates for Imagery by Transparency by
Relatedness

Table 3: Mean RTs (ms) for Transparency by Relatedness
Opaque
2731 ms
2432 ms

There were significant differences across all combinations
of the four conditions. It is important that a similar trend is
observed here in verifying familiar-familiar pairs and
transparent unknown-familiar pairs. In both cases Related
paraphrases were verified faster than Unrelated (cf. Tables 1
and 3), with the implication that transparent idioms may be
treated as familiar, and similar mechanisms may be involved
in their processing in the verification task. For Opaque
idioms, the verification time changed in the opposite
direction.
Error Rate (%) Four significant main effects were found
on the rate of errors as a dependent variable: Type of
Paraphrase
(F(1,207)=13.91;
p<0.00),
Relatedness
(F(1,207)=37.36; p<0.00), Imagery (F(1,207)=5.38; p<0.02), that
were replications of the previous discussed, and
Transparency (F(1,207)=16,65; p<0.00) that showed lower rate
of errors for transparent idioms than for opaque (20% vs
29%). Two significant two-way interactions were also
obtained: Transparency by Relatedness (F(1,207)=21.73,
p<0.00), and Paraphrase by Relatedness (F(1,207)=5.97;
p<0.02). Two significant three-way interactions, Imagery by
Transparency by Relatedness (F(1,207)=4.38; p<0.04) and
Imagery by Transparency by Type of Paraphrase
(F(1,207)=4.03; p<0.00), are shown in Figures 1 and 2,
respectively. The mean error values for every condition are
shown in Tables 4 and 5.
As Figure 1 and Table 4 demonstrate, there was a
significant shift in the rate of errors for transparent idioms in
the Related paraphrase condition (29% in the Non-imagery
vs 14% in the Imagery condition). No imagery effects were
found on either semantically transparent or opaque idioms in
the Unrelated paraphrase condition, as well as on the opaque
idioms in the Related paraphrase condition. The lack of
significance and rather low rate of errors in the Unrelated
paraphrase condition can be partially attributed to the way
the stimuli for the literal unrelated phrases were selected.
50
45
ERROR, in %

40
35
30
25
20
15
10

image non-image
unrelated

image non-image
related

transparent
opaque

Figure 1: Imagery by Transparency by Relatedness
interaction

Related
Unrelated

Transparent
Image
N-image
14 %
29 %
18 %
18 %

Opaque
Image
N-image
41 %
43 %
14 %
19 %

The facilitatory role of imagery (Figure 2, Table 5) was
also observed in the verification task results particularly for
idiomatic paraphrases of transparent idioms. In the Imagery
condition the rate of errors was reduced down to the level of
literal paraphrases in both Imagery and Non-imagery
conditions. Literal paraphrases of transparent idioms were
verified with the same success (low rate of errors) as
paraphrases for familiar Bulgarian target idioms (Table 2).
There was no imagery effect on opaque idioms although a
trend toward improved comprehension in the Imagery
condition may be observed in the case of literal paraphrases.

40
35
ERROR, in %

Related
Unrelated

Transparent
2364 ms
2647 ms

30
25
20
15
10

image non-image
idiomatic

image non-image
literal

transparent
opaque

Figure 2: Imagery by Transparency by Type of Paraphrase
Table 5: Mean Error Rates for Imagery by Transparency
by Type of Paraphrase

Idiomatic
Literal

Transparent
Image
N-image
19 %
32 %
13 %
16 %

Opaque
Image
N-image
33 %
32 %
22 %
30 %

Conclusion
The main goal of this study was to explore the faciltatory
role of mental images in comprehending unknown idioms.
Results have shown that indeed, constructing literal images
of unknown idioms can help in understanding the idiom, not
in terms of faster processing but in terms of decreasing
percentage of mistakes in recognizing a paraphrase of the
idiom. This effect is particularly salient in the processing of
semantically transparent idioms and is stronger when
unknown idioms are compared with an idiomatic
paraphrases and not with literal ones. Furthermore, the
contribution of mental imagery is such that it produces
fewer mistakes of the “miss” type for transparent idioms,
i.e., subjects improve their ability to recognize a real
paraphrase as equivalent in meaning to the target.
Semantically opaque idioms, on the other hand, seem to be
indifferent to the imagery task, though a trend toward better

understanding may be observed in the case of literal
paraphrases.
Another aim of the study was to test whether different
types of paraphrases (literal and idiomatic) could influence
the degree of understanding unknown idioms. The
hypothesis was that since idioms may be viewed as
semantically broader or more vague than literal paraphrases
subjects would more readily match idiomatic paraphrases
with unknown target idioms than literal paraphrases. As a
result they would make fewer mistakes with idiomatic
paraphrases than with literal ones. This hypothesis was
rejected by the results which revealed the opposite picture subjects made considerably fewer mistakes with literal
paraphrases than with idiomatic ones. One possible
explanation derives from the same feature of idioms, i.e.,
their semantic and ‘situational’ broadness which may have
caused subjects to reach a negative decision on the
verification task much more frequently than necessary,
hence, these results.
To conclude, the results show that transparency plays
only a minor role in comparison with familiarity, and that
familiarity itself is only useful as a concept in its own right,
not by proxy of frequency. The results also demonstrate that
constructing a literal image helps our understanding of
unknown transparent idioms whether by unconscious
applying general knowledge of the world, unconscious
reasoning or some other process involved in understanding.
Thus, there exists a close link between figurative meanings
of transparent unknown idioms and their literal mental
images.
This study, however, has helped to explain further the
mechanisms of comprehension of unknown idioms and the
role of mental imagery in this process. It remains to be seen
whether mental imagery facilitates not only the
comprehension but also the process of learning and
retrieving from memory of figurative speech.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the people who helped us a lot in
different ways: Daniela Angelova, Irina Gerdjikova, Radu
Luchianov, Agop Erdeklian, Milena Leneva, Polya
Dacheva, and Sonia Tancheva.

References
Cacciari, C. (1993). The Place of Idioms in a Literal and
Metaphorical World. In C. Cacciari & P. Tabossi (Eds.),
Idioms: Processing, Structure, and Interpretation. NJ, US:
Lawrence Erlbaum Assosiates, Inc.
Cacciari, C. and Glucksberg, S. (1995). Understanding
Idioms: Do Visual Images Reflect Figurative Meanings?
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 7(3), 283305.
Estill, R. B. & Kemper, S. (1982). Interpreting Idioms.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 11(6), 559-568.
Flores d’Arcais, G. B. (1993). The Comprehension and
Semantic Interpretation of Idioms. In C. Cacciari & P.
Tabossi (Eds.), Idioms: Processing, Structure, and

Interpretation. NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Assosiates,
Inc.
Gibbs, R.W., JR. & O’Brien, J. (1990). Idioms and Mental
Imagery: The Metaphorical Motivation for Idiomatic
Meaning. Cognition, 36, 35-68.
Gibbs, Raymond W., JR. (1992) What Do Idioms Really
Mean? Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 485-506.
Glass, A. L. (1983). The Comprehension of Idioms. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research, 12(4), 429-442.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1994). What is Metaphor? In J. Bardnen & K.
Holyoak (Eds.) Advances in Connectionist and Neural
Computational Theory. Analogy, Metaphor, and
reminding. Vol.3. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Nayak, N. P. & Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (1990). Conceptual
Knowledge in the Interpretation of Idioms. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 119(3), 315-330.
Needham, W. P. (1992). Limits on Literal Processing
During Idiom Interpretation. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 21(1), 1-16.
Paivio, A., & Walsh, M. (1998). Psychological Processes in
Metaphor Comprehension. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor
and Thought, 2nd Ed, Cambridge: University Press.
Swinney, D. A., & Cutler, A. (1979). The Access and
processing of Idiomatic Expressions. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 523-534.
Tabossi, P. & Zardon, F. (1995). The Activation of
Idiomatic Meaning. In M. Evaraert, E.-J. van der Linden,
A. Schenk, R. Shreuder (Eds.). Idioms: Structural and
Psychological Perspectives NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum
Assosiates, Inc.
Titone, D. A., & Connine, C. M. (1994). Comprehension of
Idiomatic Expressions: Effects of Predictability and
Literality. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
memory, and Cognition, 20(5), 1126-1138.

