UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Semantic Ambiguity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9k10r3sc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Rodd, Jennifer
Gaskell, Gareth
Marslen-Wilson, William

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Advantages and Disadvantages of Semantic Ambiguity
Jennifer Rodd (jenni.rodd@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit
15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge, UK

Gareth Gaskell (g.gaskell@psych.york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology
University of York, York, UK

William Marslen-Wilson (william.marslen-wilson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit
15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge, UK

Abstract
There have been several reports of faster lexical decisions for
words that have many meanings (e.g., ring) compared with
words with few meanings (e.g., hotel). However, it is not clear
whether this advantage for ambiguous words arises because
they have multiple unrelated meanings, or because they have
a large number of highly related word senses. All current accounts of the ambiguity advantage assume that it is unrelated
meanings that produce the processing benefit. We report two
experiments that challenge this assumption; in visual and auditory lexical decision experiments we found that while multiple
senses did produce faster responses, multiple meanings produced a disadvantage. We discuss how models of word recognition could accommodate this new pattern of results.

Introduction
Many words are semantically ambiguous, and can refer to
more than one concept. For example, bark can refer either
to a part of a tree, or to the sound made by a dog. To understand such words, we must disambiguate between these different interpretations, normally on the basis of the context in
which the word occurs. However, ambiguous words can also
be recognised in isolation; when presented with a word like
bark we are able to identify an appropriate meaning rapidly,
and are often unaware of any other meanings.
Words can be ambiguous in different ways. The two meanings of a word like bark are semantically unrelated, and seem
to share the same written and spoken form purely by chance.
Other words are ambiguous between highly related senses,
which are systematically related to each other. For example,
the word twist can refer to a bend in a road, an unexpected
ending to a story, a type of dance, and other related concepts.
The linguistic literature makes a distinction between these
two types of ambiguity, and refers to them as homonymy
and polysemy (Lyons, 1977; Cruse, 1986). Homonyms, such
as the two meanings of bark, are said to be different words
that by chance share the same orthographic and phonological form. On the other hand, a polysemous word like twist is
considered to be a single word that has more than one sense.
All standard dictionaries respect this distinction between
word meanings and word senses; lexicographers routinely decide whether different usages of the same spelling should correspond to different lexical entries or different senses within a

single entry. Many criteria (e.g., etymological, semantic and
syntactic) have been suggested to operationalise this distinction between senses and meanings. However, it is generally
agreed that while the distinction appears easy to formulate, it
is difficult, to apply with consistency and reliability. People
will often disagree about whether two usages of a word are
sufficiently related that they should be taken as senses of a
single meaning rather than different meanings. This suggests
that these two types of ambiguity may be best viewed as the
end points on a continuum. However, even if there is not a
clear distinction between these two different types of ambiguity, it is important to remember that words that are described
as ambiguous can vary between these two extremes.
In this paper we will review the evidence on how lexical
ambiguity affects the recognition of isolated words, and will
argue that the distinction been these two qualitatively different types of ambiguity has not been addressed. We then
report two experiments that confirm the importance of the
sense-meaning distinction, and show that in both the visual
and the auditory domains the effects of word meanings and
word senses are very different.

The Ambiguity Advantage
In early studies of semantic ambiguity, Rubenstein, Garfield,
and Millikan (1970) and Jastrzembski (1981) reported faster
visual lexical decisions for semantically ambiguous words
than for unambiguous words. However, these studies did not
control for the subjective familiarity of the words, and Gernsbacher (1984) found no effect of ambiguity over and above
familiarity. Since then, however, Kellas, Ferraro, and Simpson (1988), Borowsky and Masson (1996) and Azuma and
Van Orden (1997) have all reported an ambiguity advantage
in visual lexical decision experiments using stimuli that were
controlled for familiarity.
Although there does seem to a consensus in the literature that lexical ambiguity can produce faster lexical decision
times, it is not at all clear what type of ambiguity is producing the effect. Is it multiple meanings, or multiple senses that
produces the advantage? One way of trying to answer this
question is to examine the dictionary entries of the words used
in these experiments. As described above, dictionaries make
a distinction between words whose meanings are sufficiently
unrelated that they are given multiple entries, and those that

have multiple senses within an entry. This provides a convenient way in which to categorise words as being ambiguous
between multiple meanings or between multiple senses.
Rodd, Gaskell, and Marslen-Wilson (1999) analyzed the
stimuli used in the three studies that report a significant ambiguity advantage in this way, and found that for all three
studies the high-ambiguity words have more word senses than
the low-ambiguity words. Further, only in the Borowsky and
Masson (1996) stimuli did the two groups differ in the number of meanings. Therefore, it appears that it may be multiple
senses rather than multiple meanings that are producing the
ambiguity advantage. Despite this, all current explanations
of the ambiguity advantage assume that the processing benefit arises because of the presence of unrelated meanings.

Models of the Ambiguity Advantage
One way that the ambiguity advantage has been explained
has been to assume that ambiguous words have multiple entries within a lexical network. For example, (Kellas et al.,
1988) suggest that the benefit arises because, while the multiple entries for an ambiguous word do not inhibit each other,
they both act independently to inhibit all other competing entries, and this increased inhibition of competitors produces
the faster recognition times.
Others have assumed that the benefit arises within this type
of model by assuming that there is some level of noise or
probabilistic activation (Jastrzembski, 1981). Because words
with multiple meanings are assumed to have multiple entries,
these words might benefit from having more than one competitor in the race for recognition; on average, by a particular
point in time, one of these competitors is more likely to have
reached the threshold for recognition than a word that has
only one entry in the race.
Both these approaches to explaining the ambiguity advantage predict that the effect will occur whenever the different
meanings of the ambiguous words are sufficiently unrelated
to have separate entries in the mental lexicon; they make no
specific predictions about what should happen for words with
multiple senses, as it is not clear whether word senses would
correspond to separate entries within the network.
An alternative view of word recognition is that words compete to activate a representation of their meaning. There have
been several recent models of both spoken and visual word
recognition that have taken this approach (Hinton & Shallice, 1991; Plaut & Shallice, 1993; Joordens & Besner, 1994;
Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1997; Plaut, 1997). These models use distributed lexical representations; each word is represented as a unique pattern of activation across a set of orthographic/phonological and semantic units.
Within models of this type, the orthographic pattern bark
must be associated with two different semantic patterns corresponding to its two meanings. When the orthographic pattern
is presented to the network, the network will try to instantiate the word’s two meanings across the same set of semantic
units simultaneously. These competing semantic representations will interfere with each other, and this interference is
likely to increase the time it takes for a stable pattern of activation to be produced. Therefore, it appears that these models
predict that lexical ambiguity should delay recognition, and
not produce the faster response times seen in the literature.

In response to this inconsistency between the ambiguity advantage literature and the predictions of semantic competition
models, there have been several attempts to show that, given
particular assumptions, this class of model can overcome the
semantic competition effect, and show an advantage for ambiguous words (e.g. Joordens and Besner (1994), Borowsky
and Masson (1996) and Kawamoto, Farrar, and Kello (1994)).
Importantly, these models assume that the effect to be modelled is an advantage for those words with multiple unrelated
meanings.
Thus, the ambiguity advantage has been interpreted within
a range of models of word recognition. However, all these
accounts have implicitly assumed that the ambiguity advantage literature demonstrates that there is a processing advantage for words with more than one, unrelated, meaning. As
discussed above, it is not clear that this is the case; the ambiguity advantage may be a benefit for words with multiple
senses rather than multiple meanings. In order to understand
fully the implications of semantic ambiguity for models of
word recognition, we need to determine which of these explanations is correct.

Experiment 1: Visual Lexical Decision
Method
Experimental Design This experiment attempts to separate
out the effects of lexical ambiguity and multiple word senses
by using a factorial design (see Table 1). Groups of ambiguous and unambiguous words were selected to have either few
or many senses on the basis of their dictionary entries.
Table 1: Experiment 1: Experimental Design
Ambiguity
Ambiguous
Ambiguous
Unambiguous
Unambiguous

Senses
Few
Many
Few
Many

Example
pupil
slip
cage
mask

Participants The participants were 25 members of the
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit subject panel.
All had English as their first language, and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli The word stimuli were selected to conform to a 2 x
2 factorial design, where the two factors were ambiguity and
number of senses. Words were classed as being unambiguous
if they had only one entry in The Online Wordsmyth English
Dictionary-Thesaurus (Parks, Ray, & Bland, 1998), and as
ambiguous if they had two or more entries. Two measures of
the number of senses were used. These were the total number
of word senses listed in the Wordsmyth dictionary for all the
entries for that word, and the total number of senses given in
the WordNet lexical database (Fellbaum, 1998).
Thirty-two stimuli were selected to fill each cell of the factorial design, such that the number of word meanings was
matched across each level of number of word senses, and the
total number of word senses was matched across each level
of the number of word meanings.
The four groups of words were matched for frequency
in the CELEX lexical database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, &

Procedure All the stimulus items were pseudo-randomly
divided into four lists, such that each list contained approximately the same number of words from each stimulus group.
Participants were presented with the four lists in a random order, with a short break between lists. Within the lists, the order in which stimulus items were presented was randomised
for each participant. All participants saw all of the stimulus
materials. A practice session, consisting of 64 items not used
in the analysis, was given to familiarise participants with the
task. Each block began with 10 stimuli not included in the
analysis.
For each of the word and non-word stimuli, the participants were presented with a fixation point in the centre of a
computer screen for 500 msec, followed by the stimulus item.
Their task was to decide whether each item was a word or a
non-word; recognition was signalled with the dominant hand,
non-recognition with the other hand. As soon as the participant responded, the word was replaced with a new fixation
point.

Results
The data from two participants were removed from the analysis, because of error rates greater than 10%. The latencies for
responses to the word and non-word stimuli were recorded,
and the inverse of these response times (1/RT) were used
in the analyses to minimize the effect of outliers (Ulrich &
Miller, 1994; Ratcliff, 1993). Incorrect responses were not
included in the analysis. The overall error rate for responses
was 3.6%.
Mean values were calculated separately across participants
and items. The participant means were subjected to an
ANOVA, and the item means were subjected to an analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) with frequency, familiarity, concreteness and length entered as covariates. The mean response
times are given in Figure 1.
The ANCOVA revealed significant effects of frequency, familiarity, length and neighbourhood density (all p < :05).
The effect of concreteness was non-significant (p > :5), so
this variable was removed from the ANCOVA. The response

610
Mean Lexical Decision Time

Van Rijn, 1993), number of letters, number of syllables, concreteness and familiarity. Concreteness and familiarity scores
were obtained from rating pre-tests in which all the words
were rated on a 7-point scale by participants who were members of the MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit subject
panel, and who did not participate in the lexical decision experiment.
The groups were not explicitly matched for neighbourhood
density; however, the number of words in CELEX that differed from each word by only one letter (N ; Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson, & Besner, 1977) was calculated for each word.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed that the words in
the four groups did not differ significantly on this measure;
F (3; 124) = 1:02, p > :3.
The non-word distractors were pseudohomophones, such
as brane, with a similar distribution of word lengths to the
word stimuli. Pseudohomophones were used because both
(Azuma & Van Orden, 1997) and (Pexman & Lupker, 1999)
found stronger effects of semantic ambiguity when these nonwords were used. In this first experiment, we wanted to maximise the chance of finding significant effects of ambiguity.

600
590
few senses
many senses

580
570
560
550
ambiguous

unambiguous

Figure 1: Experiment 1, mean lexical decision times
time data revealed a main effect of the number of senses
(F1 (1; 22) = 14:22, p < :001; F2 (1; 120) = 4:51, p < :05).
Words with many senses were responded to faster than words
with few senses. The effect of ambiguity was marginal in the
participants analysis (F1 (1; 22) = 3:77, p < :07), but nonsignificant in the items analysis (F 2 (1; 120) = 1:67, p > :2).
Ambiguous words were responded to more slowly than unambiguous words. There was no significant interaction between these two variables (p > :2).
The error data also showed a significant effect of the number of senses; fewer errors were made for words with many
senses (F1 (1; 22) = 12:2, p < :005; F2 (1; 120) = 5:19,
p < :05). In the error data neither the effect of ambiguity nor
the interaction between the two variables reached significance
(all p > :4).

Discussion
This experiment shows that words with many senses were responded to faster and with fewer errors that words with few
senses. This advantage for multiple senses is in contrast with
a disadvantage for words with multiple meanings. Although
this disadvantage was not significant, it is clear that contrary
to the accepted view in the literature, there is no processing advantage for words with multiple meanings. Moreover,
Rodd et al. (1999) did find a significant disadvantage in visual lexical decision for words with more than one meaning,
compared with unambiguous words, when the stimuli were
selected to minimise the effect of word senses. Thus, previous reports of an ambiguity advantage must be the result of
the multiple senses of the high-ambiguity stimuli rather than
their multiple meanings.
Therefore, the results of this experiment together with the
results of Rodd et al. (1999) show that the two types of lexical ambiguity have opposite effects on visual word recognition; while ambiguity between multiple meanings may delay
recognition, ambiguity between multiple senses is beneficial.
The following experiment will investigate whether this pattern is also seen in the auditory domain. If the above pattern
of data is telling us something interesting about the way in
which word meanings are stored and processed, we should
expect to find the same pattern independent of the input
modality.
This experiment will also allow us to establish that these

Experiment 2: Auditory Lexical Decision
Method
Experimental Design The experimental design was identical to Experiment 1.
Participants The participants were 26 students at Cambridge University who had not participated in the first experiment. All had English as their first language, and had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli 23 stimuli were selected to fill each cell of the factorial design, such that the number of word meanings was
matched across each level of number of word senses. The
words were selected on the basis of dictionary entries as in
Experiment 1. The number of words in each cell is smaller
than was used in Experiment 1, because of the additional constraints used to match the groups. 77% of the words were also
used in Experiment 1.
The four groups of words were matched for frequency,
number of phonemes, the phoneme at which the word becomes unique, actual length of the words in msec, concreteness and familiarity. Concreteness and familiarity scores
were obtained from the same rating pre-test as in Experiment
1. All the words had only one syllable.
The non-word stimuli were created to be as word-like as
possible, and to have a similar distribution of word lengths to
the word stimuli.
Procedure The procedure used was the same as that in Experiment 1, except that now the stimuli were spoken words.
Each item appeared 1000 ms after the participants’ response
to the preceding item. If the participant did not respond
within 3000 ms of the onset of a word, the next item was
presented.

Results
The data from four participants were removed from the analysis, because of error rates greater than 10%. Incorrect responses were not included in the analysis. The overall error
rate for responses was 5.8%.
As in Experiment 1, inverse response times were used in all
analyses. Mean values were calculated separately across participants and items. The participant means were subjected to
an analysis of variance (ANOVA), and the item means were

subjected to an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with familiarity and length entered as covariates. The mean response
times are given in Figure 2.

1020
Mean Lexical Decision Time

effects of semantic ambiguity are not contingent on the type
of non-word distractors used. In Experiment 1, pseudohomophones such as brane were used. There is still debate about
how pseudohomophones affect lexical processing (see Pexman & Lupker, 1999 for a review). One possibility is that
they simply increase the difficulty of the task, and so increase
sensitivity to relatively small effects. However, an alternative
explanation is that pseudohomophones strategically effect the
way that participants make use of orthographic, phonological
and semantic information. The following experiment, which
does not use pseudohomophones will attempt to demonstrate
that these effects are not due to strategic effects induced by
these particular non-words.
Finally, this experiment will also allow us to try and replicate the significant ambiguity disadvantage seen by Rodd
et al. (1999).

1000
980
few senses
many senses

960
940
920
900
ambiguous

unambiguous

Figure 2: Experiment 2, mean lexical decision times
The ANCOVA revealed significant effects of familiarity
(r = ;:26; p < 0:05) and length (r = ;:75; p < 0:001).
Concreteness, frequency, number of phonemes and uniqueness point were not significant predictors of response times
(p > :2), so these variable were not included in the ANCOVA.
The main effect of the number of word senses was significant in both the participants and items analysis (F 1 (1; 21) =
16:9, p < :001; F2 (1; 86) = 4:4, p < :05). Words with many
senses were responded to faster than words with few senses.
The effect of ambiguity was also significant in both the participants analysis and the items analysis (F 1 (1; 21) = 27:8,
p < :001; F2 (1; 86) = 7:4, p < :005). Ambiguous words
were responded to more slowly than unambiguous words.
The interaction between these two variables was marginal in
the subjects analysis but did not approach significance in the
items analysis (F1 (1; 21) = 3:8, p < :1; F2 (1; 86) = 0:4,
p > :5).
The error data showed a similar pattern of results to the
response time data. Fewer errors were made for words
with many senses, although this difference was significant
only in the subjects analysis but not in the items analysis;
(F1 (1; 21) = 10:5, p < :005; F2 (1; 86) = 2:7, p = :1).
Fewer errors were also made for unambiguous words, although this difference was only marginal in the subjects analysis and did not approach significance in the items analysis;
(F1 (1; 21) = 4:2, p < :06; F2 (1; 86) = 0:7, p > :4). The
interaction between the two variables was not significant in
either analysis (p > :5).

General Discussion
Both the experiments reported here have shown an advantage
for words with many word senses. This advantage for multiple senses was seen alongside a disadvantage for words with
multiple meanings. This suggests that the ambiguity advantage reported in earlier studies must have been produced by
the high number of related word senses of high-ambiguity
stimuli, and not by their unrelated meanings.
What are the implications of this new pattern of results for
models of word recognition? Previously, these models had

been required to produce an advantage for words with multiple meanings, but our data suggests they must accommodate
exactly the reverse effect. In fact, this is less problematic than
might be expected.
The ambiguity disadvantage can easily be explained by
models in which words compete for the activation of semantic representations (Hinton & Shallice, 1991; Plaut & Shallice, 1993; Joordens & Besner, 1994; Gaskell & MarslenWilson, 1997; Plaut, 1997). As discussed earlier, in these
models competition between the different meanings of ambiguous words would delay their recognition. As noted by Joordens and Besner (1994), an ambiguity advantage can only
be produced by these models if an additional mechanism is
present to overcome this semantic competition. These results
suggest that no such mechanism is required.
The other class of model that may be able to accommodate
this new pattern of results is those models in which words
compete to activate abstract word nodes within a lexical network. Earlier, we discussed how these models could produce
an ambiguity advantage by assuming either that ambiguous
words are more efficient at inhibiting competitors, or that
they benefit from having multiple competitors in the race for
recognition.
Surprisingly, these models can just as easily accommodate
a disadvantage for words with multiple meanings. As in all
experiments of this type, the ambiguous words and unambiguous words in these experiments were matched on total
frequency. This means that the frequency of each meaning of
the ambiguous words is on average half that of the unambiguous word. This frequency difference could produce faster lexical decisions for the unambiguous words. Similarly, if lateral
inhibition were present between all word nodes, including the
nodes corresponding to the different meanings of an ambiguous word, this would act to slow the recognition of ambiguous
words.
Therefore, it appears that both classes of models considered here can be modified to accommodate the finding of
slower responses to words with more than one unrelated
meaning. However, Rodd et al. (1999) have shown that at
least in the visual domain, the ambiguity disadvantage is
modulated by the rated relatedness of the two meanings of
the ambiguous words; words whose meanings are sufficiently
different to be considered meanings rather than senses but
whose meanings are mildly related are responded to more
quickly that those whose meanings are highly unrelated. This
suggests that semantic representations are actively involved
in the process that produces the ambiguity disadvantage, and
that the effect cannot be explained solely as the result of a
frequency bias for unambiguous words or lateral inhibition
between abstract word nodes. Therefore, the ambiguity disadvantage may more easily be explained as the result of semantic competition which is maximal when the competing
representations are unrelated.
It is therefore apparently straightforward to explain the observed ambiguity disadvantage. The intriguing question that
remains is what causes the advantage for words with many
senses?
One possibility is to explain this effect in terms of the
attractor basins that develop in a distributed semantic network. The different senses of a word correspond to a set of

highly correlated patterns of semantic activation. As noted
by Kawamoto (1993), for a word with many related senses,
these senses will create a broad and shallow basin of attraction, containing more than one stable state corresponding to
each different sense. It is plausible that within certain architectures, settling into the correct attractor may be quicker for
such a broad attractor, compared with the attractor of a word
with few senses, or that the multiple stable states within the
attractor may lead to faster settling times. This suggestion
needs to be assessed by performing the appropriate simulations.
A second possible explanation of the sense effect would be
to consider the difference between words with many and few
senses as reflecting a difference in the amount of semantic information associated with the two types of words. In other
words, a word with many senses may be considered to be semantically rich. This is essentially the same argument that
Plaut and Shallice (1993) put forward to account for the processing benefit of concrete words over abstract words. In their
computational account of the concreteness effect, the difference between abstract and concrete words is reflected in the
number of semantic features in a distributed semantic representation; abstract words are given fewer semantic features
than concrete words. This results in concrete words activating more stable representations than abstract words. These
stable representations lead in turn to faster settling times for
words with more semantic features.
It is not yet possible to distinguish between these (and
other) possible explanations of the sense effect reported here.
A combination of network simulations and further experiments is required to determine how existing models of word
recognition should be modified to accommodate the benefit
for words with many word senses. What is clear is that the
distinction we have emphasised between word meanings and
word senses is critical. In the past, ambiguity has been treated
as a unitary property of words; we have shown that this has
masked an informative pattern of results that can be used to
constrain models of how words are recognised.
More generally, these experiments emphasise how word
recognition is inextricably linked with word meanings. Data
of this kind places an increasing demand on models of word
recognition to incorporate richer semantic representations
that reflect the complex structures of the meanings of words.

References
Azuma, T., & Van Orden, G. C. (1997). Why safe is better
than fast: The relatedness of a word’s meanings affects lexical decision times. Journal of Memory and Language, 36,
484–504.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX Lexical Database. CD-ROM. Philadelphia, P.A:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Borowsky, R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1996). Semantic ambiguity effects in word identification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 22, 63–85.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.),
Attention and Performance VI (pp. 535–555). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.

Cruse, A. D. (1986). Lexical semantics. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Ratcliff, R. (1993). Methods for dealing with reaction-time
outliers. Psychological Bulletin, 114(3), 510-532.

Fellbaum, C. (Ed.). (1998). Wordnet: An electronic lexical
database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Rodd, J. M., Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D.
(1999). Semantic competition and the ambiguity disadvantage.
In M. Hahn & S. C. Stoness (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 608–613). Mahwah, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1997). Integrating
form and meaning: A distributed model of speech perception. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 613–656.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1984). Resolving 20 years of inconsistent interactions between lexical familiarity and orthography, concreteness, and polysemy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 113, 254–281.
Hinton, G. E., & Shallice, T. (1991). Lesioning an attractor
network: Investigations of acquired dyslexia. Psychological Review, 98, 74–95.
Jastrzembski, J. E. (1981). Multiple meanings, number of
related meanings, frequency of occurrence, and the lexicon.
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 278–305.
Joordens, S., & Besner, D. (1994). When banking on meaning is not (yet) money in the bank - explorations in connectionist modeling. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 20, 1051–1062.
Kawamoto, A. H. (1993). Nonlinear dynamics in the resolution of lexical ambiguity: a parallel distributed processing
account. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 474–516.
Kawamoto, A. H., Farrar, W. T., & Kello, C. T. (1994). When
two meanings are better than one: Modeling the ambiguity
advantage using a recurrent distributed network. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 1233–1247.
Kellas, G., Ferraro, F. R., & Simpson, G. B. (1988). Lexical ambiguity and the timecourse of attentional allocation
in word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 14, 601–609.
Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Parks, R., Ray, J., & Bland, S. (1998). Wordsmyth
English dictionary-thesaurus. [ONLINE]. Available: http:
//www.wordsmyth.net/ [1999, February 1], University of
Chicago.
Pexman, P. M., & Lupker, S. J. (1999). Ambiguity and visual
word recognition: Can feedback explain both homophone
and polysemy effects? Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 323–334.
Plaut, D. C. (1997). Structure and function in the lexical
system: insights from distributed models of word reading
and lexical decision. Language and Cognitive Processes,
12, 765–805.
Plaut, D. C., & Shallice, T. (1993). Deep dyslexia: A case
study of connectionist neuropsychology. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10, 377–500.

Rubenstein, H., Garfield, L., & Millikan, J. A. (1970). Homographic entries in the internal lexicon. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9, 487–494.
Ulrich, R., & Miller, J. (1994). Effects of truncation on reaction-time analysis. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-General, 123(1), 34-80.

