UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Implications of Cognitive Science for the Significance of Experimentation in Science
Teaching

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6f75c26r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Raftopoulos, Athanassios
Constantinou, Constantinos P.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Implications of Cognitive Science for the Significance of Experimentation in
Science Teaching
Athanassios Raftopoulos (raftop@ucy.ac.cy)
Constantinos P. Constantinou (c.p.constantinou@ucy.ac.cy)
Department of Educational Sciences
University of Cyprus
P.O. Box 20537
Nicosia 1678, Cyprus

Abstract
In this paper we argue for a new role for experiment in
science teaching and learning. Our proposition is based on
the conception of experiment as an active ingredient of
theory construction and not as a mere tool for theory
testing. This latter view is based on the classical
conception of the mind-world interaction, according to
which human action purports to test the validity of a
tentative solution to a problem and follows after mental
processing. We present the new framework that views the
interactions with the environment as active ingredients of
the mind’s problem solving activity. We also adduce
evidence for this new role of experiment from the history
of science. Finally, we discuss the repercussions of this
view of cognition, as the activity of a mind-environment
inseparable whole for the role of experiment in knowledge
construction.

Introduction
Experimentation was traditionally deemed to be the main
prerequisite for the successful teaching of physical
sciences in school, mainly because the experiment was
construed as a means of confirmation of theories. As such,
it could persuade the student about the adequacy of the
theory presented in class and lead her to embrace it. This
construal of experiment was based on the thesis that
experiment follows theory with a view to testing it
empirically (which was the prevalent view in philosophy
of science until the 1960’s).
This conception about the role of experiment in
science, first, and education, later, was subsequently
criticized on philosophical, psychological, and educational
grounds. The main argument against the standard
conception of the experiment was that:
(a) the student has formed a well established body of
beliefs, intuitive theories, or phenomenological primitives
(diSessa, 1993) about the world before she attends school,
which constitutes an alternative, well entrenched, theory to

those taught in class (psychological critique);
(b) the knowledge that the student brings to a given
learning situation influences the meaning that she
constructs in that situation;
(c) experiments are not sufficient to establish the
adequacy of theoretical ideas, since by themselves they do
not constitute the basic criterion of choice among
alternative theories (philosophical critique).
Therefore, experiments should abdicate their decisive
role in science education, since even if the student actively
participated in their making, they do not suffice to allow
her to build the required concepts and to persuade her to
abandon her intuitive theories. To demonstrate this point
further, one could cite extensive research showing the
failure of instruction with regard to classical physics.
In this paper we will briefly present the theoretical
framework that led to the dispute about the role of
experiment in education. We will argue that this
framework is based on an erroneous conception of the role
of experiment in problem solving, and a fortiori in
science. We will claim that this error is based on the
classical conception of the mind-world interaction in
cognitive science and we will present the new framework
emerging in cognitive science that views the interactions
with the environment and experimentation not as a follow
up of the mind’s output purporting to test the validity of a
tentative solution to a problem, but as an active ingredient
of the mind’s problem solving activity, that extend mind
beyond its biological boundaries to the world (Clark,
1997). We will also adduce evidence for this new role of
experiment from the history of science. Finally, we will
discuss the repercussions of this view of cognition as the
activity of a mind-environment inseparable whole for the
role of experiment in knowledge construction and we will
argue for the importance of experiment not as a test of
theory only but as an integral part of theory construction.

1. Undermining the Role of the Experiment:
An Overview
Logical positivism, the main philosophical paradigm
during the first half of the 20th century conceived of
experiment as a scientific activity that follows the
theoretical, or mental, processing of raw data aiming to
provide empirical testing of scientific theories. Hanson
(1958), Kuhn (1962), Gregory (1973) , Lakatos (1978) and
others criticized this classical conception of science. They
outlined the non linear and non cumulative character of the
scientific enterprise, a conception that undermined the role
of experience and of the experiment in the rationalistic
choice among competing theories. In this context, the
realization that experience is always interpreted through
the lenses of a theoretical framework, led, on one hand, to
diminishing the importance of the experiment as a means
of theory testing, and on the other hand, to the marking out
of the role of theory as the framework within which
empirical data are interpreted.
This crisis regarding the role of experiment could not
bypass the experiment as an instructional medium. The
tendency towards criticizing experiment was strengthened
in the early 1970’s by the findings of psychologists
(Carey, 1985, 1992; Chi, 1992; Karmiloff-Smith, 1992;
Medin, 1983; Nersessian and Resnick, 1989; Rosch,
1978; Spelke, 1990) that a child’s mind is no tabula rasa
upon which the educator is called to imprint the acceptable
scientific theories included in the curriculum by proving
them experimentally. On the contrary, children have
innately acquired, or constructed very early on the basis of
some innate constraints, a set of persistent beliefs about
the world (intuitive or naive theories).
Seen in this context, the experiment loses its function
as the means par excellence of testing and proving
theories, since the child has already an intuitive conceptual
background from which she can formulate various
interpretations of the experimental results that are not
compatible with those interpretations that the instructor
seemingly wishes the student to acquire. Thus, the mere
presentation of, or participation in conducting,
experiments does not suffice to prompt the student to
accept the intended interpretations.
Leaving aside the issue of whether this set of beliefs
constitute a theory, or merely a body of incompatible
principles, one notes that even though they contain
principles that allow children to make personal sense of
their world-experience, they generally deviate from
established scientific theories (Carey, 1985; Clement,
1982, 1983; Halloun and Hestenes, 1985; McCloskey,
1983; Nersessian and Resnick 1989; Viennot, 1979).
These persistent ideas are epistemological obstacles that
instruction must guide students to overcome, if it is to be
effective. These obstacles are not merely erroneous pieces
of knowledge about the world that the child could easily
be persuaded to reject. Since they constitute the schemata
on the basis of which she has come to interpret the world,
they function as organizing principles. All experiences are
made meaningful on the basis of these principles, and as a
result, they are the least likely items to be put under
experimental inquiry (Quine, 1961).

The criticism of experiment and of its role in science
education was reinforced by the well established failure of
traditional instruction of, say, Newtonian physics.
This intense criticism of experiment was accompanied
by the realization of the need to complement instruction by
exposing students in a systematic way to their own
intuitive theories and guiding them to compare them
explicitly and in detail with current scientific theories. The
aim was to make students conscious of the implicit
principles that they use to organize and understand the
world, to render clear the points at which their intuitive
theories are in conflict with the acceptable scientific
theories, to make them realize that the latter are more
adequate in explaining the world, and finally to lead them
to construct the salient concepts of established scientific
theories.
Theory becomes, thus, predominant in science
education, while experiment loses some of its shine. This
criticism of experiment does not imply of course the
abandonment of experiments as educational means. It
simply points out that experiments by themselves, without
the presentation and discussion of the appropriate
theoretical background, are no panacea for proper
instruction in the natural sciences.
The educational paradigm that emerged in this new
framework continued to conceive of the experiment as a
follow-up to theory, a discrete step in the scientific
enterprise of theory construction, whose role is the
empirical testing of theory. Once this empirical testing is
put in doubt, experiment automatically loses its appeal. In
that regard, this new paradigm does not differ from the one
it superseded.
This classical conception of the experiment is based
on the belief that all cognizers (and a fortiori scientists)
when engaged in a problem solving activity function
according to the scheme: reception of external input (the
data of the problem), mental processing of the internal
representations of these data to figure out a solution
(problem processing that consists in a search of the
problem space) and, finally, output of a tentative solution
to the problem that is tested for empirical adequacy and
for compatibility with a body of accepted knowledge. This
is the well known <input → mental processing →
output> scheme of classical cognitivism, which in the case
of scientific problem solving becomes the well known
positivist scheme <experience → mental formal
processing → experiment>.

2. A new Role for Experiment: Its Cognitive
Background
The classical view of the interaction between cognizers
and their environment, and therefore the classical view of
experiment in everyday problem-solving and the scientific
enterprise is severely questioned by some new tendencies
in cognitive science and by the research findings in the
history of science. Some cognitive scientists (Bickhard,
1993, 1998; Clark, 1993, 1997; Clark and Thornton, 1997;
Elman, 1991; Hutchins, 1995; Rutkowska, 1993, Varela,
et. al., 1993) on the one hand hold a different view for the
cognizer-environment, and thus the theory-experiment,

interaction, which radically revises the relation between
the mind and the world. Research in the history of science
(Franklin, 1986; Gooding et. al. 1989; Gooding, 1990;
Hacking, 1983; Nersessian, 1984), on the other hand,
reveals that the experiment plays a much richer role than
merely being a test of empirical adequacy of scientific
theories.
According to the new conception of cognition, the
mind does not function autonomously from the
environment, in the sense that its relation with it does not
consist simply in passively receiving input from it, and
eventually processing it in its effort to find a solution to a
certain problem. Instead, the strategies of mind include
actions upon the world as an integral part of its problemsolving activity (Clark 1997), and, one might add, as a part
of theory construction. This active intervention of the
mind may transform the problem space, affecting the
problem-solving process itself.
This can be done in various ways. First, the
intervention upon the world may bring into light new data
that could transform the problem-space, rendering its
search more effective or even possible. Our action, for
instance, might reveal some regularities that shed new
light upon the existing data allowing perhaps their recategorization, opening thereby new research avenues. Or,
this same action may reveal some structural similarities ,
that were not lying in the surface structure of the problemspace, which allow the conceptual redeployment from
another different field on to the given problem.
Second, the active intervention upon the environment
may scaffold it so that the problem-space is structured in
such a way that its effective search could be conducted,
even allowing for the limited cognitive, perceptual and
motor resources of the cognizer (Clark, 1997; Elman,
1991; Raftopoulos, 1997).
All these are ways of reducing, what Clark and
Thornton (1997) have called, type-2 difficult problems,
(i.e., problems whose statistical regularities do not lie on
their surface structures but in their deep structure), to type1 problems that wear their statistical regularities on their
sleeves, and thus can be effectively solved by means of
inductive heuristics.
The intervention on the environment, viewed as a part
of theory construction, allows one to make sense of what it
means to say that the learning process itself induces
changes in the structures involved in learning. One way to
understand this claim is to say that the neural substrate
undergoes changes while it learns, as a result of this
learning (Quartz and Sejnowski, 1997). Another way, is to
interpret this statement to mean that the learning process
changes the representational basis in which the search of
the problem space takes place and this change influences
this learning.
The active role of the mind and its action upon the
environment results in the construction of new
representations (either external or internal). This offers an
alternative to the classical picture of learning as a search
within a defined representational problem space (the
problem of selective induction.) The cognizer builds
representations as she learns, and thus shapes the

hypothesis-space. Since learning depends crucially on the
statistical regularities of the problem input and the
structural characteristics of the learner, the structure of the
training data (and thereby the structure of the problem
domain from which these data are drawn) and the
processing characteristics of the learner shape the
hypothesis space to their constraints and requirements.
Learning, thus, need not be an inductive search
through a hypothesis space delineated by fixed
representations that restricts search to solutions that can be
expressed only by means of the pre-existing
representations, in so far as new representations can be
built during learning. The result is that processing
strategies and representations co-evolve (Clark, 1993;
Horgan and Tienson, 1996).
In this sense the result of our action upon the
environment does not consist simply in testing a tentative
solution to a given problem, and herein lies the fallacy of
cognitivism’s view of the mind, but in an active
intervention upon the environment with a view to
discovering new data and building new representations
that might help the mind in solving the problem. This
action becomes an active ingredient of the problemsolving process, and in the case of the scientific activity,
an active ingredient of theory construction.
Schunn and Klahr (1995) offer a computational
account of problem solving seen as a search in four
problem spaces. These are the data representation space
(from which representations of the salient data are
chosen), the hypothesis space (in which hypotheses about
causal relations amongst the data are drawn), the
experimental paradigm space (the classes of experiments
relevant to the problem at hand are chosen), and the
experiment space (in which the values of the parameters
within the selected paradigm are chosen). Though we do
not have the space here to discuss this model in detail
here, one can safely say that the upshot of the model is that
the solution of a problem involves a constant flow of
information among the four spaces. As a result, the
processing within each space depends crucially upon the
state of the research in the other spaces. This model shows
clearly what it means to say that the learning process itself
induces changes in the structures involved in learning, that
new kinds of representations are developed which affect
the search of the hypothesis space and so forth.
Our world is not merely a place in which we can store
information and the testing ground of our theories and
tentative solutions, although it certainly functions this way
as well. It is also, and perhaps predominantly, the space
upon which we act by transforming it and by building
external representations so that it becomes an aid to the
mind. Understanding the mind presupposes the rejection
of the conception of the mind as isolated from the world
building internal representations and models and
processing them to discover solutions to problems
(Rutowska, 1993). This view must be replaced by a mind
situated in the world that uses it to facilitate its work and
which shows that “the real power of human cognition lies
in our ability to construct functional systems that
accomplish our goals.” (Hutchins 1995, 316).

This movement in cognitive space helps explain, and
thus is being strengthened by, findings in the history of
science that show that the experiment plays a much richer
role in the scientific enterprise than being a mere test of
empirical adequacy. The study of the actual processes of
theory construction, based either on the notebooks and
letters of scientists (Newton or Faraday, for instance) or on
the in-situ observation of the workings of a research team
renders clear that the experiments transcend the theory in
the context of which they are first conceived. They acquire
their own autonomy, they become themselves objects of
inquiry independently of the theory and they are used not
just to test the theory but also to discover new evidence
that would facilitate the theoretical enterprise. They
accomplish this either by revealing structural similarities
with other domains, allowing thus conceptual
redeployment, or by bringing forth certain basic
regularities that reorganize the existing data, transform the
problem space and, thereby, allow the discovery of the
hidden structure. They also actively participate in the
construction of the (partial) meaning of the theoretical
terms of the theory.

Discussion: A New Educational Role for the
Experiment
We have seen that, according to cognitivism, the cognizer
receives environmental input, builds internal
representations and models of the world-situation
pertaining to the problem, processes these representations
and produces, as output, a tentative solution to the
problem. The view of cognition that emerges from our
discussion is entirely different. The cognizer is not a
passive processor of information from the environment.
She acts upon the environment, discovers new data that
transforms the problem-space and diminishes the cognitive
load of the problem. Hence, the problem space and the
opportunities it offers for exploitation become an
inseparable part of the problem-solving activity. Thus, the
mind transcends its biological boundaries and extends
itself to the world. This means, in return, that the well
arranged triplet <input-processing-output> cedes its place
to an action loop, that is, an interaction in which thought
leads to actions which in turn change or simplify the
problems confronting thought (Clark 1997). The
continuous interaction between mind and environment
becomes so intricate and complex that it is difficult to talk
of two distinct factors that interact and is better to
conceive them as forming an inseparable whole, which
gives rise to cognition.
Learning in the physical sciences constitutes the
development of a coherent conceptual framework that
consists of a network of conceptual models within which
mental models are constantly re-negotiated in dynamic
interaction with the framework. Conceptual models are
robust mental constructs that can be developed through
appropriate instructional intervention. In effective
learning environments, both mental and conceptual models
are processed and manipulated consciously and explicitly
by the learner.

In the context of our discussion, learning in science
emerges as a process of elaboration of mental models
through dynamic interaction between mind and
environment. In this interaction, experiment as well as
logical argumentation and syllogism both contribute in a
dynamic and integral manner to the constructive process.
This view of the experiment has important
implications for current classroom interpretations of the
constructivist paradigm. Constructivism has attracted a lot
of attention in science over recent years partly as the
overarching framework underpinning active and
collaborative learning. Constructivist classroom strategies
invariably seek to facilitate learning outcomes by taking
the students through a cycle of stages including
formulation of ideas, cognitive conflict, knowledge reorganisation and extension. However, the assumptions
that underlie the development and implementation of such
constructivist strategies are at odds with the framework
that we have presented here.
Before we go on to discuss this, we need to elaborate
on two issues. Firstly, the conceptual models whose
construction is the objective of effective science learning
environments are not necessarily identical with established
scientific theory. Learning is the outcome of individual
construction of meaning even when that happens in a
collaborative environment. Research in science education
has repeatedly demonstrated that instructional approaches
that rely on a knowledge transmissive model of teaching
lead to rote memorization rather than real learning.
Examples include rote applications of Ohm’s law without
fundamental understanding of the current model for
electric circuits (McDermott and Shaffer, 1992),
calculation of image magnification without basic
understanding of geometrical optics (Wosilait et al., 1998)
and rote application of the work-energy theorem without
the basic realization that work is done by one body on
another (O’Brien et al., 1998). It would appear that any
effort to transmit knowledge to a group of learners does
not usually result in effective construction of meaning.
Second, conceptual models are not in one to one
correspondence with the phenomena they seek to model.
The learning outcome in science is a series of mental
constructs that seek to code and process specific aspects of
the behavior of physical phenomena. For the individual
learner, both the science discipline and the conceptual
models should be aligned with the physical world in the
way that this is observed and coded by the learner’s
mental processes. In other words, both the outcome of
research (a socio-cultural construct by a community of
researchers) and the outcome of learning (a cognitive
construct of the learner) cannot be conceived as a mental
reflection of physical reality but only as mental constructs
that aid us in systematically pursuing this interaction
between mind and matter. For instance, the theory of the
Big Bang does not describe the birth of the Universe as we
currently know it; rather it seeks to describe the birth of
the Universe had an observer been there to observe what
happened, for Physics and other sciences are constrained
to formulate questions, hypotheses and theories that are
epistemologically compatible with the mind-environment

interaction that is inherent in their development.
In view of these, the experiment in natural sciences
plays a more fundamental and complex role than was
traditionally thought. It is not just a means for testing and
confirming a theory (as was conceived and implemented
by traditional instruction with the laboratory as a
supplement to the theoretical lecture-based transmission of
the knowledge to be learned), or a means of choosing
among conflicting predictions and alternative theories (as
is conceived by the modern proponents of the
constructivist model in education). In view of the fact that
learning is a process of mental construction, and as such
the product of the interaction of the mind with the physical
world, the experiment provides the means of this
interaction and implements it by enabling the construction
of meaning.
Inquiry-based approaches to teaching science are
closer to this reconceived formulation of the role of
experiment in the construction of meaning. In particular,
the implementation of inquiry developed by the Physics
Education Group at the University of Washington
(McDermott, 1996) seeks to familiarize students with the
process of using experimental evidence as a medium for
recognizing the need of new concepts, constructing
operational definitions of useful quantities and using those
and the experimental evidence to synthesize models that
are, in their turn, continuously open to validation and
constant reformulation in the light of new evidence.
To demonstrate the way experimenting can influence
the mental representation, it would be useful to present an
example from electric circuits. In Physics by Inquiry,
students initially explore how they might be able to light a
bulb with a single wire and a battery. At this stage, posttest data indicate that students have one of several models
concerning the underlying cause. Although most often
they give the name current flow to their models, they tend
to describe flow models that begin at one point and end at
another, or alternatively are unidirectional, always running
from the battery to the light bulb, or even more commonly
involving current consumption along the way. In
subsequent experiments they short-circuit a battery with a
bare wire and make the observation that both the battery
and the wire get warm, and that all points of the wire at
some distance from the battery get equally warm
simultaneously. All three of these observations contradict
different aspects of their initial models. When the issue is
raised of what flow model might account for these
observations, students have to tackle specific aspects of
their initial model one by one until they arrive at a more
valid representation of current flow. In the process they
have to go back and forth between their observations and
their model every time improving on both. The emerging
representation is aligned with continuous flow that upon
closure of the switch starts instantaneously at all points of
the circuit and uniformly cover all parts of the circuit.
Once students have developed a model for electric current,
they can then use it to make predictions of the relative
brightness of light bulbs in fairly complex circuits.
In the context of the interaction between mind and
environment, the experiment accomplishes various

essential functions. Firstly, the experiment determines
which aspects of a hypothesis or working theory are valid
or in need of reformulation. The experiment also enables
us to identify interacting variables and, via the
confirmation of hypotheses, plays a substantial role in the
construction of theory. Second, the degree to which the
learning outcome is correct is not determined by the extent
to which the outcome and hence the student ideas overlap
with current scientific thinking. Rather this is determined
by the experiments that are accessible to the learner up to
the time that instruction takes place. The degree of
correctness and of the validity of the learning outcome is
determined by the epistemological basis of the
experimental process that led to the construction of
meaning. Real learning is a result of logical argumentation
that feeds on experimental data.
This last point is in stark contrast to current
innovative approaches that seek to implement the
constructivist paradigm by shifting the student conceptions
from the naïve to the established through cognitive
conflict and knowledge reconstruction events. The
experiment cannot be conceived as an instructional means
of shifting student conceptions or as a means of
embedding theoretical knowledge. The experiment is a
viable tool in the science classroom, a tool that is
continuously used in the construction of a coherent
conceptual framework and guides subsequent theory
development and evaluation by mediating the interaction
between mind and matter that extends the boundaries of
our cognition beyond the biological confines of the brain.

References
Bickhard, M. H. (1993). Representational Content in
Humans and Machines. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 5, 285-333.
Bickhard, M. H. (1998). Constraints on the Architecture
of Mind. New Ideas in Psychology, 16, 97-105.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Carey, S. (1992). The Origin and Evolution of Everyday
Concepts. In R. Giere (ed.), Cognitive Models of
Science, Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press, 89128.
Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Conceptual Change within and
across Ontological Categories. In R. Giere (Ed.),
Cognitive Models of Science, Minneapolis: Minnesota
University Press, 129-86.
Clark, A. (1993). Associative Engines: Connectionism,
Concepts, and Representational Change. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and
World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Clark, A., and Thornton, C. (1997). Trading spaces:
Computation, representation, and the limits of
uninformed learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
20, 57-66.
Clement, J. (1982). Student’s Preconceptions in
Introductory Mechanics. American Journal of Physics,
50, 66-71.

Clement, J. (1983). A Conceptual Model discussed by
Galileo and used Intuitively by Physics Students. In D.
Gentner and A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 325-339.
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of
physics. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-55.
Elman, J. (1991). Learning and development in neural
networks: the Importance of Starting Small. Cognition,
48, 71-99.
Franklin, A. (1986). The Neglect of Experiment.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gooding, D. (1990). Experiment and the Making of
Meaning, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.
Gooding, D., Pinch, T., and Schaffer, S. (Eds.) (1989).
The Uses of Experiment: Studies in the Natural
Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gregory, R. (1974). Concepts and Mechanisms of
Perception. New York: Charles Scribners and Sons.
Hacking, I. (1983). Representing and Intervening.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Halloun, I. A., and Hestenes, D. (1985). Common sense
concepts about motion. American Journal of
Psychology, 53, 1056-1065.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of Discovery. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Horgan, T., and Tienson, J. (1996). Connectionism and
the Philosophy of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A
Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). Philosophical Papers. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Naive Theories of Motion. In D.
Gentner and A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 299-324.
McDermott, L. C. and Shaffer, P. S. (1992) Research as a
guide for curriculum development: An example from
introductory electricity, Part I: Investigation of student
understanding. American Jour. Phys. 61, 81
McDermott, L. C. and The Physics Education Group
(1996) Physics by Inquiry, Vol I & II, J. Wiley, NY.
Medin, D. L. (1983). Structural Principles of
Categorization. In Th. J. Tighe and Br. E. Shepp
(Eds.), Perception, Cognition, and Development:
Interactional Analyses. Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 203-30.
Nersessian, N. J. (1984). Faraday to Einstein:
Constructing Meaning in Scientific Theories.
Hingham, MA: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Nersessian, N. J., and Resnick, L. B. (1989). Comparing
Historical and Intuitive Explanations of Motion: Does
‘Naive Physics’ have a Structure? Proceedings of the
Twelfth Cognitive Science Society, Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 412-17.
Quartz, S. R., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1997). The neural

basis of cognitive development: a constructivist
manifesto. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 537556.
Quine, W. O. (1961). Two dogmas of empiricism. In W.
O. Quine From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2nd ed., 20-47.
O’Brien, Pride, T., Vokos, S., and McDermott, L. C.
(1998) The challenge of matching learning assessments
to teaching goals: an example from the work-energy
and impulse-momentum theorems. American Journal
of Physics, 66, 906.
Raftopoulos, A. (1997). Resource limitations in early
infancy and its role in successful learning: A
connectionist approach”. Human Development, 40 : 5,
293-319.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of Categorization. In E.
Rosch and B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
Categorization. Hillsdale, NJ: John Willeys and Sons.
Rutkowska, J. C. (1993). The Computational Infant:
Looking for Developmental Cognitive Science.
Hertfordshire: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Schunn, C. D., and Klahr, D. (1995). A 4-space model of
scientific discovery. In J. D. Moore and J. F. Lehman
(Eds.) Proceedings of the Seventeen Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Lawrence
Erlbaum, 196-111.
Spelke, E. S. (1990). Principles of Object Perception. In
Cognitive Science, 14, 29-56.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (1993). The
Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Viennot, L. (1979). Spontaneous reasoning in elementary
Dynamics. In European Journal for Science
Education, 1:2, 205-221.
Wosilait, K., Heron, P. R. L., Vokos, S. and McDermott,
L. C. (1998) Development and assessment of a
research-based tutorial on light and shadow. American
Journal of Physics, 66, 906.

