UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Primacy of One-to-One Generalization in Young Children's Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qw9829r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.
Lo, Ya-Fen

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Primacy of One-to-One Generalization in Young Children's Induction
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu )
School of Teaching & Learning & Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Ya-Fen Lo (lo.37@osu.edu )
School of Teaching & Learning & Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
The paper compares predictions derived from the
similarity-based and the theory-based accounts of
young children's induction. The former predicts the
primacy of induction from one single entity to another
single entity (one-to-one induction), whereas the latter
does not predict such primacy. Predictions were tested
in three experiments where 4-5 year-olds and 11-12 yearolds were asked to perform inductive generalization of
biological properties. Participants could generalize
properties either from a single animal to another single
animal (one-to-one induction) or from a group of animals
to a single animal (many-to-one induction). Experiments
1 and 2 revealed that under various stimuli presentation
conditions, young children exhibited a strong
preference of one-to-one induction, performing
generalizations in a similarity-based manner. At the
same time, preadolescents exhibited a strong preference
of many-to-one induction, performing generalizations in
a theory-based manner. In Experiment 3, an alternative
explanation that one-to-one induction stems from a
tendency to match quantifiers or label endings was
tested and eliminated. Results are discussed in relation
to cognitive and developmental aspects of inductive
inference.

Introduction
Inductive generalization is prominently present both in
low-level processes, such as sensation and perception, and
in high-level processes, such as learning and transfer,
categorization, analogy, rule discovery, and inductive
inference (see Shepard, 1987, for a discussion). Inductive
generalization involves at least two stimuli (or stimuli sets):
the source and the target of generalization.
One issue that has been hotly debated is what aspects of
the source and the target support inductive inference. One
possibility that has been extensively discussed in the
literature is that inductive generalizations are driven by
similarity construed as featural overlap between the source
and the target (see Estes, 1994; Medin, 1975; Nosofsky,
1986; Shepard, 1987; Tversky, 1977, for specific models of
computing similarity). In this case, the more similar the
source and the target, the more likely there will be
generalization from the source to the target (see Medin &
Smith, 1984; E. Smith, 1995; L. Smith, 1989 for discussions).
However, it has been counter argued that similarity
construed this way does not sufficiently constrain

generalization processes (see Carey, 1985; Keil, 1989; 1994;
Medin et al., 1993, for discussions). For example, there are
many more overlapping features between a live monkey and
a mechanical monkey than between the live monkey and a
worm. However, people deem it more appropriate to
generalize biological properties from a live monkey to a worm
than to generalize biological properties from the live monkey
to a mechanical monkey (Carey, 1985). Therefore, not all
featural overlaps are equally important. Somehow people
intuitively realize that it is appropriate to generalize certain
biological properties from Elephant to Hippopotamus (as
they both are mammals) and it is inappropriate to generalize
these properties from Elephant to Paris (as they both are
smaller than China). Hence, it has been argued that
generalization must be constrained by some deep
"theoretical" beliefs that could not be reduced to simple
featural similarity. Proponents of this view have suggested
that generalization processes are constrained by a set of
core beliefs about the "essence" of a category. Those
entities that have common “essential” properties (e.g., the
same biological origins) should be also considered as
members of a common group. Those biological properties
that stem from the essence (and therefore from the common
membership) could be legitimately generalized from one
entity onto the whole group and subsequently to each
member of this group (Murphy & Medin, 1985; Gelman &
Coley, 1991; Gelman & Wellman, 1991; Keil, 1994).
In this paper we attempt to derive predictions from these
positions and to empirically test these predictions. Inductive
generalizations can be performed over individual entities
(e.g., This dog has property X, therefore that dog has
property X) or over classes (e.g., Dogs have property X,
therefore cats have property X). Quantification of the source
and the target define several types of induction. The current
research focuses on two of these types of induction over
individual entities, one-to-one induction and many-to-one
induction. In the case of one-to-one induction, attributes or
relations could be generalized from one single entity to
another single entity (e.g., This sparrow has biological
property X, therefore that sparrow has biological property
X). In the case of many-to-one induction, attributes or
relations could be generalized from a group of entities to a
single entity (e.g., Sparrows have biological property X,
therefore this sparrow has biological property X). Note that
induction could be also performed strictly over classes (see

Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez, & Shafir, 1990, for a
discussion of induction over classes).
The distinction between the two types of induction
affords deriving specific and testable predictions from each
of the above mentioned positions. If induction in young
children is similarity-based, there should be primacy of oneto-one induction over many-to-one induction, whereas if
induction is category-based, there should not be such
primacy. As shown below, each prediction follows directly
from the respective position.
Proponents of the similarity-based position have argued
that induction in young children is not category-based, and
that both induction and categorization are products of
featural similarity between compared stimuli (Sloutsky & Lo,
1999). They have also suggested that (a) different attributes
and attribute dimensions have different weights in the
computation of similarity, (b) young children consider
linguistic labels as attributes with greater weights than other
attributes (Sloutsky & Lo, 1999). Finally, according to the
similarity-based approach, when entities are novel,
computation of similarity between two single novel entities
should be simpler than computation of similarity between
many novel entities and one novel entity. This is because it
is possible to directly compute similarity between single
entities, whereas computation of similarity between a group
and a single entity is difficult. The later requires one first to
construe a composite representation of the group and then
to compute similarity between the single entity and the
group. Note that the argument may not apply to familiar
entities, for which a composite representation had been
established (see Estes, 1994, for a discussion). Therefore, if
induction is a function of overall similarity, one-to-one
induction should be easier for young children than many-toone induction.
Recall that according to the theory-based approach,
young children have abstract representations of categories,
such as biological kinds. When an entity is familiar, it is
represented as a member of a familiar category, whereas
when an entity is novel, it is represented as a member of a
novel category. These novel categories are devoid of
representational specifics; they rather exist as category
"templates" or "placeholders" (see Gelman, Coley, &
Gottfried, 1994; Gelman & Coley, 1991 for discussions), and
linguistic labels point to this category placeholder. When a
perceptual input indicates that compared novel entities are
animals, a set of beliefs about "natural kinds" is activated.
These include beliefs about growth, inheritance,
reproduction, self-generated movement, and so forth
(Gelman, Coley, & Gottfried, 1994). These beliefs in
conjunction with the common category membership suggest
that both entities belong to the same natural kind, and,
therefore, they should share unobservable biological
properties (Murphy & Medin, 1985; Gelman & Coley, 1991;
Keil, 1994). Thus, according to the theory-based explanation,
induction is category-based (i.e., it is a function of
categorization) (Gelman & Coley, 1991), and the process
underlying induction should be as follows. (1) The
description of a single entity or multiple entities (e.g., This
Gubla has biological property X or These Gublas have

biological property X) activates the essence placeholder
"GUBLA." (2) Other members of the category GUBLA (this
membership is denoted by the linguistic label) should have
biological property X. (3) As indicated by the common label,
this GUBLA is a member of the category GUBLA (or these
Gublas are members of the category GUBLA), and therefore,
it (or they) should have biological property X. Therefore,
because both one-to-one and many-to-one induction follows
from the category membership, there should be no primacy
of one-to-one induction over many-to-one induction.
To test predictions derived from both approaches, we
developed the following task. Suppose that the child is
presented with a set of realistically looking novel animals
having novel labels (e.g., "Look, these are Gublas"). Then,
one Gubla is presented as a Target, another Gubla is
presented as Test 1 and the rest of Gublas are presented as
Test 2. The child is also told that this Gubla (Test 1) has
biological property X, whereas these Gublas (Test 2) have
biological property Y. Does the Target Gubla have biological
property X or Y?
The putative processes that, according to each model,
underlie the child's inference are as follows. According to
the theory-based approach, the encounter with a group of
novel biological objects that have the same linguistic label
(i.e. Gubla) should activate the category placeholder
GUBLA. Once the category is activated, the child should be
equally likely to generalize from Test 1 (one Gubla) or from
Test 2 (many Gublas) to the Target. On the basis of the
theory-based approach, it should be inferred that in the task
like this, young children should be at chance, or have a
slight preference for many-to-one over one-to-one induction.
The slight preference might stem from the fact that many
identically looking Gublas should be more representative of
the category than a single Gubla. Furthermore, normatively
it is more appropriate to generalize from many Gublas than
from a single Gubla, because a single entity is more likely to
be an exception than many entities. Of course, we should not
expect many young children to take into account this
consideration, therefore, if any, only a small many-to-one
preference should be predicted.
The similarity-based approach yields different predictions.
As described above, all other things being equal, the
computation of similarity between two entities should be
simpler than computation of similarity between many entities
and one entity. In addition, because similarity between two
identical entities is the unity (Estes, 1994; Medin, 1975;
Sloutsky & Lo, 1999), this similarity could not be less than
similarity between several entities and one entity. Therefore,
similarity between the Test Gubla and the Target Gubla
should be no less than similarity between Test Gublas and
the Target Gubla, and the former should be more easily
computed. Based on these considerations, the similaritybased approach predicts a large preference of one-to-one
induction over many-to-one induction.
These considerations led us to formulation of the
following specific predictions. If young children base their
induction on similarity between compared entities, they
should generalize from a single Gubla to another single
Gubla more often than chance. At the same time, according

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were 31 children aged 4 to 12 years.
The first group consisted of 16 four-to-five-year-old children
enrolled in two daycare centers in an upper middle class
suburb of Columbus, Ohio (M = 4.5 years, SD = 0.6 years, 11
boys and 5 girls). The second group consisted of 15 elevento-twelve year-olds selected from a public middle school
located in an upper middle class suburb of Columbus, Ohio
(M = 11.7 years, SD = .31 years, 8 girls and 7 boys).
Materials Eight sets of line-drawing pictures were used in
the present experiment. Each set consisted of two single
pictures and a stack of pictures (see Figure 1), with each
picture measuring approximately 3" by 5". Both single
pictures depicted realistically looking animals, whereas the
stack was turned faced down such that pictures in the stack
were not visible. The Target (a single picture) looked
identical to Test 1. Materials also included artificial labels
and a set of biological properties. The animals presented in
each set of pictures were given the same artificial label (e.g.,
a Gubla). Children were taught that each of the Test stimuli
had a particular biological property (e.g., has salt inside the
body or has sugar inside the body). The task consisted of
generalization of biological properties from one of the Test
stimuli to the Target. The experiment had a between-subject
design with age as a factor. The dependent variable of
interest was the proportion of inductive generalizations from
each of the Test stimuli, either one-to-one induction
(choosing Test 1) or many-to-one induction (choosing Test
2). Each participant received eight trials.

Target: This is a Gubla.

referred to using a two-syllable artificial linguistic label and
was introduced as a group of animals (e.g., I will show you
several Famos).
The experimenter then presented
participants with three stimulus items: (a) a single card
depicting a single animal (the Target), (b) another single card
depicting another single animal (Test stimulus 1), and (c) a
stack of cards that were face down (Test stimulus 2). At this
point, participants were asked to repeat the label. After
presenting the stimuli items, the experimenter introduced two
biological properties, one characterizing Test 1, and another
characterizing Test 2 (e.g., This Famo has a lot of sugar
inside the body. These Famos have a lot of salt inside their
bodies). The order of presentation of the Test stimuli, their
positions relative to the Target, and the order of introduction
of biological properties were counterbalanced across trials.
Stimuli items were randomly paired with biological
properties.
Comprehension/memory check and inductive inference
phases . After the stimuli items were presented, participants
were asked to repeat the labels and biological properties.
The labels and biological properties were reintroduced when
participants failed to answer correctly. All participants
successfully completed this comprehension/memory check
phase. After repeating the labels and biological properties,
children moved to the inductive inference phase, in which
participants were asked which of the two biological
properties was likely to be shared by the Target.

Results and Discussion
In this section, we present proportions of generalizing
from each of the Test stimuli across the two age groups.
Results of this experiment are presented in Figure 2.

1
Proportion of different types of generalizations

to the theory-based account, young children should perform
at chance (or with a slight preference of many-to-one
induction).

0.9

**
**

0.8
0.7
0.6
One-to-One Generalization
Many-to-One Generalization

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

*
*

0.1
0

Test 1: This is also a Gubla.

Test 2: These are other Gublas.

Figure 1: Layout of stimuli in Experiment 1.
Design and Procedure The experiment was conducted in a
single 15-20 minute session that included three phases:
stimuli presentation, comprehension/memory check, and
inductive inference. Each participant was tested individually
in a separate room at their daycare center or school.
Stimuli presentation. Each participant was presented with
eight stimuli triads, one triad at a time. Each triad was

4-5 year-olds

11-12 year-olds

Figure 2: Proportions of one-to-one and many-to-one
generalizations by age. Note: ** above chance, p < .0001; *
below chance, p < .0001.
To determine the difference from chance, these results
were subjected to one-sample t-tests. The analysis indicates
that while 4-5 year-olds generalized from Test 1 (one animal)
to the Target significantly above chance (81% of all
responses), t(15) = 11.2, p < .0001, 11-12 year olds
generalized from Test 2 (many animals) to the Target,

significantly above chance (93% of all responses), t(14) =
9.4, p < .0001. Percentages of one-one choices and
percentages of many-one choices (both aggregated across
the 8 trials) were subjected to a one-way ANOVA with age
as a factor. The analyses indicate that 4-5 year-olds were
significantly more likely to generalize from Test 1 (one
animal) to the Target than 11-12 year-olds, whereas 11-12
year-olds were significantly more likely to generalize from
Test 2 (many animals) to the Target than 4-5 year-olds, Fs(1,
29) > 97.1, ps < .0001. In addition, 10 out of 14
preadolescents explicitly pointed that the Target is more
likely to share properties with a larger group of animals than
with a single animal.
These results support our predictions describing
inductive generalizations of young children and point to
important differences in inductive generalizations of 4-5
year-olds and 11-12 year olds. While preadolescents'
inductive generalizations conform to what should be
expected when induction is category-based (they did in fact
generalized in a category-based manner, thus both
supporting predictions and validating the task), young
children's inductive generalizations conform to what should
be expected when induction is similarity-based. This
experiment, however, constitutes a rigorous test of whether
participants performed category-based induction, and a not
so rigorous test of whether participants performed similaritybased induction. This is because one-to-one induction was
supported by a picture, whereas many-to-one was not (see
Figure 1).
Therefore, reported findings are indicative of the categorybased induction of 11-12 year-olds, whereas they are
ambiguous with respect to induction of 4-5 year-olds.
Indeed, generalization in the latter group could point either
to the primacy of one-to-one induction or to the preference
of young children of depicted stimuli over non-depicted
stimuli. Although such preference in itself might be
indicative of similarity-based induction (indeed, category
placeholders are not accompanied by pictures), we deemed it
necessary to conduct a more rigorous testing of predictions
generated by the similarity-based model. To this end, we
conducted Experiment 2, where both Test 1 and Test 2 were
both accompanied by pictures (Condition 1) or both were
presented without pictures (Condition 2).

differences were that the design included an additional
between-subject factor, the picture presentation condition
that had two levels, Picture and No-Picture conditions, and
that pictures were presented differently from those in
Experiment 1. In the Picture condition, both Test stimuli were
accompanied by pictures, whereas in the No-Picture
condition neither of the Test stimuli was accompanied by a
picture.

Experiment 2

Experiment 3

Results and Discussion
Results of this experiment indicate that in both Picture and
No-Picture conditions young children reliably generalized in
a one-to-one manner. In the No-Picture condition in 78% of
responses children generalized from Test 1, whereas in the
Picture condition 77% of responses children generalized
from Test 1, both above chance, ts(14) > 6.2, ps < .0001. The
response patterns in the Picture and No-Picture conditions
were practically identical, t < 0.5.
These findings replicate those of Experiment 1 for young
children, ruling out the possibility that young children's
responses in Experiment stemmed from the fact that Test 1
(single animal) was accompanied by a picture, whereas Test
2 (many animals) was presented without a picture. Results of
Experiments 1 and 2 also point to a difference in inductive
generalization of young children and preadolescents: while
the later perform inductive generalizations in a manner
compatible with the category-based model, the former
perform in a manner compatible with the similarity-based
model.
The fact that young children equally frequently
generalized from a single animal in both Picture and NoPicture conditions deserves special consideration. This
finding could be indicative of several factors. First, it is
possible that young children generalize from Test 1 (single
animal) rather than from Test 2 (many animals) because they
merely match quantifiers (e.g., one and one vs. one and
many) or linguistic labels (e.g., Gubla and Gubla vs. Gubla
and Gublas). Another possibility is that because
computation of similarity is easier between single objects,
young children are biased to compute similarity between
single objects prior to computing similarity between a single
object and multiple objects. Experiment 3 was conducted to
distinguish between these possibilities.

Method

Method

Participants A group of 30 children aged 4 to 5 years
participated in the two conditions. These children were
selected from daycare centers in an upper middle class
suburb of Columbus, Ohio on the basis of permission slips
returned by parents. The No-Picture condition group of 15
children consisted of 7 boys and 8 girls (M = 4.4 years, SD =
0.48 years). The Picture condition group of 15 children
consisted of 9 boys and 6 girls (M = 4.4 years, SD = 0.39
years).
Materials, design, and procedure Materials, design, and
procedure were identical to those in Experiment 1. The only

Participants A group of 16 children aged 4 to 5 years (M =
4.1 years, SD = 0.4 years, 10 girls and 6 boys) participated in
this experiment. These children were selected from daycare
centers in an upper middle class suburb of Columbus, Ohio
on the basis of permission slips returned by parents.
Materials, design, and procedure Materials, design, and
procedure were identical to those in Experiment 1. The only
difference was that the Target was presented as many
entities, Test 1 as a single entity, and Test 2 as many
entities. All stimuli were presented face up.

Results and Discussion
Results of this experiment indicate that in 52% of
responses young children generalized from Test 2, whereas
in 48% of responses they generalized from Test 1; both
types of generalization were indistinguishable from chance, t
(15) < 0.3. Furthermore, the analysis of patterns of individual
responses indicates that the chance-level performance does
not stem from a bi-modal distribution where a part of the
sample consistently generalized from Test 1, whereas the
other part consistently generalized from Test 2. This
performance rather stemmed from inconsistency withinparticipants. In particular, 2 out 16 participants consistently
(on 6 or more out of 8 trials) generalized from Test 2 (many
entities), and another 2 out of 16 participants consistently
(on 6 or more out of 8 trials) generalized from Test 1 (single
entity), while 12 out 16 participants were inconsistent in their
choices of the two test items.
These findings allow us to rule out the matching
hypothesis. Indeed, if participants were exhibiting matching,
they should have generalized from Test 2 (many entities) to
the Target (many entities) most often, which was not the
case. Therefore, it seems plausible that patterns of
responses observed in Experiments 1 and 2 (i.e., the
tendency to generalize from a single entity to another single
entity) stem from the fact that it is easier to compute
similarity between several single entities than it is to
compute similarity between a group of entities and a single
entity.

General Discussion
Results of the three reported experiments are as follows.
Young children more readily generalize biological properties
from one single entity to another single entity, whereas older
children more readily generalize biological properties from
many entities to a single entity. At the same time young
children performed at chance when asked to generalize from
many entities either to a single entity or to many entities.
The latter finding undermines the possibility that young
children's preference for generalization from one single entity
to another single entity stems from their tendency to match
quantifiers or label endings.
Taken together, these findings support predictions of the
similarity-based approach. In particular, they indicate that
when the computation of similarity is relatively simple (such
as computation of similarity between single entities) young
children more readily generalize biological properties than
when computation of similarity is relatively complex (such as
computation of similarity of many entities to a single entity).
At the same time, when computation of similarity is
comparably difficult (such as computation of similarity of
many entities to many entities or a single entity to many
entities), young children perform at chance.
These results point to the primacy of the one-to-one
induction over the many-to-one induction in young children,
an effect that has been predicted by the similarity-based
position, but not by the theory-based position. Recall that in
the case of category-based induction advocated by the
theory-based position, there should be no primacy of the

one-to-one induction, and preadolescents, who supposedly
perform induction in a category-based manner, did not
exhibit the primacy of one-to-one induction.
Results also point to important developmental differences
between young children and preadolescents. While
preadolescents' inductive generalizations conform to what
should be expected when induction is category-based,
young children's inductive generalizations conform to what
should be expected when induction is similarity-based.
Therefore, it seems reasonable to infer that there should be a
developmental transition from similarity-based to categorybased induction. Such transition could be due to
developmental and educational factors that lead to
understanding that common category membership is a better
predictor of unobservable properties than similarity (e.g., a
whale looks more similar to a fish, but has internal structure
similar to other mammals). However, additional research is
needed to discern and tease apart these contributing factors.
The reported findings afford the differentiation between
the theory-based and the similarity-based approaches to
young children's induction, undermining the former and
supporting the latter. Recall that according to the theorybased position, linguistic labels activate "essence
placeholders" that should be equally applicable to all
members of the category, independent of the quantity of
these members. Therefore, if induction had been performed
in a category-based manner, young children should have
equally often generalized from a single animal and from a
group of animals, or have a slight preference for many-toone over one-to-one induction. In addition, the theorybased position does not predict dramatic differences
between young children and preadolescents: both groups
should perform induction in the category-based manner. At
the same time, the similarity-based position (e.g., Sloutsky &
Lo, 1999) predicts that while young children should
generalize in a similarity-based manner (generalizing from a
single entity to another single entity), preadolescents should
generalize in a category-based manner. The primacy of oneto-one induction in young children and major differences
between young children's and preadolescents' induction fit
predictions of the similarity-based position, while not fitting
predictions of the theory-based position.
Of course, the current results could not conclusively rule
out the possibility of young children having representations
of category templates, and it is hard to imagine any empirical
findings capable of conclusively ruling out this possibility.
The results of current experiments, however, support a
parsimonious account of young children's induction that is
based on a set of a priori predictions. We believe that a priori
predictions are favored over post hoc accounts by both
inferential statistics and philosophy of science, and,
therefore, they should weigh more than post hoc accounts
(cf. Barsalou, 1999).
In short, while the similarity-based approach is not
capable of conclusively ruling out the proposal that young
children rely on categories when performing inductive
inference, it is capable of undermining such a possibility. In
particular, the similarity-based approach is capable of
predicting phenomena (such as those reported above) that

could not be predicted by the category-based position.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by a grant from the James
S. McDonnell Foundation to the first author.

References
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577-660.
Carey, S. (1985). Are children fundamentally different kinds
of thinkers and learners than adults? In S. Chipman, J.
Segal & R. Glaser (Eds.), Thinking and learning skills
(Volume 2). (pp. 485-518). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Estes, W. K. (1994). Classification and cognition. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In S.
A. Gelman, S. & J. P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on
language and thought: Interrelations in development
(146-196). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essence: Early understandings of the non-obvious.
Cognition, 38(3), 213-244.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D. & Gottfried, G. M. (1994).
Essentialist beliefs in children: The acquisition of
concepts and theories. In L. Hirschfeld & S. Gelman (Eds.),
Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and
culture (pp. 234-254). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Keil, F. (1994). The birth and nurturance of concepts by
domains: The origins of concepts of living things. In L.
Hirschfeld & S. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind:
Domain specificity in cognition and culture (pp. 234-254).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Medin, D. (1975). A theory of context in discrimination
learning. In G. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning
and motivation (pp. 263-314), Vol. 9. New York: Academic
Press.
Medin, D. L., & Smith, E. E. (1984). Concepts and concept
formation. Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 113-138.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2),
254-278.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Nosofsky, R. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O, Lopez, A, & Shafir,
E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185-200.
Shepard, R. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization

for psychological science. Science, 237, 1317-1323.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y.-F. (1999). How much does a shared
name make things similar? Part 1: Linguistic labels and the
development of similarity judgement. Developmental
Psychology, 6, 1478-1492.
Smith, E. E. (1995). Concepts and categorization. In E. E.
Smith & D. Osherson (Eds), An invitation to cognitive
science, Vol. 3: Thinking (2nd ed.), (pp. 3-33). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Smith, L. (1989). A model of perceptual classification in
children and adults. Psychological Review, 96(1), 125-144.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.

