UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Referential Communication to Study Mental Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82p6t66q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Kalmanson, Julia
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Referential Communication to Study Mental Models
Julia Kalmanson (kalmanso@psych.columbia.edu)
Department of Psychology; Columbia University, 406 Schermerhorn Hall
New York, NY 10027
Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Mezes Hall 330
Austin, TX 78712
Abstract
In this paper we evaluate the utility of a referential
communication paradigm to study the content and use of
mental models. In this task pairs of people collaborate to
determine which of a set of infra-red images depicts a
physically possible situation. We demonstrate that the
referential communication task provides insight into the
interaction between the content and use of naive theories of
physics in a problem-solving domain.

Introduction
Causal explanation is critical for our daily existence.
Causal connections support our perception of the world as
coherent, and they give us a sense of mechanism,- a sense of
how things work. Our control of the physical world is to a
great extent dependent on the accuracy of our understanding
of the mechanics of the world.
A prominent suggestion is that causal knowledge is
organized into theories that people use to reason about the
world. The term “theory” has been used in a number of
different ways by psychologists (see e.g., Gopnik &
Meltzoff, 1997, for a discussion). One view assumes that
theories are large bodies of knowledge that are coherently
organized according to a few well-defined principles, so that
all explanations can be deductively derived (e.g., Kuhn,
1991). A more local view of theories is presented by
Murphy and Medin (1985), who define theories as "any host
of mental explanations, rather than a complete organized
scientific account" (p.290). Schemas and scripts contain
implicit theories of causality that allow us to explicate the
world, although may not possess properties of coherence
and consistency.
One area where theories have received extensive attention
is in naive physics, which is concerned with understanding
how knowledge and experience are integrated to create an
understanding of the mechanics of the world. Despite the
fact that physical principles describe properties of objects
with which we interact daily, people have serious difficulties
understanding formal principles of physics.
People's
understanding of fundamental physical principles has been
described as incoherent and full of
misconceptions (diSessa, 1993; McCloskey et al., 1980;
Clement, 1982; Cooke and Breedin, 1994).

Various theories have been proposed to account for these
difficulties. Some researchers have suggested that these
misconceptions arise from basic misunderstandings of
physical systems that are formed prior to any formal training
in physics (Caramazza and Green, 1980; McCloskey, 1983a,
1983b). The systematic nature of some errors has led
researchers to suggests that certain misconceptions are not
idiosyncratic, but instead are based on a more general
system of beliefs or a naive theory (Clement 1982;
McCloskey, 1983a, b). These theories are described as
systematic, general, coherent, well-developed and well
articulated conceptions that conflict with basic principles of
physics, but that nonetheless adequately explain observed
events in the world (McCloskey, 1983b).
An alternative view contends that people's understanding
of physical phenomena is a collection of fragmented and
loosely connected ideas about the world that can be used to
generate situation specific explanations (diSessa, 1988,
1993). In his view, naive theories are nothing more than ad
hoc explanations that are invented for particular situations.
Ueno (1993) in his re-interpretation of diSessa's theory
points out that these explanations are socially formed and
shared. They are maintained through communication and are
to a great extent guided by conversational pragmatics. For
example it would be anomalous to cast a simple sentence
like "Susie slapped Tom" in it's Newtonian physics
equivalent of "Tom's face slaps the palm of Susie's hand,
while the force of Susie's slapping is the same as the force of
Tom's slapping". In everyday discourse the latter sentence
would be judged nonsensical.
This reinterpretation is in line with current research on the
role of communication in category acquisition. Category
representations are structured in a manner that facilitates
communication. People typically learn categories in the
process of communicating with others. Further, people are
constrained to form categories that are shared by other
members of their culture if they are to use them effectively
(Garrod & Doherty, 1994; Malt, 1995). In this view naive
theories of physics are pragmatically motivated
explanations of complex phenomena that are socially
constructed to support our simplistic categorizations of the
physical world.
Ultimately, of course, we would like to understand the
structure of people’s naive theories. In the present paper,

we begin to address this issue by examining a novel method
that can elicit people’s naive theories of the physical world
and to explore the causal relationships that make up those
theories. This methodology draws on recent findings on the
role of communication in category acquisition, and attempts
to elicit and explore naive theories in a communicative
setting.
A popular method of eliciting people’s theories of
physical phenomena is to ask people to explain their
predictions or decisions in interviews or other verbal
protocols. These verbal protocols permit a systematic
examination of explanations people generate for their own
errors in reasoning. Chi and her colleagues have successfully
used this method to study learning in a variety of problemsolving tasks (Chi, 1989, 1983). The method we propose is
novel in that it incorporates a referential communication
design into the study of naive theories. In this task, pairs of
people are presented with four infra-red pictures that show
the heat emanating from objects. One of the pictures is an
actual infra-red image, and the other three are doctored
images that have been altered to contain systematic errors.
Pairs of people are shown these images and are asked to
determine which image is correct.
In order to perform this task, dyads must talk about the
heat pictured in the image. In this way, they must use their
naive understanding of thermodynamics. Because the task
involves two people, many aspects of people’s beliefs about
heat are stated explicitly in the conversations. People have
extensive experience with heat and have a naive theory of
heat-flow.
Referential communication tasks are quite data-intensive,
as full transcripts of conversations are developed and must
be coded. In this paper, we limit our focus to three issues.
First, does communicating about this task improve
performance? This question is useful for understanding
whether theory development occurs through communication.
If the performance of dyads improves with communication,
then it is plausible to think that theories develop when
people communicate. Second, we are interested in whether
people
use
correct
theories
when
discussing
thermodynamics. Finally, we will address the relationship
between theories and topics of discussion, as well as the
qualitative change in discussions over time.

Method
Participants: Participants were 70 members of the
Columbia University community (50 in the dyad task and 20
in the control task).
Six dyads involved two male
participants, five involved two female participants, and the
rest were mixed sex dyads. All participants were native
speakers of English who did not know each other before the
session. Data from one dyad had to be eliminated due to
mechanical failure leaving a total of 24 dyads for analysis.
Materials and Procedure: The stimuli were 12 sets of
false-color infra-red images of familiar objects and scenes
such as plants, kitchen appliances, and street scenes. Each

set consisted of one actual image and three variants of it.
The actual image was a picture of the infra-red (i.e., thermal)
energy at the surfaces of the image. The color scheme
involved 10 colors that were each assigned to a range of
temperatures. The resulting image is called a false-color
image, because it appears in colors that differ from the
colors of those objects in visible light. To complete each set
three additional versions of each picture were created using
Adobe Photoshop by changing some of the colors in the
image to create thermal inconsistencies that are highly
unlikely to occur naturally. For example, the nose of a dog
might be made to appear cooler than the fur-covered skin, or
the pattern of heat diffusion from a heat source might be
changed so that temperature did not decrease monotonically
with distance.
During the experiment the sets were presented in a
random order. Each pair of participants was instructed to
collaborate to figure out which image in the set was the
actual thermal image. Both subjects had to agree on their
response before the trial was completed. To encourage
discussion rather than pointing, a divider was placed
between the subjects, and each subject was given an
identical set of 4 images. Thus, subjects were free to refer to
pictures verbally but could not point to pictures or their
elements to establish reference. The discussions were videotaped and later transcribed. All subjects were aware of being
videotaped. The control group consisted of 20 subjects who
performed the same picture selection task alone and without
verbalizing their reasons.
General Coding: Each utterance from the transcript was
coded along six dimensions. An utterance was defined as a
turn each subject took when speaking. Thus, an utterance
could contain as little as a sentence fragment or as much as a
paragraph. Because of space limitations, we will focus on
two codes: 1). the correctness of the theory and action taken
by the dyad and 2). the topic of the discussion. To assess
the reliability of the coding, ten of the transcripts were
scored by both coders. Correlations ranging between .9 and
.98 were obtained for all codes.
The correctness of the theory and action code focused on
utterances where the dyad took an action (either selecting a
particular picture as the correct one or rejecting a picture).
First, the action was coded as correct or incorrect. A correct
action was either rejecting a picture that was not an actual
thermal image, or selecting the valid image. An incorrect
action was either rejecting the correct image or accepting an
incorrect one. Actions were typically justified in some way,
and the theory part of the code assessed whether the
justification was in accord with basic principles of physics.
Thus, this code had four levels:
1. Correct action considered on the basis of incorrect theory
2. Correct action considered on the basis of correct theory.
3. Incorrect action considered on the basis of incorrect
theory.
4. Incorrect action considered on the basis of correct theory.

Predictions
In this paper, we focus on four aspects of the present task:
1. Communication: The first question to be explored is
whether communication influences performance accuracy on
this task. To address this issue, we test to see if dyads have
higher accuracy than do people who perform the task alone.
In addition to examining overall accuracy, we look at
performance curves over the course of the experiment.
Related to this issue, we can explore how the performance of
dyads changes over time.
2. Correctness of theories: Expertise is typically
characterized by the presence of a fully integrated
representation of the domain of expertise. Experts in
domains like physics reason better than novices, because
they are able to focus on deep relational aspects of the
situation rather than being derailed by surface aspects of the
task (e.g., Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). In the present
task, we expect that subjects who exhibit evidence of having
a correct theory of thermodynamics will perform the picture
selection task more accurately than those with fragmentary
knowledge of this domain.
3. Considered actions: When discussing an image, a dyad
could decide to classify it as one of the transformed images
or to retain the picture in the set that could be classified as
the unaltered thermal image. Considering a particular action
in relation to a particular picture singles that picture out and
temporarily makes it more salient than others. It may be that
mere consideration of an action, be it based on a correct or
incorrect theory, affects the decision by anchoring people on
a particular picture. That is, if a dyad starts out considering a
particular picture and spends extensive time and energy
discussing it, that investment alone may be sufficient to
influence the final choice.
4. Topics of discussion: As discussed above, temperature
and heat differ in their relationship to a correct theory of

thermodynamics. We will explore the relationship between
the topics discussed and people’s accuracy in classifying the
pictures to see whether talking about terms that are more
relevant to correct theories is related to accurate
performance.

Analysis and Results
Communication: A key part of the present task was that
dyads worked together to find the correct thermal image. As
a way of exploring accuracy on this task, we explore
differences between the dyads and the control group on their
accuracy in selecting the actual thermal image. This
analysis addressed the following questions: 1. Are dyads
performing better than singles? 2. Are there differences in
performance during the experiment? and 3. How does
performance of dyads change over time? An examination of
overall accuracy revealed that dyads were significantly more
accurate (M=7.3 (out of 12)) than were the people in the
control group who worked alone (M=5.3), t=3.1, p<.05.
Chance performance would be 3 correct out of 12. Both
groups performed reliably above chance.
To explore how the dyads differed from the control group
more carefully, we broke down the performance data into
four blocks of three trials. The accuracy for each block for
both conditions is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Accuracy by Blocks of Three Trials
proportional frequencies

The discussion topic code distinguished between five
different topics including discussions of abstract physical
principles, discussions of the thermal conductivity of
materials, and discussions of the internal mechanics of an
object depicted. Of these codes only two yielded enough
observations to warrant further analysis: 1). discussion of
temperature and 2). discussion of heat diffusion.
Temperature referred to explicit discussions of the
temperature at particular points in the image or to relative
temperatures at neighboring points. Discussions of heat
diffusion were cases in which people talked about the flow
of heat from one location to another or to the dissipation of
heat. Because naive theories often treat temperature as a
physical quantity (rather than a measure of mean molecular
kinetic energy), discussions of temperature are likely to be
associated with poor reasoning about thermal images (Wiser
& Carey, 1983). In contrast, discussions of heat flow and
thermodynamics are more likely to be related to an accurate
theory of thermodynamics, and so they should be associated
with good reasoning about thermal images.

2.2
2
1.8

singles

1.6

dyads

1.4
1.2
1
1

2

3

4

blocks

As we would expect if the people in each condition were
approximately equivalent in their expertise, performance in
the first block of trials is about the same in each group. The
groups diverge after the first block. By the second block,
the dyads are significantly more accurate (M=1.96) than the
singles (M=1.2), t= -2.66, p<.05. The performance of
singles does improve with practice, but this does not occur
until after the last block (M=1.65).
Theories and Actions: We now turn to the relationship
between type of action, correctness of theory and overall
accuracy. For this analysis, we first converted the frequency
of each combination of accuracy and theory correctness for
each dyad to a proportion. This conversion allowed us to
control for individual differences in the length and content
of dyads’ discussions. We expected that correctness of

Figure 2 Correct Theories and Actions by
Blocks of Three Trials

proportional
frequencies

0.9

correct
action
correct
theory

0.8

0.7

0.6
1

2

blocks

3

4

As shown in the graph, the pattern of change in the
consideration of correct actions and theories closely follows
that of the accuracy improvement pattern. The greatest
increase in the frequency of correct actions and theories
occurs between the first and the second quarters, followed
by a plateau thereafter. Looking at the proportional
frequency of correct actions considered on the basis of
correct theories and incorrect actions on the basis of
incorrect theories we see a similar separation.
Topics of Discussion: Finally, we can examine the
relationship between accuracy and topics discussed. As
described above, we are most interested in discussions of
temperature and heat flow. The relationship between the use
of these topics and accuracy is shown in Figure 3. As
expected, discussion of temperature is negatively related to
accuracy (r=-.43, p<.05) and discussion of diffusion of heat
is positively related to accuracy (r=.68, p<.05). This finding
reflects that temperature is a static quality of an image that
1

Correct action/incorrect theory code is not represented here
because it yielded very low frequencies as compared to frequencies
of other codes, and while the results are in the right direction, they
were not significant.

may signal an incorrect theory, while heat flow is a property
that is central to a correct theory of thermodynamics.

Figure 3: Topics of Discussion and
Accuracy
0.6
proportional frequencies

theories would be the major factor that determined accuracy.
However, this prediction was not borne out. As expected,
consideration of a correct action was positively related to
accuracy (r =. 58, p<.01). However, in contrast to our
expectations, consideration of an incorrect action was
negatively correlated with accuracy regardless of whether
the statement was accompanied by a correct or an incorrect
theory (r(incorrect action/incorrect theory, accuracy)=-.67;
r(incorrect action/correct theory, accuracy)=-.47, both
p<.05). If we examine correctness of action and correctness
of theory separately, we also find that correct actions are a
better predictor of accuracy than correct theories (r=.74,
p<.001 and r=.48, p<.05 respectively). 1
The changes in performance during the experiment may
be related to the consideration of correct actions and
theories over the course of the study. Figure 2 shows the
frequency with which correct actions and theories are
considered as a function of four performance blocks, each
consisting of three trials.

0.5
0.4
diffusion of
heat
temperature

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
2

4

6

8

10 12

accuracy
We can also look at the relationship between discussion
topic and the use of correct actions and correct theories. We
expect the discussion of temperature to be negatively related
to the use of the correct theory and to the selection of correct
actions.
Consistent with this prediction, there is a
relationship between the frequency of discussion of
temperature and the use of incorrect theories (r=.56, p<.05).
There is also a positive relationship between the frequency
of discussion of temperature and the consideration of
incorrect actions (r=.59, p<.05). In contrast, the frequency
of discussions of heat diffusion are related to the
consideration of correct actions (r=.52, p<.01) Contrary to
our expectation, no significant relationship was observed
between the frequency of discussion of heat diffusion and
the use of correct theories. This unexpected finding will be
discussed in more detail below.
Finally, the use of these topics was explored across the
four blocks of the experiment. While the frequency of
discussion of temperatures did not change over the course of
the experiment, there was an increase in the frequency of
discussion of diffusion of heat during the experiment.

Discussion
This research is the beginning of a line of research aimed
at exploring the development and use of mental models. In
order to get a view of people’s mental models (in this case
mental models of heat flow), we examined their interactions
in a task in which they selected an actual thermal image
from a set of doctored images of the same object. The
dyadic design allows us to get people to talk about their
mental models without having to resort to a an unnatural
task like a concurrent verbal protocol.
Any study involving transcripts of communication creates
a large amount of data, and we have necessarily covered
only a small fraction of what could be extracted from this
work. We have focused on four main issues here: 1) the

influence of causal theories on performance accuracy in a
problem solving task; 2) the relationship of considered
actions to causal theories, and their influence on accuracy in
a problem solving task; 3) the relationship between topics of
conversation and causal theories; 4) the qualitative change in
discussions and theories over time.
Theories and Actions: What sort of theories do people tend
to have about thermodynamics? The mean accuracy in this
task was 60.8%, which was well above chance. Thus,
people who had probably never seen a thermal image before
were pretty good at identifying actual images. While this
performance must have been based on some knowledge of
thermodynamics, it was not based on an accurate physical
theory. The data suggest that correct performance in the
task was influenced far more strongly by whether the dyad
considered correct actions (properly accepting or rejecting a
picture) than it was by the presence of accurate discussions
of physical principles.
There are (at least) two important reasons for this
finding. First, we defined the use of a correct theory as a
discussion that was internally consistent and did not
contradict basic principles of physics. It is quite likely,
however, that this definition is too restrictive. Many
people’s naive physical models are successful at predicting
performance in the world without necessarily embodying
principles from the science of physics. McCloskey (1983b)
points out that people’s naive theories are well-developed
conceptions that are useful for predicting the behavior of
objects in the world. However, these theories often conflict
with basic principles of physics. Further research must
explore ways of characterizing people’s naive theories of
thermodynamics. One task that we have begun to use that
has some promise is to give people a blank picture of a
scene (such as an outdoor scene during the winter at night)
and ask people to color the scene as if they were looking at
the heat coming off surfaces. Pilot research with this
technique suggests that it is capable of uncovering situations
where people’s mental model of heat differs from
scientifically accepted principles.
A second reason why the presence of a correct model of
heat did not always lead to correct performance is that
people may have a correct model of thermodynamics, but
may have some difficulty translating that model to thermal
images. For example, people often correctly recognize that
heat will escape from an open window if the room is warmer
than the surrounding area. However, they may mistakenly
expect the room to look cold in a thermal image, because it
would feel cold to be standing in this room with the open
window. In fact, such a room would look warm, as an infrachange in the frequency of discussions of diffusion of heat
followed the same pattern.
One factor that may account for the difference in the
learning curves has to do with the learning benefit associated
with constantly verbalizing one’s thoughts in a collaborative
process. Chi and her colleagues have successfully used talk

red camera would be seeing the heat energy escaping from
the room. Thus, people may understand principles of
thermodynamics but have difficulty transferring this
knowledge to thermal images.
Topics of Discussion: Another way to explore people’s
mental models is to look at the topics that get considered for
discussion. A key distinction involves differences between
discussions of temperature and discussions of heat flow.
Discussions of temperature were associated with lower
accuracy and less use of correct theories in this study. There
are two reasons why this relationship makes sense. First, to
the extent that people are treating temperature as a property
of objects rather than as a measure of heat energy, they are
subscribing to a mental model that is not in accord with
physical principles (Wiser & Carey, 1983). Second, even if
they recognize that temperature is a measure of mean
molecular kinetic energy, they are still focusing on an
attribute of an object. Reasoning about physical principles
also requires consideration of relational properties (e.g.,
Gentner, et al., 1997). Discussions of heat flow, in contrast,
reflect a discussion of relational properties of the domain.
An important aspect of heat is that it flows from high
temperature regions to low temperature regions. Focusing
on these relations is often useful for understanding how
thermal images are in error. In many cases, errors in thermal
images reflect situations in which heat is flowing in an
impossible way. The relations between locations are critical
for finding errors in images.
Heat flow should also generally be related to the use of a
correct theory of thermodynamics.
Contrary to this
expectation, there was no significant relationship between
discussions of heat flow in our data. This discrepancy
probably reflects the same problem raised above that our
coding scheme focused on theories that were both internally
consistent and in accord with physical principles. It is
possible that people’s models are fragmentary, and thus
prone to exhibit inconsistencies. Further work must address
this issue.
Communication: Another striking aspect of the data was
that dyads were significantly more accurate than were
people who performed the task alone. This difference in
accuracy manifested itself in a difference in performance
across blocks. The dyads showed the greatest improvement
in performance accuracy in the shift from the first block of
three trials to the next. In contrast, singles did improve until
the final block of three trials. The frequency of correct
actions and theories for dyads closely followed the pattern
of the performance curve. Similarly, the pattern of
out-loud protocols to study problem solving strategies in a
variety of tasks. One finding that emerged from this
methodology is the learning benefit of self-generated
explanations (Chi, 1989; 1993). Chi argues that learning
requires integration of existing knowledge with new
information and that the process of self-explanations

facilitates this integration. Self-explanations derived from
talk out-loud protocols have been shown to improve
understanding and to enhance learning (Chi, 1989, 1994;
Webb, 1989). High self-explainers display deeper
understanding and more complete mental models than low
self-explainers as assessed by ability to answer complex
questions. Chi argues that the beneficial effect of selfexplanations is partly due to the fact that self-explaining is
essentially a constructive activity. Self explanations provide
an opportunity to construct new declarative knowledge and
to generate new rules that can subsequently be used to solve
complex problems. In our study, dyads are forced by the
nature of the task to engage in explanatory activity from the
very outset. Since the task itself is novel, there is a strong
demand to integrate and adopt an existing knowledge and to
construct new rules appropriate for the task at hand. To the
extent that self-explanation is a constructive activity, the
construction of the new knowledge structure needed to
succeed on the task is started from the very onset of the task
through self-explanations and explanations designed for the
partner. No similar demand was placed on the singles
performing the task. They were not required to verbalize
their strategies, although it is interesting to note that a few
subjects had spontaneously attempted to think out-loud in
the course of the study, and had to be stopped by the
experimenter. Thus, while the same mental process of selfexplaining may be going on in the minds of the singles, there
is no experimental constraint to facilitate it. This may
account for the delay in improvement among singles. The
learning benefit of self-explanations and explanations
generated for the partner has not been explored in the
context of referential communication design. We believe
that it offers a potent medium to explore these issues.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by AFOSR grant F49620-97-10155 given to the second author.

References
Chi, M., & Koeske, R. (1983). Network representation of a
child’s dinosaur knowledge. Developmental Psychology,
19, 29-39.
Chi, M., Hutchinson, J. E., & Robin A. F. (1989). How
inferences about novel domain-related concepts can be
constrained by structured knowledge. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 35(1), 27-62.
Chi, M. & Slotta, J. (1993). The ontological coherence of
intuitive physics. Cognition & Instruction, 10, 249-260.
Chi, M., Slotta, J. D. & de Leeuw, N. (1994). From things to
processes: A theory of conceptual change for learning
science concepts. Learning & Instruction, 4(1), 27-43.
Clement, J. (1982). Students’ preconceptions in
introductory mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 50,
66-70.

Cooke, N. J. & Breedin, S. D. (1994). Constructing naïve
theories of motion on the fly. Memory & Cognition, 22(4),
474-493.
diSessa, A.A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G.Forman &
P. Pufall (Eds.), Constructivism in computer age.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
diSessa, A. A. (1993) Toward an epistemology of physics.
Cognition & Instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.
Garrod, S., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation, coordination and convention: An empirical investigation of
how groups establish linguistic conventions. Cognition.
53(3), 181-215.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R., Markman, A.;
Levidow, B. ; Wolff, P. Forbus, K. Analogical reasoning
and conceptual change: A case study of Johannes Kepler.
Journal of the Learning Sciences. 6(1), 1997, 3-40.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A.N. (1997). Words, thoughts, and
theories. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kuhn, D., (1991) The skills of argument. Cambridge
University Press.
Malt, B.C. (1995). Category coherence in cross-cultural
perspective. Cognitive Psychology. 29(2), 85-148.
McCloskey, M. (1983a). Intuitive physics. Scientific
American, pp. 122-130.
McCloskey, M. (1983b).Naïve theories of motion. In
D.Genter and A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., & Green, B. (1980).
Curvilinear motion in the absence of external forces:
Naïve beliefs about the motion of objects. Science, 210,
1139-1141.
Murphy, G. L. & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92(3),
289-316.
Ueno, N. (1993). Reconstructing P-prim theory from the
viewpoint of situated cognition. Cognition and
Instruction, 10(2-3), 239-248.
Webb, N.M. (1989). Peer interactions and learning in small
groups. International Journal of Education Research, 13,
21-39.
Wiser, M., & Carey, S. (1983). When heat and temperature
were one. In D. Gentner & A.L. Stevens (Eds.) Mental
models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

