UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Viewpoint Dependent Facial Expressions Recognition Japanese Noh Masks and the Human
Face

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/75b8n859

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Lyons, Michael J.
Plante, Andre
Kamachi, Miyui
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Viewpoint Dependent Facial Expression Recognition
Japanese Noh Masks and the Human Face
Michael J. Lyons , Andre Plante , Miyuki Kamachi , & Shigeru Akamatsu
(mlyons@mic.atr.co.jp)
Advanced Telecommunications Research International
Media Integration & Communications Research Lab
Human Information Processing Research Lab
2-2 Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan, 619-0288






Ruth Campbell & Mike Coleman
r.campbell@ucl.ac.uk
Dept. of Human Communication Science, University College London
Chandler House, 2 Wakefield St, London WC1 N 1 PG
Abstract
With certain masks used in Japanese Noh drama the apparent
facial expression is a function of the vertical viewing angle.
Rotation in depth produces changes in the retinal image of the
face which viewers may confound with the distortion of features due to muscular action. In particular, as the mask is tilted
forward it appears to smile, and as it is tilted backwards it appears sad. We explored this effect in two experiments with a
Noh mask and one with a 3-D model of a laser-scanned human
face. Separate British and Japanese subject pools were used to
investigate cross-cultural effects. The results confirmed a systematic relationship between vertical angle of view and judged
affect. For the Noh mask the effect was culturally moderated,
whereas for the human face there was no significant effect of
of culture. These results are discussed and interpreted in terms
of perceptual strategies for processing familiar and unfamiliar
faces.

Introduction
A variety of visual cues inform the viewer of affect. Muscular action of the face (Ekman & Friesen, 1978), causing
feature displacement and consequent wrinkling of the skin,
conveys the most salient information. Visible changes in skin
hue caused by modulation of blood flow are also telling signs
to internal state. A further source of information about affect
is delivered by body posture: positive affect is accompanied
by an upright posture with the head held high and negative
states may be signaled by a bowed head and crouched posture (Darwin, 1872).
Visual processing of the feature displacement and textural
cues to face muscular action requires a representation sensitive to the fine metric properties of the spatial patterns on the
surface on the face (Lyons et al., 1999, 2000). Rotation and
translation of the head in 3-D space accompanying vertical
movements of the head or changes in viewpoint, distort configural relations on the face as they appear in the 2-D projection of the face on the retina. Indeed the signals from facial
muscle action and head posture conflict. Affect should be
judged relatively positively in a head held up and back. Under frontal viewing conditions, tilting the head backwards reduces upward curvature of the mouth in the 2-D projection of

Figure 1: Magojiro mask used in the Japanese Noh drama.

the face, giving the impression of a sadder or negative expression. Tilting the head forward, a negative head posture signal,
increases upward curvature of mouth - which usually accompanies the muscular action signaling a smile. It is therefore
interesting to ask whether the changes due to rigid displacement of the head interferes with the interpretation of featural
and textural cues due to muscular action of the face. Our
interest in this question was stimulated when we learned of
an illusion of facial expression perception involving masks
(figure 1) used in Japanese traditional Noh drama (Komparu,
1983). It has been known for centuries in the Noh theater
that certain masks, particularly those used to portray young
female roles, appear to change expression as the vertical inclination of the mask changes (figure 2). Tilt the mask for-

ward and it appears to smile; tilt it backwards and it appears
sad.
Is this phenomenon evidence for a lack of invariance of the
facial expression recognition system under rigid transformations? Or are special techniques employed by the mask carver
and Noh actor to trick the visual system into mistaking a rigid
rotation of the mask for a non-rigid distortion of its internal
features? We conducted three experiments to investigate the
following questions (1) Do changes in vertical inclination in
fact generate different perceptions of affect? (2) Is the effect
culturally moderated or does it depend on familiarity with the
mask? (3) Is the effect particular to the Noh mask or does it
generalize to the human face?

Materials and Methods
Stimuli
Stimuli for Experiment 1 consisted of photographs of a Noh
mask (figure 2) at 13 inclinations, from -30 to +30 in equal
5 increments. An antique Magojiro mask, used for young
female roles, dating to the Edo period (1600-1868) was photographed on a Noh stage under lighting conditions similar
to what would be used during a performance. The mask was
photographed from a frontal viewpoint using a digital camera
(Kodak Professional DCS 460) from a distance of 7.7m with a
200 mm lens. The 3060x2036 pixel 24-bit color images were
cropped and re-sampled to 300x400 pixel tiff images. Stimuli
for Experiment 2 (figure 3) comprised the same images, but
cropped so as to emphasize the internal features of the face.
Stimuli for Experiment 3 (figure 4) were derived from the
head and face of a 30 year old Japanese female model posing
a neutral expression similar to that of the Noh mask. A Cyberware 3030 Color 3-D scanner was used to acquire shape
and color information of the model' s head. The 24-bit RGB
color map was acquired under room light from an overhead
fluorescent lamp. Screen captures were taken at 13 (virtual)
head inclinations from a reconstructed 3-D model of the head,
the face oriented frontally and saved as 24-bit 300x400 pixel
tiff images. The vertical viewing angles varied from -30 to
+30 in equal 5 increments. Inter-ocular distance and eye
position were normalized for each stimulus set and matched
across sets.












Experimental Procedure
Experiments were run in separate laboratories in London and
Kyoto. In each case the stimuli were displayed on a 17 inch
24-bit color computer monitor in a slightly darkened room.
Viewing distance was approximately 60 cm. Following a
practice trial, four epochs of all 13 stimuli were presented in
succession, with presentation order randomized within each
epoch. Presentation order was as follows: fixation point (500
ms) - blank (400 ms) - stimulus (300 ms). Subjects were instructed to respond whether the stimulus face appeared happy
or sad by pressing the left or right shift key. Japanese subjects were instructed in Japanese using the terms “yorokobi”
and “kanashimi”. Left/right assignment of response keys

was counterbalanced across subjects. The words “happy” and
“sad” (in English for both subject groups) appeared on the
response-appropriate side of the screen for each subject to
maintain correct response orientation. All Japanese subjects
were familiar with the English terms. Reaction times and decision type were recorded automatically for each subject for
each trial.

Subject Pool
Different subjects were run for each of the three experiments.
There were 5 females and 5 males from each cultural group
for each experiment, making 60 subjects in total. Subjects
were undergraduates, graduates and staff from Doshisha University, Kyoto and University College London. Ages ranged
from 18 to 50 years. All had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. All were either native to the country of testing or had
first-school education in that country. The Japanese subjects
were familiar with Noh masks as images or, occasionally, objects. None of the UK subjects had familiarity with Noh or
had visited Japan.

Results
All three experiments had the same mixed, 3-factor repeated
measures design. There were 13 levels of the first factor
(inclination), which varied within subjects, and one level
of the first between-subjects factor (culture) and the second
between-subjects factor (gender). Both RTs and response (as
the proportion of “happy” responses over 4 trials) were examined. Following initial analysis, in which the full range
of scores were examined, only the seven mid-range scores
(-15 to + 15 ) in the following treatment. Preliminary
data analysis confirmed parametric, normal distributions of
the scores reported here. There were no significant differences in the pattern of results when the full range was included. However, the full-range analyses may be less reliable
due to non-Gaussian distribution of scores at some of the endpoints. RT (medians) showed no systematic relationship to
the other variables, and are not reported here. Gender had no
effect on any of the analyses and effects of gender were not
considered further. Table 1 outlines the significant finding for
each experiment. The relevant graphs are shown in figure 5.
These analyses show a significant linear relationship between
angle of inclination and rated happiness for all three experiments. The Noh mask, but not the scanned face, is classified
differently by Japanese and British viewers. Further analyses and their justification in terms of individual experimental
hypotheses are reported below.




Experiment 1 - Full Mask
The experimental hypothesis was that the Noh mask would
generate changes in perceived affect as a function of vertical
angle. The perception of facial expressions is thought to be
similar for our two cultural groups (Matsumoto, 1992), hence
similar results were expected for the two subject groups.
The results confirmed the predictions in general terms,
but with some important deviations. The groups differed in

Figure 2: Stimuli for Experiment 1. Edo-period Magojiro mask at 13 different vertical inclinations.

Figure 3: Sample stimuli for Experiment 2. Same images as in figure 2 but with the edges of the mask cropped to highlight
internal features. Images from left to right show the mask at inclinations of -15 , 0 , and 15 .






Figure 4: Sample stimuli for experiment 3. Images captured from rendered 3-D model of a Japanese female face obtained using
a Cyberware laser scanner. Images from left to right show the face at inclinations of -15 , 0 , and 15 .


the inclination at which a “neutral” expression is perceived.
Japanese viewers rated the back-tilted mask more positively
than British viewers. This may reflect different boundaries
in terms of perceived facial expression on the categories of
“happy” and “sad” and their cognates in Japanese or lower
rates of sadness recognition for Japanese viewers. We address this further in Experiment 3. A second unexpected finding is that the groups differed in the linearity of the relationship with inclination angle (interaction of group and inclination was highly significant). While the relationship was linear
over this range for the British subjects, for the Japanese subjects, the proportion of “happy” responses peaked at 5 , and
then dipped. At 15 , mean “happy” response was no greater
than at -10 . Why should this change in perceived expression occur? One possibility is that the Japanese viewers were
more sensitive to postural cues in the images of the head. A
head bowed forwards may be seen as “sadder”. Perhaps the
two subjects groups weight the posture and internal features
cues differently. For the Noh mask images used, pose cues
are most visible in the disposition of the top of the head and
the chin with change in inclination of the head.






emerged between Japanese and British viewers. The group
difference may indicate that the terms “happiness” and “sadness” in English and Japanese do not share similar extensions.
This would suggest that Japanese may be more willing than
British viewers to ascribe “happiness” (a socially acceptable
facial signal) to a relatively “unhappy” face, despite the apparent reversal of this pattern for masks at high forward tilt.
If this were so, we would expect a similar disparity between
groups to emerge when images of natural faces are perceived.
Experiment 3 explores this possibility.

Experiment 3 - Human Face





Experiment 2 - Cropped Mask
In this experiment, the face images were cropped to diminish cues to head pose and emphasize internal features of the
face (figure 3). The experimental prediction was that this
may eliminate the non-linearity in the relationship between
perceived expression and vertical inclination in the Japanese
viewers. The results supported this. In this study, the “dip” at
greater positive inclinations was greatly reduced. Thus it appears that Japanese viewers take account of cues to head pose
in ascribing expression to the image of the vertically inclined
mask.
Otherwise, experiment 2 replicates the main findings of
experiment 1: a linear relationship between angle of inclination and judged expression; as well as a group difference

This experiment used stimuli generated from a 3-D laser scan
of a human face (figure 4) to explore the question: do group
differences in ascribing expression to a cultural artifact, the
Noh mask, extend to natural face images? If they do, we may
infer that cultural and linguistic interpretations of facial expression may differ between these groups. If they do not, then
the Noh mask may have special perceptual status for Japanese
viewers. The findings strongly support the latter conclusion. The relationship between inclination angle and happysad judgments was to all purposes identical in both groups.
Mann-Whitney non-parametric t-tests explored group differences at each orientation point. None approached significance. We can conclude that the Noh mask effects reported
in Experiments 1 and 2, including both the dip in the function
at high angles of forward tilt and the “happier” classification
at most other angles, reflected a cultural phenomenon - but
one related to perceptual processing differences between the
groups. Though the laser-scanned face did not replicate the
lighting conditions of the naturally photographed images used
in Experiments 1 and 2, the relationship between inclination
and judged expression still held, suggesting that the difference in lighting differences did not contribute notably to the
illusion for this set of conditions.

Table 1: Summary of F values, separate ANOVAs for each experiment (SPSS GLM).

Experiment 1
Full Mask
Experiment 2
Cropped Mask
Experiment 3
Scanned Face

F(6,216)
Main effect of
inclination

F(1,36)
Main
effect
of group

10.5
p 0.001
23.9
p 0.001
14.96
p 0.001

NS





5.27
p 0.05
NS







Mean Response

0.5

0

-0.5

British
Japanese

-1
-20 -15 -10 -5 0
5 10
Inclination (degrees)

15

20

15

20

15

20

1
(b) Cropped Mask

Mean Response

0.5

0

-0.5

British
Japanese

-1
-20 -15 -10 -5 0
5 10
Inclination (degrees)
1
(c) Scanned Face

Mean Response

0.5



0

-0.5

F(1,36)
Main effect of
inclination
Linear trend
15.33
p 0.01
55.77
p 0.001
36.88
p 0.001




F(1,36)
Group
x
inclination
Quadratic fit
7.56
p 0.01
3.47
p 0.01
NS




Discussion
(a) Full Mask





x



1



F(6,216)
Group
inclination
interaction
4.67
p 0.001
3.47
p 0.01
NS

British
Japanese

-1
-20 -15 -10 -5 0
5 10
Inclination (degrees)

Figure 5: Mean response versus vertical inclination for the 3
experiments.

The three experiments confirmed that the angle of vertical inclination of a face profoundly influences a simple expression
discrimination task: faces tilted down have a happier cast than
those tilted back. This may be understood in terms of the projection of the three-dimensional facial surface onto the image.
An earlier study (Cavanagh et al., 1988) noted the effect as
an example of the failure of shape constancy under rotation
in depth. Another study (Kappas et al., 1994) looked at viewpoint dependence of facial expression recognition using video
clips of posed dynamic expressions as well as a schematic
wire-frame model of the face, both quite different from the
Noh mask stimuli and scanned face used here. However, that
work did not attempt to look at facial expression cues separately from pose cues, as in experiment 2, or study different
cultural groups.
A surprising but consistent (40 subjects altogether) finding
was that the Noh mask elicited different responses in the two
cultural groups. The skilled processing of faces has typically
been described as configurational (Diamond & Carey, 1986;
Young et al., 1987). That is, skilled viewers take account
of the various face features and their disposition in coming
to a unified account of the identity or reading of the face.
Their reading of the face cannot be predicted on the basis of
local featural detail. One possibility is that familiarity may
have delivered a greater degree of configural processing for
the mask in Japanese than British viewers, for the Noh mask
occasionally appears in the Japanese media, though an understanding of Noh, or interest in Noh as a tradition is no longer
widespread in the Japanese population. One local feature that
reliably signals “happy-sad” is the curvature of the mouth. It
is possible that British viewers of the Noh mask took account
of this feature alone. For Japanese viewers, other aspects of
the face may have moderated the effect. Only further experiments will indicate what facial aspects these may be.
At the outset of these studies, we speculated that the threedimensional structure of the Noh mask and the disposition of
the painted features, may be intentionally designed to elicit
changes of perceived expression with small changes in pose.
Examination of the 3-D structure of the mask showed, for
example, that the depth of the mouth region is exaggerated

