UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Was Apatosaurus a Vegan? Dinosaur Knowledge Rocks When Learning About Evolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qb7c61g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Authors
Kaufman, David R.
Ranney, Michael
Lewis, Eric
et al.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Was Apatosaurus a Vegan?
Dinosaur Knowledge Rocks When Learning About Evolution
David R. Kaufman (davek@socrates.berkeley.edu), Michael Ranney (ranney@cogsci.berkeley.edu),
Eric Lewis (eslewis@aol.com), and Anna Thanukos (thanukos@socrates.berkeley.edu)
Cognition and Development, Graduate School of Education 4533 Tolman Hall
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Sarah Brem (sarah.brem@asu.edu)
Division of Psychology in Education; P.O. Box 870611
Arizona State University; Tempe, AZ 85287
Abstract
We present the results of an experiment involving a
curriculum designed to foster conceptual changes,
generative understandings, and coherent evolutionary
explanations. This middle school curriculum highlights
dinosaur knowledge due to its intrinsic interest to students
and its compatibility with the objectives of integrating
several concepts (e.g., variation and heredity) into a
coherent natural selection schema. The domain also allows
one to communicate an understanding of the process of
evolutionary change across geologic time. Students in a
class that received the curriculum exhibited significantly
greater gains than did a control class, across a range of
problem types. Further, the subjects in the conceptual
change classroom appear to be less prone to generating the
kinds of explanations that directly conflict with Darwinian
patterns of reasoning.

Introduction
Transfer is one of the most widely investigated
phenomena in both cognitive science and science education.
Arguably, the most important goal of education is to foster
the transfer of knowledge and skills. Similarly, any learning
theory worth its salt must include mechanisms of transfer.
From some perspectives, studies of transfer have often
yielded dismal results (Detterman, 1993). However, as one
might expect, increasing any salient similarity between
training and the transfer materials increases the probability
that transfer will occur (Bassok & Holyoak, 1993) as does
selecting a source domain in which the subjects have
substantial prior knowledge (Kaufman, Patel, & Magder,
1996).
Evolution is a central unifying theory in modern biology,
contributes to a foundation for learning across biological
sciences, and provides a basis for understanding the
interrelationships among all organisms. However, evolution
remains a polarizingly controversial and poorly understood
subject that typically receives a minimal amount of class
time (Working Group on Teaching Evolution, 1998). In
addition, evolutionary concepts are often taught as a set of
discrete ideas, rather than as a central integrative topic
(Sharman, 1994). Several recent studies have documented a
range of misconceptions and erroneous beliefs in students’
understandings of evolutionary concepts and their resistance

to instructional effects. Many individuals regard evolution as
a need-driven, adaptive teleological process, whereby
organisms change traits in response to some environmental
pressure (Bishop & Anderson, 1990). Some see evolution as
Lamarckian, in which an organism passes on to its offspring
characteristics that are acquired during its lifetime
(Samarapungavan & Wiers, 1997). These teleological and
Lamarckian beliefs conflict with Darwinian theory of
evolution by natural selection theory, an essential
component of modern biological understanding.
Why is evolution such a difficult topic for students to
master? In our view, the development of evolutionary
competence is predicated on the following four factors
(Kaufman, Ranney, Thanukos, & Brem, 1999). 1)
Conceptual Knowledge: evolutionary knowledge involves
the complex integration of concepts from several biological
disciplines, including genetics, ecology, and paleontology.
2) Reasoning and argumentation: evolutionary reasoning
makes formidable demands on the process of coordinating
evidence and hypotheses; part of the problem concerns the
unique nature of evolutionary explanation, which often
requires reasoning about historical narratives rather than
proximate (Kaufman, et al, 1998). 3) Epistemological
commitments: students’ views concerning the nature of
science and of the biological world affect their
understandings of evolution (Rudolph & Stewart, 1998). 4)
Discourse practices: as in all sciences, there are ways of
constructing explanations and using communication that are
sanctioned or eschewed by the domain; students have
considerable difficulty mastering mechanistic causal
explanations and often use scientific terms, such as
adaptation, inappropriately.
What are the ultimate objectives of an introductory
evolutionary curriculum designed for middle school students?
As with other sciences, the goals are to promote robust
conceptual understanding and durable transfer. That is, we
do not want students to learn merely about the evolution of
dinosaurs, insects or other sets of organisms. We want
students to begin to “own” Darwinian patterns of reasoning
and apply them flexibly in multiple contexts. Ohlsson's
(1993) notion of an abstract schema allows us to sharpen
our intuitions about transfer. Such a schema encodes the
structure of an explanation, rather than its content. The

Method

following schema, adapted from Ohlsson, illustrates the
notion of a Darwinian explanation pattern:
•
•
•
•
•

There exists a species that varies randomly on a set of
heritable characteristics.
An environmental pressure (from imperceptible to
catastrophic) will favor individuals (regarding survival)
with certain traits.
The selection mechanism operates such that these
individuals are more likely to reproduce and pass on
their traits to offspring.
Therefore, more individuals in the next generation will
possess the favored trait and the relative distribution of
the trait will increase.
Over many generations (i.e., hundreds or thousands),
these small changes in traits accumulate and may
eventually substantially modify the characteristics of the
species.

This natural selection schema is potentially applicable to
any organism and can be articulated by instantiating the
appropriate slots (e.g., favored traits, and environmental
pressure). The schema embodies both core conceptual
knowledge and the relational argument structure that
constitutes natural selection. Mastery of this explanation
form across several domains would constitute strong
evidence for transfer. Of course, a mere syntactic mapping is
not all that is required; the use of this abstract schema
requires substantial biological knowledge and development
of the aforementioned factors that comprise evolutionary
competency.
We sought to develop a curriculum that (a) specifically
targets conceptual knowledge and reasoning/argumentation,
and (b) engages students’ prior knowledge in a domain of
student interest. Chi and colleagues (Gobbo & Chi, 1986;
Chi, Hutchinson, & Robbins, 1989) demonstrated that
young children have substantial dinosaur knowledge and can
employ this knowledge to make inferences about the
organisms’ diets, habitats, and locomotion. In addition,
many middle school students have a basic mastery of the
concepts required to learn natural selection (e.g., inheritance,
biodiversity, variation, and prey/predation), but they lack an
organizing schema for understanding evolution (Ash &
Brown, 1996). It was hypothesized that knowledge of
dinosaurs would represent a generative source domain in
order to impart a robust understanding of evolution. Further,
the study of dinosaurs exemplifies the historical/narrative
dimension of evolutionary reasoning and the process of
evidence gathering from the fossil record. In general, greater
subject matter knowledge increases the likelihood of transfer
since both entities (i.e., dinosaurs) and ecological processes
(e.g., predator/prey relations) are familiar in this context.
There is less need for negotiating new terminology and other
unfamiliar surface features. This domain may also serve to
foster epistemological commitments regarding the
transitional state of knowledge, since new fossil finds and
concomitant hypotheses are regularly brought to the public’s
attention.

Participants
Two seventh grade classes from an urban, ethnically diverse,
public school participated. The experimental and control
classes included 21 and 27 students, respectively.

Procedure
Pretest: In the first of the study’s three phases, each class
was given a dinosaur knowledge test followed by two
evolutionary knowledge tests. The dinosaur test consisted of
39 questions that evaluated students’ abilities to identify
dinosaurs from pictures, draw inferences about the dinosaurs’
diets from both pictures and dinosaur names, match dinosaur
names to descriptions of dinosaurs, order events on a timeline, and, respond to Likert items about dinosaurs. The
evolution tests assessed students’ understandings of related
concepts. The two tests respectively consisted of seven
Likert items, followed by eight short essay questions
(/problems). The evolution tests assessed students’
knowledge of heredity, variation, selection pressure, survival
advantage, and mutation. The test questions involved a
variety of animal contexts including birds, humans, and
dinosaurs. There were three types of essay questions,
involving natural selection, conditions of adaptational
change, and common ancestry. An example of an essay
problem addressing natural selection is “Apatosaurus was a
dinosaur that had a long neck (longer than modern giraffes).
The ancestors of all Apatosaurs had short necks (similar to
necks of horses). Please explain how Apatosaurs came to
have long necks.” The conditions of adaptational change
questions can best be answered by discussing functional
adaptation and the time scale for such adaptations to appear.
An example of this type of problem is: "If there were a
sudden drought that killed off most edible plants, could a
cow start to eat other animals instead of plants? Explain
why or why not." The common ancestry questions addressed
the salient similarity and differences among ancestral and
contemporary species. The following problem is an
example: Ostriches are large birds that cannot fly. The Rhea
and the Emu are in the same family of birds – they are very
closely related genetically. Interestingly, Ostriches are found
in Africa, the Rhea live in South America, and the Emu live
in Australia. How can you explain that these birds, which
cannot fly, are found on different continents? "
Instruction: In the next phase of the study, the two
classes participated in divergent eight-day evolution units. In
the experimental class, hands-on activities, illustrations, and
lectures were constructed to illustrate scientists’ conceptions
of dinosaur life. (Each lesson included at least one hands-on
activity, an interactive discussion, and independent thinking
assignments.) The curriculum addressed a range of topics:
heredity, variation in the environment, mutation, extinction,
and variation among individuals in a population. Explicit
examples were provided to model how students could transfer
evolution concepts to other animal species. This curriculum
was created and taught by the teacher-researcher, a Masters

student who had prior experience teaching the students in
this classroom (Lewis, 1999). This instructor used a
constructivist pedagogy, largely modeled after Minstrell’s
instructional approach (van Zee & Minstrell, 1997).
Minstrell is noted for introducing a new topic with a
“benchmark lesson.” He attempts to discover what students
know about a topic, and tries to evaluate which of the
different facets of the larger concept are understood or
misunderstood.
The control class was taught by its regular teacher. He
had over 25 years of teaching experience and taught in a
traditional didactic manner while relying on the textbook.
Students were responsible for taking accurate notes and
answering the questions that appeared in the text. The
control class drew on a range of organisms to illustrate the
process of how life changes over time and evidence for these
changes.
Posttest: The final phase of the study measured what
students learned by again assessing dinosaur and evolution
knowledge. The dinosaur test was essentially identical to the
original test except for the order of questions. The evolution
posttest used analogous (structurally isomorphic) and
questions that were identical to those on the pretest. The
evolution posttest was thus designed to assess the students’
basic learning and their ability to transfer evolutionary
knowledge to novel contexts.
Analyses: The Likert questions were initially scored on a
seven point scale, based on the "correctness" of answers, and
then scaled to fractions of a single point. The essay
questions were scored and weighted for difficulty, according
to a modified version of a rubric created by Kaufman, et al
(1999). The coding criteria are similar to those used by
Ferrari and Chi (1997) and Ohlsson (1990). For example, on
the natural selection questions, explanations were coded for
clear expressions (i.e., not merely jargon usage) of 1)
variation,
2)
selection
pressure
(environmental
contingencies),
3)
survival
advantage
(adaptive
characteristics) and 4) heredity. A subset of the 16 questions
was rescored by a second reader, resulting in an interrater
reliability of 94%.

Results
The results indicate that both control and experimental
classes exhibited various gains. A multivariate repeated
measures analysis of variance was performed, with the three
tests serving as the dependant variables and class as the
independent variable. The analysis revealed a main effect for
class (F(1,46)=6.24, p<.05) with the experimental class
performing better than the control class. There was also a
significant temporal effect, indicating that subjects
performed better on the posttests (F(1,46)=100.79, p<.001).
In addition, there was a significant time by class interaction
(F(1,46)=19.46, p<.001) with the experimental class
exhibiting a larger gain.
The overall results, presented in Table 1, reveal that both
classes had considerable and comparable prior dinosaur
knowledge, averaging 70% (F(1,46)=1.19, n.s.) on the

dinosaur pretest. The evolutionary knowledge pretest
indicated even more similarity between the experimental and
control classes, averaging 67% (F( 1,46)=.28, n.s.) over the
Likert questions and 23% (F(1,46)=.002, n.s.) over the essay
questions. Both classes improved on the evolution posttests,
averaging 77% of the Likert questions’ points
(F(1,46)=37.26, p<.001) and 39% of the essay questions’
points (F(1,46)=67.70, p<.001)
Not surprisingly, the experimental class demonstrated a
significantly greater increase on the dinosaur posttest than
the control group (F(1,46)=9.660, p<.005). More
importantly, the experimental class showed a greater gain on
both the Likert (F(1,46)=7.60; p<.01) and the essay
(F(1,46)=6.43; p<.02) evolution tests. In concert with the
view of dinosaur knowledge as an anchor for learning, an
exploratory regression analysis to determine the predictors of
the evolution essay posttest showed the dinosaur pretest to
be the best predictor, accounting for over 30% of the
variance.
Further exploration (Table 2) of the three essay questions
that most involved natural selection reveal very modest
pretest performance; the mean score for the experimental
class was 12% (SD = 9%), while that for the control class
was 16% (SD = 10%). However, during the posttest, the
mean for the experimental class grew to 35% (SD = 16%),
while the mean for the control class was 22% (SD = 19%).
Table 2 also illustrates the breakdown of these three essay
responses into the four natural selection criteria. The results
indicate that students generated responses that accounted for
selection pressures 36% of the time, whereas students only
discussed the role of heredity in natural selection 8% of the
time. The experimental class demonstrated several notable
gains regarding the criteria (particularly, mutation/variation,
which grew from 11% to 54%), whereas the gains of the
control class were generally more modest. Consider the
following
student
responses,
regarding
why
apatosaurs/giraffes had longer necks than their ancestors:
A7 Pretest
They need to reach the food at the top of trees and
they evolved with longer and longer necks.
A7 Posttest
"There was a random mutation and one baby had a
long neck some of its baby will have long neck too.
Then soemthing in there environment or surrounds
change i.e. Food is higher in the trees making it
good to have a long neck because food is harder to
get the ones with the short necks die leving only
ones with long necks. They mate and then there are
more long neck and this keeps happing."
A13 Pretest
I think that apatosaurs came to have longer necks by
evolution. Over time, they got bigger and bigger.
A13 Posttest
RANDOM MUTATION! Giraffes may have had
offspring that, purely by luck, had long necks.
Maybe food on the floor of the forest was

diminishing and the long necked giraffes got food
from high up. The short neck giraffes probably died
of starvation. Then when only long necks were left,
long necks had to reporduce. If longnecks mated
they'd produce other long necks, until present day
giraffes were known for their long necks.

evolutionary concepts and at least rudimentary mastery of
the appropriate form of a natural selection explanation. In
spite of the differential learning successes exhibited by the
experimental class, their explanations were still rather
modest or inconsistent, as evidenced by their evolution
posttest essays and their natural selection question
responses. These results are consistent with other studies
(e.g., Ohlsson, 1990; Bishop & Anderson, 1990) that
documented persistent difficulties in students’ (from middle
school to college) reasoning about natural selection.

The pretest responses often invoked the notion of "need"
with no real sense of mechanisms. On the posttest, the
subjects expressed more sophisticated understandings of

T a b l e 1 . Mean percentages and standard deviations (parentheses) for all tests and classes.
Dinosaur
Dinosaur
Evolution
Evolution
Evolution
Evolution
Pretest
Posttest
Pretest
Posttest
Pretest
Posttest
Likert
Likert
Essay
Essay
Exp.
73 (17)
85 (14)
68 (8)
84 (10)
23 (12)
45 (18)
n=21
Cont.
n=27

68 (17)

70 (17)

66 (12)

72 (14)

23 (11)

35 (16)

Total

70 (16)

76 (16)

67 (11)

77 (13)

23 (11)

39 (17)

Table 2. Percentages of natural selection essay responses with respect to aspects of the coding criteria.
Experimental
Control
Pretest
Posttest
Pretest
Posttest
Totals
M/V
11
54
20
15
25
SP

25

41

28

48

36

SA

6

27

12

20

16

HE

6

19

4

4

8

Mean
12 (9)
35 (16)
16 (10)
22 (19)
21(12)
Code: M/V: Mutation/Variation, SP: Selection Pressure, SA: Survival Advantage, HE: Heredity.
Table 3. Percentages of some non-Darwinian essay responses.
Experimental
Control
Pretest

Posttest

Pretest

Posttest

Lamarckian

4

3

4

7

Teleological

10

7

10

18

Amechanistic

24

14

21

24

Total

38

24

35

49

Students often exhibit patterns of reasoning that are
inconsistent with Darwinian explanations. When possible,
non-Darwinian response patterns were classified as
Lamarckian, Teleological, or Amechanistic (absence of
mechanism), as shown in Table 3. Note that there were
many responses that were not fully consonant with a
Darwinian explanation, yet were not classifiable according to

this coding scheme. Lamarckian explanations implying the
passing of acquired traits to progeny. For example, a student
from the experimental class explained, "I think that maybe
the cheetahs hunted animals that started to get fast and run
away. The cheetahs had to adapt and run faster to catch their
food. As their prey began to lead them on chases, their speed
increased. Over time, their muscles probably just got bigger

and stronger (because they worked them so much). Now,
cheetahs run very fast, and can catch gazelles and impalas
and zebras and antelop." Teleological explanations suggest
that need causes evolutionary change. A control class student
envisioned changes in the eating habits of a cow if there
were suddenly no grass to eat: “I think that they would just
get so hungry they would start with insects and move their
way up to fish.” Another student, during the control class’s
posttest, explained that giraffe necks are so long “Because
the giraffes had to stretch their necks to reach the trees for
food.” Amechanistic explanations indicate that evolution
simply happens. In explaining why cheetahs became faster,
one control class student stated “they had adapted to the prey
getting faster. Through evolution.” While some nonDarwinian explanations merely reflect an inability to express
ideas maturely or the absence of specific biological
knowledge, they may also indicate an inability to construct
reasonable Darwinian arguments with their existing
knowledge of evolution.
Table 3 also illustrates ways in which the two classes,
while performing rather similarly on the pretest, differ when
it comes to posttest response patterns. The experimental
class’s non-Darwinian responding went from 38% to 24%,
while the control class’s non-Darwinian responding moved
in the opposite direction, from 35% to 49%. One of the
central goals of the experimental curriculum was to foster
effective Darwinian reasoning, and the results suggest
modest success in that regard. Further, the results suggest
that instruction may even foster more problematic patterns
of reasoning.

Discussion
Recently, innovative curricula have targeted different
facets of student difficulty regarding understanding evolution.
The present study suggests that a conceptual change
evolution curriculum anchored in the domain of dinosaur
knowledge can promote the integration of core concepts and
foster more effective Darwinian reasoning. Dinosaurs seem
to be a good choice as an anchor for a contextualized
curriculum. Dinosaur knowledge has been established to be
relatively high among middle school students, and the
results of this study suggest that having dinosaur knowledge
may provide students with an advantage in learning about
evolution.
Although the results of this curriculum are promising, the
gains are still modest. Further research is needed to exclude
the possibility that the differences between groups are not
the result of extraneous factors. For example, the gains
maybe explained by the novelty of dinosaurs, the
experimental teacher's enthusiasm, or the relative advantage
of constructivist teaching methods over conventional didactic
instruction. Nevertheless, this study suggests that
employing an intrinsically motivating curricular source
domain that engages a student’s prior knowledge can
facilitate the development of evolutionary competence. The
dinosaur curriculum was designed to foster generative
conceptual knowledge and coherent evolutionary reasoning.
The other two pieces of the evolutionary competence puzzle,

epistemological commitments and discourse practices, were
less central in the curriculum. These core features of
evolutionary competence are clearly interdependent. For
example, a student who appreciates the "correct form" of a
natural selection explanation, but lacks a suitable descriptive
vocabulary (i.e., one who can't “talk the talk”) is unlikely to
generate a coherent explanation. The standards of coherence
for evolutionary explanations are particularly exacting, and
coherence-building interventions are worthy pursuits in
fostering critical thinking (Ranney & Schank, 1998).
Teleological reasoning was noted in many of the students'
explanations. Teleological causation in explanations is
hardly unique to evolution. It may underlie intuitive theories
of biology in children as well as adults (Carey, 1995).
Biological processes can be thought about in mechanistic or
teleological terms. While it is advantageous for students to
have a principled, mechanistic, understanding of scientific
concepts, teleological or goal-oriented explanations are often
presented in textbooks and lectures to orient students to the
functions of a particular bodily mechanism. Teleological
explanations are also commonplace in everyday discourse.
Considerable research indicates that young children develop
rudimentary theories in which biological functions are often
expressed in intentionalist terms, such as striving to fulfill
"wants" and "needs" (Hatano & Inagaki, 1996; Carey, 1995).
This phenomenon is not unique to children. Medical
students sometimes generate teleological explanations in
reasoning about the function of the heart and circulatory
system (Kaufman, Patel, & Magder, 1996).
Teleological thought is rooted in productive forms of
knowledge and provide coherent explanations for
nonintuitive phenomena that surrounds us. It is a challenge
is to effectively exploit this knowledge in formal education
in order to develop mechanistic understandings of biological
processes. For example, teleological reasoning may promote
an understanding of structure-function relations in young
children; Ash and Brown (1996) developed a curriculum that
fosters transitions from more rudimentary forms of
teleological thought towards adaptationist reasoning that
approximates mature natural selection explanations.
Our results suggest that some students began to
demonstrate proficient Darwinian explanation patterns.
However, most students continued to experience difficulties
incorporating notions of variation and heredity into their
responses––amd subjects were somewhat inconsistent across
problems. Anchoring in a given domain represents a starting
point, but experience applying the schema in different
domains is likely a prerequisite to mastery.
Learning about evolution in a familiar domain can
certainly facilitate the development of disciplinary discourse,
though more needs to be done to foster proficient “evolution
speak”. Tabak and Reiser (1999), using BGuILE (the
Biology Guided Inquiry Learning Environment) and working
with middle school teachers, also try to advance productive
discourse strategies in learning about natural selection,
striving to scaffold students so that they can progress from
lay explanations to increasingly sophisticated scientific
explanations. The process involved establishing scientific
norms, providing specific prompts (e.g., to elaborate
incomplete explanations) and reshaping response patterns in

a manner that approximates scientific discourse. Fostering
effective disciplinary discourse practices is essential in the
development of evolutionary competence.
The concept of biological evolution represents a critical
challenge for students to master, and given that it is a
foundational concept in the biological sciences, it warrants
special attention. A growing body of empirical work has
systematically diagnosed a range of student difficulties
pertaining to evolution, and researchers will certainly
continue to develop ever more promising instructional
strategies to support coherent evolutionary reasoning and
argumentation.

Acknowledgments
We thank the participants in the Evolution and Biology
Education research groups. We are especially grateful to Anli
Liu, Jennifer Schindel, and Franz Cheng for their comments
and assistance in the data analyses.

References
Ash, D. & Brown, A. (1996). Thematic Communities guide
shifts in biological reasoning: children’s transition
towards deep principles of evolution. Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the Educational Research
Association, New York, April 1996.
Bassok, M. & Holyoak, K.J. (1993). Pragmatic knowledge
and conceptual structure: Determinants of transfer between
quantitative domains. In: D. K. Detterman and R. J.
Sternberg (eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition,
and instruction.. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Bishop, B. & C. Anderson (1990). Student Conceptions of
Natural Selection and its role in Evolution. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 27, 415-427.
Carey, S. (1995). On the origin of causal understanding. In
D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack (Eds.), Causal
cognition: A multidisciplinary debate. (pp. 268-308).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Chi, M., Hutchinson, J., & Robin, A. (1989). How
Inferences About Novel Domain-Related Concepts Can be
Constrained by Structured Knowledge. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 35, 27 -62.
Detterman, D.K. (1993). The case for the prosecution:
Transfer as an epiphenomenon. In D.K. Detterman and
R.J. Sternberg (eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence,
cognition, and instruction. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Ferrari, M & Chi, M.T.H. (1998). The nature of naive
explanations of natural selection. International Journal Of
Science Education, 20 1231-1256.
Gobbo, C. & Chi, M. (1986). How knowledge is structured
and used by expert and novice children. Cognitive
Development, 1, 221-237.
Hatano, G & Inagaki, K. (1996). Cognitive and cultural
factors in the acquisition of intuitive biology. In D. R.
Olson & Torrance, N. (eds.) The Handbook of Education
and Human Development: New models of learning,
teaching, and schooling. New York: Blackwell.
Kaufman, D.R. Patel, V.L., & Magder, S (1996). The
Explanatory Role of Spontaneously Generated Analogies

in a Reasoning about Physiological Concepts.
International Journal of Science Education, 18, 369-386.
Kaufman, D.R., Ranney, M, Ohlsson, S. Reiser, B.J., &
Shapiro, L. (1998). Symposium: Multidisciplinary
Perspectives on Evolutionary Reasoning. Presented at the
Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Madison, WC. August 1-4, 1998.
Kaufman, D.R., Ranney, M, Thanukos, A., & Brem, S.
(1999). How to Spin an Evolutionary Tale. Presented at
the Twenty-First Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Vancouver, B.C. August 19-22, 1999.
Lewis, E. (1999). Dinosaur Knowledge as a Fruitful Anchor
for Learning Evolution Proto-Concepts. Masters Thesis,
Cognition and Development, Graduate School of
Education. University of California, Berkeley. Berkeley,
CA.
Ohlsson, S. (1990). Young Adults’ Understanding of
Evolutionary Explanations: Preliminary Observations.
(Office of Educational Research and Improvement Rep.).
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, The Learning
Research and Development Center.
Ohlsson, S. (1993). Abstract schemas. Educational
Psychologist, 28, 51-66.
Ranney, M., & Schank, P. (1998). Toward an integration of
the social and the scientific: Observing, modeling, and
promoting the explanatory coherence of reasoning. In S.
Read & L. Miller (Eds.), Connectionist models of social
reasoning and social behavior. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum
Reiser, B. J., Sandoval, W. A., & Tabak, I. (1998).
Teachers' support of students’ biological inquiry: Making
use of artifacts of students’ reasoning. Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, San Diego, CA.
Rudolph, J. & Stewart, J. (1998). Evolution and the Nature
of Science: On the Historical Discord and Its Implications
for Education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
35 (10), 1069-1089.
Samarapungavan, A. & Wiers, R. (1997). Children's
Thoughts on the Origin of Species: A Study of
Explanatory Coherence. Cognitive Science, 21 (2), 147177.
Shankar, G., & Skoog, G. D. (1993). Emphasis given
evolution and creationism by Texas high school biology
teachers. Science Education, 77, 221-233.
Sharman, L. C. (1994). Teaching evolution: Designing
successful instruction. Journal of Science Teacher
Education, 5, 122-129.
Tabak, I. & Reiser, B.J. (1999). Steering the course of
dialogue in inquiry-based science classrooms. Paper
presented at the 1999 Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association. Montreal, Canada.
van Zee, E. & Minstrell, J. (1997). Using Questioning to
Guide Student Thinking. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 6, 227-269.
Working Group on Teaching Evolution, National Academy
of Science (1998). Teaching about evolution and the
nature of science. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

