UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What are fallacies good for? Representational speed-up in Propositional Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zm4v5f4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 22(22)

Author
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2000-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What are fallacies good for? Representational speed-up in propositional reasoning
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu )
School of Teaching & Learning & Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
Two experiments examine speed-up in argument pairs of
various propositional forms. In the first experiment,
participants were presented with pairs of conditional
arguments. Some of these pairs had a form of a valid
Modus Ponens (MP) inference, whereas other pairs had
a form of a fallacy of Affirming the Consequent (AC). In
both argument pairs, presentation of the prime led to a
significant speed-up in the probe argument. In the
second experiment, in addition to AC-AC and MP-MP
pairs, AC-MP and MP-AC pairs were also included.
Results indicated that AC primes led to a speed-up of
MP probes, and MP primes led to a speed-up in AC
probes. The results are discussed in relation to theories
of propositional reasoning.

Introduction
The ability to reason deriving conclusions from available
information is an integral aspect of human cognition. A large
component of this ability is propositional reasoning, or
reasoning with logical connectives AND, OR, IF…THEN,
and NOT. There are two major theoretical approaches to
propositional reasoning, the syntactic approach and the
semantics approach. According to the former, reasoners
extract the syntactic form of the argument and apply certain
formal rules of inference, or inferential schemata, to the
extracted form (Braine & O'Brien, 1991; Rips, 1994). For
example, reasoners easily conclude that B is the case, using
the modus ponens (MP) schema, when presented with the
following premises:
A à B (If A then B)
A.
The syntactic approach thus hinges on assumptions that
reasoners (a) veridically represent information in the
premises and (b) automatically apply inferential schemata to
these representations.
According to the semantic approach, the untrained mind is
not equipped with formal rules of inference. Furthermore,
reasoning, to a large extent, is a function of representations
of information in the premises. In turn, these representations
are not veridical but are often incomplete or defective
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Evans & Over, 1996;
Sloutsky & Goladvarg, 1999; Sloutsky, Rader, & Morris,
1998).
One of the semantic theories of propositional reasoning,
the Mental Model Theory (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991)
suggests that inferences, such as considered above, occur
in the following manner. First, the reasoner constructs the
initial representation of the premises:

First premise
A B
…

Second premise
A

The first line in the leftmost column makes explicit the
possibility in which both A and B co-occur, and the second
model (ellipses) corresponds to those possibilities in which
the antecedent of the conditional is false. The theory
accordingly assumes that individuals do not normally make
these possibilities explicit (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991).
The line in the rightmost column represents the second
premise. Combining the two models together leads to the
inference that B.
There is a plethora of empirical studies contrasting
predictions stemming from the two approaches. One major
result of these comparisons is that the Mental Model Theory
is capable of accounting for a variety of systematic errors
observed in reasoning (Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1999;
Newsome & Johnson-Laird, 1996; Sloutsky & JohnsonLaird, 1999; Yang & Johnson-Laird, in press; see also
Johnson-Laird, 1999; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991, for
reviews). One of these errors accounted for by the Mental
Model Theory is the fallacy of Affirming the Consequent
(AC). AC has the following form:
AàB
B.
Therefore A.
The inference is a fallacy because there is nothing in the
argument suggesting that B could not occur without A. The
mental model explanation of this fallacy is that initial
representations of MP arguments and AC arguments are
identical. As a result, people tend to draw conclusions, both
when presented with valid MP arguments and invalid AC
arguments.
This paper offers a further examination this issue. If
inferences in Modus Ponens arguments occur due to the MP
schema, as specified by the syntatic approach, then the use
of the schema should lead to a speed-up in subsequent
applications of the schema (see Smith, Langston, & Nisbett,
1992). At the same time, inferring conclusions from AC
arguments should not lead to a speed-up in MP arguments,
because there is no schema for AC. However, if people
reason from mental representations, as according to the
semantic approach, then arguments that have identical
mental representations should speed up each other. We
therefore, predicted that (1) AC arguments should speed-up
AC arguments and (2) MP arguments should speed-up MP

arguments. We further predicted that (3) AC arguments
should speed-up MP arguments and (4) MP arguments
should speed-up AC arguments. The first two hypotheses
were tested in Experiment 1, whereas the last two were tested
in Experiment 2.
There was also a critical point added to Experiment 1.
According to the syntactic theory of mental logic (Braine &
O'Brien, 1998), conjunctive arguments (CONJ) of the form A
& B could be simplified using conjunction elimination
schema of the form:
A&B
Therefore A.
On the other hand, the semantic theory of mental models

suggests that conjunctions have similar (although not
identical) representations as conditionals. Therefore, an
important question is whether or not conjunctive arguments
can also be speeded up by subsequent use. There is
evidence that during text comprehension, conjunctions do
not result in automatic, on-line inferences, whereas
conditionals do (Gernsbacher, 1997; Millis, Golding, &
Barker, 1995). The importance of this question is that, if
hypotheses are confirmed, the examination of conjunctive
arguments will allow us to assess the generality of findings:
whether all forms that have similar representations prime
each other, or if priming is limited to If…Then forms only.

Table 1: Sample stimuli by argument type and prime type.
Prime Type
Related Prime (select a
conclusion)

Unrelated Prime (select a
conclusion)

Probe (answer Yes or No)

MP
If there is an Ace then
there is a Jack.
There is an Ace.
• No conclusion follows
• There is a Jack
• There is no Jack
• There is a Two
There is a Three or there is
a Seven, but not both.
There is a Three
• No conclusion follows
• There is a Seven
• There is no Seven
• There is a Jack
If there is a Queen then
there is a Six.
There is a Queen.
• There is a Six

Argument Type
CONJ
There is an Ace and there
is a Jack.
There is an Ace.
• No conclusion follows
• There is a Jack
• There is no Jack
• There is a Two
There is a Three or there is
a Seven, but not both.
There is a Three
• No conclusion follows
• There is a Seven
• There is no Seven
• There is a Jack
If there is a Queen then
there is a Six.
There is a Six.
• There is a Queen

Experiment 1
The first goal of this experiment was to test hypotheses 1
and 2, suggesting that there is AC-AC and MP-MP priming.
The second goal was to examine whether or not there is
priming of conjunctive arguments.

Method
Participants A total of 86 participants from Ohio State
University took part in the experiment for an introductory
psychology course credit. These participants represented
three groups, with each group receiving a particular
argument type. There were 31 participants in the Modus
Ponens (MP) group, 29 participants in the Conjunction
group (CONJ) and 26 participants in the Affirmation of
Consequent (AC) group. All participants were fluent English
speakers.
Materials In each of the three groups, stimuli considered of
60 critical items and 120 filler items. Critical items consisted
of 30 prime-probe pairs. Half of primes had the same
argument form as probes, whereas another half of the primes
had a different argument form. Examples of stimuli for each of

AC
If there is an Ace then
there is a Jack.
There is a Jack.
• No conclusion follows
• There is an Ace
• There is no Ace
• There is a Two
There is a Three or there is
a Seven, but not both.
There is a Three
• No conclusion follows
• There is a Seven
• There is no Seven
• There is a Jack
There is a Queen and there
is a Six.
There is a Queen.
• There is a Six

the group are presented in Table 1. Filler items consisted of
primes and probes that were similar to those in the Table,
except that they had a different logical form. Primes had a
form of inclusive OR (e.g., There is a Joker or an Ace, or
both), whereas probes had a form of exclusive or (There is a
Joker or an Ace, but not both). Participants were randomly
assigned to one of the three groups.
Design and Procedure The experiment had a 3 Argument
Type (AC, MP, CONJ) by 2 Prime Type (Related, Unrelated)
mixed design with Prime Type as a repeated measure. Stimuli
were presented on a PC screen and controlled by Superlab
Pro for Windows (Cedrus Corporation, 1997). Participants
were tested individually. Participants were told that they
would read arguments on the computer. They were further
told that sometimes they would need to select a conclusion
from a set of conclusions, and sometimes to determine
whether or not a conclusion follows logically from the
premises by answering either Yes (follows) or No (does not
follow). Participants were asked to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible. Then they were given examples of
conclusions that do and do not follow logically from
premises accompanied with explanations. Finally, they were

Results and Discussion
In all reported analyses, degrees of freedom are based on
subjects * item variability. Accuracy by argument and prime
type are presented in Table 2 and response times are
presented in Figure 1. For AC arguments accuracy was
below chance t (389) < -7, p < .0001, two-tailed. For MP and
CONJ arguments, accuracy was above chance ts (389) >7, p
< .0001, two-tailed. Because comparisons of response times
across between-subject conditions could be misleading, we
perform only comparisons across within-subject conditions.
For CONJ condition, there were no significant differences in
responses to the probe questions between related and
unrelated primes. In fact, unrelated primes resulted in slightly
(but not significantly) faster responses than related primes.
At the same time, in the AC condition, t(353) = 3.5, p < .0001
and MP condition, t(425) = 3.8, p < .0001, related primes
resulted in a significant speed-up of responses to the probe
questions. These data indicate that while there was no
speed-up in the CONJ condition, both AC and MP
arguments were speeded-up by more 500 ms when preceded
by a related prime. Having established that responses to
both AC and MP arguments could be speeded up by a
related prime, we deemed it necessary to answer another
question: what constitutes a related prime? According to
syntactic theories of reasoning, related prime would be the
one that is based on the same inference rule. However,
syntactic theories do not posit a rule for AC inferences. In
accordance with the semantic approach, we hypothesized
that the prime is related whenever it has a identical mental
representation with the probe. For example, according to the
Mental Model Theory, AC and MP have identical mental
representations. In this case, both an AC prime should
speed up both AC and MP probes, and MP prime should
speed up AC and MP probes. This prediction was tested in
Experiment 2. Note, that there was not priming in CONJCONJ pairs; this issue will be addressed in the General
Discussion section.

Table 2: Percent of accurate responses by argument type
and prime type.
Prime Type
Argument Type
Related
Unrelated
AC
32.80
31.28
MP
95.90
92.20
CONJ
68.50
68.00

5500
Response Time (ms)

presented with four practice trials, two of which included
selecting a conclusion from a list, and another two included
a Yes/No response. These practice trials were accompanied
by feedback, such that participants were told whether or not
their inference was warranted and why. After finishing the
practice trials, participants were presented with experimental
trials. Each participant received 30 experimental items (60
arguments) and 60 filler items (120 arguments) with a total of
180 arguments. Participants read each argument in self-paced
fashion. Once the argument that served as a prime was
answered, a probe argument appeared on the screen.
Argument pairs were separated by 300 ms interstimuli
intervals. The experiment took approximately 40 minutes.

5000
4500

Related Prime

4000

Unrelated Prime

3500
3000
AC

MP

CONJ

Argument Type

Figure 1: Response times by argument type and prime type.
Error bars represent standard errors of the mean

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 differs from Experiment 1 in two respects. First,
in Experiment 2, both types of argument and types of prime
varied within subjects. Each participant received two types
of arguments (AC and MP) and three types of prime (AC,
MP, and XOR, which was considered unrelated). Types of
argument were fully crossed with types of prime. Second,
because there was no CONJ-CONJ speed-up, conjunctive
arguments were eliminated.

Method
Participants A total of 26 participants from Ohio State
University took part in the experiment for an introductory
psychology course credit. All participants were fluent
English speakers.
Materials & Procedure The experiment had a 3 Argument
Type (AC, MP) by 3 Prime Type (AC, MP, XOR) withinsubject design. The experimental procedure was identical to
that of the first experiment, except that the total number of
items in the current experiment was 240. The experiment took
approximately 55 minutes.

Results and Discussion
As in the previous experiment, degrees of freedom are
based on subjects * item variability. Accuracy rates by
argument and prime type are presented in Table 3. These
rates were subjected to one-sample t-tests. The analyses
indicate that for AC arguments accuracy was below chance,

t < - 7, p < .0001, whereas for MP argument accuracy was
above chance ts >7, ps < .0001. Figure 2 presents relative
speed-up for prime-probe pairs; estimates for relative speedup were derived as RTunrelated prime - RTrelated prime. Speed-up
rates presented in Figure 2 were subjected to one-sample ttests. Recall that it was predicted that for both types of
arguments, MP and AC primes should lead to a speed-up
above XOR primes that were considered unrelated. As
depicted in Figure 2, all "related" primes resulted in a speedup. Speed-up, however, did not reach significance above 0
for AC-MP pairs, while it was significantly above 0 for the
other prime-probe pairs ts > 2, ps < .05. Speed-up effects
presented in Figure 2 were also subjected to a repeated
measures ANOVA. The analysis reveal no overall
differences between different prime-probe pairs, F(3, 320) =
2.13, p = .1.
These findings are consistent with predictions that speedup occurs due to a common mental representation. Note that
even though speed-up in the AC-MP pair did not reach
significance, the difference between XOR-MP pairs and ACMP pairs was in the predicted direction.
Table 3: Percent of accurate responses by argument type
and prime type
Argument Type
Prime Type
AC
MP
AC
39.74
95.64
MP
39.75
98.21
XOR
39.49
97.69

Relative Speed-UP

800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
AC_MP

MP_AC

AC_AC

MP_MP

Prime-Probe Pair

Figure 2: Relative speed-up by prime-probe pairs. Error bars
represent standard errors of the mean.

General Discussion
The results of the two reported experiments indicate that
both MP and AC arguments speed-up each other. These
findings support predictions that priming could be due to a
common mental representation rather than due to a common
syntactic rule. Indeed, what do AC and MP arguments have

in common? First, they have the common linguistic form
"If…then," and second, they have a similar mental
representation. It seems more likely that the observed speedup is due to the similarity of mental representation rather
than due to the similarity of linguistic form. This suggestion
is based on indirect evidence (e.g., Lea, 1995; Rader &
Sloutsky, 2000) that when inference in the priming argument
is blocked (e.g., If there is an Ace then there is a King. I
really need an Ace.), priming does not occur.
It also seems important that there was no speed-up in
CONJ-CONJ pairs, even though these arguments have
identical linguistic form and identical representation. One
important difference of conjunctive arguments is that, unlike
conditionals, conjunctions do not lead to an automatic, online inference (Gernsbacher, 1997; Millis, Golding, & Barker,
1995). Taken together, these findings suggest that the
identical mental representation is not sufficient for priming:
only those forms exhibit speed-up that (a) have the identical
mental representation and (b) lead to an automatic inference.
Furthermore, priming effects occur in both valid (MP) and
invalid (AC) conditional arguments.
One finding that deviates from predictions is that in the
Experiment 2, where argument forms varied within subjects,
AC-MP pairs resulted in a smaller speed-up than AC-AC,
MP-AC, and MP-MP pairs. Recall that in the Experiment 1,
where argument forms varied across subjects, both AC-AC
and MP-MP pairs resulted in a comparable (approximately
500 ms) speed-up. Taken together, results of the two
experiments suggest that the presence of MP arguments may
lead participants to consider AC arguments as invalid
arguments (after all the participants are college
undergraduates who may be familiar with basic principles of
logic). This consideration did not lead to an increase in
accuracy, but could have slowed down their responses.
There are several issues that are to be tested in future
research. In particular, it could be predicted that
strengthening of the associative link between the antecedent
and the consequent in the AC argument (If it flies then it is a
bird. It is a bird.) should result in an increase in the speedup in AC-AC pairs. This is because when the antecedent
and the consequent are highly associated, people are less
likely to notice that the inference is invalid (Markovits, 1993;
Markovits, Fleury, Quinn, & Venet, 1998). Alternatively,
weakening of the associative link between the antecedent
and the consequent in the AC argument (If you throw a
watermelon to the window, the window breaks. The
window is broken.) should result in an a decrease in the
speed-up in AC-AC pairs.
While these possibilities will be tested in further
experiments, results of the current experiments seem to
indicate that independently of the validity, MP and AC
conditional arguments tend to speed-up each other. This
finding seems to support the idea that those arguments that
share mental representation and lead to an automatic, on-line
inference are likely to get primed by each other
independently of their validity.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by a grant from the James
S. McDonnell Foundation.

References
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P., Eds. (1998). Mental logic.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993).
Human Reasoning: The Psychology of deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Savary, F. (1999). Illusory inferences:
A novel class of erroneous deductions Cognition, 71(3),
191-229.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Deductive reasoning. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50, 109-135.
Lea, R. B. (1995). On-line evidence for elaborative logical
inferences in text. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1469-1482.
Markovits, H. (1993). The development of conditional
reasoning: A Piagetian reformulation of mental models
theory. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 39, 131-158.
Markovits, H., Fleury, M., Quinn, S., & Venet, M. (1998).
The development of conditional reasoning and the
structure of semantic memory. Child Development, 69,
742-755.
Millis, K. K., Golding, J. M., & Barker, G. (1995). Causal
connectives increase inference generation. Discourse
Processes, 20, 29-49.
Newsome, M. R., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1996). An antidote
to illusory inferences? In Cottrell, G.W. (Ed.) Proceedings
of the Eighteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, p. 820.
Rader, A. W., & Sloutsky, V. M (2000). Conditional
inferences during comprehension: Is If really logical?
Under review.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Goldvarg, Y. (1999). Effects of
externalization on representation of indeterminate
problems. In M. Hahn & S. Stones (Eds.), Proceedings of
the XXI Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 695-700). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Johnson-Laird. P. N. (1999). Problem
representations and illusions in reasoning. In M. Hahn &
S. Stones (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXI Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 701705). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloutsky, V. M., Rader, A., & Morris, B. (1998). Increasing
informativeness and reducing ambiguities: Adaptive
strategies in human information processing.
In
Gernsbacher, M.A., & Derry, S.J. (Eds.) Proceedings of
the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. (pp. 997-999). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yang, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (in press). Illusions in
quantified reasoning: How to make the impossible seem
possible, and vice versa. Memory & Cognition.

