UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Negative Effect of Evaluation Upon Analogical Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g6776n4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Bearman, Christopher R.
Ormerod, Thomas C.
Ball, Linden J.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Negative Effect of Evaluation Upon Analogical Problem Solving
Christopher R. Bearman (C.Bearman@lancaster.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, Lancaster University, LA1 4YF, UK

Thomas C. Ormerod (T.Ormerod@lancaster.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, Lancaster University, LA1 4YF, UK

Linden J. Ball (L.Ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, Lancaster University, LA1 4YF, UK
Abstract
Evaluation is generally considered to enhance problem
solving and is strongly correlated with increasing
expertise. Moreover, manipulations that increase the
active processing of source problems generally promote
analogical transfer of solution principles. Therefore, we
expected that an instruction to evaluate the information
given in problem and solution exemplars would enhance
analogical problem solving. However, in Experiment 1,
evaluation was found to have a detrimental effect on
transfer compared with control groups instructed to
summarize source problems and solutions, even when
participants received additional instructions to memorize
source problems for later recall. In Experiment 2, the
impairing effects of instructions to evaluate were not
reduced by making participants engage in evaluation
when solving the target problem, a test of a ‘transfer
appropriate processing’ explanation. We propose that
instructions to evaluate lead participants to focus upon
some elements of source problems and solutions at the
expense of other elements required for effective transfer.

Evaluation, the set of processes involved in judging
problem-related information under dimensions such as
importance, value, appropriateness and scope, is
generally seen as fundamental to human intellectual
performance. It is central to the TOTE (Test-OperateTest-Exit) unit proposed by Miller, Galanter and
Pribram (1960) as the basis of exploratory problemsolving behaviour, and is considered to be beneficial
when seeking solutions to complex real-world problems
(Klein, 1999). For example, Ashton and Kennedy
(2002) found that evaluation instructions led to a
reduction in the use of temporally salient but otherwise
inappropriate data when making auditing decisions.
Evaluation is also invoked in accounts of expertise in
domains such as management (Easton, 1992), medicine
(Nezu & Nezu, 1995), and design (Darses, 2002;
Ormerod & Ridgeway, 1999). Indeed, the proportion of
problem-solving time devoted to evaluative activity has
been shown to increase with domain expertise (Chi,
Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; Schoenfeld, 1992).
Like evaluation, analogy is also seen as fundamental
to problem solving (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Anderson,

121

1989). The power of analogy as a strategy for problem
solving lies in the transfer of abstract solution concepts
from a source problem to a superficially different but
conceptually similar target problem. Studies of real–
world domains have shown its importance, both for
domain experts (e.g., Blanchette & Dunbar, 2000) and
novices (e.g., Bearman, Ball & Ormerod, 2001).
However, laboratory studies have identified limitations
upon spontaneous analogising (Dunbar, 2001). In
particular, participants often fail to transfer a conceptual
solution in the absence of an explicit hint that source
and target problems are related (e.g., Gick & Holyoak,
1980). When spontaneous analogising does occur, it is
frequently based upon superficial similarities (e.g.,
Keane, 1987; Holyoak & Koh, 1987).
There are, however, grounds to expect that direct
instructions to evaluate might enhance analogical
transfer. Studies have shown benefits from
manipulations that encourage the ‘active’ processing of
information given in a source problem and its solution.
For example, Lewis and Anderson (1985) had
participants actively generate a hypothesis about a piece
of missing information needed to solve a geometry
problem. After receiving feedback about their
hypotheses, participants were more likely to select the
correct solution to a target problem from a set of
alternatives. Similarly, encouraging participants to
generate solutions to a source problem facilitates
transfer (Gick & Holyoak, 1980; Needham & Begg,
1991). To the extent that evaluation involves the active
processing of source problems and solutions, it may
also enhance analogical problem solving.
Instructions to evaluate may well increase active
processing of source information, but they may also
change other aspects of the problem-solving process.
For example, evaluation may focus participants’
attention upon some aspects of the source problem and
solution at the expense of others, which in turn might
adversely affect memory for source information. Thus,
in the present study, as well as assessing participants’
solution performance before and after they received a
hint to analogise, we also measured the extent of their
recall of source information.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was conducted to test the hypothesis that
instructions to evaluate source material would influence
analogical problem solving. This hypothesis is based
upon an assumption that active processing enhances
analogical transfer. However, there is evidence to
suggest that any additional processing of source
information can enhance analogical transfer. For
example, instructions to memorize source material have
been shown to increase solution rates (Needham &
Begg, 1991). Therefore, we also investigated the
influence of instructions to memorize source
information in order to assess whether the effects of
instructions to evaluate and to memorize might be
additive or interactive.

Method
Design A two-factor, between-participants design was
used, with Source Processing (evaluative vs. nonevaluative) as one factor, and Encoding Instruction
(memory encoding vs. no memory encoding) as the
other factor. The two dependent variables were the
frequency of correct solutions assessed pre-hint and
post-hint.
Participants Students and staff (37 female; 35 male)
from Lancaster University received £3 for participating.
Materials The materials were similar to those of Gick
and Holyoak (1980, 1983), with the target task being
Dunker’s radiation problem (see Appendix). Since Gick
and Holyoak’s source problem tends to produce ceiling
effects on post-hint performance, a new source was
developed to convey the critical ‘dispersionconvergence’ solution principle. This source involved a
story about a nuclear power station that required a
constant supply of water (see Appendix). This source
analogue could be used by participants to generate
solutions to the radiation problem at either a conceptual
level (replacing a large force with multiple smaller
forces) or at a superficial level (invoking surface-level
entities such as pipes). Pilot studies indicated that the
nuclear power station story produced intermediate
levels of transfer (50% post-hint solution rates
compared to 92% in Gick & Holyoak, 1980).
The nuclear power station story presents a source that
is superficially different but conceptually similar to the
radiation problem. Two distracter stories were also
developed. The first was superficially similar but
conceptually different to the radiation problem, and
referred to an osteopath who wished to cure back pain
using a novel machine (see Appendix). The second
distracter was a non-analogous story that was neither
conceptually similar nor superficially similar to the

122

radiation problem, and described a general
overthrowing a military headquarters using a bridge.
Procedure Although the basic experimental procedure
closely followed the one employed by Gick and
Holyoak (1980, Exp. 4), a subtle procedural change was
instigated to encourage participants in the ‘evaluation’
conditions to believe that each presented solution was
not necessarily the most effective one for solving a
particular source problem, thereby promoting enhanced
evaluative processing of that solution. This procedural
innovation ran as follows for each source: Following
presentation of the source problem—which participants
were asked to read through—participants were
requested to select randomly a single solution from a
set of five that, unbeknownst to them, were all identical.
Then, participants were given instructions that required
them either: (1) to evaluate how good they thought the
selected solution was, or (2) to read aloud and then
summarize the story and selected solution. Participants
in the memory conditions were instructed to attempt to
memorize source problems and solutions for a later
recall test (which was not given). If participants lapsed
into silence they were asked to keep talking until
approximately two minutes had elapsed. The order of
the source stories was counterbalanced across
participants. After processing the source stories
participants worked on an interpolated task (Wason’s,
1960, 2-4-6 task) for up to 10 minutes. Finally
participants were given five minutes to tackle the
radiation problem. If the correct solution had not been
generated in this time a hint was given that “one or
more of the stories seen at the beginning of the
experiment could be used to form a solution to the
[target] problem”. Participants were then given a further
three minutes to try to solve the radiation problem and
lastly were asked to recall any source story not
previously mentioned during their problem solving.

Results and Discussion
Overall, only six participants (8%) generated a
dispersion-convergence solution to the radiation
problem without a hint to use the previous stories. This
8% pre-hint solution rate is comparable to the rates
observed by Gick and Holyoak (1980, Exp. 4) for an
analogous story and two distracters. There were no
differences between conditions in the incorrect
solutions produced pre-hint.
Table 1: Frequency of production of the target solution
after a hint, by condition (n = 18).
Source processing
Encoding instruction Evaluative Non-evaluative
Memory encoding
5 (28%)
11 (61%)
No memory encoding
4 (22%)
9 (50%)

The post-hint solution frequencies by condition are
presented in Table 1. A logistic regression using Source
Processing and Encoding Instruction as predictors, and
post-hint success at a dependent measure, yielded a
significant model, χ2 = 7.7, p = .02, with Source
Processing being the only reliable predictor, Wald =
6.7, p = .009. The data indicate that instructions to
evaluate the source have a detrimental effect on later
analogical transfer rather than a beneficial influence, as
might be expected.
In relation to the actual recall of the source stories
during target problem solving, many participants (27
out of 72) were observed to have forgotten one or more
of the source stories. The non-analogous source was
forgotten significantly less (just once) than either the
superficially similar source (16 occasions) or the
conceptually similar source (14 occasions), χ2 = 12.8, p
= .002. However, when the number of source stories
forgotten in each category (conceptually similar,
superficially similar, and non-analogous) was analysed
by Source Processing and Encoding Instruction no
significant differences emerged. Participants were
equally likely to forget either the superficially similar or
the conceptually similar source story regardless of the
condition that they were in.
In summary, Experiment 1 indicates that instructions
to evaluate source information have a negative effect on
participants’ ability to invoke a conceptually similar but
superficially different source analogue to create an
effective solution to a target problem, despite
participants having the post-hint knowledge that one of
the three sources contains information that would be
helpful for solving the target. These findings are clearly
contrary to the expectation that evaluation should have
a beneficial effect on the identification and application
of useful source information during problem solving.

Experiment 2
In light of the findings of Experiment 1, Experiment 2
aimed to examine whether the apparently negative
effect of source evaluation on analogical problem
solving was reliable. In addition to our interest in
replicating this effect, however, we also set out to
assess whether instructions for encouraging participants
to evaluate their putative solutions to the target problem
might reduce the detrimental effect of source
evaluation. The rationale behind this latter ‘target
evaluation’ manipulation derived from the notion of
transfer appropriate processing as espoused by
Roediger (e.g., 1990), which captures the observation
that recall of information is reliably enhanced when the
processes engaged in at retrieval match those that arose
during encoding. In the field of analogy research,
Dunbar, Blanchette and Chung (2001) have
demonstrated that if the target problem is processed in

123

the same manner as the source problem then increased
analogical transfer is found. In particular, Dunbar et al.
showed increased transfer from a source problem to a
‘relational’ probe but not to an ‘instrumental’ probe
when participants had been instructed that they were
going to have to produce a metaphor for the source
problem (an instruction claimed by the authors to lead
to relational processing). Likewise, Needham and Begg
(1991) found facilitation for memory tasks with
memory encoding of the source story, and facilitation
for problem-solving tasks with problem-solving based
encoding of the source.
The findings of Dunbar et al. and Needham and Begg
lend support to the idea that the detrimental effect of
evaluation might be overturned if participants are
requested to engage in evaluative processing of target
material. In Experiment 2, therefore, we assessed such
transfer appropriate processing effects by crossing the
instructions that participants received during source
processing (evaluative vs. non-evaluative, summary
instructions) with those that they received during target
processing (evaluative vs. non-evaluative).

Method
Design There were two between-participants factors:
Source Processing (evaluative vs. non-evaluative) and
Target Processing (evaluative vs. non-evaluative). The
two dependent variables were the frequency of correct
solutions assessed pre-hint and post-hint.
Participants Students and staff (40 female; 32 male)
from Lancaster University received £4 for participating.
Materials and Procedure The materials and procedure
(including source processing instructions) were the
same as those employed in the Experiment 1 conditions
that did not involve a source-memorization
requirement. The only exception to this was that
immediately prior to attempting to solve the target
(radiation) problem participants were instructed either
that: (1) “It does not matter if you do not think the
solutions will work, as the aim is to brainstorm the
problem” (i.e., non-evaluative target processing); or (2)
“Please try not to provide solutions that will not work,
as the aim is to produce the best possible solution” (i.e.,
evaluative target processing). In addition, after
participants had attempted (whether successfully or
unsuccessfully) to solve the radiation problem, they
were requested to free recall the ‘salient aspects’ of the
story about the nuclear power station (the conceptually
similar and superficially different source).

Results and Discussion
Overall, only a single participant produced the
dispersion-convergence solution to the radiation

problem before a hint (1.3%). This 1.3% pre-hint
solution rate represents a significant drop from the
standard 8% found by Gick and Holyoak (1980). There
were no differences between conditions in the incorrect
solutions produced pre-hint.
Post-hint solutions frequencies are presented in Table
2. A logistic regression using Source Processing and
Target Processing as predictors of success yielded a
significant model, χ2 = 13, p = .01, with Source
Processing being the only significant predictor (Wald =
7, p = .008).
Table 2: Frequency of production of the target solution
after a hint, by condition (n = 18).
Source processing
Target processing
Evaluative
Non-evaluative
Evaluative
4 (22%)
9 (50%)
Non-evaluative
3 (16%)
9 (50%)
In terms of memory for the source stories during
target processing, participants were observed to have
forgotten the superficially similar source on 18
occasions, the conceptually similar story on five
occasions, and the non-analogous source on one
occasion. These differences were reliable, χ2 = 19.8
(2), p < .001. As in Experiment 1, however, there were
no significant differences between the conditions in
terms of forgetting the source stories.
In order to investigate further what may be causing
the detrimental effect of source-evaluation instructions,
participants’ recall of the nuclear power station story
was investigated after the attempt (whether successful
or unsuccessful) at the radiation task. The nuclear
power station story can be decomposed into several
critical features according to what is relevant for later
transfer to the radiation problem. These features include
lower forces in the pipes (corresponding to lower
intensity X-rays in the radiation problem), multiple
pipes (analogous to multiple X-rays), and converging
forces (the same in both solutions). The presence or
absence of these features in the participants’ recall of
the nuclear power station story thus formed a threepoint coding scheme for investigating recall of the
critical components of the source story. Participants in
the evaluative source-processing conditions produced a
significantly lower average score (1.8, SD = 1.6) than
participants in the non-evaluative source-processing
conditions (2.6, SD = 1.6), F(1,65) = 4.4, p = .04. This
seemed to be attributable to participants in the
evaluative source-processing conditions having a
reduced tendency to mention ‘lower forces’ (18 in the
evaluative conditions vs. 24 in the non-evaluative
conditions), and a reduced tendency to mention
‘converging forces’ (nine in the evaluative conditions
vs. 14 in the non-evaluative conditions).

124

As a verification of this latter result, the actual
solutions that participants generated from the analogous
source story post-hint were investigated. In the same
way as the story recall was analysed for the presence of
critical components, so too can the solution generated
from the analogous source be analysed for the presence
of any mention of lower forces, multiple forces, and
converging forces. In addition, solution generation
based on the analogous source was scored for the
mention of X-rays, making this measure a four-point
score. This score is inferior to the one based purely on
story recall since a measure based on solution
generation will be correlated with task success, which is
already known to differ between the groups (i.e, a
person producing a correct solution will have generated
all four critical solution components). Notwithstanding
this caveat, however, the measure of story recall
showed that participants in the evaluative sourceprocessing conditions had a significantly lower mean
score for the presence of the critical components of the
source information (1.7, SD = 0.8) than participants in
the non-evaluative source-processing conditions (2.1,
SD = 0.7), F(1,65) = 4.5, p = .03.
In addition, it was found that the number of words of
the conceptually similar source story recalled by the
participants in the evaluative source-processing
conditions was significantly lower (56 words, SD =
22.5) than the number of words recalled by participants
in the non-evaluative source-processing conditions
(70.5 words, SD = 22.6), F(1,62) = 6.6, p = .01. This
further supports the idea that participants in the
evaluation conditions have developed a generally
impoverished representation of the source material.
In summary, the detrimental effect of evaluative
processing of source stories on post-hint analogizing
found in Experiment 1 was replicated in Experiment 2.
It was also evident that engaging participants in transfer
appropriate processing (i.e., requiring evaluation of the
target problem as well as the source information) could
not overturn this effect. In addition, it was observed that
participants who evaluated the source information did
not retain as much of that information as did people
who merely summarized the material. It thus seems that
focusing processing effort on the quality of a solution
leads to important information being lost from the
representation of the source analogue.

General Discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 have demonstrated that evaluative
source processing can lead to reliably worse
performance than non-evaluative source processing in
an analogical problem-solving context requiring the
application of prior solution ideas to a conceptually
similar but superficially different problem encountered
just 10 minutes after initially examining source
information. In addition, it has been shown that a

superficially similar but conceptually different source is
recalled significantly less often than either a
conceptually similar but superficially different source
or a non-analogous source.
These striking failures of analogical transfer with
source-evaluation instructions appear, on initial
consideration, to fly in the face of previous research
that has demonstrated the benefits of active source
processing on analogical problem solving. What, then,
may be the reason for these seemingly discrepant
findings? In order for analogical transfer to occur it is
commonly claimed (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983) that it
is necessary for individuals to represent source
information at a relatively deep level of abstraction
whereby the surface features of the problem and
solution are less salient than the underlying solution
principle itself. The process of ‘solution generation’
appears to encourage participants to represent the deep
structure of source information due to its requirement
that participants engage fully with the problem and its
potential solutions. Thus, the difference between the
present experiments and previous studies that have
revealed the benefits of source processing may well
hinge on the fact that solution evaluation carries no
requirement to generate information. As such, the
representation of source information associated with
evaluative processing may not be sufficiently enriched
as would be the case if the representation derived from
a generative process. Instead, source representations
appear to be restricted in nature—perhaps because
participants focus in depth upon a few specific aspects
of the problem and solution at the expense of others.
Rather than arguing that evaluation produces a
negative effect on transfer of an analogous solution,
however, another possible interpretation of the present
dataset is that the process of summarizing source stories
actually has a positive effect on transfer. Summarizing
source information might well lead to the creation of an
abstract representation of such information, since the
details in the story will be reduced and replaced with
higher-level ideas and concepts. Such reduction and
replacement of detail might not occur with evaluative
processing, where the focus is on considering whether a
solution is going to be effective or not. This would be
consistent with previous research findings showing that
explicitly instructing participants to produce an abstract
representation of source material has beneficial effects
on pre-hint solution-transfer rates (Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Mandler & Orlich, 1993).
A further possible interpretation of our findings is
that participants in the evaluative-processing conditions
may have been less effective at producing the
analogous dispersion-convergence solution because
they may have believed that the dispersion-convergence
solution encountered during the first phase of the study
was in some sense a sub-optimal way to tackle the

125

nuclear power station problem. However, most
participants were actually observed to consider that
dispersion-convergence was a very good solution to the
power station problem. In addition, a qualitative
assessment of the data indicated that dismissing or
accepting the dispersion-convergence solution to the
nuclear power station source problem was not related to
task success. Finally, Experiment 1 was explicitly
designed to encourage the production of a wide range
of solution ideas even if these were felt to be suboptimal. It should be noted, too, that participants were
scored as having produced the dispersion-convergence
solution even if they didn’t think that it would work
successfully.
Overall, then, it seems that contrary to initial
expectations, evaluative processing is reliably less
effective at promoting analogical transfer than nonevaluative summarization of source analogues. This
effect appears to be caused by evaluation instructions
encouraging participants to focus on only some aspects
of the source information at the expense of others.
Summarizing the source information does not promote
such focusing, and may lead to a broader and more
flexible representation of source information that can be
invoked and applied in subsequent problem solving.
The finding that evaluative processing has an
apparently detrimental effect on post-hint transfer is not
only theoretically interesting, but also crucially
important when possible applications of analogy
research to real-world problem solving are considered.
For example, since evaluative processing of solution
ideas is a vital aspect of domain-based problem solving,
then it would seem important to explore mechanisms
that might eliminate the negative effect of evaluative
source processing on subsequent analogising.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1989). The analogical origins of errors
in problem solving. In D. Klahr, & K. Kotovsky
(Eds.), Complex information processing: The impact
of Herbert A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Ashton, R H., & Kennedy, J. (2002). Eliminating
recency with self-review: The case of auditors ‘going
concern’ judgements. Journal of Behavioural
Decision Making, 15, 221-231.
Bearman, C. R., Ball, L. J., & Ormerod, T. C. (2002).
An exploration of real-world analogical problem
solving in novices. In W.D. Gray, & C. Schunn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
101-106). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2000). How analogies are
generated: The roles of structural and superficial
similarity. Memory and Cognition, 28, 108-124.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics

problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science,
5, 121-152.
Darses, F. (2002). A framework for continuous design
of production systems and its application in collective
re-design of production line equipment. Human
Factors & Ergonomics in Manufacturing, 12, 55-74.
Dunbar, K. (2001). The analogy paradox: Why analogy
is so easy in naturalistic settings, yet so difficult in
the psychological laboratory. In D. Gentner, K. J.
Holyoak, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Analogy:
Perspectives from cognitive science. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Dunbar, K., Blanchette, I., & Chung, T. (2001). Goals,
encoding, and analog retrieval. Unpublished
manuscript, Department of Psychology, McGill
University.
Easton, G. (1992). Learning from case studies (2nd
Edn.). New York: Prentice Hall.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical
problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema
induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and
structural similarity in analogical transfer. Memory
and Cognition, 15, 332-340.
Keane, M. (1987). On retrieving analogues when
solving problems. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 39A, 29-41.
Klein, G. (1999). Sources of power: How people make
decisions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lewis, M. W., & Anderson, J. R. (1985).Discrimination
of operator schemata in problem solving: Learning
from examples. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 26-65.
Mandler, J. E., & Orlich, F. (1993). Analogical transfer:
The roles of schema abstraction and awareness.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 31, 485-487.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960).
Plans and the structured of behaviour. New York:
Holt, Reinhhart and Winston.
Nezu, C. M., & Nezu, A. M. (1995). Clinical decision
making in everyday practice: The science in art.
Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 2, 5-25.
Needham, D. R., & Begg, I. M. (1991). Problemoriented training promotes spontaneous analogical
transfer, memory-oriented training promoted memory
for training. Memory and Cognition, 19, 5453-557.
Ormerod, T. C., & Ridgeway, J. (1999). Developing
task design guides through cognitive studies of
expertise. Proceedings of the Third European
Conference on Cognitive Science. Sienna: Consiglio
Nazionale Della Richerche.
Roediger, H. L. (1990). Implicit memory: Retention
without remembering. American Psychologist, 45,
1043-1056.

126

Schoenfeld, (1992). Learning to think mathematically:
Problem solving, metacognition, and sense-making in
mathematics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook for
research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp.
334-370). New York: Macmillan.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate
hypotheses in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 12, 129-140.

Appendix
The Radiation Problem
A doctor is faced with a patient who has a malignant
tumour in his stomach. It is impossible to operate on the
patient, but unless the tumour is destroyed the patient
will die. X-rays can be used to destroy the tumour. If an
X-ray reaches it at sufficiently high intensity the tumour
will be destroyed. Unfortunately, at this intensity the
healthy tissue that the ray passes through on the way to
the tumour will also be destroyed. At lower intensities
the ray is harmless to healthy tissue, but it will not
affect the tumour either. It looked like the patient was
going to die.

The Nuclear Power Station Story
A water pumping station in the hills above Peshawar
has recently been adapted to feed a nuclear power
facility, where the water acts as a coolant.
Unfortunately the main pipe that leads from the water
pumping station to the nuclear facility cannot stand the
increased pressure and will eventually rupture. The
nuclear power facility must have a continuous supply at
a certain volume or it will overheat and go into
meltdown. Experts have found that it is impossible to
build a single large pipe to carry the water with the
materials available that will not also rupture due to the
high pressure of the water flowing through it. The
suggestion is: to build a number of pipes that have less
water pressure.

The Osteopath Story
After many years of research, a Philadelphia doctor of
Osteopathy thinks that he has found a way to alleviate
chronic back pain. The doctor theorizes that if a high
velocity thrust can be applied to a fairly wide section of
the lumber region of a person’s back they will be cured.
Unfortunately, the doctor has found it impossible to test
his theory because he is unable to deliver a high
velocity thrust of sufficient force because such a thrust
requires more strength than the doctor possesses. The
suggestion is: to have the doctor develop a machine that
is capable of delivering the high velocity thrust.

