UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Psychophysical Law for Linguistic Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2772g5zf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Keller, Frank

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Psychophysical Law for Linguistic Judgments
Frank Keller (keller@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK

perceived magnitude (log scale)

Abstract
It has been argued that linguistic acceptability can be estimated using the psychophysical technique of magnitude
estimation, in the same way as physical continua such
as brightness and loudness (Bard, Robertson, & Sorace,
1996; Cowart, 1997). For physical continua, plotting the
perceived stimulus magnitude against the actual physical magnitude results in a power relationship, the Psychophysical Law (Stevens, 1957). We show that a power
law of the same kind can be derived by plotting estimated
linguistic acceptability against the number of linguistic
constraints violated in the stimulus.

brightness
loudness

25

5

1

0.2
40

Introduction
Magnitude estimation (ME) is a technique standardly applied in psychophysics to measure judgments of sensory
stimuli (Stevens, 1957). The procedure requires subjects
to estimate the perceived magnitude of a physical stimulus (e.g., the brightness of a light source or the loudness of a beep) by assigning numeric values proportional
to stimulus magnitude. Typically, subjects are first presented with a reference stimulus (the modulus), which
they assign an arbitrary number. All other stimuli are
then judged in proportion to the modulus. For instance, if
a stimulus is perceived as twice as bright as the modulus,
then the subjects assigns it twice the modulus number, if
it is only one third as bright, one third of the modulus
number will be assigned.
A simple exponential relationship holds between the
physical magnitude of a stimulus (for instance its brightness measured in lux) and its perceived subjective magnitude. Stevens (1957) formulates this as the Psychophysical Law:
(1) ψ = kSn
Where ψ is the perceived stimulus magnitude, S is the
physical magnitude and k is a constant. Stevens (1957)
lists 14 different modalities for which the Psychophysical Law holds; the exponent n is characteristic of a given
modality, it can range from .3 for loudness to 2.0 for visual flash rate.1
The exponential relationship in (1) can be turned into
a linear relationship by log-transforming both ψ and S;
this is how psychophysical relationships are typically
graphed. An example is given in Figure 1 for brightness
and loudness.
1 As an anonymous reviewer points out, Stevens’ Law is not
uncontroversial. It has been suggested that the power function
is an artifact of data averaging across subjects (see Myung,
Kim, & Pitt, 2000, and the references cited therein). Also, the
power function itself has been claimed to be too versatile: it can
fit almost any monotonic curve within the errors of measurement (see Krueger, 1989, and the associated commentaries).

652

50

60
70
80
90
100
physical magnitude (log scale)

110

Figure 1: Example of the power law for psychophysical
judgment tasks (brightness and loudness of a stimulus);
from Stevens (1957)

The ME paradigm has been extended successfully to
the psychosocial domain (see Lodge, 1981 for a survey) and recently Bard et al. (1996) and Cowart (1997)
showed that linguistic judgments can be elicited in the
same way as judgments for sensory or social stimuli.
Unlike the five- or seven-point scale conventionally employed in the study of intuitive judgments, ME makes it
possible to treat linguistic acceptability as a continuum
and directly measures acceptability differences between
stimuli. ME has been shown to provide fine-grained measurements of linguistic acceptability, which are robust
enough to yield statistically significant results, while being highly replicable both within and across speakers.
The techniques has already been applied to wide variety of linguistic phenomena (see Sorace & Keller, 2003
for an overview).
Magnitude estimation of linguistic acceptability is
analogous to the standard procedure used to elicit judgments for physical stimuli. Subjects are presented with
a series of linguistic stimuli, and have to respond by assigning a numeric value to each stimulus proportional to
its perceived acceptability. However, as noted by Bard
et al. (1996), the crucial difference between ME of physical stimuli and ME of linguistic stimuli is that for the
latter, no objective standard of comparison is available:
linguistic acceptability does not have a physical manifestation that can be measured directly.
The aim of the present paper is to address this problem. Our hypothesis is that the theoretical notion of number of constraint violations can form the basis of a power
law for linguistic judgments analogous to Stevens’ Psychophysical Law.
This paper is structured as follows. In the next section,
we will review some linguistic background on the phe-

nomenon used as the test case for our power law: word
order variation in German. Then we present an ME experiment that elicits data on this phenomenon. We show
how the word order data can be accounted for by a power
law that relates the number of constraints violated by a
sentence to its perceived acceptability. We demonstrate
that this law fits the data better than a linear law, and
show that this observation extends to a range of results
from the literature on ME of linguistic acceptability.

Linguistic Background
To test if the Psychophysical Law can be applied to linguistic judgments, we need a concrete data set. In this paper, we deal with a linguistic phenomenon that has been
widely studied in the theoretical literature: word order
variation in German. The present section introduces the
necessary linguistic background.

(3) a. SIOV: Ich glaube, dass der Produzent dem
Regisseur den Schauspieler vorschlägt.
b. ISOV: Ich glaube, dass dem Regisseur der Produzent den Schauspieler vorschlägt.
c. IOSV: Ich glaube, dass dem Regisseur den
Schauspieler der Produzent vorschlägt.
The experiment is also designed to test the effect of
pronominalization on acceptability. The same three orders as in (3) are used, but now one of the NPs is realized as a pronoun. The position of the pronominalized
NP varies; either the first, second, or third NP is realized
as a pronoun. Example sentences are given in (4) for the
order SIOV. We use the index ‘pro’ to mark the pronominalized NP.
(4) a. Spro IOV:

Ich glaube, dass er
I

believe

that

dem

he-NOM the

Regisseur den Schauspieler vorschlägt.
director- DAT the actor- ACC

Word Order in German
German has a fixed verb order. Subordinate clauses are
verb final, while yes/no questions require verb initial order, and declarative main clauses have the verb in second
position. In the present experiment we will focus on subordinate clauses, whose order is generally considered the
basic one from which the main clause and question orders are derived (e.g., Haider, 1993).2 An example for
the stimuli used in this study is given in (2). We use ditransitive verbs such as vorschlagen ‘suggest’ that can
take three animate NPs as complements. For example,
the verb final sentence in (2a) is full acceptable, while the
verb initial sentence in (2b) is seriously unacceptable.
(2) a. Ich glaube, dass der Produzent
I

believe

that

the

producer-NOM

dem
the

Regisseur den Schauspieler vorschlägt.
director- DAT the actor- ACC

suggests

‘I believe that the producer will suggest the
actor to the director.’
b. Ich glaube, dass vorschlägt der Produzent dem
Regisseur den Schauspieler.
While verb order is fixed in German, the order of the
complements of the verb is variable. A range of factors
can influence the acceptability of the different orders, including case marking, pronominalization, thematic roles,
information structure, intonation, definiteness, and animacy (Choi, 1996; Jacobs, 1988; Müller, 1999; Uszkoreit, 1987; Scheepers, 1997). The present study focuses
on the effect of case marking and pronominalization on
word order, keeping the other factors constant.
We test three different complement orders, with the
nominative NP in first, second, and third position, respectively. Examples for these three orders are given in (3).
Our notation for word orders uses ‘V’ for verb, ‘S’ for
subject, and ‘O’ and ‘I’ for direct and indirect object, respectively.
2 Using subordinate clauses avoids potential confounds from
topicalization and other phenomena that can occur in verb second clauses. This is standard practice in the psycholinguistic
literature on German (e.g., Bader & Meng, 1999).

653

proposes

‘I believe that he will propose the actor to the
director.’
b. SIpro OV: Ich glaube, dass der Produzent ihm
den Schauspieler vorschlägt.
c. SIOpro V: Ich glaube, dass der Produzent dem
Regisseur ihn vorschlägt.

Word Order Constraints
The fact that different word orders in German differ in
their acceptability is typically analyzed in terms of word
order constraints, i.e., statements on the precedence of
constituents that when violated trigger a decrease in acceptability. The effect of constraint violation is typically
assumed to be cumulative (Jacobs, 1988; Müller, 1999;
Uszkoreit, 1987): the more violations a sentence incurs,
the less acceptable it is.
In this paper, we use the set of word order constraints proposed by Uszkoreit (1987, p. 114), listed
in (5) (only constraints relevant to the present study are
given and constraint names have been added). (Jacobs,
1988; Müller, 1999) use very similar constraints.3
(5) a. V ERB: X ≺ V[−MC]
b. N OM: [+NOM] ≺ [−NOM]
c. P RO : [+PRO] ≺ [−PRO ]
Here, ‘≺’ denotes the linear precedence of constituents
in a sentence. The constraint V ERB relies on the feature MC (main clause) to specify verb order; if this feature is negative (i.e., in a subordinate clause), then the
verb has to succeed any other constituent. The constraint
N OM requires nominative constituents (marked [+NOM])
precede non-nominative constituents (marked [−NOM]).
The constraint P RO requires pronouns to precede constituents that are not pronouns.

The Experiment
This section reports an experiment was designed to test
the hypothesis that the number of constraint violations
incurred by a sentence stands in a power law relationship
to the perceived acceptability of the sentence. This was
3 In

fact, the constraint N OM collapses two of Uszkoreit’s
(1987) constraints and is due to Müller (1999).

tested by eliciting magnitude estimation judgments for
sentences that violate between one and five of the word
order constraints described in the previous section.

Method
Subjects Thirty-four subjects participated in this experiment, all of them native speakers of German (by selfassessment).
Materials The materials were created based on two
subdesigns. The first subdesign included sentences with
three full NPs and used a factorial design with the two
factors Nom and Verb, corresponding to violations of the
constraints N OM and V ERB . Between zero and two violations of N OM were included, and either zero or one violation of V ERB. This resulted in an overall design with
Nom × Verb = 3 × 2 = 6 cells. Eight lexicalizations were
used per cell. See (2) and (3) for example stimuli.
The second subdesign included sentences with two
full NPs and one pronominalized NP. Again, a factorial
design was used, this time the additional factor Pro was
included, corresponding violations of the constraint P RO .
Between zero and two violations of P RO were tested. The
resulting design had Nom × Pro × Verb = 3 × 3 × 2 = 18
cells. Example stimuli are given in (4). Eight lexicalizations were used for each cell. This resulted in an overall
set of 192 stimuli for both subdesigns.
A set of 24 fillers was created, designed to cover the
whole acceptability range. A sentence of medium acceptability was used as the modulus item.
Procedure The experimental paradigm was magnitude
estimation as described by Stevens (1957) and extended
to linguistic stimuli by Bard et al. (1996) and Cowart
(1997) (see Introduction for details).
Subjects first saw a set of instructions that explained
the concept of numerical magnitude estimation using line
length. Subjects were instructed to make length estimates
relative to the first line they would see, the reference line.
They were told to give the reference line an arbitrary
number, and then assign a number to each following line
so that it represented how long the line was in proportion
to the reference line. Several example lines and corresponding numerical estimates were provided to illustrate
the concept of proportionality. Then subjects were told
that linguistic acceptability could be judged in the same
way as line length. The concept of linguistic acceptability was not defined, but examples of acceptable and unacceptable sentences were provided.
The experiment started with a training phase designed
to familiarize subjects with the magnitude estimation
task. Subjects had to estimate the length of a set of lines.
Then, a set of practice items (similar to the experimental items) were administered to familiarize subjects with
applying magnitude estimation to linguistic stimuli. Finally, subjects had to judge the experimental items.
Eight test sets were generated, each containing one
lexicalization for each cell in the design, i.e., a total of
24 items. Lexicalizations were assigned to test sets using
a Latin square design.
Each subject was randomly assigned one test set. The
subject judged 48 items in total: 24 items in the test set
and 24 fillers (which were the same for all subjects).
Items were presented in random order, with a new ran-

654

domization being generated for each subject.

Results
The data were normalized by dividing each numerical
judgment by the modulus value that the subject had assigned to the reference sentence. This operation creates
a common scale for all subjects. All analyses were carried out on the log-transformed normalized judgments,
as is standard for magnitude estimation data (Bard et al.,
1996; Cowart, 1997).
The aim of this experiment was to test the hypothesis that there is a power relationship between linguistic acceptability and the number of constraint violations.
Before we can test this hypothesis, we first have to verify that the factors Nom, Pro, and Verb were effective in
implementing the constraints N OM, P RO , and V ERB . To
this end, we conducted an analysis of variance (ANOVA)
for each of the two subexperiments. We will report both
by-subject (F1 ) and by-item (F2 ) analyses.
For the first subexperiment, we found significant
main effects of Nom (F1 (2, 66) = 28.970, p < .0005;
F2 (2, 14) = 19.058, p < .0005) and Verb (F1 (1, 33) =
69.816, p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) = 105.594, p < .0005), and
a significant interaction of the two factors (F1 (2, 66) =
17.656, p < .0005; F2 (2, 14) = 7.992, p = .005). A posthoc Tukey test on the factor Nom confirmed that zero
violations of N OM were more acceptable than a single
violation, which in turn was more acceptable than a double violation (α < .01 in both cases).
For the second subexperiment, we found significant main effects of Nom (F1 (2, 66) = 55.712, p <
.0005; F2 (2, 14) = 22.167, p < .0005), Pro (F1 (2, 66) =
54.078, p < .0005; F2 (2, 14) = 33.568, p < .0005),
and Verb (F1 (1, 33) = 63.767, p < .0005; F2 (1, 7) =
851.116, p < .0005). Also all the interactions were
significant: Nom/Pro (F1 (4, 132) = 7.638, p < .0005;
F2 (4, 28) = 4.216, p = .009), Nom/Verb (F1 (2, 66) =
30.233, p < .0005; F2 (2, 14) = 14.026, p < .0005),
Pro/Verb (F1 (2, 66) = 28.871, p < .0005; F2 (2, 14) =
18.705, p < .0005), and Nom/Pro/Verb (F1 (4, 132) =
10.907, p < .0005; F2 (4, 28) = 4.105, p = .010). We conducted post-hoc Tukey tests on the factors Nom and Pro,
which confirmed that zero violations were more acceptable than single violations, which in turn were more acceptable than a double violations (α < .01 in all cases).

The Psychophysical Law
In this section, we apply Stevens’ Psychophysical Law to
linguistic judgments, first to the data set obtained in the
experiment reported in the previous section, and then to
data sets from the literature on magnitude estimation of
linguistic acceptability.

Modeling the Experimental Data
In the previous section, we reported significant main effects of the factors Nom, Pro, and Verb, which confirmed
that our experimental manipulation was successful in
triggering between zero and two violations of the constraints N OM, P RO , and V ERB . Each of the sentences
in our set of materials violated between zero and three
constraints in the first subexperiment (at most two N OM
violations and one V ERB violation). The second subexperiment included between zero and five constraint viola-

perceived acceptability

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

1
2
3
4
number of constraint violations

5

perceived acceptability (log scale)

Figure 2: Perceived acceptability as a function of number
of word order constraints violated
2

1

0.5

0.25
1

2
3
4
number of constraint violations (log scale)

5

Figure 3: Perceived acceptability as a function of number
of word order constraints violated, log-log scale

tions (at most two N OM violations, two P RO violations),
and one V ERB violation). For further analysis we combined the results of both subexperiment, yielding a set of
24 data points.
The next step was to test the hypothesis that there is
a power relationship between the perceived acceptability
of a sentence and the number of constraints it violates.
Figure 2 plots acceptability against number of violations
and clearly shows an exponential relationship (this figure
plots the non-log transformed data). As discussed in the
introduction, a power relationship like this is characteristic of psychophysical continua such as brightness and
loudness. Plotting the data on log-log coordinates should
result in a linear relationship. This is illustrated in Figure 3, which plots the same data as Figure 2, now using
logarithmic scales (note that the two data points with zero
violations were dropped from this graph).
The figures suggest that acceptability behaves like a
psychophysical continuum, and that we should be able
to fit the psychophysical law in (1) to the data. In contrast to continua like loudness or brightness, linguistic
acceptability does not have a natural zero point. Rather,
the maximum acceptability of a sentence (corresponding
to zero violations) may vary for different linguistic constructions; it may also vary from experiment to experiment, e.g., due to anchoring effects (Nagata, 1992).

655

To take this into account, we introduced a threshold
term l into the equation in (1). This means that we are in
effect measuring the exponential reduction in acceptability triggered by the constraints a stimulus violates. This
yields the following equation:
(6) ψ = l − kSn
Using non-linear regression, we now fitted the terms l,
k, and n, which represent the acceptability threshold, the
intercept of the exponential function, and its exponent,
respectively. The term ψ is the acceptability measured
using magnitude estimation, while S is the number of
constraint violations. On our data set, non-linear regression yielded a significant relationship between ψ and S
(R = .81, N = 24, p < .001), with the following regression equation:
(7) ψ = 2.21 − 1.21S.36
Note that the exponent of .36 is within the range of exponents that have been reported for other psychophysical
continua, ranging from .3 for loudness to 2.0 for visual
flash rate (Stevens, 1957).
As a next step, we tested the hypothesis that acceptability is best described by a power law—one could
imagine that a simple linear relationship between the acceptability of a stimulus and the number of constraint
violations it incurs fits the data just as well. Indeed, a
linear regression on the data yielded a significant predictive relationship (R = .70, N = 24, p < .001). (The linear
regression used the equation in (6), but with n = 1.)
In order to compare the fit achieved by the two regressions, we computed degrees of freedom adjusted correlation coefficient R0 .4 This adjustment takes into account the number of parameters in the regression equation used to obtain a given R, and therefore makes it
possible to compare the fit of the non-linear regression
equation (three parameters: l, k, and n) with the fit of the
linear regression (only two parameters: l and k). The adjusted correlation coefficients was R0 = .78 for the nonlinear regression and R0 = .67 for the linear regression. A
one-tailed t-test for correlation coefficients showed that
the difference between the two R0 values was significant
(t(24) = 1.68, p < .05), i.e., the power law yielded a significantly better fit with the data than the linear law.
While the power law in (6) gave rise to a substantial
correlation coefficient of R0 = .78 for our data, there is an
obvious problem with the hypothesis that the number of
violation directly predicts the acceptability of a sentence:
it rests on the assumption that all violations contribute
equally to acceptability. In our case this means that all
three constraints N OM , P RO , and V ERB are assumed to
cause an equal reduction in acceptability. However, this
is not the case, as authors in the theoretical linguistics
literature have pointed out (Jacobs, 1988; Müller, 1999;
Uszkoreit, 1987). There is also experimental support for
the claim that not all the constraints in (5) are equal:
Keller (2000a) showed that violations of V ERB are more
serious than violations of N OM and P RO . Also in our
data, the inequality of constraint violations can be observed. Consider the single violations displayed in Figure 2, which represent violations of P RO , N OM, N OM,
q
N−1 , where
formula used was: R0 = 1 − (1 − R2 ) N−k−1
k is the number of variables in the regression equation.
4 The

(8) ψ = l −

∑ wiCi

2.5

perceived acceptability

N OM, and V ERB (top to bottom). It is clear that the three
constraints differ substantially in the amount of unacceptability they trigger.
To take account of this fact, we elaborated the equation in (6) by introducing constraint weights that represent the reduction in acceptability that an individual constraint triggers. This amounts to replacing kS in (6) with
a weighted sum, resulting in the following power law:
!n

2
1.5
1
0.5

i

(10) ψ = 2.25 − (1.38CNom + .84ProCPro + 3.78CVerb ).38
Note that the number of parameters differs for the two
non-linear equations: the weighted equation in (9) contains five parameters, while the unweighted equation
in (6) only contains three. In order to compare the fit
achieved by these two equations, we again computed degrees of freedom adjusted correlation coefficients: R0 =
.78 and R0 = .85 for (7) and (10), respectively. The difference between the two adjusted coefficients was significant (t(24) = 1.64, p < .05), which means that a power
law based on weighted constraints achieved a better fit on
the data than a power law with unweighted constraints.
Figures 4 and 5 plot acceptability scores against the
weighted sum of the number of constraint violations, on
linear and logarithmic scales, respectively. The fact that
the data points cluster around a straight line if they are
plotted on a log-log scale confirms the hypothesis that
perceived acceptability is subject to a power law, just like
other psychophysical continua.
Finally, we carried out a linear regression analysis using equation (9), but setting n = 1. This resulted in a
significant correlation (R = .78, N = 24, p < .001). The
adjusted correlation coefficient of R0 = .73 was significantly lower than the R0 = .85 obtained for the weighted
power law (t(24) = 2.62, p < .01). This demonstrates
that a power law yielded a better fit than a linear law,
even for weighted constraints.

Generalizing to other Data Sets
As mentioned in the Introduction, each modality is characterized by a specific exponent n in the psychophysical
power law. The hypothesis that linguistic acceptability
is a psychophysical continuum like loudness and brightness makes an important prediction: there should be a
unique exponent for acceptability that is invariant across
experiments. This hypothesis can be tested by applying
the power law in (8) to data sets from the literature. Table 1 presents the results of regression analyses using
equation (8) for seven data sets from the literature; all

656

0

0

2
4
6
weighted sum of constraint violations

8

Figure 4: Perceived acceptability as a function of the
weighted sum of the number of word order constraints
violated
perceived acceptability (log scale)

Here, wi is the weight of constraint i and Ci is the number
of times constraint i is violated. For the data at hand, we
obtained the following equation for our three constraints
N OM, P RO , and V ERB :
(9) ψ = l − (wNomCNom + wProCPro + wVerbCVerb )n
This led to the prediction that equation (9) fits our data
better than equation (6), which simply assumes that all
constraints have an equal weight (viz., k). We tested
this by applying non-linear regression to our data. This
resulted in a significant correlation (R = .89, N = 24,
p < .001) and the regression equation in (10):

2

1

0.5

0.25
1
2
3
4
5 6 7 8
weighted sum of constraint violations (log scale)

Figure 5: Perceived acceptability as a function of the
weighted sum of the number of word order constraints
violated. log-log scale
studies are magnitude estimation studies of linguistic acceptability. We only included data from experiments that
were based on an explicit set of linguistic constraints,
as this is the prerequisite for applying the power law.
Note that some of the experiments included context as
a between-subject variable. We conducted separate analyses for the context and the no context condition, as the
context has an influence on the threshold l for acceptability (for example, Keller & Alexopoulou, 2001 found
that judgments are higher in the no context condition, all
other factors being equal).
These published data cover a range of syntactic constructions (word order, extraction, gapping) in three different languages (German, Greek, English). The results
show that the weighted power law provides a consistently
good fit with the experimental data. The fit of the power
law is significantly better than the fit of the corresponding
linear law in all but two cases (see Table 1). The exponent
of the power law, n, ranges from .14 to .83, the average
is n = .36. Note that there are two outliers: the data of
Experiment 1 (context) and Experiment 2 (no context) of
Keller and Alexopoulou (2001) results in exponents of
n = .14 and n = .83 respectively. These are also the two
cases where the fit of the power law is not significantly

Table 1: Applying the power law to data sets in the literature
Construction Language N m R0l
R0p
p
n
Source
Word order
German
16 3 .79 .92 ** .22 Keller, 2000a, Exp. 1, no context
Word order
German
24 4 .84 .90 * .34 Keller, 2000a, Exp. 1, context
Word order
Greek
24 3 .72 .81 – .14 Keller & Alexopoulou, 2001, Exp. 1, context
Word order
Greek
24 3 .88 .87 – .83 Keller & Alexopoulou, 2001, Exp. 2, no context
Word order
Greek
36 5 .81 .87 * .30 Keller & Alexopoulou, 2001, Exp. 2, context
Extraction
English
16 6 .80 .93 ** .28 Keller, 2000b, Exp. 4
Gapping
English
24 3 .83 .89 * .43 Keller, 2001, Exp. 2, context
m number of constraints
N
number of data points
R0l adj. correlation coefficient for linear law p sig. difference R0l and R0p (*p < .05; **p < .01)
R0p adj. correlation coefficient for power law n exponent for power law
better than that of the linear law. In the case of n = .83
this is expected, as the exponent is close to one, resulting
in basically a linear law. If we discount these two outliers, then the remaining exponents are all close to the
value of n = .38 that we found when applying the power
law to the experimental data set reported in this paper.

Conclusions
This paper dealt with the question of whether linguistic acceptability can be treated as a psychophysical
continuum such as brightness and loudness. It is well
known that linguistic acceptability can be measured using the psychophysical technique of magnitude estimation. However, the psychophysical power law that relates
perceived magnitude to physical magnitude is not directly applicable, as linguistic acceptability has no physical correlate.
We therefore proposed a power law that relates the perceived acceptability of a linguistic structure to the number linguistic constraints that the structure violates. We
presented experimental data for word order variation in
German that allowed us to test this hypothesis. It was
found that a power law closely models the experimental
data; a comparison with a linear law relating acceptability and number of violations yielded a significantly worse
fit. We were also able to show that a modified power law
that assigns weights to constraints yields an even better
fit with the experimental data. Again, it significantly outperforms the corresponding linear law.
Finally, we generalized our results by applying them
to a range of data sets from the literature on magnitude
estimation of linguistic acceptability. In all cases a close
fit with the data was achieved, and in all but two cases
the power law provided a better fit than the linear law.
We also found that the modality-specific exponent in the
Stevens’ Psychophysical Law is approximately n = .36
for linguistic acceptability.

References
Bader, M., & Meng, M. (1999). Subject-object ambiguities
in German embedded clauses: An across-the-board comparison. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28(2), 121–143.
Bard, E. G., Robertson, D., & Sorace, A. (1996). Magnitude
estimation of linguistic acceptability. Language, 72(1), 32–
68.

657

Choi, H.-W. (1996). Optimizing structure in context: Scrambling and information structure. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.
Cowart, W. (1997). Experimental syntax: Applying objective
methods to sentence judgments. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Haider, H. (1993). Deutsche Syntax generativ: Vorstudien
zur Theorie einer projektiven Grammatik. Tübingen: Gunter
Narr.
Jacobs, J. (1988). Probleme der freien Wortstellung im
Deutschen. In I. Rosengren (Ed.), Sprache und Pragmatik
(Vol. 5, pp. 8–37). Department of German, Lund University.
Keller, F. (2000a). Evaluating competition-based models of
word order. In L. R. Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 747–752). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Keller, F. (2000b). Gradience in grammar: Experimental and
computational aspects of degrees of grammaticality. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Edinburgh.
Keller, F. (2001). Experimental evidence for constraint competition in gapping constructions. In G. Müller & W. Sternefeld
(Eds.), Competition in syntax (pp. 211–248). Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Keller, F., & Alexopoulou, T. (2001). Phonology competes with
syntax: Experimental evidence for the interaction of word
order and accent placement in the realization of information
structure. Cognition, 79(3), 301–372.
Krueger, L. E. (1989). Reconciling Fechner and Stevens: Toward a unified psychophysical law. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 12(2), 251–267.
Lodge, M. (1981). Magnitude scaling: Quantitative measurement of opinions. Beverley Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Müller, G. (1999). Optimality, markedness, and word order in
German. Linguistics, 37(5), 777–818.
Myung, I. J., Kim, C., & Pitt, M. (2000). Toward an explanation of the power law artifact: Insights from response surface
analysis. Memory and Cognition, 28(5), 832–840.
Nagata, H. (1992). Anchoring effects in judging grammaticality of sentences. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 75(1), 159–
164.
Scheepers, C. (1997). Menschliche Satzverarbeitung: Syntaktische und thematische Aspekte der Wortstellung im
Deutschen. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Freiburg.
Sorace, A., & Keller, F. (2003). Gradience in linguistic data.
Lingua, to appear.
Stevens, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysical law. Psychological Review, 64(3), 153–181.
Uszkoreit, H. (1987). Word order and constituent structure in
German. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

