UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analysis of Adaptive Dynamical Systems for Eating Regulation Disorders

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40s0m0zc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Bosse, Tibor
Delfos, Martine F.
Jonker, Catholijn M.
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analysis of Adaptive Dynamical Systems for Eating Regulation Disorders
1

2

1

Tibor Bosse , Martine F. Delfos , Catholijn M. Jonker , and Jan Treur
(mfdelfos@wanadoo.nl, {tbosse, jonker, treur}@cs.vu.nl)

1,3

1

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence
De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands URL: http://www.cs.vu.nl/~{tbosse, jonker, treur}
2
PICOWO, Psychological Institute for Consultancy, Education and Research
Goeree 18, 3524 ZZ Utrecht, The Netherlands
3
Universiteit Utrecht, Department of Philosophy
Heidelberglaan 8, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Abstract
To analyse a subject’s mental processes, psychotherapists
often face nontrivial properties of adaptive dynamical systems.
Analysis of dynamical systems usually is performed using
mathematical techniques. Such an analysis is not precisely the
type of reasoning performed in psychotherapy practice. In this
paper it is shown how practical reasoning about dynamic
properties of adaptive dynamical systems within
psychotherapy can be described using dynamical logical
methods and a high-level language to describe dynamics.

Introduction
Within the context of psychotherapy often types of human
behaviour and development are addressed that are highly
complex, dynamic and adaptive. Recently it has been
suggested that the Dynamical Systems Theory (DST), cf.
Port and van Gelder (1995), could be an adequate tool for
psychotherapists to describe and analyse such behaviours;
e.g., (Kupper and Hoffmann, 1996; Levine, 1996;
Tschacher, Scheier, and Grawe, 1998; Warren, Sprott, and
Hawkins, 2002). However, application of the DST approach
in the practice of psychotherapy is not at all straightforward,
and much remains to be done. A therapist’s reasoning
usually is performed in an informal, intuitive, partly
conscious manner. Explanation of (at least parts of) this
reasoning may take place in a qualitative, logical manner. In
contrast, DST requires quantitative mathematical modelling,
and analysis of dynamic properties is based on quantitative
techniques from mathematics. This contrast between
‘qualitative, logical’ and ‘quantitative, mathematical’ makes
it very difficult, if not impossible to use the DST approach
in this domain. The main contribution of this paper is to
show how alternative techniques are better suited to
adequately describe the manner in which reasoning about
such an adaptive dynamical system in therapy practice takes
place, or can take place in a systematic manner.
Within the areas of Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence recently alternative techniques have been
developed to analyse the dynamics of phenomena using
logical means. Examples are dynamic and temporal logic,
and event and situation calculus; e.g., (Reiter, 2001). These
logical techniques allow to consider and relate states of a
process at different points in time. The form of these
relations can cover qualitative aspects, but also quantitative
aspects.

This paper illustrates the usefulness of such an
alternative approach for the analysis and formalisation of
adaptive dynamical systems in psychotherapy practice, in
particular for the first phase of eating regulation disorders;
e.g., (Beument et al., 1987; Garner and Garfinkel, 1985). In
Delfos (2002), an adaptive dynamical model that describes
normal functioning of eating regulation under varying
metabolism levels is used as a basis for classification of
eating regulation disorders, and of diagnosis and treatment
within a therapy. Reasoning about the dynamic properties of
this model (and disturbances of them) is performed in an
intuitive, conceptual but informal manner.
In this paper, first this model is formalised in a highlevel executable format, and some simulations are shown,
both for wellfunctioning situations and for different types of
malfunctioning situations that correspond to the first phase
of well-known disorders such as anorexia (nervosa),
obesitas, and bulimia. Next, as part of our analysis a number
of relevant dynamic properties of this dynamical system are
identified and formalised at different levels of aggregation:
both for the regulation as a whole and for separate parts of
the adaptive system. Using a software environment that has
been developed, these properties have been checked for a
number of simulation traces. Moreover, it is shown how
these dynamic properties logically relate to each other, i.e.,
which properties at the lower level of aggregation together
imply given properties at the higher level. Such logical
relationships are especially important for the diagnosis of a
malfunctioning system.

Modelling Approach
The domain of reasoning about dynamical systems in
psychotherapy requires an abstract modelling form yet
showing the essential dynamic properties. As dynamic
properties of such a dynamical system can be complex, a
high-level language is needed to characterise them. To
this end the Temporal Trace Language TTL is used as a
tool; for previous applications of this language to the
analysis of (cognitive) processes, see, e.g., (Jonker and
Treur, 2002). Using this language, dynamic properties
can be expressed in informal, semi-formal, or formal
format. The language allows to explicitly refer to (real)
time, and to developments of processes over time.
Moreover to perform simulations, models are desired that
can be formalised and are computationally easy to

168

handle. These executable models are based on the
socalled ‘leads to’ format which is defined as a
sublanguage of TTL; for a previous application of this
format for simulation of cognitive processes, see (Jonker,
Treur, and Wijngaards, 2003). The Temporal Trace
Language TTL is briefly defined as follows.
A state ontology is a specification (in order-sorted
logic) of a vocabulary to describe a state of a process. A
state for ontology Ont is an assignment of truth-values
true or false to the set At(Ont) of ground atoms expressed in
terms of Ont. The set of all possible states for state
ontology Ont is denoted by STATES(Ont). The set of state
properties STATPROP(Ont) for state ontology Ont is the set
of all propositions over ground atoms from At(Ont). A
fixed time frame T is assumed which is linearly ordered,
for example the natural or real numbers. A trace T over
a state ontology Ont and time frame T is a mapping T : T
→ STATES(Ont), i.e., a sequence of states T t (t ∈ T ) in
STATES(Ont). The set of all traces over state ontology Ont
is denoted by TRACES(Ont). The set of dynamic properties
DYNPROP(Ont) is the set of temporal statements that can
be formulated with respect to traces based on the state
ontology Ont in the following manner.
These states can be related to state properties via the
formally defined satisfaction relation |==, comparable to
the Holds -predicate in the Situation Calculus; cf. (Reiter,
2001): state(T, t) |== p denotes that state property p holds in
trace T at time t. Based on these statements, dynamic
properties can be formulated , using quantifiers over time
and the usual first-order logical connectives ¬ (not), &
(and), ∨ (or), ⇒ (implies), ∀ (for all), ∃ (there exists); to
be more formal: formulae in a sorted first-order predicate
logic with sorts T for time points, Traces for traces and F
for state formulae.
To model basic mechanisms of a process at a lower
aggregation level, direct temporal dependencies between
two state properties, the simpler ‘leads to’ format is used.
This executable format can be used for simulation and is
defined as follows. Let α and β be state properties. In
leads to specifications the notation α →
→e, f, g, h β , means:
if state property α holds for a certain time interval
with duration g, then after some delay (between e
and f) state property β will hold for a certain time
interval h.
For a more formal definition, see (Jonker, Treur, and
Wijngaards, 2003).

Local properties
Local properties are dynamic properties of the basic
mechanisms in the dynamical model. Based on these
properties the global properties of the system emerge; they
together entail these global properties. Local properties are
specified in the executable ‘leads to’ format; for simplicity,
below the parameters e, f, g, and h have been left out (their
values are discussed in the section on Simulation
Experiments). An overall picture of the executable model
can be found in Figure 1.

adaptation

sensory
processes

action
generation

body state
day used energy

weight

Figure 1 Overview of the executable model
The first two (action generation) properties characterise
when a stimulus to eat is generated, based on an internal eat
norm N that is maintained.
LP1 (eat-stimulus)
The first local property LP1 expresses that an eat norm N
and an intermediate amount eaten E less than this norm
together lead to an eat stimulus. Formalisation:
intermediate_amount_eaten(E) and eat_norm(N) and E < N
→
→ stimulus(eat)

LP2 (not-eat-stimulus)
Local property LP2 expresses that an eat norm N and an
intermediate amount eaten E higher than this norm together
lead to an non-eat stimulus. Formalisation:
intermediate_amount_eaten(E) and eat_norm(N) and E ≥ N
→
→ stimulus(do_not_eat)

The properties LP3, LP4, LP5 and LP6 characterise the
effect of eating (on body state); it is assumed that the
outcomes on amount eaten are taken by sensory processing.
LP3 (increase of amount eaten)
Local property LP3 expresses how an eat stimulus increases
an intermediate amount eaten by additional energy d (the
energy value of what is eaten). Formalisation:
intermediate_amount_eaten(E) and stimulus(eat)
→
→ intermediate_amount_eaten(E+d)

LP4 (stabilizing amount eaten)
Local property LP4 expresses how a non-eat stimulus keeps
the intermediate amount eaten the same. Formalisation:
intermediate_amount_eaten(E) and stimulus(do_not_eat)
→
→ intermediate_amount_eaten(E)

LP5 (day amount eaten)
Local property LP5 expresses that the day amount eaten is
the intermediate amount eaten at the end of the day.
Formalisation:
intermediate_amount_eaten(E) and time(24)
→
→ day_amount_eaten(E)
Here time counts the hours from 1 to 24 during

the day.

LP6 (weight through balance of amount eaten and
energy used)
Local property LP6 expresses a simple mechanism of how
weight is affected by the day balance of amount eaten and

169

energy used. Here γ is a fraction that specifies how energy
leads to weight kilograms. Formalisation:
day_amount_eaten(E1) and day_used_energy(E2) and weight(W)
→
→ weight(W + γ * (E1 – E2))

The last local property characterises adaptation: how the eat
norm N is adapted to the day used energy.
LP7 (adaptation of amount to be eaten)
Local property LP7 expresses a simple (logistic) mechanism
for the adaptation of the eat norm based on the day amount
of energy used. Here α is the adaptation speed, β is the
fraction of E that is the limit of the adaptation; normally β =
1. Formalisation:
day_used_energy(E) and eat_norm(N) and time(24)
→
→ eat_norm(N + α * N * (1 - N/βE))

Simulation Examples
A special software environment has been created to enable
the simulation of executable models. Based on an input
consisting of dynamic properties in ’leads to’ format, the
software environment generates simulation traces. Examples
of such traces can be seen in Figure 2, 4 and 5. Here, time is
on the horizontal axis, the state properties are on the vertical
axis. A dark box on top of the line indicates that the property
is true during that time period, and a lighter box below the
line indicates that the property is false. These traces are
based on all local properties presented above.

correctly adapted to the amount of energy used, but in the
end they are practically equal. As a consequence, the subject
first undereats a little bit (6 units), causing a loss of 0.4
kilogram. However, within the next 24 hours she starts
eating more (8 units). Subsequently, the eating pattern
stabilizes, and so does the weight (at 59.6 kg).
The simulation of anorexia is based upon the assumption
that anorexia in many cases has a genetic background (Vink
et al., 2001). This means that the signal ‘stop eating’ , in this
simulation translated into the ‘stimulus(do-not-eat)’ , comes
too early with respect to the amount of energy deployed.
Delfos (2002) proposes that as a result of this condition,
there exists an unconscious phase of slight underfeeding
resulting in not gaining weight proportional to the growth
and the risk of hampering growth. This first phase of
anorexia, which can cover several years especially
prepuberty, consists of a discrepancy between food eaten
and energy deployed at an unconscious level; the person is
not consciously trying to lose weight.

Figure 3 Height velocity pattern for anorexia

Figure 2 Simulation of a normal pattern
Certain parameters are the same in all three simulations. In
the properties LP1 to LP5, the values (0,0,1,1) have been
chosen for the timing parameters e, f, g, and h. In the
properties LP6 and LP7, these values are (0,0,1,25);
moreover, γ = 0.2 in LP6. The initial weight is always 60,
the initial eat-norm is always 6, and the amount of energy
used on each day remains 8. Thus, we are dealing with
situations where initially the eat-norm is too low with
respect to the energy used, and should be adapted
accordingly. All simulations involve a period of 110 hours
(i.e., slightly more than four days). In Figure 2, an example
of a normal situation is shown (i.e., no eating regulation
disorders are present). To simulate this, in the Norm
Adaptation Property (LP7), α = 0.75 and β = 1; As can be
seen in the figure, it takes some time before the eat-norm is

In Figure 3 the anorexia process is depicted in height
velocity (cm/year). The girl entered the conscious phase of
her eating disorder (anorexia) when she was nearly 13 years
old. It was then that she began dieting. Within a year she
was in a very bad medical condition. The height velocity
however shows that the growth was stopped much earlier by
a delay of puberty from age 10 on. After entering therapy
when 14 years old, the height velocity recovered with the
process of gaining weight.
Figure 4 shows a simulation of the eating pattern of a
person within the first (unconscious) phase of anorexia. To
simulate this, in the Norm Adaptation Property, α = 0.75
and β = 0.95. These settings result in an eat norm that
converges a little bit to the amount of energy used, but this
adaptation is not enough. The picture clearly demonstrates
the consequences: the subject continuously eats an amount
of food that is too low, compared to what she needs.
Therefore, weight drops from 60 to 59.6 to 59.4, and this
decreasing trend continues. A simulation of the dynamics of
obesitas that has been performed (not shown) provides

170

exactly the opposite pattern. In that case, the simulated
subject continuously eats too much and gains weight.
As for bulimia there exists two kinds of situations. First
the prephase of bulimia, in which the eating disorder exists
at an unconscious level, and second the bulimia that evolves
from consciously slight underfeeding or anorectic
underfeeding that results in compensating urges of excessive
eating.

Figure 4 Simulation of the pattern of a person with anorexia

as the subject starts to attempt to correct these fluctuations
by conscious decisions. This further interference of more
conscious cognitive aspects within the adaptive processes
will be addressed in future research.

Analysis of Dynamic Properties of the System
Complex dynamic processes can be described at different
aggregation levels, varying from the local level of
(generating) basic mechanisms to the level of (emerging)
global dynamic properties of a process as a whole. To
analyse how such global dynamic properties relate to local
properties it is useful to distinguish intermediate properties.
Moreover, some other (environmental) properties may be
needed that relate the considered process to other processes
that are not modelled and considered as external
environment. In this section, the different types of non-local
dynamic properties of the system are identified. For the
relationships between the properties see also Figure 6.
For the adaptive dynamical system, the amount of used
energy is an exogenous variable, i.e., this comes from the
environment. To be able to do analysis, it is convenient to
consider certain simplifying assumptions on the
environment. For example, to study limit behaviour, a
suitable assumption is that from a certain point of time no
changes occur in the used energy (EP2), or to study how the
system behaves under one change, a suitable assumption is
that only one change occurs in the environment (EP1). The
latter type of environment may be used, for example, to
study transitions occurring in subjects of around 35 years
old, when the metabolism becomes slower, and hence the
day amount of used energy will become lower. For each of
the properties, first an informal description is given, and
next the formal description that has been used for the
automated checking software; see Discussion.
EP1(t1, t2, E1, E2) (Transition from one used energy E1
to another used energy E2)
Property EP1 expresses that first the day amount of used
energy is constant at value E1, and next it is constant at
(another) value E2. Formalisation:
For all t < t1 state(T, t) |== day_used_energy(E1)
& for all t ≥ t2 state(T, t) |== day_used_energy(E2)

Figure 5 Simulation of the pattern of a person with bulimia
In Figure 5, a simulation of the eating pattern of a person in
a prephase for bulimia is shown. To simulate this, in the
Norm Adaptation Property, α = 2.25 and β = 1.2. Especially
the value of α is very important here, because it makes that
the adaptation of the eat norm to the energy use is too
sensitive. Thus, a norm that is too low will be increased, but
this increment will be too big, so that the new norm is too
high. This behavior can be seen in Figure 5, where the eatnorm keeps fluctuating somewhere between 6 and 12. This
results in a very irregular eating pattern. Accordingly, the
subject’s weight fluctuates between 59 and 62. The risk of
developing bulimia fully in the form as known in
psychotherapy is present, and will become manifest as soon

EP2(t, E) (Constant amount of used energy E from
time t)
Property EP2 expresses that from a certain time point t the
day amount of used energy is constant E. Formalisation:
For all t’ ≥ t

state(T, t’) |== day_used_energy(E)

Global properties (GP) are dynamic properties of the
process as a whole.
GP1(W, m) (Stable weight W, margin m, e.g., 2%)
Property GP1 expresses that fluctuations in weight are
limited to a relative m-interval of weight W. Formalisation:
For all t [ state(T, t) |== weight(W1) ⇒ -m ≤ (W1 - W)/W ≤ m ]
GP2(t1, t2, E1, E2, W, m) (Conditional constant weight
W with margin m)

171

Property GP2 states that GP1 holds in environments in
which only one change occurs in the day amount of used
energy. Formalisation: EP1(t1, t2, E1, E2) ⇒ GP1(W, m)
GP3(t, E, d, e) (Adaptation of day amount eaten)
Property GP3 expresses that if the day amount of used
energy is constant E after a time point t, then the day amount
of food eaten will be in a relative d-interval of E.
Formalisation:
For all t EP2(t, E) ⇒ ∃t’ t ≤ t’ ≤ t + e & state(T, t’) |== time(24) &
∀E1[state(T, t’) |== day_amount_eaten(E1) ⇒ -d ≤ (E1 - E)/E ≤ d ]

Intermediate properties are dynamic properties, normally
fulfilled by parts of the dynamical system such that together
they entail the global properties.
IP1(t, E, d, e) (Eat norm is adapting to used energy)
Intermediate property IP1 expresses that, if the day amount
of used energy is constant after time point t, than, after some
time the eat norm will be in a relative d-interval of E.
Formalisation:
For all t EP2(t, E) ⇒ ∃t’ t ≤ t’ ≤ t + e & state(T, t’) |== time(24) &
[state(T, t’) |== eat_norm(N) ⇒ -d ≤ (N - E)/E ≤ d ]
IP2 (Eat stimuli)
Intermediate property IP2 expresses how the eat norm N and
the amount of food eaten together determine whether or not
an eat stimulus occurs. It is just the conjunction of LP1 and
LP2. Formalisation: LP1 & LP2
IP3 (Day eating accumulation)
Intermediate property IP3 expresses how the day amount of
eaten food is generated by following the eat stimuli during
the day. Formalisation: LP3 & LP4 & LP5.
GP1

GP2

GP3

IP1

LP7

The interlevel relationships are depicted by an AND-tree in
Figure 6. Here a property at a parent node is implied by the
conjunction of the properties at its children nodes.

Diagnostics Based on Failing Analysis
The interlevel relations as depicted in Figure 6 provide a
formalisation of a basis for a form of diagnostic reasoning
that is sometimes applied in therapy practice. This reasoning
runs as follows. Suppose the top level property GP1 fails
(e.g., non-stable weight). Then due to the logical interlevel
relations, one level lower in the tree either EP1 fails (e.g.,
strongly fluctuating metabolism) or GP2 fails. Suppose GP2
fails. Then one level lower either LP6 fails (e.g., insufficient
food uptake by digestion) or GP3 fails. Suppose GP3 fails.
Then either IP2 fails (e.g., no effect of eatnorm on eating) or
IP3 fails (e.g., eating no adequate food in the sense of
energy-content) or IP1 fails. Suppose IP1 fails. Then LP7
fails (e.g., no adequate adaptation mechanism of eat norm
to energy use). Subsequently the type of failure of LP7 can
be identified depending on whether weight is systematically
too low or decreasing (first phase anorexia), too high, or
increasing (first phase obesitas) or fluctuating (first phase
bulimia).

Discussion

IP3

LP3

GP1(W, m)
GP2(W, m)
GP3(d, e)
IP1(d)
IP2
IP3

Two software environments have been developed to support
the research reported here. First a simulation environment
has been used to generate simulation traces as shown.
Second, checking software has been used that takes traces
and formally specified properties and checks whether a
property holds for a trace.

LP6

LP2

⇒
⇒
⇒
⇒
⇒
⇒

EP1(t1, t2, E1, E2) & GP2(W, m)
GP3(d, e) & LP6
IP1(d, e) & IP2 & IP3
LP7
LP1 & LP2
LP3 & LP4 & LP5

EP1

IP2

LP1

level have been defined: the intermediate properties. Thus a
set of properties at different aggregation levels was obtained
that forms a connected set of properties with the following
interlevel relationships:

LP4

LP5

EP1
EP2
GP1
GP2
GP3
IP1
IP2
IP3
LP1
LP2
LP3
LP4
LP5
LP6
LP7

Figure 6 Interlevel relations between the dynamic properties

Interlevel Relationships Between Properties
The dynamic properties as identified in the section above
describe the process at different levels of aggregation. The
global properties describe the highest aggregation level: of
the process as a whole. The local properties presented
earlier describe the process at the lowest level of
aggregation: the specific basic mechanisms. These
properties are logically related in the sense that if a trace
satisfies all local properties, then it also satisfies the global
properties. To analyse these logical relationships between
properties at different aggregation levels more
systematically, properties at an intermediate aggregation

trace 1

trace 2

trace 3

trace 4

trace 5

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

Table 1 Results of checking properties against traces

172

The results for checking the properties on a number of these
traces are as depicted in Table 1. The parameters used were
as follows: W = 60, E = 8, m = 0.02, d = 0.1 and e = 24.
Here the first three traces are those depicted in Figure 2, 4
and 5 respectively (normal, anorexia and bulimia). In traces
2 and 3 the adaptation mechanism is malfunctioning (LP7 is
the cause of the problems). Trace 4 shows a pattern in which
the eating regulation in principle functions well but there is
insufficient food uptake by digestion (LP6 is the cause of
the problems), whereas trace 5 shows a pattern in which the
response on the eat stimulus is eating food without energetic
value (LP3 is the cause of the problems). Notice that indeed
for all these traces the interlevel relations of Figure 6 hold.
In comparison to Temporal Logic (Barringer et al.,
1996) our simulation approach has possibilities to
incorporate (real or integer) numbers in state properties, and
in the timing parameters e, f, g, h. Furthermore, TTL has
more expressive power than temporal logic. For example,
explicit reference can be made to (real) time, and variables
can be used. Moreover, reference can be made to different
developments of processes over time; thus statements such
as ‘exercise improves skill’ , which require comparison of
different histories, can be formalised.
In comparison to rule-based approaches such as
described by Holland (1995) and Rosenbloom, Laird and
Newell (1993), our leads to format is more declarative in a
temporal sense: in a built-in manner the simulation
processes are explicitly related to (and have their semantics
in) the (real) time dimension, and that relationship to time
does not depend on the computational processes in an
implicit manner, as in rule processing is usual. Furthermore,
in our approach a format is available to express more
complex, non-executable dynamic properties in our
language TTL, and analysis methods for these dynamic
properties at different aggregation levels are available as
described above.
The high-level model integrates both medical and
psychological aspects of the process, and has proven its
value by predicting and explaining many of the patterns
observed in psychotherapy practice. As one example, the
development of obesitas after the age of 35 year can be
explained as a lack of adaptive properties of the system with
respect to decreased metabolism level. A more detailed
model based on a set of differential equations for more
detailed physiological processes is hard to obtain due to the
lack of detailed knowledge (and parameter values) at the
physiological level. Furthermore, even if such a model could
be constructed, it probably would be so complex that it is
hard to handle for simulation and analysis. Moreover, such
mathematical techniques are not compatible with the type of
reasoning within psychotherapy practice.
Further work is underway to address further phases of
eating regulation disorders, especially phases when the
subject’ s more conscious cognitive mechanisms to cope
with such a disorder becomes more dominant. One of the

aims is to show how, for cases of a malfunctioning system,
the types of therapy described in (Delfos, 2002) can lead to
a modified dynamical system in which eating regulation is
functioning well.

References
Barringer, H., Fisher, M., Gabbay, D., Owens, R., and Reynolds,
M. (1996). The Imperative Future: Principles of Executable
Temporal Logic, Research Studies Press Ltd. and John Wiley &
Sons.
Beumont, P.J.V., et al. (1987). Neural Basis of Appetite and Food
Intake. Handbook of Eating Disorders, New York: Elsevier
Science Publishing Co.
Delfos, M.F. (2002). Lost Figure: Treatment of Anorexia, Bulimia
and Obesitas (in Dutch). Swets and Zeitlinger Publishers, Lisse.
Garner, D.M. and P.E. Garfinkel, eds. (1985). Handbook of
Psychotherapy for Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia, New York:
The Guilford Press.
Holland, J.H. (1995). Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds
Complexity. Addison-Wesley.
Jonker, C.M., and Treur, J. (2002). Analysis of the Dynamics of
Reasoning Using Multiple Representations. In: W.D. Gray and
C.D. Schunn (eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci 2002. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2002, pp. 512-517.
Jonker, C.M., Treur, J., and Wijngaards, W.C.A. (2003). A
Temporal Modelling Environment for Internally Grounded
Beliefs, Desires and Intentions. Cognitive Systems Research
Journal, vol. 4(3), 2003, pp. 191-210.
Kupper, Z., and Hoffmann, H. (1996). A Boolean Approach to the
Dynamics of Psychosis. In: W. Sulis and R. Combs (eds.),
Nonlinear Dynamics in Human Behaviour. World Scientific,
Singapore, pp. 296-315.
Levine, D.S., (1996). What Can Academic Psychology Contribute
to Psychotherapy? Psychline, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 18-19, 1996.
Port, R.F., Gelder, T. van (eds.) (1995). Mind as Motion:
Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Reiter, R. (2001). Knowledge in Action: Logical Foundations for
Specifying and Implementing Dynamical Systems. MIT Press,
2001.
Rosenbloom, P.S., Laird, J.E., Newell, A. (eds.) (1993). The SOAR
Papers: Research on Integrated Intelligence. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Tschacher, W., Scheier, C., and Grawe, K., (1998). Order and
Pattern Formation in Psychotherapy. Nonlinear Dynamics,
Psychology and Life Sciences, vol. 2, pp. 195-215
Vink, T., Hinney, A., Van Elburg, A.A., Van Goozen, S.H.,
Sandkuijl, L.A., Sinke, R.J., Herpertz-Dahlman, B.M.,
Henebrand, J., Remschmidt, H., Van Engeland, H. & Adan, R.A.
(2001). Association between an agouti-related protein gene
polymorphism and anorexia nervosa. Mol. Psychiatry, 6 (3):
325-328
Warren, K., Sprott, J.C., and Hawkins, R.C., (2002). The Spirit Is
Willing: Nonlinearity, Bifurcations, and Mental Control.
Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences, vol. 6, pp.
55-70.

173

