UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Inference in Automatic Interpretation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rg2n62z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Day, Samuel B.
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Inference in Automatic Interpretation
Samuel B. Day (s-day2@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Abstract
We present findings suggesting that analogical inference can
play a role in the fundamental processes involved in
automatic comprehension and interpretation. Participants
were found to use information from a prior relationally
similar example in understanding the content of a currently
encoded example. Further, in doing so they were sensitive to
structural mappings between the two instances, ruling out
explanations based solely on more general kinds of activation
and application. Reading speed measures were used to
demonstrate that these inferences were taking place during
encoding rather than at later retrieval. These findings support
the integration of sophisticated processes such as analogical
mapping in a wide range of cognitive functions.

Introduction
One of an individual’s primary cognitive tasks is simply
making sense of the things he or she encounters in the
world. A person must quickly classify and assess objects
and situations in order to know how to interact and what
kinds of responses to expect, to know where to allot
attention and what to safely disregard. So much information
must be evaluated so rapidly that these processes are
generally automatic and non-deliberative, apparently
consistent with fairly low-level processing.
However, this assessment belies the complexity of the
information these automatic interpretive processes can
frequently produce.
For many situations, accurate
comprehension requires an understanding of the roles that
each entity is playing, and how these various roles relate to
one another, creating a larger coherent structure. This is
particularly relevant since, in most real-world experiences, a
great deal of information is left unstated or ambiguous,
requiring a substantial amount of inference. This seems
consistent with more sophisticated cognitive processes, such
as analogical inference. In this paper, we present evidence
that analogical inference plays a role in the automatic, nondeliberative processes of online interpretation and
comprehension.

Analogical inference in comprehension
In analogical inference, a current representation is compared
with that of some previously stored case, and a structural
mapping between the two identifies common relational
systems. These relational commonalities are then used to
support the inference of additional information about the

306

current case (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989).
Specifically, information occupying a particular structural
position in one representation is carried over to a matching
position in the other. The experiments presented here
support the idea that this kind of process can be involved in
the fast, automatic, non-deliberative processes used in realtime comprehension of experiences. In other words, people
seem able to rapidly compare the structure of the current
situation to some specific prior case, map together entities
that are in similar roles, and automatically incorporate
additional information from the prior case into their
perceptions of the current one, perhaps without even
realizing they are doing so.
This can be distinguished from prior work showing the
influence of more general kinds of activation on
interpretation (such as priming) where facilitation of an idea
does not rely on structural commonalities. It is also distinct
from the vast literature on analogical inference that takes
place in directed, deliberate tasks.
Further, it represents a different sort of process than is
observed in implicit structural processes such as the
application of the structure in a learned artificial grammar
(Reber, 1967; 1969). In these cases, structure seems to be
playing a role in automatic interpretation, but only after
extensive exposure to a large number of specific instances,
presumably leading to a general, abstracted schema. The
investigation of processes that are structural, non-deliberate,
and based on a single prior instance therefore represents an
intriguing and novel question.

General activation in comprehension
To date, investigation of the factors that are relevant in
linking past episodes to current perception and
interpretation has focused almost exclusively on simpler
kinds of processes. For instance, a substantial amount of
research has been done on priming effects in perceptual
recognition, robustly demonstrating that prior exposure to a
stimulus facilitates its future recognition, both in terms of
speed and accuracy (Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Tulving,
Schacter, & Stark, 1982). McKoon & Ratcliff (1996)
further showed that this priming may sometimes mislead
individuals, biasing them toward responses that are
consistent with what they have previously experienced even
when these interpretations are incorrect. Similarly, studies
of semantic priming have demonstrated that recognition of a

word can be facilitated by simply presentation of
semantically related words (Meyer & Schvaneveldt, 1971).
For instance, recognition of doctor is improved after
exposure to nurse.
There is also some evidence that these kinds of effects can
extend beyond speeded, local recognition and influence
somewhat broader interpretational processes, though still in
an unstructured way. For instance, Anderson, Reynolds,
Schallert & Goetz (1977) designed ambiguous passages that
could be comprehended in two entirely different ways. One
of their passages, for example, could plausibly be
interpreted as describing either an attempted jailbreak or a
wrestling match (e.g., “The lock that held him was strong,
but he thought that he could break it.”).
People’s
interpretations varied as a function of prior experience;
further, the majority of participants reported never
considering an alternative explanation from the first one
they settled upon. This is consistent with automatic, nondeliberative processes. Ross and Bradshaw (1994) also
used ambiguous passages, including a modified version of
Anderson, et al’s wrestling/jailbreak story, to demonstrate
how simple association and general activation could
influence interpretation. In their studies, the two relevant
themes (wrestling and jailbreaks) had each been arbitrarily
associated with some other topic (e.g., Shakespeare) in
stories early in the set. Later, simply mentioning this
neutral topic in the text of the ambiguous passage proved
sufficient to lead participants strongly toward interpretation
consistent with the associated theme. Again, however, this
relied on a general increase in the accessibility of the
concept, not on any structure-to-structure mapping.
Schunn & Dunbar (1996) reported related results in the
area of problem solving. In their study, participants were
more easily able to make use of the idea of the mechanism
of inhibition in solving a novel problem when they had
recently encountered the concept in a problem from a
different domain (biochemistry v. molecular genetics).
Verbal protocols from participants were conspicuously
lacking in references to the earlier task (which had been
done on the previous day), leading the authors to suggest
that the transfer and use were implicit and outside of
conscious awareness. The authors interpreted these results
as priming of the general idea of inhibition, and emphasized
that the two problems did not share a larger global structure
that would support analogical mapping. Rather, it seemed
to be a more general application of a single, local relation.
In the examples so far, detailed structure mapping need
not play a role. The influence of prior experience on current
interpretation could be accounted for by broad activation of
a relevant theme, or mapping of a simple local structure.
Work on implicit learning (e.g., Reber, 1967; 1969), on the
other hand, suggests that relational structure may be
unconsciously encoded and applied to new situations, but
only after extensive exposure and presumed abstraction.
There is nothing here to suggest that individuals may make
use of a single prior instance in the online comprehension of
novel experiences.

307

Explicit analogy in interpretation
Some work has been done that is more closely related to our
current focus, however. Blanchette and Dunbar (2002)
examined analogy’s role in on-line interpretation, using a
false recognition paradigm to demonstrate representational
change in an analogical target. In one of their studies,
participants read a passage discussing the issue of marijuana
legalization. Near the end of the passage, it was stated that
the situation could be compared to alcohol prohibition, and
the passage went on to describe some aspects of prohibition
that could be considered analogous to the marijuana issue,
although none of the potential inferences was stated
explicitly. For instance, it was noted that the illegal
production and distribution of alcohol during prohibition
gave rise to elaborate and violent criminal organizations.
Later, participants were more likely to believe that they had
seen the implied facts actually stated about the target
domain than were individuals in a control group that had not
read the analogy paragraph—e.g., they falsely recognized
sentences explicitly stating that drug laws gave rise to
violent crime.
Importantly, this study demonstrates that analogical
inference can be used in interpretation, actually altering
participants’ representations and beliefs about what they had
seen. Unlike the present studies, however, the analogy had
been explicitly identified, so participants were aware of the
comparisons they were making and, at least to some extent,
of the inferences they were drawing.

Text comprehension
As hinted above, research on text comprehension clearly
bears on the question of automatic and nondeliberate
inferencing. Although there is considerable variation in
views concerning the degree and scope of inference-making
during text comprehension (Kintsch, 1988; McKoon &
Ratcliff, 1992; Glenberg et al., 1987; Graesser, Singer &
Trabasso, 1994), even the most conservative estimates
suggest that a fair number of automatic inferences are
necessary to meaningfully process text. This motivates the
use of narrative texts as a domain for examining the role of
analogical processing in the generation of automatic
inferences.
Although a considerable amount of research exists
examining the incorporation of new information into
existing knowledge structures (e.g., Kintsch’s (1988)
construction-integration model) as well as the role of
available semantic associations in influencing inferences,
the question remains open of whether and how structural
information from a single, seemingly independent episode
could bring about new automatic inferences.

Predictions
In the experiments described here, we examine whether
analogical inference may be involved in the automatic,
online interpretation of novel, ambiguous stimuli. If so,
these inferences should not only reflect the general
activation of previously seen concepts, but should also be

sensitive to commonalities in the roles that those concepts
played in specific prior instances. Additionally, they should
be incorporated into representations in a way that impacts
individuals’ actual beliefs about what they have seen.

Experiments
Participants read a series of narrative passages, designed
such that some of the later stories were relationally similar
to ones earlier in the set. Additionally, these later passages
(the target passages) always left some relevant piece of
information ambiguous or unstated. The question was
whether participants would automatically use information
from the earlier, analogous source passages to make
inferences while comprehending the ambiguous targets.
There were two versions of each source passage (given
between-subjects) that varied in some key details—the same
details which could be used to guide inferences in the
comprehension of the targets. For example, one source
passage described a herpetologist exploring the jungles of
Peru, who came across a lizard with some unusual physical
characteristics. In one version of the story, the scientist is
thrilled to realize that he has discovered a new species; in
the other, he is upset by what he recognizes as a physical
mutation caused by pollution from a nearby refinery. Aside
from these key statements, the passages are identical. Later
in the series, participants read an analogous scenario about a
marine biologist who finds a sea turtle, again with unusual
physical characteristics. This target passage leaves the
cause of these characteristics unstated, however, simply
stating that the researcher recognized the significance of
what she had found, and carefully reported her discovery to
the scientific community. Our primary focus, then, was to
examine how participants resolved the ambiguities in each
of the target passages, and how these comprehension-related
inferences varied as a function of which versions of the
source passages had been read.
In previously completed research (Day & Gentner, in
preparation) we discovered a strong tendency for
participants to interpret this kind of ambiguous passage in a
manner consistent with the information presented in the
earlier source analog. While consistent with our claim of
automatic analogical inference, this result on its own cannot
distinguish between inferences based on structural mapping
and those resulting from a more general kind of conceptual
activation. For instance, a participant who has recently
encountered the notion of discovering a new species may
have a generally increased fluency and availability for this
idea, increasing its influence on comprehension whenever
any ambiguity is encountered. In this situation, no mapping
between representations would be required. Our first
experiment was designed to distinguish between these two
possible factors.

Experiment 1
In our first study, we sought to rule out an explanation for
automatic inference based solely on the prior activation of a
general concept, and to demonstrate an influence of

308

matching representational structure. We therefore included
both of the key concepts in each version of the source
passages, but varied the role that each piece of information
played in the larger representation. For example, in the
source story involving the herpetologist, one version
described the lizard as a new species, but also revealed the
fact that the scientist had earned his reputation through
examining the effects of pollution on reptile growth and
development; the other version reversed the roles of these
facts—the lizard is described as being deformed by
pollution, while the scientist’s reputation was based on the
discovery of new species.
Note that if simple conceptual activation due to exposure
were the sole factor in the source passages’ influence, there
should be no difference between the two conditions—all
participants have seen both key concepts. If mapped
structure between the source and target were also playing a
part, however, then there should be an advantage for target
interpretations that are based on the source concept that
played a structurally matching role to the ambiguous portion
of the target.
After reading the passages, participants were given
several questions about their content, including some critical
items used to determine how they had interpreted each of
the target stories.

Participants
The participants were 20 undergraduate students at
Northwestern University, who participated in the study for
class credit.

Materials and Procedure
The materials consisted of a set of narrative passages and a
set of questions about their content. The story set included
nine passages—two source-target pairs and five filler
stories—presented in the following order: filler, Source 1,
Source 2, two fillers, Target 1, filler, Target 2, filler. The
average story length was 182 words (sd = 84). Above each
story was a brief (2-3 word) title, describing some salient
feature of the passage, such as setting (e.g., “The Bank,”
“High School”).
There were two versions of each source passage, varying
the role of two relevant pieces of information. The target
passages left this information unstated or ambiguous, and
were designed to be equally comprehensible with either of
the possible interpretations inferable from the source.
Which version of the source was read was varied between
participants, and all individuals were randomly assigned to
one of the two groups (10 per group). All participants read
the same filler and target passages. Participants were given
the story set along with the following instructions: “Please
read each of the following passages quickly but thoroughly.
Later, you will be asked to answer a few questions about
them.”
The participants were allowed to read the nine stories at
their own pace, usually requiring about five minutes for the
set. Once finished, they performed an unrelated filler task

that took approximately twenty minutes to complete, and
then answered a set of questions about the stories. The
questions were given with the following instructions:
“Please circle Yes or No to indicate whether each of the
following facts was stated in the passages you read earlier.
To assist you, the title of the relevant story is given in italics
before each fact.”
The test set contained 18 items, two per passage. For
each of the source and filler stories, there was one fact that
had actually been presented in the passage and one fact that
had not, making the correct responses “yes” and “no”
equally represented. For the target passages, there was also
one new statement consistent with each of the possible
inferences given by the sources and inconsistent with the
other, although neither fact had been explicitly stated in the
passage. For instance, there was one item that was
consistent with the interpretation that the marine biologist
had discovered a new species of sea turtle and one that was
consistent with her discovery of a turtle that had been
deformed due to pollution.
If participants failed to make any inferences about the
ambiguous portion of the target passages, or if they engaged
in a deliberate inference process (which would require
awareness of the ambiguity) they should respond “no” to
both of these critical items, since both statements were
actually new.
If participants’ interpretations were
influenced solely by a general activation of the relevant
concepts in the source passages, then they should sometimes
answer “yes” to the critical items, but there should be no
systematic differences in the pattern of responses between
the two conditions—both source concepts would have been
activated for all participants. However, if they are also
sensitive to the role that the relevant concept played in the
source passage and how that role maps onto the structure of
the target, then they should be more likely to interpret the
ambiguous portion of the target in a manner consistent with
the concept in the structurally matching part of the source.

Results and Discussion
The results were consistent with our claim of structurally
consistent inferences. For each participant, the proportion
of “yes” responses was calculated separately for items
consistent with structurally corresponding and structurally
non-corresponding source information—that is, whether the
key concept in the source was in the same or a different
structural position as the ambiguous portion of the target. A
one-way ANOVA was performed using these proportions as
a within-participants factor. The results showed that
participants were significantly more likely to respond that a
fact had been stated in the target when that fact was
consistent with information playing a corresponding role in
the source (F (1, 19) = 13.11, p < .01). On average,
participants responded affirmatively to structurally
corresponding items 58% of the time and noncorresponding items only 23% of the time.
Prior work has demonstrated that an individual’s
comprehension of ambiguous information may be

309

influenced by the general activation of a potentially relevant
concept. The current results support the additional idea that
individuals may automatically use a single prior instance as
a source for inference based on structural commonalities.
The results are consistent with the proposal that the
representations of the two passages are aligned and
inferences are made based on structural commonalities
found during the mapping process. Even though all
participants had seen the same two relevant concepts, either
of which could be used to support target comprehension,
they were far more likely to make use of a source element
when it corresponded structurally to the ambiguous part of
the target story. Further, the fact that they indicated that the
information was actually stated in the target story supports
the idea that these inferences did not involve active
deliberation, but rather were automatically incorporated into
their representations as they were being created.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 lend support to our suggestion
of analogical inference in automatic interpretation. The
patterns of inference are consistent with the claim that
individuals are making use of prior analogous instances
during the actual interpretation of a new episode. However,
it would be desirable to have a more subtle measure of
online inferences. Additionally, although the method used
in Experiment 1—asking which facts had been stated in the
target passages—provides a strong measure of participants’
current representations of the stories, it leaves itself
vulnerable to some concerns. For instance, participants
could have inadvertently been remembering the source story
itself rather than the target. Although steps were taken to
make this less likely—giving story titles with each test item,
changing salient details such as character gender between
source-target pairs—this remains a concern. Due to
similarity between the source and target scenarios,
participants also could have conflated the two stories,
reconstructing a memory that included details from both
passages.
In order to address issues such as these, as well as to more
directly examine participants' online processes, we adopted
a computer-based reading speed measure. The passages
from Experiment 1 were modified by adding a sentence to
each target that would be consistent with one of the possible
interpretations and inconsistent with the other. If the source
passage were influencing the target during online
comprehension rather than retrieval, we would expect
confusion (and therefore slower reading times) when a
sentence in the target was inconsistent with the
interpretation suggested by the corresponding concept in the
source.

Participants
The participants were 20 undergraduate students at
Northwestern University, who participated in the study for
pay or for class credit.

Materials and Procedure
The materials consisted of modified versions of the set of
narrative passages used in Experiment 1. Since reading
speed served as the dependent measure, there were no
additional test items. The relevant passages were altered in
two ways. First, the two versions of the source passages
each contained only one of the key concepts that could be
used in interpreting the target. The alternate concept, which
had been located in a non-corresponding section of the
source in Experiment 1, was deleted for this study.
Additionally, a sentence was added to each of the target
passages that was consistent with one of the possible
interpretations and inconsistent with the other.
All
participants read the same target passages, but whether the
additional sentence was consistent or inconsistent with
source-based inferences depended upon which version of
the source passage had been read.
For instance, one of the source passages described a
wealthy widow who had died under suspicious
circumstances. In one version, her niece, who lived in
another city, dutifully flew to her aunt’s home upon the
announcement of her death. In the other version, the niece
had been in the same city as her aunt but mysteriously left
town when the death was announced. The target passage,
which closely parallels the source, simply stated that a
nephew, George, bought a ticket and flew to Rio de Janeiro
upon the announcement of his wealthy uncle’s death. This
leaves unstated whether it is a flight to or from his uncle’s
home, or neither. Later in the passage, the following
sentence was added: “George's absence from the service
was conspicuous, especially since he had been seen around
his uncle's estate prior to his death, and the police soon
found out about his flight to Rio.” If the reader has
interpreted the nephew’s trip as fleeing the scene of a crime,
this sentence is easy to understand. If the trip is understood
as the nephew coming to the uncle’s funeral, however, the
sentence becomes not only unexpected, but somewhat
incomprehensible. Reading times for this sentence therefore
provide a way of potentially examining which relevant
inferences are being made online. The source passages
were varied between participants such that each individual
read one target that was consistent and one that was
inconsistent with inferences from the sources that had been
read. Each target passage was read an equal number of
times as consistent and inconsistent with the source
information.
Participants read the passages from the terminal of a
desktop computer. The stories were presented one sentence
at a time, with participants pressing the space bar to proceed
to the next sentence. Reading times for each sentence were
recorded, measured from the time a sentence appeared on
the screen until the space bar was pressed. The title for each
story remained at the top of the screen while each sentence
was read, and at the end of each story the screen cleared and
did not proceed to the next passage until the space bar was
pressed again. Reading times for the critical sentences,
which could be either consistent or inconsistent with source-

310

based inferences, served as the dependent measure for this
experiment

Results and Discussion
The results from Experiment 2 indicate that participants
were making source-based inferences during the reading of
the target passages. A one-way ANOVA using sourceconsistency as a between-items factor revealed a significant
difference in reading times (F (1, 19) = 6.81, p < .05). The
average reading time for a relevant sentence when it was
consistent with a potential inference from the source was
6.40 seconds, compared with a reading time of 8.88 seconds
for the same sentence when it was inconsistent with the
inference. This disparity, almost 2.5 seconds, represents a
sizeable difference. Perhaps a more telling measure is a
simple count—for 16 of the 20 participants, reading times
were longer for whichever sentence was inconsistent with
potential source inferences compared with the sentence that
was consistent. It is important to note that these reading
times reflect the result of inferences made earlier in the
target passage. The test sentences themselves are not
directly involved in the relevant, structurally based
inferences from the source passage. Rather, they provide a
means of examining whether such inferences have already
been made in the earlier, ambiguous portion of the target.
These results demonstrate that the contents and structure
of the source passage are influencing the comprehension of
the target as it is being read. Identical sentences took
significantly longer to read when they conflicted with
inferences suggested by an earlier analogous story. This is
evidence that the effects observed in Experiments 1 are
influenced by online interpretive processes.

General discussion
Taken together, the results of these experiments strongly
support the idea that structural information from a single
analogous instantiation can influence the understood
structure of a new instance, while it is being experienced. In
Experiment 1, participants interpreted new narrative
passages in a way that indicated they were using an earlier
passage as a source for inference, interpreting the same
target passage in different ways depending on which source
had been read. Further, they were quite sensitive to the role
that the relevant information played in the source story,
showing a strong preference for inferences based on
concepts in a matching structural position. Experiment 2
ruled out explanations for this result based solely on simple
memory effects, showing instead that these inferences were
actually being made during reading. In combination with the
results of the first experiment, this suggests that the
mapping of prior structure was occurring at the level of
interpretation of the materials. Inferences were taking place
during the encoding of the target passages that influenced
participants' beliefs about what had been presented in those
stories.
These results are consistent with the use of structuremapping in the fundamental process of assigning meaning

to the things we encounter. They support the idea that the
developing representations of events, as those events are
being experienced, may be aligned with existing mental
representations of specific prior episodes in a way that
identifies common structure and allows for the potential
importation of structurally matching information. It should
be noted that the story pairs used in this research were quite
similar overall. Prior research established that surface
similarity is an important determinant of analogical retrieval
from long-term memory (Gentner et al., 1993; Holyoak &
Koh, 1987). Thus one question for future research is
whether this kind of structural priming process occurs
between materials with less surface similarity.
Prior research has established ways in which analogical
inference may be involved in a number of higher cognitive
functions, such as learning (e.g., Gentner & Medina, 1998;
Loewenstein, Thompson, & Gentner, 1999), problem
solving (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983), and decision making
(Medin, Goldstone, & Markman, 1995). The current
findings support its potential role in seemingly more basic
and automatic processes, such as comprehension. This
work, combined with research exploring the relationship
between analogy and other fundamental processes such as
judgments of perceptual similarity (Gentner & Markman,
1997; Goldstone, Medin & Gentner, 1991) bolsters the view
that structure-mapping mechanisms of alignment and
inference may be recruited to play a role in processes at all
levels of cognition. Further research will help to clarify the
extent of this role, and how these mechanisms interact with
other mental processes to support cognition.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by ONR award N00014-02-10078. Thanks to Jason Jameson and the rest of the
Similarity and Analogy group.

References
Anderson, R.C., Reynolds, R.E., Schallert, D.L., & Goetz,
E.T. (1977). Frameworks for comprehending discourse.
American Educational Research Journal, 14, 367–381.
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2002). Representational
change and analogy: How analogical inferences alter
representations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 28(4), 672–685.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263–297.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A.B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychology, 52(1),
45–56.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gick, M. L., and K. J. Holyoak. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Glenberg, A. M., Meyer, M., & Lindem, K. (1987). Mental
models contribute to foreground during text

311

comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 26(1),
69-83.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the non-independence of
features in similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology,
23, 222-264.
Graesser, A., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101(3), 371-395.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition, 15,
332-340.
Holyoak, K.J., & Thagard, P.R. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295–
355.
Jacoby, L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship
between autobiographical memory and perceptual
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
110, 306–340.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(4), 586–
597.
Medin, D.L., Goldstone, R.L., & Markman, A.B. (1995).
Comparison and choice: Relations between similarity
processes and decision processes. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 2, 1–19.
Medin, D.L., & Ross, B.H. (1989). The specific character of
abstract thought: categorization, problem solving, and
induction. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Meyer, D.E., & Schvaneveldt, R.W. (1971). Facilitation in
recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence
upon retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 90, 227–234.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1996). Bias effects in implicit
memory tasks.. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 125, 403–421.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6, 855863.
Reber, A. S. (1969). Transfer of syntactic structure in
synthetic languages. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
81, 115-119.
Ross, B.H., & Bradshaw, G.L. (1994). Encoding effects of
remindings. Memory and Cognition, 22, 591–605.
Schunn, C., & Dunbar, K. (1996). Priming, analogy, and
awareness in complex reasoning. Memory & Cognition,
24(3), 271–284.
Tulving, E., Schacter, D., & Stark, H. (1982). Priming
effects in word fragment completion are independent of
recognition memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 8, 336–342.

