UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analyzing Effects of Goal Competition and Task Difficulty in Multiple-Task Performance:
Volitional Action Control within ACT-R

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/99r212vv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Schorr, Tina
Gerjets, Peter
Scheiter, Katharina

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analyzing Effects of Goal Competition and Task Difficulty in Multiple-Task
Performance: Volitional Action Control within ACT-R
Tina Schorr (t.schorr@iwm-kmrc.de)
Virtual Ph.D. Program: Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New Media
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@imw-kmrc.de)
Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
In this paper we present a cognitive-modeling analysis of
processes of volitional action control in multiple-task
performance. We simulated experimentally obtained effects of goal competition and task difficulty on processing strategies and performance in a high-level learning
and problem-solving task within the ACT-R architecture
(version 4.0). Beyond the model's capacity for explaining
the empirical pattern of results, the fundamental processing mechanisms used for modeling, i.e., activation
mechanisms and executive control productions are in line
with current explanations of elementary executive control
processes. Thus, we consider our modeling approach to
be a solution to fill the gap between volitional control
demands in real-world multiple-task performance and
experimental findings on elementary executive functions.

Elementary Executive Control Processes
In recent years, research on action control in multipletask situations in the fields of experimental cognitive
psychology and cognitive modeling has yielded promising insights (see Monsell & Driver, 2000, for an overview). With regard to modeling, mainly two approaches
have been proposed for analyzing the management of
component tasks in multiple-task performance. First,
activation mechanisms have been proven useful to represent aspects of task coordination and task interference.
Second, executive control productions have successfully
modeled processes that act on task-related processes by
enabling, preventing, and directing them. There are two
ways to handle component tasks in a multiple-task
situation, namely either simultaneously or successively.

Simultaneous Task Procedures
In simultaneous processing, people are required to perform two different tasks at the same time as in the psychological refractory period (PRP) procedure where two
choice reaction time tasks have to be performed with a

temporal overlap. If this overlap is short enough performance impairments on the second but not on the first
task will result. However, the total time required to
complete both tasks is often less than the sum of times
for performing both tasks separately.
Meyer and Kieras (1997) simulated these findings in
an EPIC model by introducing executive production
rules that schedule and control task-specific rules by
monitoring task progress and by inserting and deleting
task goals as well as strategy notes in working memory.

Successive Task Procedures
Successive processing requires the ability to alternate
between different tasks and is often studied in the taskswitching paradigm where subjects either repeatedly
have to perform the same task or to alternate between
different tasks. Typically, alternating task sequences
result in temporal switch costs in terms of a prolonged
response time compared to task repetition.
In their ACT-R model, Altmann and Gray (2000)
simulated switch costs mainly as a result of proactive
interference from previous tasks that may impede performance on a current task. The authors proposed active
inhibition and automatic decay of memory elements as
mechanisms that in combination may counteract proactive interference. According to this view, a memory
element can be inhibited by an encoding process that
increases the activation of a competing element. Additionally, the activation of an unused memory element
decreases over time because of automatic decay.
Rubinstein, Meyer, and Evans (2001) proposed an
EPIC model of task switching with two complementary
sets of production rules. Task processes are used for
performing the component tasks involved in multipletask performance. Executive control processes coordinate the execution of various task and subtask procedures.
Because activation mechanisms as well as executive
control productions have been shown to influence task
switching, Sohn and Anderson (2001) combined both

1053

approaches in their ACT-R model. An activation-based
task repetition mechanism increases the activation of a
task representation. An executive control process for
task preparation reconfigures the cognitive system in
accordance with an upcoming task.

The Issue of Scaling Up
The current research as it is reflected in the above mentioned cognitive models yields promising results with
regard to the study of multiple-task performance. However, these results may be confined to the microscopic
world of simple choice reaction time tasks. For this reason, it remains unclear whether theoretical constructs
and computational mechanisms that have been useful in
thinking about elementary control processes might be
applicable to everyday multiple-task behavior. First,
real-world tasks may be better analyzed on a coarser
temporal grain size because their time demands are not
comparable to microscopic tasks. Second, further executive functions (e.g., planning) may be relevant for
the coordination of more complex tasks that need to be
integrated into a comprehensive theoretical framework.
Third, energetic, dynamic, or motivational aspects of
action control may be much more relevant.

Volitional Action Control
In the remainder of this paper, it will be examined
whether the mechanisms that have been used to analyze
elementary processes of action control are suitable to
explain more complex control processes. To do so, we
first introduce a comprehensive framework of volitional
action control that allows deriving empirical hypotheses
on effects of goal competition and task difficulty in
multiple-task situations. Second, we outline how this
framework can be connected with cognitive concepts
relevant for the analysis of executive functions. Third,
we sketch an experimental study that was conducted to
test the proposed hypotheses (cf. Gerjets, Scheiter, &
Heise, 2002). Fourth, we present an ACT-R model that
simulates our findings on complex control processes by
using the above mentioned computational mechanisms.

A Framework of Volitional Action Control
In the following, we use the term “volitional action control” to refer to abilities that are traditionally ascribed to
a hypothetical “will power”. For instance, will power
comes into play when we need to maintain goals over
time and in the face of competing goals. As a comprehensive framework for the analysis of volitional action
control we use a condensed and precise version of the
rubicon theory of action phases (Heckhausen, 1991)
called PART (Pivotal Assumptions of the Rubicon
Theory; Heise, Gerjets, & Westermann, 1997).
PART’s broad framework integrates general cognitive, motivational, and volitional principles of goaldirected action. The framework is guided by an analysis

of control demands at the level of everyday actions and
deals with issues of goal setting and implementation on
a rather abstract functional level and thus without elaborating how these control demands may be met by cognitive mechanisms of information processing.
The theory describes actions from a time-sequential
perspective as an idealized sequence of four phases
(Figure 1). In the predecisional phase, the goal alternative with the highest expected value will be chosen as
the current goal to pursue. In the preexecutive phase
goal-related activities are planned that will be executed
when a suitable opportunity occurs. In the executive
phase, the focus lies on regulating effort investment and
persistence in goal accomplishment, both of which depend on a variable called goal strength and determine
performance. After goal accomplishment or disengagement in the case of failure the postexecutive phase starts
in which the attained outcome is evaluated.
Deliberation
(Predecisional)

Planning
Implementation Evaluation
(Preexecutive)
(Executive)
(Postexecutive)

Goal setting
("Rubicon")

Initiation
of activities

Termination
of activities

Figure 1: Action phases in PART
In multiple-task situations, conflicts between different
actions may occur. In our work we focus on conflicts
between a current goal (i.e., a Task 1 in its executive
phase) and a pending goal (i.e., a Task 2 in its preexecutive phase). When situational opportunities for implementing a pending goal arise, its goal strength may be
increased leading to a competition between this goal
and the current goal.
The theory allows for deriving several empirically
testable hypotheses for this situation from which we
chose the following two for experimental investigation.
• Distraction due to competing goals. The performance
of a currently executed Task 1 will be impaired if a
suitable opportunity for the implementation of activities related to a pending Task 2 occurs. This prediction results from the assumption that an opportunity
to implement Task 2 increases its goal strength. Impairments of Task 1 will be reflected in error rates or
reaction times. This is expected in the case that Task
1 is maintained as well as in the case that it is suspended in favor of the pending Task 2, i.e., in the case
of goal switching that takes place only if the goal
strength of Task 2 exceeds the one of Task 1.
• Difficulty-related volitional protection. Performance
impairments due to goal competition should be more
severe for a low than for a high level of task difficulty
of a currently executed Task 1. This prediction results
from the assumption that an increasing level of task
difficulty for Task 1 leads to an increase of its goal
strength. This influences the balance between the goal
strengths of Task 1 and Task 2 in favor of Task 1 and
thus decreases the distracting effect of the pending
Task 2.

1054

Cognitive Foundations of PART
In order to restate these assumptions on conflicts between a current and a pending goal in more cognitive
terms, we use concepts from Cognitive Load Theory
(Sweller, van Merrienboer, & Paas, 1998). This theory
distinguishes between mental effort as the amount of
cognitive capacity that is allocated to accommodate task
demands and cognitive load that is imposed by these
task demands on the cognitive system. Cognitive load is
caused by processing task-related information (intrinsic
and germane workload) as well as by processing taskunrelated information (extraneous workload). However,
only the latter one is responsible for performance impairments because it reduces working memory capacity
available for performing a current task. It can be hypothesized that an opportunity for the implementation
of a pending goal activates information related to that
goal in memory and thus, increases extraneous workload for the current goal. As a consequence, simpler
processing strategies might be selected to accomplish
the current goal which may be less resource demanding
but at the same time less effective (Schunn & Reder,
2001). These assumptions may allow for a more cognitive explanation of our first hypothesis on distraction
due to competing goals.
Our second hypothesis on difficulty-related volitional
protection can also be related to Cognitive Load Theory
by assuming a first-come-first-serve principle of working memory allocation (cf. Gerjets & Scheiter, in press).
A current goal with a low level of difficulty may be accompanied with low levels of intrinsic cognitive load
and thus leaves working memory resources that can be
claimed by either extraneous or germane cognitive load.
Without goal competition these resources may be used
to implement rather sophisticated processing strategies
to accomplish the current goal. Conversely, goal competition in multiple-task situations may impose extraneous
cognitive load that prevents the utilization of sophisticated strategies. However, working on a current goal
with a high level of difficulty may be characterized by
high levels of intrinsic cognitive load and thus, may not
leave enough working memory resources available for
sophisticated strategies or for being distracted.

Empirical Findings on Conflicts between a Current and a Pending Goal
We tested our hypotheses in a series of experiments
with a complex hypertext-based learning and problemsolving task (see Gerjets et al., 2002, for details).
Materials and procedure The subjects' main task (the
current goal) was to solve three probability word problems by identifying the correct problem category and
two correct variable values. Subjects were instructed to
solve the problems as fast and as correctly as possible
using information provided in a hypertext environment
which they could browse freely. Six problem categories
from probability theory were explained and illustrated

by worked-out examples with interesting cover stories
related to attractiveness and mate choice. Each example
was presented on two pages, one containing the example
problem and one containing a step-by-step example
solution that explicitly mentioned three structural features defining the problem categories. All information
was available during the whole experiment.
Design and dependent measures As independent variables two different levels of difficulty of the word problems (easy vs. difficult problems) and two levels of goal
competition (with vs. without goal competition) were
introduced. Both variables of the resulting 2x2-design
were varied between subjects (N = 68). In accordance
with preliminary studies we manipulated the level of
task difficulty by using larger numbers for the difficult
problems and by stating them in a less familiar way than
the easy problems. We assumed that this manipulation
would affect the intrinsic cognitive load imposed onto
the cognitive system when representing the problem.
This is because the problem situation in difficult test
problems is harder to understand and thus harder to represent than in easy test problems for which the important structural features can be extracted more easily. For
difficult test problems the problem interpretation, i.e.,
identifying structural features is more ambiguous so that
it may be necessary to additionally represent individual
propositions of the problem description. Therefore, the
representations of difficult word problems will tend to
be more complex than those of the easy word problems.
In the conditions with goal competition we introduced
a pending goal and a suitable opportunity for its implementation. Subjects in this condition were informed at
the beginning of the experiment that they would have to
work on a second task within the same hypertext environment after having finished the problem-solving task.
The second task consisted of answering three questions
about attractiveness and mate choice that were presented briefly at the beginning of the experiment. Subjects were instructed to work on the problem-solving
task first and to postpone thinking about the questionanswering task until they finished the three word problems. In order to provide suitable opportunities to execute activities related to the pending goal we included
information about attractiveness and mate choice in the
hypertext environment. To make this information available during the first task, the examples illustrating the
problem categories contained hyperlinks to access this
information. In the conditions without goal competition
no competing goal was induced. Subjects were only
instructed to work on the problem-solving task.
As dependent variables, we obtained the percentage
of errors for the three word problems (performance
measure) as well as several time and frequency parameters (process measures) that were determined by means
of log file analyses. In particular, the total amount of
time spent on relevant information pages was computed.
Results and discussion Overall, the average error rate
in the problem-solving task was 35.41 %. Comparing
the conditions with and without goal competition

1055

yielded a significant main effect of goal competition on
error rates. As expected in our first hypothesis, subjects
with competing goal showed worse performance in the
problem-solving task than subjects without competing
goal. This was true regardless of whether the subjects
with competing goal displayed active distraction behavior, i.e., retrieved irrelevant information pages in the
hypertext environment, or not.
Additionally, a main effect of task difficulty demonstrated that the manipulation of task difficulty was successful. In accordance with our second hypothesis on
difficulty-related distraction effects, the influence of the
competing goal on performance depended on the difficulty of the problem-solving task: Distraction effects
could be traced back completely to differences in the
conditions with easy problems whereas there where no
performance impairments due to goal competition in the
conditions with difficult problems.
In the next step we analyzed time spent on relevant
information. The average time across all conditions was
1212 seconds. There was no main effect for task difficulty, but a main effect for goal competition as well as
an interaction. Subjects who worked on easy problems
under goal competition spent less time on relevant information pages than subjects in the respective condition without goal competition. There was no comparable speed-up due to goal competition for subjects working on difficult problems.
Taken together, our data showed no distraction effects
in terms of performance impairments or a speed-up regarding the studying of relevant information for difficult problems. However, for easy problems goal competition led to an increase in error rates and to a decrease
in time investment. These results fit nicely into the refinements of our hypotheses based on the Cognitive
Load Theory. The processing of task-unrelated information in the case of easy problems and goal competition
may have increased extraneous cognitive load, and thus
may have led to the selection of simpler strategies. This
resource-adaptive strategy shift would explain the performance impairments and the speed-up in the condition
with easy problems and competing goal. Further evidence for this idea resulted from more detailed analyses
of log file data which showed that subjects in this condition are characterized by a cursory processing especially
of example-solution pages. Studying these pages intensively, however, was identified as a resourcedemanding strategy suited to improve performance.
We further examined this empirical pattern of results
in an ACT-R model of volitional action control that
uses the elementary control processes introduced at the
beginning of this paper to simulate high-level effects of
goal competition and task difficulty.

Modeling Volitional Action Control in ACT-R
Our ACT-R model (for details see Gerjets, Scheiter, &
Schorr, in press) was developed to cope with the same
materials and tasks as subjects in the experiment. The
model’s overall structure is made up of three compo-

nents that simulate either the problem-solving task or
the question-answering task or model volitional action
control itself (Figure 2).
Top goal: Hypertext-based experiment
[start]
[answer]

[start]
[answer]

Subgoal: Question
[interrupt]

Subgoal: Word problem
[stop]

[read]
[stop]

Subgoal: Example problem
[think
about]

[read]
Subgoal: Example solution

[identify structural features]
[remember task strings]
[infer problem category]
[identify variable values]
[identify structural features]
[infer problem category]
[identify structural features]
[identify variable values]
[infer problem category]

Figure 2: Symbolic structure of the ACT-R model
The three word problems of the problem-solving task
are solved one after another by identifying the problem
category and the values of two variables. The processing of a problem starts with an initial problem representation. This representation is rather condensed for a low
level of task difficulty, but more ambiguous and complex in the case of high task difficulty in order to account for the fact that difficult problems are harder to
understand. As a result, the initial representation of a
difficult problem is characterized by a higher level of
intrinsic cognitive load (i.e., increased number of
chunks simultaneously activated in working memory)
than the initial representation of an easy problem.
Information on identifying problem categories and
variable values in probability theory that is needed to
solve a problem can be acquired by studying example
problems and their solutions. Examples can be studied
more or less comprehensively depending on the processing strategy deployed. When using the sophisticated
strategy implemented in our model all example problems and their worked-out solutions are studied thoroughly. This is realized by executing complex productions that rely on the simultaneous activation of descriptions of example problems and their solutions in working memory. Thus, applying a sophisticated strategy
results in a high degree of intrinsic cognitive load which
in turn imposes high demands with regard to cognitive
resources and processing time. On the other hand, the
simple strategy in our model omits steps of example
processing, e.g., only example problems are studied but
not their solutions. This strategy is simulated by executing rather simple productions that may even fire when
only descriptions of example problems are activated in
working memory, but not their solutions. As a result of
applying a simple strategy, not all relevant information
will be acquired so that performance impairments are to
be expected when solving the word problems. However,
when using a simple strategy there will also be a speedup in task performance and a lower level of intrinsic
cognitive load. Thus, severe restrictions of cognitive
resources or time that impede the implementation of
more resource-demanding strategies will lead to the
application of a simple strategy in our model.

1056

Easy problem + goal competition
(low intrinsic cognitive load)
Activation of a pending goal
(external cueing)

Firing of interrupt-production

Performance impairments and
speed-up in problem solving
observable
relations Strategy shifting: simpler, but
error-prone example-processing
Increased extraneous cognitive
load (conflict tracking)

Figure 3: Emergence of distraction effects
We simulated these processes by relying on three ideas:
(1) the situational cueing of pending goals, (2) a specific
representational format for goals that enables tasksuperordinated processes, and (3) an executive production rule for task interruption and goal management.
(1) When working on easy problems intrinsic cognitive load is low and thus working memory capacity is
available that allows for additional processing. This
may lead to the encoding of hyperlinks within the examples that are related to a pending goal. By using
ACT-R’s capability for spreading activation, these hyperlinks serve as external cues that activate the pending
goal’s representation (cf. Altmann & Trafton, 2002). (2)
However, in order to allow this pending goal to guide
behavior additional task-superordinated executive processes are necessary that are able to fire irrespectively of
the task that is currently pursued. We implemented this
prerequisite in ACT-R by introducing a chunk-type ‘intention’ as a super-type that subsumes all possible goals
that may guide behavior. The chunk-type ‘intention’
contains slots to track the implementation status (e.g.,
current, pending) of goals. Executive processes have
access to that information and can use it when resolving
goal conflicts (cf. Meyer & Kieras, 1997). Additional
history-slots are used to track past conflicts that the goal
was involved in. (3) Finally, we introduced an interruptproduction that implements task-superordinated executive processes of resolving goal conflicts. The interrupt
production may fire whenever multiple chunks of the
chunk-type ‘intention’ are activated. If a pending goal
becomes activated by situational cueing while a current
goal is pursued the interrupt-production selects the goal
with the highest activation value for further processing
(cf. Altmann & Trafton, 2002). This approach simulates
the goal selection process in PART that is guided by the
competing goals’ strengths. Regardless whether there is
a goal switch or not, the conflict situation between the
two goals will be stored in the goals’ history slots. As a

result the extraneous cognitive load increases and leads
to a more distributed pattern of activation so that chunks
from declarative memory may be harder to retrieve because of low activation levels and thus, hindering the
execution of the sophisticated processing strategy.

Comparing Data and Model
The model’s simulations were based on the same 2x2design that was used in the experiment with the independent variables task difficulty (easy vs. difficult problems) and goal competition (with vs. without goal competition). We added some activation and expected-gain
noise to the system and executed 10 runs for each condition. Dependent measures were error rates for the
word problems, total time demands for completing a run
as well as the number of executed productions per run.
The ACT-R model was able to capture the empirically
obtained pattern of results very well. With regard to the
simulated problem-solving errors (Figure 4), an
ANOVA (task difficulty x goal competition) showed a
main effect for task difficulty (F(1,36) = 4.69; MSe =
201.39; p < .05), a main effect for goal competition
(F(1,36) = 7.08; MSe = 201.39; p < .05), and a significant interaction (F(1,36) = 4.17; MSe = 201.39; p < .05).
The effect of goal competition could be traced back
completely to differences in the conditions with easy
test problems (t(18) = 3.12; p < .01, two-tailed) whereas
there were no performance impairments due to a competing goal in the conditions with difficult test problems
(t(18) = .47; p > .60, two-tailed). Thus, the finding of
difficulty-related distraction effects could be simulated.
50
40

Errors in %

The accomplishment of the question-answering task
is simulated in a very simplified and superficial way
because it serves only for inducing a competing goal.
The management of multiple goals is simulated by a
model component that is responsible for volitional action control. On basis of the above mentioned theoretical considerations and empirical findings, we assume
that processes that are illustrated in Figure 3 produce the
empirically observed distraction effects (i.e., performance impairments and speed-up in problem solving as
well as strategy shifts to simple strategies when working
on easy problems under goal competition).

30
20
10
0

Easy Problems
Without Goal Competition

Difficult Problems
With Goal Competition

Figure 4: Simulated error rates as a function of
task difficulty and goal competition
Regarding the time needed for completing a run (Figure
5) we found the same pattern as in the empirical data,
i.e., a speed-up when solving easy problems under goal
competition. However, time data from experiment and
simulation were not directly comparable because the
simulation runs comprised not only processing of taskrelevant but also of task-irrelevant information.
Most interestingly, the model revealed strategy shifts
in the condition with easy problems and competing
goal, as it was assumed on basis of the experimental
data. The model not only simulated the speed-up in this
condition but also displayed an increased number of
processing cycles indicating a more cursory processing
based on rather simple production rules. Two types of
productions in the model are sufficiently simple to ac-

1057

count for this data, namely the interrupt-production and
productions that implement simple example-processing
strategies without studying example-solution pages.
1250

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. We thank F. Paas, P. Pirolli, G.
Strube, J. Sweller, and W. H. Tack.

Time in sec

1000

References

750
500
250
0

Easy Problems
Without Goal Competition

Difficult Problems
With Goal Competition

Figure 5: Simulated total time demands as a function
of task difficulty and goal competition
Finally, it should be noted that the described results are
not dependent on actual goal shifting which is in line
with our predictions and with the experimental data.
Distraction effects occurred in our model whenever
competing goals became activated and thus the execution of control processes was initiated, regardless of
whether a pending goal overrode the current goal or not.

Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we outlined an ACT-R model of volitional
action control that is based on mechanisms which have
proven useful for modeling elementary control processes in multiple-task performance, namely activation
mechanisms and executive control productions. However, our model simulates effects of goal competition
and task difficulty on processing strategies and performance for complex learning and problem-solving
tasks of a much coarser temporal grain size. The model
is able to capture the following experimental findings.
First, distraction effects occur when task-irrelevant
information related to a pending goal is available. Distraction effects comprise performance impairments, a
speed-up in time as well as resource-adaptive strategy
shifts towards simpler but at the same time more errorprone processing strategies. Second, the occurrence of
distraction effects is moderated by task difficulty as
these effects could be observed only in the case of low
task difficulty. Third, active distraction behavior (i.e.,
actively retrieving task-irrelevant information related to
a pending goal) is not a necessary prerequisite for performance impairments due to goal competition.
Thus, we consider our modeling approach to be a solution to fill the conceptual and explanatory gap that
exists between volitional control demands in real-world
multiple-task performance on the one hand and experimental task-switching and PRP effects and their respective simulations on the other hand. Our model allows
for scaling up findings on elementary processes as well
as for providing a cognitive foundation for volitional
frameworks that analyze control demands of everyday
multiple-task performance on an abstract level without
elaborating how these control demands may be met by
cognitive mechanisms of information processing.

Altmann, E. M., & Gray, W. D. (2000). An integrated
model of set shifting and maintenance. In N. Taatgen
& J. Aasman (Eds.), Proceedings of the third
international conference on cognitive modeling.
Veenendaal: Universal Press.
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for
goals: An activation based model. Cognitive Science,
26, 39-83.
Gerjets, P., & Scheiter, K. (in press). Goals and
strategies as moderators between instructional design
and cognitive load: Evidence from hypertext-based
instruction. Educational Psychologist.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Heise, E. (2002). Distraction
in hypertext-based learning and problem solving:
Effects of goal competition and task difficulty on
strategies of information utilization and performance.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Schorr, T. (in press). Modeling processes of volitional action control in multipletask performance: How to explain effects of goal
competition and task difficulty on processing strategies and performance within ACT-R. Cognitive Science Quarterly.
Heckhausen, H. (1991). Motivation and action. New
York: Springer.
Heise, E., Gerjets, P., & Westermann, R. (1997). The
influence of a waiting intention on action performance: Efficiency impairment and volitional protection
in tasks of varying difficulty. Acta Psychologica, 97,
167-182.
Meyer, D. E., & Kieras, D. E. (1997). A computational
theory of executive cognitive processes and multipletask performance: Part 1. Basic mechanisms.
Psychological Review, 104, 3-65.
Monsell, S., & Driver, J. (Eds.) (2000). Attention and
performance XVIII: Control of cognitive processes.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rubinstein, J. S., Meyer, D. E., & Evans, J. E. (2001).
Executive control of cognitive processes in task
switching. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 27, 763-797.
Schunn, C. D., & Reder, L. M. (2001). Another source
of individual differences: Strategy adaptivity to
changing rates of success. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 59-76.
Sohn, M.-H., & Anderson, J. R. (2001). Task
preparation and task repetition: Two-component
model of task switching. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 764-778.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional
design. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.

1058

