UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Quirks of Grammar Affect the Way You Think? Grammatical Gender and Object
Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31t455gf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Phillips, Webb
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Quirks of Grammar Affect the Way You Think?
Grammatical Gender and Object Concepts
Webb Phillips (webb@mit.edu)
MIT NE20-457, 77 Mass Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Lera Boroditsky (lera@mit.edu)
MIT NE20-456, 77 Mass Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract

suggest that people’s mental representations of the world are
not universal. Even people’s ideas about concrete objects
can be shaped by implementational quirks of their
languages.

Can the language you speak affect the way you think? Unlike
English, many languages have a grammatical gender system
whereby all nouns are assigned a gender. Does talking about
inanimate objects as if they were masculine or feminine
actually lead people to think of inanimate objects as having a
gender? A series of studies found effects of grammatical
gender on people’s perceptions of similarity between objects
and people. This was true even though the tasks were
performed in English (a language devoid of grammatical
gender), even when the tasks were non-linguistic (e.g., rating
similarities between unlabeled pictures), and even while
subjects were engaged in a verbal interference task. Finally,
results showed that cross-linguistic differences in thought can
be produced just by grammatical differences and in the
absence of other cultural factors.

Grammatical Gender

Introduction
Humans communicate with one another using a dazzling
array of languages, and each language differs from the next
in innumerable ways (from obvious differences in
pronunciation and vocabulary to more subtle differences in
grammar). For example, to say that “someone ate the
cheese” in English, we must include tense - the fact that the
event happened in the past. In Russian, the verb would also
have to include whether the cheese-eater was male or
female, and whether said cheese-eater ate all of the cheese
or just a portion of it. Speakers of different languages have
to attend to and encode strikingly different aspects of the
world in order to use their language properly (Sapir, 1921;
Slobin, 1996).
Yet despite all these differences, speakers of all languages
inhabit very similar bodies, and need to communicate about
very similar physical worlds. This has lead some scholars to
argue that speakers of different languages vary only in their
speaking, and not in their thinking. Beyond the surface
structure of languages, the argument goes, lies a universal
language of thought (Fodor, 1975).
The question of universality of mental representations
(whether or not speakers of different languages think
differently about the world) has long been at the center of
controversy attracting scholars from Plato to Chomsky, but
despite much attention and debate, definitive answers have
not been forthcoming. Findings presented in this paper

928

Unlike English, many languages have a grammatical gender
system whereby all nouns (e.g., penguins, pockets, and
toasters) are assigned a gender. Many languages only have
masculine and feminine genders, but some also assign
neuter, vegetative, and other more obscure genders. When
speaking a language with grammatical gender, speakers are
required to mark objects as gendered through definite
articles, gendered pronouns, and often need to modify
adjectives or even verbs to agree in gender with the nouns.
Could the grammatical genders assigned to objects by a
language influence people’s mental representations of
objects?
Forks and frying pans do not (by virtue of being
inanimate) have a biological gender. The perceptual
information available for most objects does not provide
much evidence as to their gender, and so conclusive
information about the genders of objects is only available in
language (and only in those languages that have
grammatical gender). It is possible that language has the
greatest influence on thought in abstract domains like
grammatical gender – ones not so reliant on sensory
experience (Boroditsky, 2000; 2001). For example, people’s
subjective conception of time (say as a vertical or a
horizontal medium) is not constrained by sensory
experience, and appears to vary across languages and
cultures (see Boroditsky, 2000; 2001 for further discussion).
This paper examines whether people’s mental
representations of objects are influenced by the grammatical
genders assigned to the objects’ names in their native
language.

But Isn’t Grammatical Gender Arbitrary?
The assumption that grammatical gender has no meaning is
widespread in the field. For example, the purely
grammatical nature of grammatical gender has been a key
(though untested) assumption in the recent debate about the
tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon (Caramazza & Miozzo,

1997; Vigliocco et al., 1997). Indeed, a priori, there are
several reasons to think that people would not take
grammatical gender as meaningful. First, the assignment of
grammatical gender to object names often appears to be
semantically arbitrary (and sometimes downright absurd).
As Mark Twain noted, “In German, a young lady has no
sex, while a turnip has…a tree is male, its buds are female,
its leaves are neuter; horses are sexless, dogs are male, cats
are female... tomcats included.” Further, the grammatical
genders assigned to names of particular objects vary greatly
across languages (Braine, 1987). For example, the sun is
feminine in German, but masculine in Spanish, and neuter in
Russian. The moon, on the other hand, is feminine in
Spanish and Russian, but masculine in German.
On the other hand, there are also reasons why we might
expect people to take grammatical gender as meaningful.
First, since many other grammatical distinctions reflect
differences that are observable in the world (the plural
inflection, for example), children learning to speak a
language with a grammatical gender system have no a priori
reason to believe that grammatical gender doesn’t indicate a
meaningful distinction between types of objects. Indeed,
many adult philosophers throughout history have thought
that grammatical gender systems were a reflection of the
essential properties of objects, and even took a considerable
amount of pride in the thought that the natural genders of
objects would be captured in the grammatical subtlety of
their language (Fodor, 1959). Children learning a language
may make similar (though perhaps less patriotically minded)
hypotheses.
Second, since most children grow up learning only one
language, they have no opportunity to perform the
comparative linguistics necessary to discover the seemingly
arbitrary nature of grammatical gender assignment. For all
they know, the grammatical genders assigned by their
language are the true universal genders of objects. Finally,
speakers of languages with grammatical gender must mark
gender almost every time they utter a noun (hundreds or
thousands of times a day). The sheer weight of repetition (of
needing to refer to objects as masculine or feminine) may
leave its semantic traces, making the objects’ masculine or
feminine qualities more salient in the representation.

German. We hypothesized that same-gender pairs would be
rated as more similar.

Can Grammatical Gender Affect Concepts?

Procedure Participants were tested individually. A
computer presented the experimental materials and recorded
the participants’ responses. Each pair of pictures remained
on the screen until a participant made a response.
Participants made responses by clicking on one of the boxes
(numbered 1 through 9) on the screen to signify a similarity
score.

We hypothesize that the grammatical genders assigned to
objects by a language influence people’s mental
representations of objects.

Experiment 1: Picture Similarity
Experiment 1 was designed to test whether an objects’ name
being grammatically feminine or masculine in a language
leads speakers of that language to think of the object itself
as more like a male or female. Spanish and German
speakers were asked to rate the similarity of objects and
animals to human males and females. All subjects were
tested in English, all items were presented as unlabeled
pictures, and all of the objects and animals chosen for this
study had opposite grammatical genders in Spanish and

929

Participants Twenty-two Spanish-English bilinguals, and
thirty-three German-English bilinguals participated in the
study on a volunteer basis. Participants ranged in age from
17 to 69 years (M=32.9 yrs old). All of the Spanish and
German speakers considered Spanish and German
(respectively) to be their native language, but both groups
were highly proficient in English and had an average of 15.9
years of experience with English (16.4 years for German
speakers, and 15.4 years for Spanish speakers).
Materials Materials used in this study comprised 14
pictures of objects and animals, and 8 pictures of people. Of
the pictures of people, 4 were pictures of females (a woman,
a ballerina, a bride, and a girl), and 4 were pictures of males
(a man, a king, a giant, and a boy). Of the objects, half were
items whose names are masculine in German but feminine
in Spanish (toaster, moon, spoon, broom, whale, frog, fox),
and half were items whose names are feminine in German,
but masculine in Spanish (clock, sun, fork, toothbrush,
mouse, snail, cat). The pictures of objects and animals were
chosen such that they had a single dominant label in both
Spanish & German which had opposite genders in the two
languages.
Each participant provided a similarity rating for every
possible person—object comparison (a total of 112) on a
scale of 1 (not similar) to 9 (very similar). A new random
order for the comparisons was generated for each subject.
Spanish and German speakers completed the same
experimental task, and both groups completed the task in
English. Participants read the following instructions “In this
study, you will see pairs of pictures appear on the screen. In
each pair, there will be a picture of a person on the left and a
picture of an object or animal on the right. Your task is to
tell us how similar you think the two things being depicted
are. You will see a scale where 1=not similar and 9= very
similar. For each pair of pictures, please choose a number
between 1 and 9 to indicate how similar you think the two
things are. Please use the whole scale (give some 1's and
some 9's and some of all the numbers in-between).”

Results and Discussion Subjects found greater similarity
between people and objects of matching gender than
between people and objects of non-matching gender (by
subjects: t = 3.08, df = 42, p < .0018; by items: t = 4.62, df =
7, p = .0012). This suggests that Spanish and German
speakers indeed end up thinking about objects as more
similar to biological males and females, depending on the
object’s grammatical gender in their native language.

Experience with a language that uses grammatical gender
appears to bias one’s representations of objects. This raises
a further question: what would happen if a person spoke two
languages that gave opposite grammatical genders to an
object? Would the discovery that grammatical genders can
vary lead people to discount grammatical gender biases?
Would people stick with the biases of whichever language
they learned first?

Experiment 2: Spanish-German Bilinguals
To investigate these questions, Experiment 2 tested people
who spoke both Spanish and German in the same similarity
task as described in Experiment 1.
Participants Thirty-six Spanish-German bilinguals who
were also fluent in English participated in the study on a
volunteer basis. Each participant had some experience with
both Spanish & German, and all were also proficient in
English. Participants had an average of 23.1 years of
experience with Spanish (ranging from 1 to 61 years), an
average of 26.1 years of experience with German (ranging
from 1 to 67 years), and an average of 21.5 years of
experience with English (ranging from 2 to 62 years). On a
scale of 1 (not fluent) to 5 (very fluent), participants rated
themselves on average 4.19 in Spanish, 4.27 in German, and
4.28 in English.
Materials and Procedures Materials and Procedures were
the same as in Experiment 1.
Results and Discussion For each subject, a similarity-rating
score was calculated by taking their average similarity
rating for gender-consistent pairs (relative to Spanish), and
subtracting their average similarity rating for genderinconsistent pairs. Since all objects used had opposite
genders in Spanish & German, a resulting positive score
would indicate a Spanish bias in similarity ratings, and a
negative score would indicate a German bias. Each subject’s
relative language skill was calculated by subtracting their
German-fluency score (provided on a scale of 1= not fluent
to 5=very fluent) from their Spanish-fluency score. Again, a
positive number indicated higher relative proficiency in
Spanish, and a negative number indicated higher relative
proficiency in German.
There was a significant positive correlation between
people’s relative proficiency in Spanish/German and their
biases in the similarity task, r=.40, N=36, p<.01. The more
relatively proficient a subject was in Spanish, the more
consistent with Spanish grammatical gender their similarity
ratings. And the more relatively proficient a subject was in
German, the more consistent with German grammatical
gender their similarity ratings. Subjects’ relative skill in the
two languages was the best predictor of their similarity
scores, faring better than whether one was born in a Spanish
or German speaking country (r=.325, N=36, p<.05), and
which of the two languages one has known for a longer
amount of time (r=.158, N=36, p=.178).

930

Experiment 3: Verbal Interference
We repeated Experiment 1 with the addition of a verbal
interference task, in order to rule out the hypothesis that the
effect is due to the subjects subvocally naming the objects.
Participants Seven Spanish-English bilinguals and seven
German-English bilinguals participated in the study in
exchange for payment. Both groups were highly proficient
in English and had an average of 17.04 years of experience
with English (19.57 years for German speakers, and 14.5
years for Spanish speakers). None of the Spanish speakers
spoke German and none of the German speakers spoke
Spanish. None of the subjects had a self-rated proficiency
greater than 2 (on a scale of 1 to 5, where 5 is fluent) in any
other languages that use grammatical gender.
Materials All of the similarity task materials were exactly
the same as in Experiment 1. In addition to the similarity
task, subjects performed a verbal shadowing task. A
computer played an audio-stream of randomly generated
English letters at a speed of 1 per second, and subjects were
asked to repeat each letter aloud as it was played.
Procedure The procedures were similar to Experiment 1
with the following changes. Subjects were asked to perform
the shadowing task described above the entire time that they
were rating similarities. Subjects’ verbal shadowing
performance was recorded by a tape-recorder. Just as in
Experiment 1, all of the participants were tested in English
with English instructions.
Results and Discussion Verbal interference did not change
Spanish and German speakers similarity ratings. Just as in
Experiment 1, Spanish and German speakers rated person—
object pairs more similar when the grammatical gender of
the object’s name in their native language was consistent
with the biological gender of the person in the comparison
(M=3.15) than when the two genders were inconsistent (M=
2.98), t= 2.20, df= 13, p<.05 (by subjects). This interaction
between person-gender and object-gender was also
confirmed in a 2 x2 repeated measures ANOVA (2 person
gender X 2 object-gender), F(1, 13)= 4.85, p<.05 (by
subjects). Because all of the objects chosen for this study
had opposite genders in Spanish and German, Spanish and
German speakers rated opposite pairs as more similar. This
was confirmed by a 3-way interaction of person-gender,
object-gender (relative to one of the languages), and native
language, F(1, 12)= 4.77, p<.05 (by subjects).
Comparing the results of Experiments 1 and 3, there was
no effect of the verbal interference task on the effect of
gender-consistency as confirmed by a lack of consistency by
interference interaction in a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA
(2 (gender consistent or inconsistent) X 2 (interference
(Exp. 6) or no interference (Exp. 4)), F(1,67)=.075, p=.786
(by subjects), and F(1,26)=.073, p=.789 (by items). The
same analysis confirmed an overall main effect of
grammatical gender consistency both by subjects (F (1, 67)
= 8.18, p<.01) and by items (F(1,26) = 7.57, p<.02 across
the two experiments.

Finally, participants in the interference condition
performed at an average of 90% correct on the shadowing
task. This confirms that the failure of the verbal interference
manipulation to override the effect of consistency was not
due to the subjects’ failure to engage in the shadowing task.
These findings once again indicate that people’s thinking
about objects is influenced by the grammatical genders their
native language assigns to the objects’ names. A further
question is whether such differences in similarity can be
obtained just by differences in grammar, and without
concomitant cultural differences.

Experiments 4 and 5: Gumbuzi Similarity
Experiment 4 was designed to test whether grammatical
gender in a language can indeed exert a causal power over
thought without intermediary cultural factors. Native
English speakers were taught about the soupative/oosative
distinction in the fictional Gumbuzi language. Participants
were shown pictures of males and females along with many
inanimate objects and were taught which would be
considered soupative and which oosative in Gumbuzi. The
soupative/oosative distinction always corresponded to
biological gender (all females were in one category and all
males in the other) but also extended to inanimate objects. A
given participant might have learned that pans, forks,
pencils, ballerinas, and girls are soupative, while pots,
spoons, pens, giants, and boys are oosative.
After participants had mastered the oosative/soupative
distinction, they rated the similarity of each person-object
pair, much like the Spanish and German speakers in
Experiment 1. Experiment 5 adds verbal inteference
condition. We hypothesized that with or without
interference, same-gender pairs would be rated as more
similar.
Participants Twenty-two native English speakers
participated in the study in exchange for payment. Twelve
of these participated in the verbal interference version of the
task, while the remaining ten did not do the verbal
interference.
Materials A set of 20 pictures was constructed to include 8
pictures of people and 12 pictures of inanimate objects. The
inanimate objects were chosen in pairs such that the
members of each pair were quite similar to each other (e.g.,
fork and spoon, pen and pencil, bowl and cup, guitar and
violin, apple and pear, pot and pan). The members of each
pair were assigned to different grammatical categories (if
“pot” was oosative, “pan” would be soupative). This was
done so that participants had to pay attention to the
particulars of each object and couldn’t simply develop a
heuristic like “kitchen things are soupative” or “fruits are
oosative”. Pears, forks, violins, pots, pens, and cups were
said to be oosative, and apples, spoons, guitars, pans,
pencils, and bowls were said to be soupative.
The pictures of people included 4 pictures of males (a
man, a boy, a giant, and a king), and 4 pictures of females (a
woman, a girl, a ballerina, and a bride). For half of the
participants the females were said to be oosative and the
males soupative, and for the other half it was the reverse.

931

This meant that each inanimate object was grouped with
females for half of the participants, and with males for the
other half. Overall, each participant learned to classify 20
pictures into two categories (oosative or soupative) with
each category containing 4 pictures of people of the same
gender and 6 pictures of inanimate objects.
Procedure Participants read the following instructions: “In
this study you will learn a bit about the Gumbuzi language.
In Gumbuzi, there are two different words for ‘the.’ For
example, in order to say ‘the chair’ you would say ‘sou
chair,’ and in order to say ‘the table’ you would say ‘oos
table.’ This is called the oosative/soupative distinction.
Some nouns are always preceded by ‘sou’ and some are
always preceded by ‘oos.’” Participants were then shown
pictures on a computer screen one at a time with each
picture accompanied by a label (a picture of a pear for
example would be accompanied by “oos pear”).
After they had seen all the items three times, they were
tested on how well they had learned the oosative/soupative
distinction. Participants were shown the pictures one at a
time and had to indicate whether each item would be
considered oosative or soupative in Gumbuzi by pressing
one of two keys on a keyboard. If they answered correctly,
the computer went on to the next item. If they answered
incorrectly, it beeped and waited for them to provide the
correct answer. Participants were tested until they could
answer all twenty items correctly in a row.
After they had learned the oosative/soupative distinction
perfectly, participants proceeded to the similarity-ratings
portion of the study. Just as the Spanish & German speakers
in Experiments 1-3, participants rated the similarity of every
possible person—object pair (a total of 96 comparisons) on
a scale of 1 (not similar) to 9 (very similar). The computer
generated a random order of pairs for each subject. Each
pair was kept on the screen until the participant made their
response by pressing one of the number keys on the
keyboard. One group of participants performed the
similarity-ratings task on its own, while another rated
similarities while at the same time performing the verbal
interference task described in Experiment 3.
Results and Discussion Just as the Spanish and German
speakers, participants in this study rated person—object
pairs more similar when they were consistent in gender
(M=4.43) than when the two genders were inconsistent
(M=3.79), F(1,11)=26.8, p<.001 (by items), F(1,20)=7.14,
p<.05 (by subjects). The effect was present equally for both
the verbal shadowing and the non-shadowing groups:
without verbal shadowing M=4.63 when the genders were
consistent and M=3.97 when they were inconsistent, t=3.24,
df=11, p<.01, and with verbal shadowing M=4.27 when the
genders were consistent and M=3.65 when they were
inconsistent, t=4.24, df=11, p<.001. There was no effect of
the shadowing task on the effect of consistency as
confirmed by a lack of consistency by shadowing
interaction in a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA (2
(consistent or inconsistent) X 2 (shadowing or no
shadowing)), F(1,20)=.005, p=.942 (by subjects), and
F(1,11)=.019, p=.892 (by items). Finally, participants in the

shadowing condition performed at an average of 96%
correct on the shadowing task. This confirms that the failure
of the verbal shadowing manipulation to override the effect
of consistency was not due to the subjects’ failure to engage
in the shadowing task.
These results show that the effects of grammatical gender
on object representations can be produced in the absence of
culture, even under verbal interference.
Discussion Beyond demonstrating that learning linguistic
categories can affect people’s descriptions of objects or
similarity ratings,

General Discussion
These findings suggest that people’s ideas about the genders
of objects can indeed be influenced by the grammatical
genders assigned to those objects in a language. Further, this
effect can be produced just by grammatical differences and
in the absence of other cultural factors it is important to
consider how learning such categories can have this effect.
One possibility is that in order to make sense of the
grammatical categories they encounter in language (or in the
lab) people deliberately look for similarities between items
assigned to the same grammatical category. If a meaningful
and consistent set of similarities is discovered, these
similarities can then be stored (or perhaps the features that
are relevant to the similarity can be made more salient in the
representation), and this would explain both the increased
within-category similarity reported in this paper and the bias
in descriptions observed in the earlier studies (Boroditsky &
Schmidt, 2000; under review). This type of mechanism is
supported by recent findings suggesting that comparison
leads to an increase in similarity (so long as the items being
compared make it possible to discover meaningful
similarities) (Boroditsky, under review; see also Gentner &
Namy, 1999; Lowenstein & Gentner, 1998).
One interesting question is how learning what we’ve
called here a “grammatical category” can change people’s
ideas about objects. One possibility is that grammatical
categories in language function just like other category
names (e.g., penguin, game, etc). By calling things by the
same name, or putting them in the same grammatical
category, languages may invite their speakers to (not
necessarily consciously) carry out comparisons that they
wouldn’t have otherwise carried out (or perhaps wouldn’t
have carried out as often or with the same goals in mind). In
the process of carrying out these comparisons, people may
discover meaningful similarities between objects. Any
discovered similarities may then be stored or highlighted in
the representations of the objects. There is no claim being
made here about the specialness of language in having this
effect. There are many ways to direct a person’s attention to
the similarities or differences of a pair of items, or to
classify a group of items into two categories – language just
happens to be a popular and convenient medium for doing
so.
So does all this mean that language affects thought? Or,
more precisely, does all this mean that thinking for speaking
a particular language can have an effect on how people
think even when not thinking for that same language?

932

The results reviewed and described in this paper
demonstrate that a grammatical distinction in language has
the power to bias people’s memory for and their
descriptions of objects and has an effect on people’s ratings
of similarity between pictures of objects. This is true even
though people perform tasks in a language different from
the one they learned the grammatical distinction in, perform
tasks involving no words (just pictures), and even despite
interference from a verbal shadowing task. Previous
evidence also suggests that the same grammatical distinction
affects people’s decision making (e.g., assigning voices to
animated characters), personification of nouns (as in the
Russian days of the week), and ratings of object
characteristics (e.g., potency). In short, speakers of different
languages behave differently in a wide range of cognitive
tasks in ways that are consistent with the grammatical
distinctions made in their languages.
But does all this evidence mean that language affects
thought? In particular, does it mean that linguistic categories
(e.g., a noun being grammatically feminine or masculine)
actually alter non-linguistic representations? Perhaps
linguistic categories simply get recruited covertly for all
these tasks, so even though speakers of different languages
may exhibit different patterns in behavior, linguistic and
non-linguistic representations remain truly separate, and
everybody’s non-linguistic representations are in fact the
same.
This is an interesting possibility, and a difficult one to
rule out empirically. The fact that grammatical distinctions
learned in one language seem to have an effect even when a
task is performed in another language may favor the view
that grammatical knowledge actually plays a role in shaping
the underlying non-linguistic representation (hence the ease
of transfer between languages). Still, this kind of evidence
does not rule out the possibility that grammatical
information (even from the wrong language) is covertly
recruited in all sorts of tasks that don’t seem to require it. To
test this further, we attempted to disable people’s linguistic
faculties by asking them to shadow speech while they
performed the similarity-rating tasks described earlier. If
effects of grammatical gender had disappeared under these
verbal interference conditions, then we may have been able
to infer that grammatical categories hadn’t affected nonlinguistic representations.
Instead, it would seem that language affected thinking in
this case because people covertly invoked linguistic
representations in a set of seemingly non-linguistic tasks.
But it turned out that tying up the linguistic faculties had no
effect on the results (that effects of grammatical gender
were equally strong when subjects were under verbal
interference as when not). Can we now conclude that
grammatical gender definitely does affect people’s nonlinguistic representations? Perhaps the shadowing task
simply didn’t disable all of the aspects of language that
could have been covertly recruited for the task? Perhaps
some different, more complex verbal interference task
would have changed the results. Several other tasks could be
tried, but as long as the verbal interference doesn’t get rid of
the effect of language on thought, there will always be doubt
about whether or not all of the necessary linguistic faculties

were properly interfered with. There seems to be no sure
way to disable all linguistic processes (and this is not in
small part due to the difficulty in deciding on what counts as
linguistic and non-linguistic processing in the first place).
Fortunately, being able to discriminate between these two
possibilities is not necessary here. Most likely, both
possibilities are true to some degree. Regardless of the
answer, it appears that language plays an important role in
thinking. Whether people’s native language is covertly
involved in all manner of seemingly non-linguistic tasks
(even despite verbal interference, in tasks conducted entirely
in pictures, and in tasks conducted in other languages), or
whether aspects of grammar are able to influence nonlinguistic representations directly, it appears that (what we
colloquially call) thinking involves a collaboration between
many different linguistic and non-linguistic representations
and processes. This means that the private mental lives of
speakers of different languages may differ dramatically –
and not only when they are thinking for speaking their
particular languages, but in all manner of cognitive tasks.

Conclusions
The findings presented in this paper suggest that people’s
thinking about objects can be influenced by aspects of
grammar that differ across languages. A series of studies
found effects of grammatical gender on people’s perceptions
of similarity between objects and people. This was true even
though the tasks were performed in English (a language
devoid of grammatical gender), even when the tasks were
non-linguistic (e.g., rating similarities between unlabeled
pictures), and even while subjects were engaged in a verbal
interference task. Finally, results showed that crosslinguistic differences in thought can be produced just by
grammatical differences and in the absence of other cultural
factors. It is striking that even a fluke of grammar (the
nearly arbitrary assignment of a noun to be masculine or
feminine) can have an effect on how people think about
things in the world. Considering the many ways in which
languages differ, our findings suggest that the private mental
lives of people who speak different languages may differ
much more than previously thought.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship to Lera Boroditsky. Partial support was also
provided by NIMH research grant MH-47575 to Gordon
Bower. The authors would like to thank Michael Ramscar,
Herbert H. Clark, Eve Clark, Barbara Tversky, Gordon
Bower, and Steven Pinker for helpful comments and
insightful discussions of this research. We would also like to
thank Lauren Schmidt for her foundational contributions to
this research, and Jill M. Schmidt who generously
contributed most of the pictures used in these studies.

933

References
Chalnick, A., & Billman, D. (1988). Unsupervised learning
of correlational structure. Proceedings of the Tenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
510-516). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Feigenbaum, E. A. (1963). The simulation of verbal
learning behavior. In E. A. Feigenbaum & J. Feldman
(Eds.), Computers and thought. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Boroditsky, L. (in preparation). The role of comparison in
the development of similarity.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does Language Shape Thought?
Mandarin and English speakers conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1).
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1).
Boroditsky, L. & Schmidt, L. (2000). Sex, Syntax, and
Semantics. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Braine, M. (1987). What is learned in acquiring word
classes - a step toward an acquisition theory. In B.
MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fodor, I. (1959). The origin of grammatical gender I.
Lingua, 8, 1.
Caramazza, A., & Miozzo, M. (1997). The relation between
syntactic and phonological knowledge in lexical access:
Evidence from the "tip-of-the-tongue" phenomenon.
Cognition, 64(3).
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (1998). Relational language
facilitates analogy in children. Proceedings of the
Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 615-620. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language, New York, NY: Harcourt,
Brace, and World.
Slobin, D. (1996). From “thought and language” to
“thinking for speaking.” In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson
(Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press..
Vigliocco, G., Antonini, T., & Garrett, M.F. (1997).
Grammatical gender is on the tip of Italian tongues.
Psychological-Science, 8(4).

