UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Design Principles for Visualizations: Revealing and Instantiating

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kv073gd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Heiser, Julie
Tversky, Barbara
Agrawala, Maneesh
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Design Principles for Visualizations: Revealing and Instantiating
Julie Heiser (jheiser@psych.stanford.edu)1
Barbara Tversky (bt@psych.stanford.edu)1
Maneesh Agrawala (maneesh@graphics.stanford.edu)2
Pat Hanrahan (hanrahan@graphics.stanford.edu)3
1

Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Stanford CA, 94305-2130

2

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond WA 98052

3

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford CA, 94305

Abstract
The creation of visualizations can be automated, informed by
design principles derived from cognitive research. We describe a
collaboration between psychology and computer science to
uncover design principles for assembly instructions and instantiate
them in algorithms. Participants assembled an object and then
constructed diagrammatic instructions; those instructions were first
rated and then tested. It was found that effective visualizations
contain step-by-step action diagrams with 3-D views that best
reveal the assembly actions. The design principles were
incorporated into algorithms that generate assembly instructions
from object models. The general techniques as well as the specific
principles extend to other visual explanations.

Introduction
Visualizations are cognitive tools used to communicate,
depict, instruct, and record information in nearly every
domain, from architecture to chemistry, meteorology to
radiology, economics to history. When designed properly,
visualizations can augment human information processing
(Tversky, 2001). Their external nature reduces cognitive
load, provides common ground in collaborative tasks, and
enables modifications and updates. Their spatial nature
encourages more efficient spatial reasoning, such as
inferences of proximity, relatedness, and common
destination. Effective visualizations abstract essential
information, sometimes distorting it, and eliminate
irrelevant details.
Perhaps due to their effectiveness in communication and
inference, perhaps due to advances in computing, the
demand for visualizations increases.
Individualizing
visualizations is a job for computers, but computers, like
designers, need to be educated. In order to create effective
visualizations, computers must “know” what information is
essential and what is irrelevant; they must also “know” how
to present that information so that people can perceive and
understand it. Creating effective visualizations by computer
then, requires a partnership between cognitive psychologists
and computer scientists. The task of the cognitive
psychologist is to uncover the desired mental representation
and to evaluate the comprehensibility of the design; that is,

545

to uncover the specific design principles (e.g. Kosslyn,
1994; Mayer, 2001). The task of the computer scientist is to
incorporate the design principles into algorithms. This may
sound simpler than it is. For one thing, the design principles
are likely to be in the form of tradeoffs, with the potential
for inconsistency and conflict; for another, they are unlikely
to be sufficient.
Line-drive (Agrawala & Stolte, 2001) is an example of
such a partnership. This algorithm generates sketch-like
maps rather than the highway maps with routes
superimposed that websites typically produce. Sketch route
maps differ from highway maps in a number of ways
(Tversky & Lee, 1998). They show only the route, with
some extra spatial information as protection against error.
They take liberties with distance and direction information
in the service of conveying the essential information clearly:
paths and node, points of action. Thus, the visualizations
produced by students and those produced by the algorithm
distort distance, direction, and other information, much like
the heralded London subway map. Despite the distortions,
or perhaps because of them, the sketch maps produced by
mapblast.com have met with praise by users.
There are many domains in need of improved
visualizations as well as individualized ones. One notorious
domain is assembly instructions. Optimistic consumers see
attractive barbeques or desks in stores, bring them home in
their boxes, pull out the “easy” instructions, and are all too
often greeted with a cluttered exploded diagram, such as
that in Figure 1, perhaps impressive as an image, but hardly
functional as a set of instructions. Small parts can’t be
discerned, nor can how and where they should be attached.
What to do when is not evident. The authors have collected
a corpus of assembly instructions, and these problems prove
to be widespread and frequent.
Assembly instructions are of interest not only in
themselves but also because they are representative of a
larger class of visualizations that includes instructions on
how to operate something, like a copier or a nuclear plant,
and how complex systems work, like a heart or a corporate
structure.

using instructions with high or low ratings; their
performance was evaluated in terms of the quality of the
instructions.

Experiment 1: Generate Instructions
Students assembled a TV cart using only a photograph of
the assembled object. Then, they produced instructions to
assemble it.

Method

Figure 1. Instructions for assembling a barbeque.
How can cognitive design principles be revealed? For the
project on route maps, knowing how people think about
routes as well as how they produce sketch maps provided
many design principles. For assembly of objects, it helps to
know how people think about objects; people think about
objects in terms of their parts, first and foremost, the parts
that are perceptually salient and functionally significant
(Tversky & Hemenway, 1984). Next, it helps to know how
people think about assembly; people think about assembly
as hierarchically organized sequences, where objects or
significant object parts separate steps at the higher level and
differentiated actions on the same object at the finer level
(Zacks, Tversky, & Iyer, 2001). More suggestions come
from a study of instructions for constructing origami
figures, where instructions that show each step were more
effective than instructions that only showed start and end
states (Novick & Morse, 2000).
These guidelines are useful, but need to be supplemented
by guidelines that are specific to assembly. To uncover
people’s conceptions of routes, Tversky and Lee (1998)
asked participants to produce route maps and route
directions.
Both route maps and route directions
schematized the information in ways that people found
efficient and useful. The route sketches also provided
guidelines for the information that should be captured in
visualizations of routes and guidelines how to display it.
We adopted the same strategy here, to simultaneously
uncover the information that is essential to convey as well
as how to convey it.
We adopted the methods of Tversky and Lee (1998) to
extract people’s conceptions of object assembly and
effective visualizations of the assembly. This part of the
work has three stages. In the first, participants assemblied a
simple object—a TV cart—using only a photo of the
assembled object; then they produced instructions for
others. Next, new participants assemble the TV cart, and
rate the instructions produced by the first set of participants
for quality and effectiveness. The design features that
appeared in the highly rated instructions were abstracted.
Finally, a third group of participants assembled the TV cart

546

Participants. Forty-five Stanford University
undergraduates participated for pay. The data of two
participants were eliminated as they had participated more
than once.
Spatial Ability Measures. Participants first completed a
questionnaire on their previous experience assembling
objects. Then they completed the Vandenburg and Kuse
(1978) test of mental rotation and the Money Spatial
Navigation Task (Money & Alexander, 1966), a 1-minute
test that evaluates egocentric perspective transformations.
These measures have correlated with performance in many
tasks.
Object Assembly. Participants assembled a TV stand from
parts, connectors, and tools provided using the photograph
on the box as a guide (see Figure 2). Assembly required five
major steps, each corresponding to a major part of the stand.

Figure 2. Picture of box and completed TV Stand.
Constructing Instructions. Upon completion of assembly,
participants were asked to write instructions for a novice to
“easily and efficiently assemble the TV stand.” They were
told they could use text and diagrams; whatever they felt
could convey the process most effectively.

Results
Performance on Tasks. All participants were able to
assemble the TV stand without instructions. Performance on
the assembly tasks was highly related to scores on the

individual differences measures. Experience also correlated
with an average of the ability measures (r = .61, p <.01).
Participants were divided into high and low spatial ability
by a median split of the average of the two spatial ability
tasks, yielding 21 low and 22 high spatial participants.
Participants had to perform below average to be included in
the low category, and above average in the high spatial
category. Low spatial participants took 12.7 minutes (SD =
3.56 min) to assemble the TV stand, while high spatial
participants completed the task in 7.3 minutes (SD = 2.09
min), F (1,41) = 36.01, p <.01). Low spatial participants
made more errors during assembly, such putting pieces in
upside down, putting the unfinished side of the wood facing
outward, etc. These errors were manifest in the instructions
participants wrote where 86% of low spatial participants
included an error of an “impossible action” in their
instructions, whereas only 12% of instructions produced by
high spatial participants had such errors, t(1,41) = 5.9, p
<.01.
Instructions Produced. Differences between high and low
spatial participants appeared in the sketches drawn in the
instructions. High spatial participants produced 2.67 action
drawings on average. Action drawings show how parts are
assembled. By contrast, low spatial participants produced
.64 action drawings per instruction set, F(1,41) = 16, p <.01.
Conversely, low spatial participants included 1.45 drawings
that depicted the structure of the system, but high spatial
participants produced only .81 structural drawings per
instruction (see Figure 3 for examples), though this
difference was not significant due to high variance. Action
diagrams necessarily depict structure, so the majority of
drawings produced by the high spatial participants depicted
both action and structure. Low spatial participants were
more likely to include sketches of parts on their own (low
had mean of 4.14 compared to high mean of 2.19, F(1,41) =
5, p < .05). More differences manifested, such as, high
spatial participants were more likely to include complex 3D
pictorial or exploded diagrams in instructions.

spatial individuals. Then, they constructed instructions for
assembly. The assembly steps adopted corresponded to the
major components of the TV stand. High spatial participants
produced instructions with rich and informative drawings,
specifically, 3-D step-by-step perspective drawings that
showed assembly actions. Low spatial participants
produced fewer diagrams, and were more likely to produce
2-D pictorial lists of parts or structural diagrams. The
efficacy of the diagrammatic techniques used by the high
spatial participants is rated in the next study.

Experiment 2: Rate Instructions
Do other participants prefer the diagrammatic techniques
spontaneously adopted by the high spatial participants in the
first experiment? Given the large differences in drawings
produced by high and low spatial participants, are there
parallel differences in their preferences? Here, we address
those questions by having a new set of participants rate a
subset of the instructions produced in the first experiment.

Method
Participants. Twenty-one undergraduates from Stanford
University participated in this experiment to fulfill a course
requirement.
Ability Measures and TV Stand Assembly. The
procedures for this part of the experiment were identical to
those in the first experiment After assembly, instead of
producing instructions, participants rated the previous ones.
Rating Instructions. Thirty-nine sets of instructions from
the first experiment were rated. Four sets were eliminated
due to high similarity to other instructions in the sample. All
written text was typed and sketches redrawn to equate
clarity, legibility, and aesthetics. The order of instructions
given to raters was randomized to avoid ordering effects.
Participants rated the quality and effectiveness of
instructions from very poor (1) to excellent (7). They were
also asked to write comments explaining their ratings,
specifically to describe the features of the sets of
instructions they liked or disliked.

Results and Discussion
Figure 3: Diagrams Produced by Participants. A. Structural
Diagram. B. Action Diagram

Discussion
Undergraduates successfully assembled a TV stand using a
photograph of the completed stand as a guide. High spatial
participants completed the task nearly twice as fast as low

547

There was general agreement on the quality and the good
and bad characteristics of the instruction sets across
participants. Ratings of the 21 participants correlated
highly, r = .97, p < .001, and there were no differences in
preferences of high and low spatial/experience participants.
The characteristics of instructions that received the highest
ratings were: action diagrams, or diagrams that showed
assembly of parts: explicit ordering of assembly; use of
extra-pictorial elements, such as arrows and guidelines to

convey directions of actions; step-by-step diagrams; precise
use of text; clear portrayal of actions showing connector
pieces and how to use them; and use of 3-D perspective to
convey views depicting needed actions.
Instructions receiving low ratings included those that had
no diagrams, just part menus, poor representation of
proportions for parts, diagrams with lengthy text,
instructions that left out steps, and instructions that did not
specify the order of assembly. Participants commented that
these features would lead to confusion and errors.

Experiment 3: Test Instructions
Results from Experiment 2 allowed us to recognize
important features of instructions. In Experiment 3 we
undertook preliminary testing of instruction sets selected
from Experiment 1 & 2. These instruction sets were
reconstructed in order to test different features of
instructions, with the goal of extracting guidelines for the
design of instructional visualizations.

Method
Participants. Forty-four undergraduates from Stanford
University participated in this experiment to fulfill a course
requirement. They were randomly assigned to one of the
four instructions sets.
Ability Measures. As in Experiments 1 & 2, participants
completed a questionnaire about their experience with
assembling objects and two spatial ability tests.
Instructions. Four sets of instructions were selected that
used the highly rated features, such as step-by-step
instructions, use of action diagrams, clear indication of
ordering, and explicit indications of part attachment. Each
included various of the features that were preferred in
varying degrees, such as use of explanatory text, presence of
menu of parts, and integrated text and diagrams.
Assembly of TV Stand. Participants were told to use the
instructions provided to assemble the TV stand. All
participants were videotaped. After assembling the TV
stand, they were queried as to the features of the instructions
they found helpful or not.

Results and Discussion
Instructions improved performance of low spatial
participants considerably compared to performance in the
first experiment, unaided by instructions. Without
instructions in the first experiment, low spatial participants
took 12.6 minutes to assemble the stand; with instructions in
this experiment they took only 9.4 minutes. High spatial
participants showed no benefit from instructions,

548

performing as they had without, assembling the TV stand in
7 minutes. The videos revealed that high spatial participants
consulted instructions only 3.3 times, whereas low spatial
participants consulted them 9.1 times (F (1,42), p < .01).
This suggests that for this relatively easy task, high spatial
participants did not need instructions. With instructions, low
spatial participants made fewer errors than in the first
experiment though they made more errors than high ability
participants (F(1,42) = 5.8 p <.05)
Although there were no differences in performance as a
consequence of the four versions of the instructions, there
were differences in the features regarded as important in the
post-assembly interview. The lack of performance
differences reflects the fact that all instructions contained
the features most highly rated and most frequently
mentioned.
Participants’ total assembly time was divided into the time
it took to complete each step. Interestingly, the only step
that was significantly longer for low spatial/experience was
the first step, where low participants took an average of 2.29
minutes and high participants took and average of 1.04
minutes. F(1,42) = 7.17, p = .01. Analysis of the videotapes
revealed that low ability participants spent that extra minute
orienting themselves to the parts, looking at the connector
pieces, inspecting the instructions again, whereas the high
ability/expertise participants began assembling almost
immediately.
Responses in the post-assembly interview indicated that
participants found extracting information from the
instructions easier from action diagrams than from text
explanations. Several participants reported that they never
read the text that described actions portrayed in diagrams,
but that they may have needed it if the assembly was more
complicated.
Experiment 3 confirmed and added to what was learned
from Experiments 1 & 2, as well as providing more data
from which to extract design principles. For example,
having a menu of parts will be helpful in orienting the low
spatial/experience participants, text may be needed as a
buffer, but clear, explicit diagrams are more helpful, and if
text is used, it should be succinct.

Applying Design Principles
Overall, the experiments have provided cognitive guidelines
that are directly relevant to assembly instructions and
pertinent to other kinds of visualizations as well, particularly
those that show processes over time. Here are some of the
features that are important for effective visualizations:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Step-by-step, one for each major step
Clear and explicit order
Parts added in each step should be visible
Mode of attachment should be visible
Action diagrams rather than structural
Arrows and guidelines to indicate attachment

•
•
•

Show perspective of attachment
Avoid changing perspectives
Show stable orientations

Note that some of these desiderata can conflict, notably the
preference for showing the perspective of attachment and
the preference for minimizing perspective switches. This
illustrates just one of the challenges of instantiating
cognitive design principles in algorithms. A second
challenge comes from under-specification; the design
principles are moot on many design decisions that must be
taken, for example, whether to show shadows or texture.
Yet another shortcoming is revealed in unpredictable
emergent properties. Some of the perspectives are unstable,
that is, they reverse depth like a Necker cube.
Despite the limitations, the design guidelines have been
instantiated in a working program (Agrawala, Phan, Heiser,
Haymaker, Klingner, Hanrahan, and Tversky, 2003).

Automated Assembly Instruction Design

planning algorithms have been well-studied in robotics
(Romney, Godard, Goldwasser and Ramkumar, 1995,
Wilson, 1992). These algorithms first compute all
geometrically feasible assembly sequences for the object by
analyzing the blocking relationships between all pairs of
parts. This analysis yields a directed acyclic graph encoding
the removability constraints on each part and each valid
topological sort of this removability graph produces a
geometrically valid assembly sequence for the object.
The goal of these algorithms is to plan a sequence of
instructions that a machine-tool could use to build the
object. Each valid assembly sequence is evaluated for the
particular machine-tool it will be implemented on and the
most cost-effective sequence is chosen as the final assembly
plan. But, these assembly planning techniques do not
consider the requirements of human builders and therefore,
the resulting instructions are usually very difficult for
humans to follow. As our human-subject experiments show,
for an assembly plan to be easy to follow it must be both
geometrically feasible and adhere to the principles described
in the previous section.

We have developed an automated assembly instruction
design system based on these principles. As input our
system requires a geometric model of the assembly with
each part in its final assembled configuration and a default
orientation for the assembly. Users can optionally specify
additional semantic information including:
Groupings: Labeling of parts that should be grouped together
based on functional or geometric properties. The grouping labels
include fasteners, significant parts, symmetry, and similar-action.
Ordering Constraints: Constraints on the order of assembly
operations.

Figure 4. A structural assembly sequence of a Lego
Landspeeder generated by our system.
Our system divides the task of generating assembly
instructions into two phases; assembly planning and
diagram production. In the assembly planning phase the
system analyzes the geometry of the model to compute the
sequence of steps required to build the object. Assembly

549

Figure 5. Assembly instructions for TV Stand generated the
automated system described here.

Therefore, our system first computes the set of
geometrically feasible assembly sequences using the
removability analysis technique developed for robotics.
But, unlike prior systems we evaluate the resulting assembly
sequences based on the cognitive design principles revealed
by our experiments. Thus our system is able to produce
step-by-step assembly sequences that are well-designed for
human builders.
Once we have computed the assembly plan we
must generate a diagram showing each step in the plan. We
can generate structural sketches by simply showing the set
of parts added in each step in their final assembled
positions. The assembly planning stage of our system
ensures that all of the parts added in each step and their
points of attachment will be visible in each step. The
resulting instructions are similar to those included with
Lego (see Figure 4).
The diagram production stage of our system is also
capable of generating action diagrams (see Figure 5).
Instead of placing each new part in its final assembled
position, we offset the new parts from the earlier parts and
use diagrammatic elements to indicate how they attach to
one another. These dotted lines and arrows indicate the
motion of the parts as well as the points of attachment
between them.

Conclusions
Good visualizations for assembly make a difference.
They improve performance especially for those in need,
those lower in spatial ability and experience. This applies to
visualizations in other domains as well. Visualizations can
facilitate understanding, inference, and insight. Designing
visualizations does not have to be an art at best or
guesswork at worst. Cognitive experiments can take much
of the art and guesswork out of design by revealing how
people think about the system visualized and how they
convey that information. From these, guidelines can be
extracted that can be evaluated. Finding design principles is
an iterative process, benefiting from both performance of
experienced people as well as their evaluations of features
that aided or hindered performance.
Principles for designing effective visualizations can be
explicit enough to be instantiated in computer algorithms
that generate individualized visualizations on demand.
Previous work instantiated cognitive design principles for
route maps into an algorithm that generates sketch-like route
maps on demand. The present paper describes a project that
reveals and implements design principles for assembly
instructions.
Two implications emerge from this collaboration. Many
of the specific guidelines for assembly are applicable for
other visualizations, such as visualizations for operating a
device or explaining a system. More generally, the
procedures for eliciting cognitive design principles can be

550

applied to other cognitive tools, and could have great impact
in educational domains as well. Understanding what types
of visualizations elicit accurate and complete mental
representations can provide insight into the nature of
knowledge representation and information processing in
human cognition.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Christina Vincent, Rachel Mackenzie,
Heesoo Kim and Vincent Pham for help in data collection
and analysis. This research is funded by ONR grants
NOOO14-PP-1-O649, N000 14-01-1-0717, and N0001402-1-0534

References
Agrawala, M. & Stolte, C. (2001). Rendering Effective
Route Maps: Improving Usability Through
Generalization, SIGGRAPH 2001, August 2001.
Agrawala, M., Phan, D., Heiser, J., Haymaker, J., Klingner,
J., Hanrahan, P., and Tversky, B. (2003, in press).
Designing effective step-by-step assembly instructions.
SIGGRAPH2003, July 2003.
Kosslyn,S (1994) Elements of Graph Design NY: Freeman.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia Learning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Money, J., and Alexander, D. (1966). Turner’s syndrome:
further demonstration of the presence of specific
cognitional deficiencies. Journal of Medical Genetics, 3,
47-48.
Novick, L. and Morse, D.L. (2000). Folding a fish,
making a mushrooms: The role of diagrams in executing
assembly procedures. Memory & Cognition, 28(7),
1242-1256.
Tversky, B. (2001). Spatial Schemas in Depictions. In
M.Gattis, Editor. Spatial Scemas and Abstract Thought.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tversky, B., & Hemenway, K. (1984). Objects, parts, and
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 113, 169-193.
Tversky, B, Zacks, J., Lee, P. U., & Heiser, J. (2000). Lines,
blobs, crosses, and arrows: Diagrammatic
communication with schematic figures. In M. Anderson,
P. Cheng, and V. Haarslev (Editors). Theory and
application of diagrams. Pp. 221-230. Berlin: Springer.
Vandenburg, S.G. and Kuse, A.R. (1978). Mental
rotations. A group test of three-dimensional spatial
visualization. Perceptual Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.
Zacks, J., Tversky, B., and Iyer, G. (2001). Perceiving,
remembering, and communicating structure in events
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(1),
29-58.

