UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparative Search Reveals the Tradeoff between Eye Movements and Working Memory
Use in Visual Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4k01x26b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Inamdar, Shantanu
Pomplun, Marc

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparative Search Reveals the Tradeoff between
Eye Movements and Working Memory Use in Visual Tasks
Shantanu Inamdar (inamdar@cs.umb.edu)
Marc Pomplun (marc@cs.umb.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Boston
100 Morrissey Blvd., Boston, MA 02125, USA

Abstract
The experiments reported here provide an insight into how the
use of working memory is influenced when eye movements
become ‘costlier’ in a visual task. In our comparative search
paradigm, each half of the screen contains a column of simple
geometrical objects of three sizes and forms. Participants have
to detect whether the two halves of the screen are exactly
identical or contain a difference. The eye movement data
recorded from two experiments provides evidence for a
working memory versus eye movement tradeoff. Visual
working memory use – within capacity limits - is flexibly
adapted to optimize task performance for varying costs of eye
movements.

Introduction
The capacity of visual working memory is surprisingly
small. This has been impressively shown by research on
change detection in a flicker paradigm, revealing a
phenomenon termed change blindness (see Simons & Levin,
1997; Simons, 2000, for reviews). In such experiments,
participants are presented with two almost identical images
A and B, and their task is to detect the only local difference
between them; for example, one of the items shown in
image A is missing in image B. However, A and B are not
shown at the same time, but they alternate with short blanks
separating them in time. Participants have been found to be
strikingly insensitive to the changes presented to them,
indicating a remarkable capacity limitation of visual
working memory.
A similar finding in a different paradigm was obtained by
Ballard, Hayhoe and Pelz (1995). These researchers used a
task in which participants had to copy a shown pattern of
colored blocks by moving blocks from a source to a
workspace area. In one experiment, the task was performed
on a computer screen, and in a second experiment, it was
performed with real blocks on a surface. In both
experiments, it was found that participants made only
minimal use of working memory; for example, they tended
not to simultaneously memorize the color and the position
of a block. Instead, they performed additional eye
movements towards the model and back to the workspace or
source to acquire information only immediately before it
was needed.
The interpretation of both the change blindness and block
matching results is in line with models of task performance
with minimal memory demands (Ballard, 1991; Brooks,

599

1986). The basic idea underlying these models is that the
effort of building a comprehensive internal representation
can be avoided if the required information is easily
accessible by sensors. In other words, why should we invest
time and effort in filling up our visual working memory if
instead we can just ‘grab’ the relevant information from the
visual field when we need it? Loosely speaking, it is more
efficient to use the visual scene as an external memory
instead of internalizing a substantial part of it. Eye
movements (saccades) are very quick and therefore
‘inexpensive’ as compared to expensive working memory
use.
If this view of visual task performance - balancing the
use of working memory and eye movements based on their
costs to optimize efficiency – is correct, then making eye
movements more expensive should result in an increased
use of working memory to reduce the number of saccades
during task performance. This is exactly what we did in
Experiment 1. We employed the paradigm of comparative
visual search task, which has been shown to yield insight
into working memory performance (Pomplun, 1998;
Pomplun, Sichelschmidt, Wagner, Clermont, Rickheit &
Ritter, 2001; Pomplun, Reingold & Shen, 2001).
Participants had to compare two columns (hemifields) of
items to determine whether there was a difference between
them or not. By varying the distance between the
hemifields, we varied the cost of eye movements in this
task. Participants’ eye movements were recorded to reveal
working memory use. In Experiment 2, we tested the
capacity limitation of working memory in the present
context. After each switch between hemifields, the features
of items were hidden for a varying amount of time, thereby
artificially and drastically changing the cost of interhemifield saccades.

Experiment 1
To investigate the influence of the distance between object
columns on working memory use, we devised a comparative
visual search task employing the gaze-contingent window
technique. The stimulus displays showed object columns
with three levels of distance between them. This created
three levels of required amplitude for inter-hemifield
saccades and thus three levels of costs for eye movements.
To perform the task efficiently, participants had to
memorize some information from one hemifield, then
switch their gaze to the other one, compare the information

given there with their memory content, then memorize
another chunk of information, and so on. By identifying
inter-hemifield saccades in participants’ gaze trajectories we
were therefore able to determine the amount and time course
of working memory use.

Method
Participants. Eight students from UMass Boston
participated in the experiment. They were paid for the
participation and did not have any information about the
nature of the study.
Apparatus. Eye movements were recorded with the SR
Research Ltd. EyeLink-II system, which operates at a
sampling rate of 500 Hz and measures a subject’s gaze
position with an average error of less than 0.5 degrees of
visual angle. Stimuli were presented on a 21-inch Dell
Trinitron monitor with a refresh rate of 85 Hz and a screen
resolution of 1152 by 864 pixels.
Materials. The stimulus displays showed two columns of
simple geometrical objects on a white background. The
objects were in three different forms (triangles, circles, and
squares) and three different colors (fully saturated blue,
green and red). They were evenly spaced avoiding item
overlap and contiguity with diameters of approximately 0.95
degrees and a distance of 1.91 degrees between neighboring
objects.
Each stimulus image consisted of two hemifields
separated by a black line. There were 20 objects in each
hemifield, which were equally balanced for form and color.
The columns of objects in each hemifield were identical
except for one difference (target), which were present in
half of the displays. This difference could consist in the
color or form of one of the objects. The two columns were
at the distances of approximately 15, 30 and 45 degrees
from each other for the small, medium and large distance
conditions, respectively. The corresponding objects in each
hemifield were connected by a black line to help
participants make precise eye movements when switching
between the halves and not lose track of the current row(s)
in reference.
The two hemifields were presented employing the gazecontingent moving window paradigm (Pomplun, Reingold
and Shen, 2001). Only in the hemifield containing the
current gaze position the objects’ features were visible; gray
blobs were used to mask the actual form and color of the
objects in the other hemifield. As soon as the participant’s
gaze crossed the midline of the display, a display change
was initiated and completed within a maximum duration of
14ms. This manipulation was required because, when the
two columns were very close to each other it would not have
been necessary for participants to switch their gaze between
the columns. Instead, participants could have perceived both
columns at once accurately enough to perform comparisons
using covert shifts of attention. Figure 1 illustrates the gazecontingent window manipulation.

600

Figure 1: Sample display as seen by the participant when the
gaze position is in the left hemifield (top) or in the right
hemifield (bottom). The first row of items contains a color
difference. Note that the actual displays contained 20
objects per hemifield.
Procedure. Prior to the start of the experiment the
participants were instructed to decide for each display if it
contained a difference between the two hemifields.
Participants were to press a designated button on a game
pad if there was a difference and press another one if there
was none. They were asked to fixate a marker in the upper
left region of the display before each new trial. The marker
was placed at the first position of the object in the display
stimulus to appear. On pressing a button, the display
stimulus was displayed. This procedure served for the
recalibration of the system during the experiment and the
standardization of participants’ initial gaze position in each
trial.
After the instruction of a participant and the initial setup
of the system, there were 24 practice trials to get the
participant well versed with the system. These trials were
followed by four blocks of 48 stimuli each. Participants
were free to take breaks in between blocks if they so
desired. Before continuing, after a break, the system was
recalibrated to reduce error. A block consisted of 16
consecutive stimuli for each of the three distances. Out of
these 16 stimuli, eight had a target and eight did not have
one. The targets, if present, were at any of the 20 objects in
the stimulus. The position of targets as well as the order of
stimulus types were counterbalanced across blocks and
participants.

Results and Discussion
Only target-absent trials with correct – negative – response
were included in the data analysis for Experiment 1. There
were two reasons for this restriction: First, since in targetpresent trials the target could sometimes be found within a
few saccades, including these trials would have added
substantial noise to the data. Second, it is known from
previous research (Pomplun et al, 2001; see also Zelinsky,
1996) that verifying a suspected target induces eyemovement patterns that are substantially different from the
ones generated during the preceding search process.
The error rate, that is, the proportion of participants’
incorrect responses, did not vary significantly with the
distance between the hemifields, F(2;14) = 3.72, p > 0.05.
Its relatively low value (2.34%, 4.29%, and 1.36% for small,
medium, and large distance, respectively) indicated that
participants performed their task accurately. Interestingly,
while average response time was shorter for small and
medium distance (8.47s and 8.38s, respectively) than for
large distance (8.73s), this difference did not reach
significance, F(2;14) = 1.28, p > 0.3 (see Figure 2, top
panel). As expected, however, the duration of saccades
switching between hemifields did depend on the distance
between them, F(2;14) = 146.65, p < 0.001. Saccade
duration increased significantly with increasing distance
across all its levels - small, medium, and large (58.99ms,
72.58ms, and 101.40ms, respectively) - all t(7) > 11.23, p <
0.001 (see Figure 2, center panel). Thus, eye movements
indeed became more time-consuming or ‘expensive’ with
growing distance between the hemifields. How did
participants adapt to this change in costs?
First of all, the duration of participants’ processing
intervals – the average time that their gaze remained in the
same hemifield before switching to the other one –
depended significantly on the inter-hemifield distance,
F(2;14) = 13.65, p < 0.001. Larger distance led to longer
processing intervals (439.4ms, 466.4ms, and 531.3ms for
small, medium, and large distance, respectively). While the
differences between large distance and the other two
distances was significant, both t(7) > 3.03, p < 0.05, the
difference between small and medium distance only showed
a tendency, t(7) = 2.17, p = 0.065. Regardless of the
variance in the empirical data, it is evident that participants
reacted to the increased cost of eye movements by spending
more time on processing between switches. The difference
in processing time even clearly exceeded the difference in
saccade duration (see Figure 2, center panel). However, the
longer processing time may also have been caused by more
difficult matching (despite the horizontal lines in the
displays) or increased memory decay during switching. In
order to find evidence for an actual and successful increase
in working memory use due to more expensive eye
movements, we needed to analyze how much information
was actually memorized between switches. This information
was obtained by measuring the number of inter-hemifield
saccades per trial.
The distance between the hemifields exerted a significant
effect on the number of gaze switches between them,
F(2;14) = 13.78, p < 0.001 (see Figure 2, bottom panel).
With growing distance, participants switched less often

601

between the hemifields while completing their task (17.61,
16.09, and 14.37 switches for small, medium, and large
distance, respectively). There were significant differences in
the number of switches across all three distances, all t(7) >
2.44, p < 0.05. Fewer inter-hemifield saccades for larger
distances indicate that participants must have stored a larger
amount of information in working memory in order to
complete the task with the same accuracy.

Figure 2: Response time (top), duration of processing and
switching between hemifields (center), and number of interhemifield saccades per trial (bottom) in Experiment 1.

All in all, the results of Experiment 1 demonstrated that
participants adapted their use of visual working memory to
the varying cost of eye movements. Figure 3 shows sample
eye movements of one of the participants for each of the
three distances.

working memory is used to its limit? This question was
tackled in Experiment 2. Obviously, to further increase the
cost of eye movements, a different approach had to be
taken. We decided to introduce a variable delay between the
gaze crossing of the midline and the unmasking of the
objects in the currently attended hemifield. Participants
knew that after the crossing of the midline they would have
to wait for a certain duration until they could compare their
memorized information with the one shown in the current
hemifield. Consequently, each inter-hemifield saccade
delayed task performance by this duration. This
manipulation, although very artificial, had the advantage of
allowing us to establish any desired cost (delay) of interhemifield saccades. We used two levels of visibility delay
plus a no-delay condition to vary the cost of eye movements
in the comparative search task by substantial amounts.

Method
Participants. Eight students from UMass Boston
participated in Experiment 2. They were paid for the
participation and did not have any information about the
nature of the study.
Apparatus. The same apparatus as in Experiment 1 was
used.
Materials. The stimulus display showed only the images
with medium distance from Experiment 1. The two
hemifields were presented employing the gaze-contingent
moving window paradigm. Whenever participants switched
from one hemifield to the other, objects in both hemifields
were masked, and the objects in the attended hemifield
appeared after a delay of 0, 500 or 1000ms.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1
except that there were 12 practice trials followed by three
blocks. A block consisted of 24 stimuli with eight stimuli
for each of the 0ms, 500ms, and 1000ms delay conditions.
Out of the eight stimuli, four had a target and the other four
had no target. The position of targets as well as the order of
stimulus types were counterbalanced across blocks and
participants.

Results and Discussion

Figure 3: Eye movements of one of the participants across
the three levels of costs for eye movements: Small distance
(top), medium distance (center) and large distance (bottom).
The lines connect successive fixations.

Experiment 2
The distance manipulation in Experiment 1 was sufficient to
induce higher eye movement costs and, in turn, successful
adaptation of working memory use. This was possible
because the required memory load was within the capacity
of visual working memory. However, what happens if the
cost of eye movements is drastically increased so that

602

In analogy to Experiment 1, only target-absent trials with
correct response were analyzed in Experiment 2. The error
rate was comparable to the one obtained in Experiment 1
(4.16%, 2.29%, and 4.16% for visibility delays of 0ms,
500ms, and 1000ms, respectively) and was not significantly
influenced by the delay, F(2;14) < 1. However, unlike in
Experiment 1, there was a significant effect of the delay on
participants’ response time, F(2;14) = 88.35, p < 0.001.
Response time increased significantly with longer delay
across all of its three levels (12.30s, 22.68s, and 30.47s for
0ms, 500ms, and 1000ms delays, respectively), all t(7) >
5.95, p < 0.01 (see Figure 4, top panel). This demonstrates
that participants were unable to completely compensate for
the artificially imposed long delays between processing
intervals.

that is, the time between two processing intervals. In the two
delay conditions, the time for the delay begins to count as
soon as the participant’s gaze crosses the midline of the
display. Assuming an approximately symmetric trajectory of
saccades, the crossing occurs after about 42.5ms and is sent
to the display computer with an average delay of 2ms. Due
to the latency of the monitor screen, unmasking the objects
after the delay takes an average of 6ms, so all in all the
actual switching intervals are approximately 85ms, 550ms,
and 1050ms.
These delays exerted a significant effect on the duration
of processing intervals, F(2;14) = 43.07, p < 0.001. In
Experiment 2, a processing interval was defined as the time
from the unmasking of a hemifield until the onset of the
next saccade switching to the other hemifield. Processing
intervals increased with longer visibility delays (638ms,
1479ms, and 1803ms for delays of 0ms, 500ms, and
1000ms), with significant differences between all three
levels, all t(7) > 5.3, p < 0.05 (see Figure 4, center panel).
Interestingly, the 500ms delay caused an additional 841ms
in processing time as compared to the no-delay condition,
whereas the 1000ms delay increased processing time only
by another 324ms relative to the 500ms delay condition. It
therefore seems that participants adapted their behavior to
the 500ms condition by dramatically increasing their
processing intervals, while there was only little extra effort
when this delay was doubled, assumedly due to the capacity
limit of visual working memory. If this assumption is
correct, we would expect a substantial increase in memory
load between the no-delay and 500ms delay conditions and
only a small increase between the 500ms and 1000ms
conditions.
Accordingly, we analyzed the number of inter-hemifield
saccades and found a significant effect on it by the delay,
F(2;14) = 9.11, p < 0.01. While there were significantly
more switches in the no-delay condition (19.88) than in the
500ms condition (12.64) and the 1000ms condition (11.43),
both t(7) > 2.73, p < 0.05, the difference between the 500ms
and 1000ms conditions did not reach significance, t(7) =
1.80, p > 0.1 (see Figure 4, bottom panel). This finding
suggests that in the 500ms delay condition participants filled
up their working memory in each processing interval to a
large extent, which could not be significantly increased in
the 1000ms delay condition. Figure 5 shows the eye
movements of one participant for the three levels of
visibility delay.

Conclusions
Figure 4: Response time (top), duration of processing and
switching between hemifields (center), and number of interhemifield saccades per trial (bottom) in Experiment 2.
Since in Experiment 2 the distance between hemifields
was not varied, it is not surprising that the duration of interhemifield saccades (84.98ms) was not significantly affected
by the delay, F(2;14) = 1.57, p > 0.2. Nevertheless, it is still
important to consider saccade duration in the data analysis
as it determines the actual duration of the switching interval,

603

All in all, the present study provides evidence for a working
memory versus eye movement tradeoff in visual tasks,
supporting the point of view that visual scenes are used as
an ‘external memory’ to an extent that optimizes task
performance (Ballard, 1991; Ballard, Hayhoe & Pelz, 1995;
Brooks, 1986). Experiment 1 demonstrates that increasing
the cost of eye movements by demanding longer saccades
leads to increased memory use by the participants.
Memorizing more information at a time enables participants
to compensate for the increased saccade duration without
performing their task significantly less efficiently.

Experiment 1 reaches its limits under the condition of
extremely expensive eye movements in Experiment 2.
According to the present data, the employment of visual
working memory can be flexibly adapted to optimize task
performance as long as the creation of internal
representations does not exceed an estimated duration of
roughly one second. Beyond this duration, the limited
capacity of working memory will dramatically reduce a
person’s efficiency in completing a visual task.
Motivated by the present results, our future research will
focus on developing a quantitative model of the working
memory versus eye movement tradeoff, which was
infeasible for the current data due to its substantial variance.
Moreover, we will apply the current comparative visual
search approach to investigate the role of memory decay in
visual tasks.

References
Ballard, D.H. (1991). Animate vision. Artificial Intelligence
Journal, 48, 57-86.
Ballard, D.H., Hayhoe, M.M. & Pelz, J.B. (1995). Memory
representations in natural tasks. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 7, 66-80.
Brooks, R.A. (1986). A robust layered control system for a
mobile robot. IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation,
2, 14-22.
Pomplun, M. (1998). Analysis and models of eye movements
in comparative visual search. Göttingen: Cuvillier.
Pomplun, M., Reingold, E.M. & Shen, J. (2001).
Investigating the visual span in comparative search: The
effects of task difficulty and divided attention. Cognition,
81, B57-B67.
Pomplun, M., Sichelschmidt, L., Wagner, K., Clermont, T.,
Rickheit, G. & Ritter, H. (2001). Comparative visual
search: A difference that makes a difference. Cognitive
Science, 25, 3-36.
Simons, D. J., ed. (2000), Change Blindness and Visual
Memory: A Special Issue of the Journal Visual Cognition,
(Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press).
Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T. (1997). Change blindness.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 261-267.
Zelinsky, G. J. (1996). Using eye saccades to assess the
selectivity of search movements. Vision Research, 36,
2177–2187.

Figure 5: Eye movements of one of the participants across
the three levels of visibility delay: No delay (top), 500ms
delay (center), and 1000ms delay (bottom). The lines
connect successive fixations.
The results of Experiment 2 show that participants adapt
to the imposed 500ms visibility delay by dramatically
increasing their working memory load and reducing the
number of expensive inter-hemifield saccades. Adding
another 500ms to the visibility delay, however, causes
participants to increase their working memory load only
very little. Obviously, due to the limited capacity of visual
working memory, it would take participants a
disproportionate amount of time and effort to memorize
more information at a time in order to avoid costly interhemifield saccades. The flexibility of memory use for
optimizing efficiency that determines the results of

604

