UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conjunctions are easier than disjunctions: A study of logical reasoning problems in the GRE

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x36w44x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Yang, Yingrui
Johnson-Laird, P.N.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conjunctions are easier than disjunctions:
A study of logical reasoning problems in the GRE
Yingrui Yang (yangyri@rpi.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences
Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Carnegie Hall, Troy, NY 12180 USA
P.N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology
Princeton University
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA
Trend

Abstract
We report three experiments corroborating a
prediction of the theory of mental models about reasoning.
In realistic problems deriving from those used in the
Graduate Record Examination (GRE), logically untrained
individuals are able to cope better with conditional
assertions, which have only a single explicit mental model,
than with disjunctive assertions, which have multiple
explicit mental models. The experiments showed that a
manipulation of a sentence in the text of the problems had
only a marginal effect, whereas a manipulation of the
response options – whether they were both conditionals or
both disjunctions – had robust effects both on the
accuracy of performance and the latency of response.

Introduction
In logic, a conditional, such as: “If the trend continues
then a decline will occur” is treated as equivalent to a
disjunction: “Either the trend stops, i.e., doesn't continue,
or a decline will occur”. Both assertions are compatible
with the following three possibilities:
Trend
Decline
¬ Trend
Decline
¬ Trend
¬ Decline
where “¬” signifies negation. In daily life, of course, the
equivalence may break down as a result of the specific
content or context of assertions (Johnson-Laird and Byrne,
2002). But, where the two assertions are compatible with
the same possibilities, psychologists can ask: are they
equally easy to comprehend and to use to make inferences?
Theories based on formal rules postulate separate rules of
inference for the two connectives, such as: A or B; Not A;
therefore, B; and If A then B; A; therefore, B. These
theories then use empirical data to estimate the relative
ease of successfully using the various rules for the
different connectives (see, e.g., Rips, 1984; Braine and
O'Brien, 1998). In contrast, the theory of mental models
predicts a difference between them (see, e.g., JohnsonLaird and Byrne, 1991). The theory postulates that
individuals represent the conditional above in the mental
models:

Decline
. . .
The first of these models represents the possibility in which
the trend continues and the decline occurs, and the second
model, which has no explicit content, represents the
possibilities in which the antecedent of the conditional is false.
If reasoners remember that the antecedent is false in this
implicit model then they can flesh it out, where necessary, into
the two further possibilities shown above.
The theory
postulates that individuals represent the disjunction above in
the mental models:
¬ Trend
Decline
And they may also add the possibility in which both
propositions occur:
¬ Trend
Decline
One consequence of this account is that it takes work for
individuals to grasp that they can infer the conditional from
the disjunction, and vice versa (see Richardson and Ormerod,
1997).
Another consequence, however, is that inferences
based on conditionals and that do not call for models to be
fleshed out fully explicitly should generally be easier than
inferences based on disjunctions. The former call for only
one explicit mental model to be held in mind, whereas the
latter call for multiple explicit mental models to be held in
mind.
In previous research, we have investigated some of the
factors that affect the difficulty of the so-called "logical
reasoning" (LR) problems in the GRE developed by
Educational Testing Service of Princeton, New Jersey (Yang
and Johnson-Laird, 1999, 2001). The aim of the present
research was to examine a further factor – the nature of the
sentential connectives in the problems, and to test the
prediction that problems based on conditionals would be
easier to cope with than problems based on disjunctions.

Experiment 1
Method
Design The participants acted as their own controls and
carried out two sorts of modified LR problems from the GRE:
Problems with a conditional statement in the text and
problems with a disjunctive statement in the text. Eight

1271

original logical reasoning problems were selected from a
sample of 120 representative items provided by the
Educational Testing Service (ETS). Each of the 8
problems was modified to yield two versions: A
conditional version and a disjunctive version. In addition,
only two of the five response options from the original
problems were used: One was the correct response and
the other was the most frequently chosen item among the
four foils (as shown in the results, which were also
provided by ETS). Below are examples of the two sorts of
problems used in the experiment. The two problems share
the same two response options.
1. Conditional version:
Because the number of surgeons is growing faster
than the number of operations and because
noninvasive medical therapies are increasingly
replacing surgery, the average annual number of
operations per surgeon has fallen by one-fourth in
recent years. It can be concluded that, if these trends
continue, a dangerous decline in the level of surgical
skill will occur.
2. Disjunctive version:
Because the number of surgeons is growing faster
than the number of operations and because
noninvasive medical therapies are increasingly
replacing surgery, the average annual number of
operations per surgeon has fallen by one-fourth in
recent years. It can be concluded that, either these
trends stop, or a dangerous decline in the level of
surgical skill will occur.

problem page during the course of solving a problem. Their
task was to choose whichever of the two response options they
thought was correct, and they were told that there was no time
limit.
Participants. Twenty undergraduates at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute were paid to participate in the experiment.
They had no training in logic.
Results and Discussion
The overall percentage of correct responses to the
conditional problems was 74% and to the disjunctive problems
was 67%. This difference was not significant. But, the
participants were faster to solve the conditional problems (a
mean of 1.76 minutes per problem) than to solve the
disjunctive problems (a mean of 2.06 minutes per problem),
and the difference was significant (Wilcoxon T = 45, p < .05).
This result was promising, and suggested a modification to the
problems, which we examined in the next experiment.

Experiment 2
Method
Experiment 2 was similar to the previous experiment, but
in addition the response options for the conditional problems
were both conditionals, and the response options for the
disjunctive problems were both disjunctions. An example of
two sorts of problem is given below:
1. Conditional version:
According to one psychological theory, if you don't have
an intimate relationship with another person, then you are
sad. Yet the world's greatest composers spent most of
their time in solitude and had no intimate relationships. So
the psychological theory must be wrong.
The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?
(A) If you are one of the world's greatest composers, then
you are not sad.
(B) If you spend a lot of time in solitude then you don't
have an intimate relationship.

The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?
(A) Surgeons now spend a large percentage of their
time performing noninvasive medical procedures.
(B) A surgeon’s skill cannot be properly maintained
unless the surgeon performs operations with a certain
minimum frequency.
Option (B) is the correct answer. By modifying the 8
original LR problems in a similar way, 16 experimental
problems were obtained.
Materials. The 16 experimental problems were
divided into two sets of 8 problems: Each set contained
only one version of an original LR problem and included
4 conditional problems and 4 disjunctive ones. Each of
these sets was printed in a booklet with one problem on
each page, with enough space for the participants to make
notes. The participants were given a single booklet of
problems, and so they encountered a particular content
only once, and carried out 4 problems of each sort.
Procedure. The participants were tested individually in
a quiet room. They were given written instructions, which
included one practice problem. They were encouraged to
write or to draw whatever they had in mind on the

2. Disjunctive version:
According to one psychological theory, either you have
an intimate relationship with another person, or you are
sad. Yet the world's greatest composers spent most of
their time in solitude and had no intimate relationships. So
the psychological theory must be wrong.
The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?
(A) Either you are not one of the world's greatest
composers, or you are sad.
(B) Either you spend little time in solitude or you don't
have an intimate relationship.
The correct answer in both cases was option A. Otherwise,
the materials and procedure were identical to those of the
previous experiment. Twenty undergraduates from the same
population as before were paid to participate in the experiment.

1272

Results and Discussion
The participants were more accurate with the
conditional problems (73% correct) than with the
disjunctive problems (61% correct, Wilcoxon's T = 13.5,
p < .005). The participants also responded faster to the
conditional problems (mean = 0.8 minutes) than to the
disjunctive problems (mean = 1.17 minutes; Wilcoxon’s T
= 13, p < .005). The use of a sentence containing a given
connective in both the text and the two response options
evidently amplified the difference between conditionals
and disjunctions. But, it leaves unanswered the question
of which is the key location giving rise to the difference:
the sentence in the text or the sentences in the response
option. Our final experiment was designed to answer this
question.

Experiment 3
Method
Experiment 3 examined all four possibilities
depending on whether the sentence in the text was a
conditional or a disjunction, and whether the pair of
sentences in the response options were both conditionals
or both disjunctions. Hence, we derived four sorts of
problem from each of the original 8 LR problems, as
shown here:
1. Conditional in text and conditional response options
(Conditional-conditional):
Inspection system X and inspection system Y, though
based on different principles, each detect all product
flaws, but they each also erroneously reject three
percent of flawless products. Since false rejections
are very costly, money will be saved by installing
both systems, instead of either one or the other, and if
a product is rejected, then it must be found flawed by
both systems X and Y.
The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?
(A) If system X rejects a flawless product among the
three percent of such products, then system Y is not
likely to reject it.
(B) If a flawed product is accepted, then the cost is
less than the rejection of a flawless one.
2. Disjunction in text with conditional response options
(Disjunction-conditional):
Inspection system X and inspection system Y, though
based on different principles, each detect all product
flaws, but they each also erroneously reject three
percent of flawless products. Since false rejections
are very costly, money will be saved by installing
both systems, instead of either one or the other, and
either a product is passed, or it found flawed by both
systems.
The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?

(A) If system X rejects a flawless product among the three
percent of such products, then system Y is not likely to
reject it.
(B) If a flawed product is accepted, then the cost is less
than the rejection of a flawless one.
3. Disjunction in text with disjunctive response options
(Disjunction-disjunction):
Inspection system X and inspection system Y, though
based on different principles, each detect all product
flaws, but they each also erroneously reject three percent
of flawless products. Since false rejections are very costly,
money will be saved by installing both systems, instead of
either one or the other, and either a product is passed, or it
found flawed by both systems.
The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?
(A) Either system X accepts a flawless product among the
three percent of such products, or system Y is not likely to
reject it.
(B) Either a flawed product is rejected, or the cost is less
than the rejection of a flawless one.
4. Conditional in text and disjunctive response options
(Conditional-disjunction):
Inspection system X and inspection system Y, though
based on different principles, each detect all product flaws,
but they each also erroneously reject three percent of
flawless products. Since false rejections are very costly,
money will be saved by installing both systems, instead of
either one or the other, and if a product is rejected, then it
must be found flawed by both systems X and Y.
The argument is based on which of the following
assumptions?
(A) Either system X accepts a flawless product among the
three percent of such products, or system Y is not likely to
reject it.
(B) Either a flawed product is rejected, or the cost is less
than the rejection of a flawless one.
Problems of the sort shown in 1 and 3 are, of course, identical
to those used in the previous experiment.
The resulting 32 experimental problems were divided into
four sets of 8 problems, which each contained only one
version of an original LR problem, and two problems of each
of four sorts. Each participant carried out a single set of
problems, and so encountered a particular content only once.
Otherwise, the procedure was the same as in the previous
experiments. Forty undergraduates from the same population
as before were paid to participate in the experiment, and they
were assigned by rotation to one of the four sets of problems.
Results and Discussion
Table 1 presents the percentages of correct responses and
the overall mean latencies to the four sorts of problem. The
results are clear-cut. What matters is the nature of the

1273

S. Bringsjord, Y. Yang, P.N. Johnson-Laird, and M. Bauer.
Table 1: The percentages of correct responses and overall
mean latencies (in min.) in Experiment 3.
Problem type
Accuracy Mean latency
(%)
(min.)
Conditional-conditional 66
1.28
Disjunctive-conditional 70
1.36
Disjunctive-disjunctive 44
1.43
Conditional-disjunctive 50
1.43

References
Braine, M.D.S., and O’Brien, D.P., Eds. (1998) Mental Logic,
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

response options.
The problems with conditional
response options were evaluated more accurately and
more rapidly than the problems with the disjunctive
response options (Wilcoxon’s T = 63.0, z = 3.18, p < .001;
Wilcoxon’s T = 262.5, z = 1.99, p < .025, respectively).
The results also replicated those of Experiment 2: the
conditional-conditional problems were evaluated more
accurately and more rapidly than the disjunctivedisjunctive problems (Wilcoxon’s T = 108.0, z = 2.56, p
< .005; Wilcoxon’s T = 237.0, z = 2.33, p < .01,
respectively). Finally, disjunctive-conditional problems
were evaluated more accurately, though not reliably more
rapidly,
than
conditional-disjunctive
problems
(Wilcoxon’s T = 47.5, z = 2.56, p < .005).

General discussion

Johnson-Laird, P.N., and Byrne, R.M.J. (2002) Conditionals:
A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference.
Psychological Review, in press.
Richardson, J., and Ormerod, T.C. (1997) Rephrasing between
disjunctives and conditionals: Mental models and the
effects of thematic content.
Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 50A, 358-385.
Rips, L.J. (1994). The Psychology of Proof. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Yang, Y., and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2001). Mental models and
logical reasoning problems in the GRE. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, Vol. 7, No. 4, 308316.
Yang, Y., and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1999) A study of complex
reasoning: The case of GRE ‘logical’ problems.
Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 767-771.

In accordance with the theory of mental models, when
individuals reason about problems derived from those in
the GRE, they cope better with those based on
conditionals than with those based on disjunctions.
Experiment 1 yielded only a difference in latency, which
was just reliable. But the difference reflected only a single
sentence in the text, which was either conditional or
disjunction. Experiment 2 yielded robust effects in
accuracy and latency when the difference concerned both
a sentence in the text and the two response options: the
three sentences were either all conditionals or all
disjunctions. Experiment 3 showed that these effects
were primarily a result of manipulating the response
options. This phenomenon makes sense: reasoners have to
keep considering the response options throughout the
process of trying to solve the problems. And the correct
response hinges on the complete text, not just the single
sentence that we manipulated in the text of the problems.
The model theory is able to elucidate certain aspects of
performance with reasoning problems in the GRE. As it
predicts, reasoning from conditionals is easier than
reasoning from logically equivalent disjunctions.

Acknowledgments
This research was a part of the project, eWriter, which
was supported by a grant from ETS and the GRE Board to

1274

