UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constructive Perception: A Metacognitive Skill for Coordinating Perception and Conception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5bs8n43r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Suwa, Masaki
Tversky, Barbara

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constructive Perception: A Metacognitive Skill for Coordinating Perception
and Conception
Masaki Suwa (suwa@sccs.chukyo-u.ac.jp)
PRESTO, JST & School of Computer and Cognitive Sciences, Chukyo University,
101 Tokodachi, Kaizu, Toyota, 470-0348 Japan

Barbara Tversky (bt@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA
Abstract
One aspect of expertise, in chess, in diagrammatic
reasoning, in design, and in other domains, is inferring
conceptual ideas from perception. In design, this process
is associated with creativity. We propose that underlying
this skill is a process we call constructive perception, the
deliberate adoption of perceptual strategies in the service
of cognition. In the case of enabling new ideas in design,
this seems to be a coordination of two processes:
reorganizing perception and associating ideas. The
present research presents evidence for the two
components
underlying
constructive
perception.
Generating new interpretations of ambiguous sketches
was correlated independently with a perceptual ability,
reorganizing parts of figures, and with a conceptual
ability, associative fluency.

Introduction
One common conception of creativity is facility at
recombining old ideas into new ones. To this end,
Finke and others have developed tasks that ask people
to reconfigure parts for new uses (Finke, 1990). An
analysis of this task reveals that it has two essential
components: a perceptual component and a conceptual
component. The perceptual component is reconfiguring
visible parts. The conceptual component is molding the
new configuration to some use, function, or goal. The
perceptual component entails careful looking and
mental transformation whereas the conceptual
component entails connections to knowledge.
Viewed such, as a marriage of perceptual and
conceptual processes, creativity comes to resemble
expertise. For years artificial intelligence and cognitive
science have addressed this issue. Expert systems that
flourished in the 80’s in artificial intelligence were a
bold trial to capture expertise in order to implement it in
computers. But the inherent tacitness of expertise made
it elusive to elicitation, a prerequisite for
implementation. Direct pursuit of expertise was not a
success.
A better understanding of expertise may come from
investigating how the perceptual and conceptual
processes of people become interwoven. Expertise
embodies the kinds of features and relations in the
external world an expert perceives and how the expert

1140

interprets them. This implies that experts are able to
differentiate and perceive meaning in some features and
relations in the external world that would be
meaningless to novices or misinterpreted by novices.
For example, the move history and options on a midgame chessboard are not apparent to chess novices.
Similarly, a statistical graph with two data lines that
form an X may perplex a novice, but greeted with
excitement by the expert, who sees in it an interaction.
The ability to infer conceptual features from perceptual
ones is often taken for granted by experts. Therefore,
acquisition of expertise can be regarded as a process of
becoming able to perceive what was not evident
previously. Gibson and Gibson (1955) described a
similar process, also in relation to expertise, in their
case, wine-tasting: “Perceptual learning, then, consists
of responding to variables of physical stimulation not
previously responded to” (p. 34). Recent studies on the
roles of external representations (e.g. Chandrasekaran,
Glasgow & Narayanan, 1995) suggest that the interplay
of perception and conception is a major driving-force of
human problem solving and inference
In the realm of design, expertise in perceiving plans
and sketches is of particular significance. Sketches on
paper are not simply instructions to engineers and
contractors. Sketches also serve the designer as an
external tool for checking the coherence and appearance
of ideas as well as for generating new ideas and
interpretations. Sketches are a revelation of a set of
ideas as well as a stimulus for new ones (e. g.,
Goldschmidt, 1994; Schon, 1983). Arnheim (1969)
called this “visual thinking”, providing many examples
in art and architecture.
Reinterpreting sketches and generating new ideas
work in a productive cycle. A detailed study of the
cognitive processes of an expert architect revealed that
when he made new perceptual discoveries in his own
sketches, he was more likely to come up with new ideas.
Similarly, new design ideas led him to see new features
and relations in his sketches (Suwa, Gero and Purcell,
2000). That study highlights two significant
components of expertise. One is perception of subtle
features and relations in the external representation of a
domain, and the other is the generation of ideas and

interpretations in the domain. Coordinating the two so
that each amplifies the other is one important feature of
both creativity and domain expertise, at least in design.
What does it take to be able to coordinate perceptual
discoveries and conceptual ideas in a domain? Of
course, exposure to many instances of perceptual
discovery and conceptual generation through training in
the domain is indispensable. Irrespective of training,
however, some individuals are more effective than
others. What underlies their skill? We propose that a
mental skill, which we term, constructive perception,
underlies coordinating perceptual discoveries and
conceptual generation in a domain (Suwa and Tversky,
2002). Constructive perception entails awareness of the
ways perception grounds interpretation as well as ways
to reorganize perception in the search for new
interpretations. We developed this concept to account
for previous research observing students and designers
in their attempts at generating as many interpretations
as possible from ambiguous sketches (Suwa & Tversky,
2001) (see Figure 1 for the sketches). We found that
professional designers produced more interpretations
than design students, students who did not study design,
or those whose profession was unrelated to design. This
was a modest study, with 10 professional designers, 10
design students, 11 non-professionals and 22 nondesign students. Why did professional designers
perform better in this task, which is not directly
pertinent to design? We proposed that the skill of
constructive perception may be fundamental to
expertise in design, and that it may be general enough
to apply to other domains as well.
Here, we examine the abilities of designers in greater
detail in order to gain a better understanding of the skill
of constructive perception. What cognitive abilities are
its significant components? In order to come up with a
new interpretation of a sketch, it is helpful if not
necessary to see the sketch differently, that is, to
reorganize the parts or view it from a different
perspective. But reorganizing is not sufficient; the new
organization must be interpreted as well.
The evidence reviewed suggests that two abilities
underlie constructive perception: a perceptual ability
and an associative ability. Is the perceptual ability a
general spatial ability or a more specific ability that
engenders fluency in seeing new figures and relations?
In the present study, we administer ability tests to
expert designers, students studying design, people in
unrelated professions and students studying cognitive
science, and relate those ability measures to
performance in a task requiring producing as many
interpretations as possible for ambiguous sketches. The
ability measures include a general test of spatial ability
(mental rotation), a specific test of perceptual
reorganization (embedded figures) and a test of
(linguistic) associative fluency (remote associates).

1141

Constructive Perception for Interpreting
Ambiguous Drawings
Before describing the present study, we review the task
of generating interpretations of ambiguous drawings,
showing how the skill of constructive perception is
required for good performance of this task. Reversing
interpretations of ambiguous figures, such as the duckrabbit figure, is difficult in imagery. Chambers and
Reisberg (1992) argued seeing another figure requires
changing perceptual reference frames -- the duck and
the rabbit face opposite directions--, and that changing
reference frames is more difficult in imagery. Rock
(1973) has demonstrated that assigning a reference
frame is integral to interpreting a figure. In general a
drawing consists of elements arranged in space relative
to each other and to a reference frame and perspective
(Tversky, 2001). Interpreting a drawing means
grouping certain elements and not others as well as
assigning a reference frame and perspective. People
unwittingly fixate to the particular groupings of
elements and/or reference frames and perspectives
underlying previous interpretations. This accounts for
the difficulty, in general, of reorganizing perception.
Howard-Jones (1998) demonstrated fixation in an
experiment on which ours was based. Participants were
asked to generate as many interpretations as possible of
a single ambiguous drawing. The typical pattern was a
drastic reduction in the rate of generating interpretations
after the first minute, the fixation effect. Fixation is a
problem that plagues designers, indeed, all problem
solvers. In order to avoid fixation, observers would
need to coordinate two processes, perceptual
reorganization of the elements of a drawing and
conceptual generation of new interpretations.
Perceptual reorganization can happen by regrouping
elements, by changing reference frame, and by altering
perspective.
We proposed that constructive perception is the skill
for coordinating perceptual reorganization and
conceptual generation. What is meant by “constructive
perception” is self-awareness of the ways perception
serves as the basis for interpretations of drawings. This
awareness allows reorganization of perception in a
deliberate and constructive manner, facilitating
generation of new ideas and interpretations. Our
previous study (Suwa, Tversky, Gero, and Purcell,
2001) using ambiguous drawings provided support for
the hypothesis, showing that participants who were selfaware of how they perceptually grouped parts of a
drawing and thereby regrouped parts intentionally
generated more interpretations than those who did not.
Perceptually regrouping parts of a drawing is one form
of constructive perception. What the hypothesis implies
is, in other words, that the performance of the task of
generating many interpretations of an ambiguous
drawing can be a measure of the skill of constructive
perception.

Experiment: Comparing Generating
Interpretations and Abilities
In this experiment, professional designers, design
students, people in unrelated professions and students
studying cognitive science were asked to generate as
many interpretations as possible for four ambiguous
figures. Their performance is compared to their
performance on the three ability tests, perceptual
reorganization, spatial ability, and associative fluency.

Methods
Participants. 48 people participated in the experiment.
They consisted of 14 professional designers, recruited
from the domain of industrial design or architecture; 12
design students, juniors or sophomores, 11 of which
study industrial design at Tama Art University and 1 at
Chiba University; 7 office workers in unrelated
professions; and 15 students, all juniors, who study
cognitive science at Chukyo University. The age range
of professional designers was between 28 and 44, so
that they have been practicing design for more than 5
years. The age range of office workers in unrelated
professions was the same, between 28 and 44. They
graduated from the department of law, social science, or
humanity in their universities. Using participants from
such diverse groups was expected to yield a wide range
of scores for the task of ambiguous drawings.
Procedure. Participants first worked on the general
spatial ability test, then the task of generating
interpretations of ambiguous drawings, and then the
perceptual reorganization test and the associative
fluency test.

Ability Measures
We selected three tests as measures for the three
abilities from the many measures that have been
developed and tested (e.g. Carroll, 1993).
Mental Rotation. The most widely used measure of
general spatial ability is mental rotation, because it
correlates with performance in a wide range of tasks
(e.g. Linn & Petersen, 1986). We chose to use the
standard test of mental rotation, that developed by
Vandenberg and Kuse (1978). In that test, participants
judge whether a target stimulus is the same or a mirror
image of a set of 4 test stimuli that are rotated relative
to the target. There were two sets of 10 trials. For each
trial, two of the four test stimuli are rotations of the
target, hence, correct answers. The test is speeded; that
is, performance is measured by the number of correct
trials in a preset amount of time. Participants had 3
minutes for each set of 10 trials with a 1-minute rest
between sets.
Embedded Figures.
Perceptual redefinition or
reorganization is one facet of “intellectual flexibility”

1142

(Guilford, 1959). The Embedded Figure Test (EFT) is
widely used as a measure for testing perceptual
redefinition. In EFT, participants are given many pairs
of (a) simple figure(s) and a complex figure, and
answer for each pair whether or not the simple one(s) is
embedded in the complex one. Several versions of EFT
have been proposed, varying in terms of whether the
number of simple figures for each pair is one or more
than one, and whether the number of simple figures
embedded in the complex one for each pair, correct
answers, is one (single-answer) or more than one
(multiple-answer). Guilford (1959) argued that the
multiple-answer condition of EFT requires the ability of
redefinition more crucially. The reason is as follows.
People, once they have found a simple figure to be
embedded, would unwittingly see the complex one in a
way that the simple one embedded appears evident. The
multiple-answer condition requires checking if other
simple figures are embedded. To do this, people would
have to reorganize ways to see the complex figure, e.g.
by regrouping its parts. For this reason we adopted the
multiple-answer version of the EFT.
The material for the multiple-answer EFT was
adapted from Gottschaldt’s test (1926), because the
Gottschaldt figures have been most widely used
(Guilford, 1959). There were 15 items, one per page.
Each item had 5 simple figures and one complex figure.
The simple figures were the same on each page. For 6
items, one simple figure is embedded in the complex
one, for 6 items 2 simple figures are embedded, and for
3 items 3 simple figures are embedded (the Gottschaldt
figures only allowed one correct answer; hence the
adaptation). Participants were told that 1 or more of the
simple figures could be found in the complex figure and
that the orientation of the embedded figure is the same
as in the simple figure but the size might be
proportionally scaled up or down. Participants had 5
minutes to work on the task.
Associative Fluency. Associative fluency is defined as
the ability to produce words in a restricted area of
meaning. Kettner, Guilford and Christensen (1959)
listed three tests having high loadings with this ability:
Associations III, Associations IV, and Controlled
Associations. The task in Associations III is to produce
a word that is similar in meaning to two given words.
The task in Associations IV is to produce a word that
can be associated with two given words. The task in
Controlled Associations is to write as many synonyms
as possible for each given word. It is not evident from
the previous literature which of the three has been most
widely used. Our primary consideration in selecting a
measure was appropriateness to Japanese because the
participants in the experiment were Japanese. Japanese
uses Kanji-characters each of which has inherent
meaning(s). Taking advantage of this, Japanese
language has a systematic way of creating a word,

called ‘jukugo’, by two Kanji-characters so that the
word has the connotation of both meanings. If Japanese
participants were asked to produce a word similar to a
given word, it might be easy to produce a ‘jukugo’ that
shares a Kanji-character with, and thus is similar in
meaning to, the given word. Therefore, Associations III
and Controlled Associations may be easy tasks in
Japanese. For this reason, we selected Associations IV
as a measure for testing associative fluency. We
prepared 25 pairs of unrelated words in Japanese. For
each, participants were to produce a third word that was
associated to both, for example, producing “egg” as a
third word associated with given words, “cake” and
“frog”. Participants had 4 minutes to work on the task.
Then, for each pair, they wrote the way each given
word was associated to the produced word. These
explanations were used for rating the plausibility of the
produced words.

Differences among the Groups

Task: Generating Interpretations
The procedure was adapted from Howard-Jones’s
(1998). Participants generated interpretations for each
of four ambiguous drawings, those shown in Figure 1,
for four minutes, with the goal of generating as many
interpretations as possible. For each four-minute session,
participants had a stack of pages, each containing the
drawing and a space for writing an interpretation. They
studied the drawing, wrote an interpretation, put it aside,
and repeated until the four minutes had passed.
Participants were told that their interpretations did not
have to include every part of each drawing. They were
instructed not to rotate the sheet of paper.

Drawing 1

Drawing 2

Drawing 3

incorrect answers as the perceptual reorganization score
for each participant. For the Associations IV test, we
first rated the associations generated by participants.
The principle adopted was whether or not both
associations from the two given words to the produced
word were understandable in terms of commonsense.
Ratings were conducted blindly by the first author. The
number of pairs for which both associations were rated
as understandable was the score of associational fluency
for each participant.
We reasoned that the more interpretations of
ambiguous drawings a participant produced with a
given time, the more skilled at constructive perception
he or she is. Therefore, we adopted the total number of
interpretations generated for the four drawings as a
measure for the skill of constructive perception. There
were no differences in number of interpretations for
each of the four drawings.

Drawing 4

Figure 1: Ambiguous drawings used
The drawings were systematically varied. The left two
in Figure 1 used rigid lines; the right two used sketchy
lines. Of each set, two contained primarily closed
figures (the left of each set) and two contained
relatively open structures (the right of each set). The
order of drawings was the same for all participants; 1, 4,
3, 2.

Results
Scoring Ability Tests and the Generation Task
For Vandenberg test, we summed the correct responses
over Parts 1 and 2 as the spatial ability score for each
participant. For the multiple-answer EFT, we summed
the correct responses over items without subtracting

1143

Did the four groups of participants differ in the three
tests and the generation task? For the mental rotation
test, one designer interpreted the task incorrectly, so the
differences were examined over 47 participants. The
one-way ANOVA indicated no significant differences
among the four groups (F(3, 43) = 1.57). For EFT,
another designer misinterpreted the task, so the
differences were examined over 47 participants. The
one-way ANOVA indicated no significant differences
among the four groups (F(3, 43) = 0.962). For the
associative fluency test, the designer who interpreted
EFT incorrectly interpreted this task incorrectly as well,
leaving 47 participants. The one-way ANOVA
indicated significant differences among the four groups
(F(3, 43) = 2.85, p<0.05). The designers had higher
scores on associative fluency than the other groups,
who were about the same. The post hoc Turkey’s HSD
test indicated that for a significance level of 0.05, the
critical HSD value was 2.69, so the differences between
any pair was not significant.
For the task of generating interpretations, differences
among the four groups were examined over 48
participants. The one-way ANOVA indicated
significant differences among the four groups (F(3, 44)
= 4.51, p<0.01). The post hoc Turkey’s HSD test
indicated that the critical HSD value with the
significance level of 0.05 was 19.1. The differences
between the average number for designers (48.6) and
that for cognitive science students (29.0), and between
that for design students (49.2) and that for cognitive
science students were larger than 19.1. This indicates
that both designers and design students were more
productive than cognitive science students.
The present results fail to replicate the previous
finding (Suwa & Tversky, 2001) of higher performance
of designers on generating interpretations than that of
design students and office workers in unrelated
professions. In the present experiment, both design
students and office workers performed much better than

their counterparts in our previous experiment. The
discrepancy might simply be variability due to small
samples, or it might be the particular samples of
designers and design students. However, the finding
that a considerable number of students were able to
perform in the generation task similarly to professional
designers is worth noting. It again confirms the
relevance of constructive perception to design. It also
suggests that constructive perception is an ability on
which individuals differ, and raises the possibility that
students attracted to design are adept at it (or that
students attracted to cognitive science are not)

Correlations of the Scores of Different Tests
More critical evidence for constructive perception
comes from the correlations among the measures and
with the generate ideas task. Do the scores of the three
tests correlate with the total number of interpretations
for the ambiguous drawings? Since two designers
interpreted tests incorrectly, the correlations among the
tests and the generation task were examined over 46
participants. Table 1 shows pair-wise correlations of the
scores for the three tests and the generation task.
Notably, there was no correlation between mental
rotation score and numbers of interpretations; g=0.065.
The skill of constructive perception is not related to
what is used as a general measure of spatial ability. On
the other hand, there was a positive correlation between
the score for perceptual reorganization, the multipleanswer EFT, and the number of interpretations; g=0.253
(p<0.05). This finding adds to the evidence that spatial
ability is not a unitary ability, but rather, one with
several components (e. g., Linn & Peterson, 1986).
Table 1: Correlation coefficients of pair-wise
examinations among the tests and the generation task
Generation
EFT
Association Rotation
Generation
-0.253*
0.358**
0.065
EFT
--0.190
0.110
Association
---0.023
Note: the symbols ‘*’ and ‘**’ denote correlations at the 0.05
and 0.01 levels, respectively.

There was also a positive correlation between the
score for associative fluency, the Associations IV test,
and the number of interpretations; g=0.358 (p<0.01).
However, scores on EFT and on Associations IV were
not related (g=0.190). This indicates that the abilities of
perceptual reorganization and of associative fluency
make independent contributions to constructive
perception. In other words, it is not sufficient to be able
to see new perceptual configurations or perspectives in
external representations; the perceptual reorganizations
must be linked to meaningful interpretations.
The independent contributions of perceptual
reorganization and of associative fluency to
constructive perception were corroborated by two
additional analyses. As the first analysis, for each

1144

participant, we multiplied scores on EFT and
Associations IV to form a composite score; the
composite scores yielded an even stronger correlation
with the numbers of interpretations than either score
alone; g=0.393 (p<0.005).
As the second, we conducted multiple regression
analysis. First, we set up the following multiple
regression model;
Generation = a + b* EFT + c * Association +
d * Rotation + error
Fitting data for 46 participants to this model yielded the
following set of coefficients; a = 21.19, b= 0.9109, c=
2.424, d = 0.0786. The statistical test showed that the
model is not valid with the significance level of 0.05;
F(3,42)= 2.77. The comparison of the three coefficients,
b, c and d, reveals a less degree of contribution of the
general spatial ability to the performance of the
generation task than the other two abilities. Thus, we
revised the regression model in the following way;
Generation = a + b* EFT + c * Association + error
For this model, the following set of coefficients were
derived; a = 22.52, b= 0.9306, c= 2.425. Statistically,
the model is valid with the significance level of 0.025;
F(2,43)=4.22.
This
confirms
that
perceptual
reorganization
and
associational
fluency
are
independent contributors to the generation task, but a
general spatial ability is not. The analysis of validity of
the coefficients b and c shows that b is valid, t(43)=2.27
(p<0.025) and that c is marginal, t(43)=1.35 (p<0.1).
The contribution of associational fluency is stronger
than that of perceptual reorganization.

Discussion
We began by observing that both a kind of creativity
and domain expertise entail coordinating cognitive
processes in two different modes; perception of subtle
features and relations in the external environment, and
conceptual generation of ideas and interpretations. We
proposed that the skill of constructive perception may
be fundamental to coordinating the two processes.
The present research examined constructive
perception in a fairly general domain, interpreting
ambiguous sketches. This has given support, in the
domain of design, for the proposed idea by providing
insight into the constituents of constructive perception,
and suggesting how that skill may play a role in driving
creative processes. Both associative fluency and
perceptual reorganization contribute, and contribute
independently, to constructive perception, supporting
the idea that it has two components. Its perceptual
component facilitates perceptually reorganizing what
one sees in the external environment, enabling detection
of subtle features and relations that novices might not
discern. Its conceptual component enables fluency in
generating new and related thoughts. To keep
generating new ideas in a domain these two
components must be tightly coordinated.
This analysis suggests a way that cognition is situated.
Perceptual reorganization is grounded in external

stimuli. Expertise is attained by coming to differentiate
and reorganize parts, wholes, perspectives, and
reference frames. The perceptual expertise must then be
coordinated with behavior, for example, playing a chess
game or designing a building. For example, Clancey
(1997) had claimed that coordinating perception,
conception and physical performance is the
fundamental way people and surrounding environments
interact and develop together. The implication is that
expertise is not acquired straightforwardly by teaching,
but rather by a coordinated act of perceiving new
features and relations unheeded previously, conceiving
of new and associated thoughts unattended to
previously and acting on the surrounding environment
in a domain.
Constructive perception undoubtedly has some
domain specificity. Reorganizing perception of chess
configurations differs from reorganization of checker
boards or Go boards, and certainly from reorganizing
sketches in design. Assigning interpretations to
configurations similarly differs across domains.
Can constructive perception be nurtured? The
previous finding (not replicated here) that professional
designers were superior to design students and others in
generating new interpretations is suggestive. The main
thrust of the current research, that constructive
perception consists of two components, perceptual
reconfiguration and conceptual associations, suggests
that
promoting
perceptual
reorganization
in
coordination with interpretations might be effective. If
such training succeeds, the next question is how domain
independent the training can be and still be effective. A
further question is whether analogous processes
underlie creativity and expertise in other domains.

Acknowledgments
Prepartion of this manuscript was aided by Office of
Naval Research, Grants Number NOOO14-PP-1-O649,
N000140110717, and N000140210534 to Stanford
University.

References
Arnheim, R. (1969). Visual thinking, Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: a
survey of factor-analytic studies, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Chambers, D. & Reisberg, D. (1992). What an image
depicts depends on what an image means, Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 145-174.
Chandrasekaran, B., Glasgow, J. & Narayanan, N. H.
eds. (1995). Diagrammatic reasoning, Menlo Park,
CA: AAAI Press/The MIT Press.
Finke, R. A. (1990). Creative imagery. Hillsdale:
Erlbaum
Gibson, J. J. & Gibson, E. J. (1955). Perceptual
learning:
differentiation
or
enrichment?,
Psychological Review, 62, 32-41.

1145

Clancey, W J. (1997). Situated cognition: on human
knowledge
and
computer
representations,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goldschmidt, G. (1994). On visual design thinking: the
vis kids of architecture, Design Studies, 15, 158-174.
Gottschaldt, K. (1926). Uber den Einfluss der
Erfahrung auf die Wahrnehmung von Figuren, I,
Psychologische Forschung, 8, 261-317.
Guilford, J. P. (1959). Three faces of intellect,
American Psychologist, 14, 469-479.
Howard-Jones, P. A. (1998). The variation of ideational
productivity over short timescales and the influence
of an instructional strategy to defocus attention, Proc.
of Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 496-501), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Kettner, N. W., Guilford, J. P. & Christensen, P. R.
(1959). The relation of certain thinking factors to
training criteria in the U.S. Coast Guard Academy,
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 19,
381-394.
Linn, M. C. & Petersen, A. C. (1986). A meta-analysis
of gender differences in spatial ability: implications
for mathematics and science achievement. In J. S.
Hyde and M. C. Linn (eds.), The psychology of
gender: advances through meta-analysis (pp. 67-101).
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rock, I. (1973). Orientation and form, New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Schon, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Suwa, M., Gero, J. & Purcell, T. (2000). Unexpected
discoveries and S-invention of design requirements:
important vehicles for a design process. Design
Studies, 21, 539-567.
Suwa, M. & Tversky, B. (2001). Constructive
perception in design. In J. S. Gero & M. L. Maher
(Eds.) Computational and cognitive models of
creative design V (pp.227-239), Sydney: University
of Sydney.
Suwa, M., Tversky, B., Gero, J. & Purcell, T. (2001).
Regrouping parts of an external representation as a
source of insight. Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Cognitive Science (pp.692-696),
Beijing, China: Press of University of Science and
Technology of China.
Suwa, M. & Tversky, B. (2002). Constructive
perception: An expertise to use diagrams for dynamic
interactivity, Proc. of 24th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society(pp.55), Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tversky, B. (2001). Spatial schemas in depictions. In M.
Gattis (ed.), Spatial schemas and abstract thought.
Cambridge: MIT Press, pp.79-111.
Vandenberg, S. G. and Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental
rotations. A group test of three-dimensional spatial
visualization. Perceptual Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.

