UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Content Effects in Conditional Reasoning: Evaluating the Container Schema

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0dp3n1kg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Bloomfield, Amber N.
Rips, Lance J.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Content Effects in Conditional Reasoning: Evaluating the Container Schema
Amber N. Bloomfield (a-bloomfield@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Lance J. Rips (rips@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
This study presented participants with conditional statements
with content that was group-related, container-related, and a
combination of group and container. Participants received
modus ponens, modus tollens, denying the antecedent,
affirming the consequent, and inconsistent forms of
conditional arguments. Results demonstrated a significant
advantage of the group over the container wording for some
of the arguments. These results suggest that content that is
specifically container-related does not provide a consistent
advantage over other types of content, contrary to some
theories of embodied mathematics.

Introduction
Conditional sentences are statements about relationships
between an antecedent proposition (p) and a consequent
proposition (q) that we will represent generically as “If p,
then q.” In tests of conditional reasoning, individuals are
asked either to construct conclusions or to confirm the
validity of arguments made from premises that include a
conditional sentence. Thus, conditional reasoning requires
two cognitive processes: a) comprehending the premises and
b) making inferences based on the premises (Marcus &
Rips, 1979).
Conditional arguments can be valid or invalid, depending
on how the conditional is interpreted. On a material
conditional interpretation, the truth of a conditional depends
on the truth values of the antecedent and the consequent.
The only combination of antecedent and consequent that
makes a material conditional false is one in which the
antecedent is true, but the consequent is not (p, not q).
Alternatively, a material biconditional interpretation dictates
that a conditional is false unless both p and q are true, or
both are false (p, q; not p, not q).
Conditional reasoning experiments explore four main
kinds of logical arguments. These are modus ponens (If p, q;
p; therefore, q), modus tollens (If p, q; not q; therefore, not
p), denial of the antecedent (If p, q; not p; therefore, not q)
and affirmation of the consequent (If p, q; q; therefore, p).
Given a material conditional interpretation of the premise,
only modus ponens and modus tollens are valid arguments.
Given a material biconditional interpretation, all four of the
arguments are valid.

157

Some of these argument types are more difficult than
others for participants to identify as valid or invalid. For
instance, modus tollens arguments are typically more
difficult for participants to verify than are modus ponens
arguments, possibly due to the difficulty negation creates for
individuals in reasoning, or the reversed order of the second
premise and conclusion.
There is also a great deal of evidence that the content of
the individual propositions affects the difficulty of the
argument types (see Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993, for a
review). Participants often use their prior knowledge about
the subject matter of the conditional to impose restrictions
on the relationship between the antecedent and the
consequent. In the case of conditional arguments, such as
modus ponens and tollens, much of this evidence concerns
how people’s knowledge of sufficiency and necessity alters
their decisions about which arguments are valid (e.g., Ahn
& Graham, 1999; Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis, & Rist, 1991;
Thompson, 1994).
For example, if the antecedent is perceived as sufficient
for the consequent (or, as in Cummins et al., 1991,
participants cannot readily think of disabling factors that
could prevent the antecedent from bringing about the
consequent), participants will identify modus ponens and
tollens arguments as valid. However, if participants view the
antecedent as both sufficient and necessary for the
consequent (or participants cannot imagine other possible
causes of the consequent), they will identify denial of the
antecedent and affirmation of the consequent as valid as
well.
The present experiment investigates a different source of
content effects, one that is explicit in current theories of
embodied mathematics. Lakoff and Nunez (2000) hold that
people understand abstract concepts, such as most
mathematical concepts, by tying them to real-world
experience---in effect grounding them in concrete reality. In
the case of conditional reasoning, Lakoff and Nunez suggest
that individuals use what they call the Container Schema, an
internal representation of an object that can hold another.
According to this theory, individuals translate any
conditional argument into a mental representation of
containment. For modus ponens, Lakoff and Nunez present
the following concrete representation: “Given two Container

schemas A and B and an object X, if A is in B and X is in
A, then X is in B.” Individuals then use what they know of
containment to reason about the argument.
Certain types of content should be able to facilitate
reasoning if individuals truly use the Container Schema. If
Lakoff and Nunez are correct, it should be easier for
individuals to respond to conditional statements that involve
literal containers, such as buildings or boxes, than those that
can only be interpreted as metaphorical or abstract
containers, such as sets or groups.
Knowledge of containment should also lead to a material
conditional interpretation in reasoning about conditionals
involving literal containers. While being inside a room that
is inside a building is sufficient for being inside that
building, it is not necessary for it; one could just as easily be
in another room in that same building. To the extent that the
Container Schema governs more abstract content, people
should also use the material conditional interpretation with
groups or sets. While being a member of the Senate means
that one is a member of the US government, being a
member of the US government does not imply that one is in
the Senate.
The present study investigates the effects of literal and
abstract container-related content on accuracy in responding
to conditional arguments. Unlike many earlier studies of
conditional reasoning, this study employs conditional
statements that express arbitrary relationships between the
antecedent and the consequent, such that participants cannot
import outside knowledge regarding the truth of the
conditional. However, the antecedent and the consequent in
each statement is always either a literal container (building)
or an abstract container (a group). This allows participants
to use all knowledge they possess of containment (e.g., a
person cannot be both outside and inside a building) in order
to see if such information allows participants to be more
accurate in identifying the validity of logical arguments.
The Container theory predicts that participants should be
more accurate in responding to conditional arguments when
the antecedent and the consequent are literal containers than
when they were both abstract containers. Lakoff and Nunez
assert that “spatial logic is primary, and the abstract logic of
categories is secondarily derived from it via conceptual
metaphor” (Lakoff & Nunez, 2000, p. 45). If this claim is
true, statements involving a relationship between two
groups should be more difficult to reason about than
statements involving a spatial relationship between two
containers. We will evaluate accuracy in this case using the
material conditional interpretation, since the Container
Schema seems to presuppose this standard. We also expect
to find that participants would be more accurate in
responding to items where both the antecedent and the
consequent were literal containers than when one was a
literal container and the other an abstract container. The
latter condition would require the combination of two
different levels of abstraction into one coherent mental
representation.

158

Methods
Materials
Instructions We told participants that they would see a
series of three sentences and that they would have to
determine if the third sentence (marked with a “C” and
highlighted red) must be true whenever the first two are
true. They were instructed to press the “y” key when the
third sentence had to be true whenever the first two
sentences were true and “n” when it did not. They were
asked to move through the items as quickly and accurately
as possible. They saw two example arguments, one where
the third sentence did not logically follow and one where it
did. These examples used logical forms unrelated to the
conditional arguments (Either p or q; p; therefore not q).
Stimuli All participants received 120 arguments, each
including a conditional statement, a minor premise, and a
conclusion. There were 36 arguments of each content type:
Container only (C), Group only (G) and Group by Container
(G/C), plus 12 filler arguments of unrelated content. The
container arguments were about two hypothetical spatial
locations: the Hannley building and the Science Center.
The group arguments were always about two hypothetical
groups: the Spanish club and the Poetry club. The
Group/Container arguments combined these locations and
clubs (If the individual is in the Poetry club, the individual
is in the Hannley building). The Group/Container condition
was included as a control condition with the goal of
allowing phrase content to differ as little as possible
between the control and the Group and Container
conditions.
Of the 36 arguments within each content type, there were
three different types of phrasing for the conditional
sentence: “If p, then q,” “All p are q,” “For all x, if x is p,
then x is q.” Examples of the different content sets for each
type of phrasing appear in Appendix A.
Within each set of twelve arguments for a given type of
phrasing and content, four were inconsistent (INC)
arguments (If p then q, p, therefore not q; If p then q, not p,
therefore q; If p then q, q, therefore not p; If p then q, not q,
therefore p), three were modus ponens arguments, three
were modus tollens arguments, one was a denial of the
antecedent argument, and one was an affirmation of the
consequent argument. Thus, for each type of content,
participants had the opportunity to respond to twelve INC
arguments, nine modus tollens arguments, nine modus
ponens arguments, three denial of the antecedent arguments,
and three affirmation of the consequent arguments. We
used this array of argument types to insure that there would
be an equal number of valid and invalid arguments,
according to the material conditional interpretation.
Participants received one of two versions of the entire
stimulus set. The versions differed only in the way
propositions were assigned to logical positions in the
arguments. For example, one version assigned the
proposition about being in the Spanish club to the

antecedent p and assigned the proposition about being in the
Poetry club to the consequent q in the modus ponens
argument “If p, then q; p; q.” The second version reversed
these assignments.
Participants received the instructions for the task and
responded to the test items via computer. The participants
read five screens of instructions, moving through them with
the spacebar. During the task, participants studied each
argument and pressed either the “y” or “n” key to indicate
whether the third sentence was necessarily true whenever
the first two sentences were true. As soon as the participant
responded, the next argument appeared on the screen.
Participants were not given any feedback on their
performance. At the end of the 120 arguments, participants
were presented with a “Thank you” screen and were then
read debriefing information by the experimenter.

Participants
Participants were 30 Northwestern undergraduates who
participated to fulfill a course requirement. Two additional
participants were excluded due to computer malfunction.

0.85
Proportion correct

Procedure

Proportion correct over all items

Planned comparisons
More important, paired samples t-tests between types of
content revealed significant differences. Participants
responded correctly to significantly more denial of the
antecedent items when they had Group content than when
they had Container content (52.2 % vs. 36.7%, t(29) = -2.83,
p < .01). Participants also responded correctly to
significantly more modus tollens items for the Container
content than for the G/C content (88.6% vs. 80.4% correct,
t(29) = 2.74, p = .01). There was also a marginally

159

0.75

0.70
Container

Group

G/C

Content

Figure 1: Proportion correct over all items by content
significant tendency to respond correctly to more modus
tollens items for the Group content than for the G/C content
(87.17% vs. 80.43%, t(29) = 1.86, p = .07). Figures 2 and 3
show the differences in proportion correct across content
conditions for these arguments. There were no further
differences due to content for any of the other argument
types. Table 1 shows the percentage correct for each type of
argument in each content condition.

Results

Proportion Correct on Denial of the Antecedent
Items
0.60
Proportion Correct

We calculated the proportion of correct responses as a
function of content, argument type and phrasing. Contrary
to the predictions of the Container theory, participants
responded correctly to more Group items than to the
Container or G/C items (F(2, 56) = 3.15, p = .05 ---see
Figure 1). There was also a significant effect of type of
logical argument on accuracy (F(4, 112) = 31.31, p < .01).
The mean proportion of correct responses to denial of the
antecedent and affirmation of the consequent across all
participants was less than .50, while for modus ponens,
modus tollens, and INC items, mean proportion correct
across participants was over .80. These differences are
generally consistent with those found in earlier studies
(Evans et al., 1993). There was also a significant interaction
of content and argument type (F(8, 224) = 2.45, p = .015).
We will describe this interaction in connection with planned
comparisons. There was no significant effect of phrasing on
accuracy (F(2, 56) < 1), and this variable did not interact
with content or type of logical argument. All the following
accuracy analyses collapsed across phrasing.

0.80

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
Container

Group

G/C

Content

Figure 2: Proportion correct by content on the Denial of
the Antecedent

Differences in interpretation
It is possible that differences in accuracy between content
conditions arose from differences in the interpretation of
conditionals based on their content. Within each content and
phrasing group of twelve conditionals, participants were
coded as having a material conditional interpretation if they
answered “n” to all denial of the antecedent and affirmation
of the consequent items, “n” to at least 3/4 of the INC items,
and “y” to at least 2/3 of the modus ponens and tollens
items. Participants were coded as having a material
biconditional interpretation if they answered “y” to all
denial of the antecedent and affirmation of the consequent

Table 2: Percentage of material biconditional, material
conditional and “other” interpretations by content

Proportion Correct on Modus Tollens Items

Pro p o rtio n co rrect

1.00

Content
Interpretation
Type
MB
MC
Other

0.90
0.80
0.70

Group

G/C

Content

Figure 3: Proportion correct by content on
Modus Tollens items

Table 1: Percentage correct for argument by content
Type of Argument
AC
41.1%
55.6%
50.0%

DA
36.7%
52.2%
46.7%

INC
88.1%
86.4%
87.3%

MP
93.8%
96.7%
95.9%

Group/Container
32.22%
27.78%
40.00%

Discussion

statements and to at least 2/3 of all modus ponens and
tollens statements, and answered “n” to at least 3/4 of all
INC statements. Participants with other patterns of
responses were coded as having an “other” interpretation.
Table 2 displays the percentage of the three types of
interpretations for each content type (collapsed across
phrasings).
A repeated-measures ANOVA with content and phrasing
as repeated measures revealed no significant effect of either
content or phrasing on the interpretations adopted by the
participants, and no significant interaction of content and
phrasing. However, despite the non-significant effect of
content on interpretation, there was a notable tendency for
more participants to adopt a material biconditional
interpretation when evaluating the Container-related items
than when evaluating the Group or Group/Container-related
items. It is possible that this tendency led participants to be
less accurate on the DA and AC items in the Container
condition. One possible reason for this is that participants
may have interpreted “If the individual is in the Hannley
building, then the individual is in the Science Center” to

Type of
content
Container
Group
G/C

Group
24.44%
31.11%
44.44%

mean that the Hannley building and the Science Center were
the same building. To investigate this possibility, we have
conducted a follow-up study using containers that are
clearly distinct (a cardboard box and a wooden shipping
crate). Although this change narrowed the difference
between the Container and Groups conditions, there was no
hint that containers promoted greater accuracy than groups.

0.60
Container

Container
38.89%
23.33%
37.78%

MT
88.6%
87.2%
80.4%

AC = Affirming the Consequent, DA = Denying the
Antecedent, INC = Inconsistent, MP = Modus Ponens,
MT = Modus Tollens

160

Although Lakoff and Nunez’s (2000) cognitive theory of
mathematics would appear to predict an advantage for
arguments that follow a Container Schema, the literal
container items did not produce the highest accuracy levels
in our experiment. Rather, participants showed best
performance on items with Group content. The advantage
for group content was most clear-cut for denial of the
antecedent arguments. For modus tollens arguments, items
with Container content produced slightly more correct
responses, but even here there was no significant difference
between Container and Group content items. Clearly, the
literal container content did not produce a consistent
advantage in accuracy over the other types of content. These
results are surprising, given the suppositions of the
Container Schema theory. It seems reasonable that a literal
container would enable participants to form container
schemas more efficiently and, thus, reason more accurately.
In our study, this was not consistently the case.
The benefit of the Group over Container content is
difficult to reconcile with the Container Schema idea. If we
consider a group to be an abstract or metaphorical container,
we would expect that processing arguments about groups
would require additional steps to generate the metaphorical
extension from the basic Container Schema. Our findings
imply instead that there may be a processing advantage for
conditional reasoning with group content. Further studies
are planned to explore this possibility.
In this experiment, the effect of content appeared only for
certain types of arguments. One reason for this is a ceiling
effect for some of the remaining types. Responses to modus
ponens items were correct 95% of the time across all
content conditions. For INC items, the level of correct
responses was also high: 87% across all content conditions.
Any effect of content would be expected to appear for the
“harder” argument types: modus tollens, denial of the
antecedent, and affirmation of the consequent. Modus
tollens and denial of the antecedent items did show such an

effect. The reason for the absence of the effect on
affirmation of the consequent items is unclear to us. We
note, however, that both modus tollens and denial of the
antecedent arguments involve two negatives (one in the
minor premise and one in the conclusion). Affirmation of
the consequent arguments, like modus ponens, contained no
negatives. It seems possible that content in this study
facilitated conditional reasoning by reducing the burden of
processing negatives. It should be possible to investigate
this effect in further work by introducing negatives in the
antecedent and consequent of the conditional, as in some
earlier studies of conditional syllogisms.
All of arguments in this study were container-related, on
either a literal or metaphorical level. A potential objection to
the evidence we have collected so far is that the Container
Schema is so pervasive in people’s thinking that any contact
with the schema will improve reasoning. This objection may
be difficult to handle, since remote extensions of the schema
might always be possible. We note, however, that our
results show reversals in performance (especially for denial
of the antecedent arguments) that are unexplained on the
hypothesis that any relation to containers boosts
performance.

Conclusion
The current study cannot rule out the possibility that the
Container Schema is sometimes helpful to people when they
reason about conditionals. The findings do suggest,
however, that Container Schemas are not the only source of
content effects. The theory of Container Schemas suggests
no reason for an advantage of abstract container-related
content over literal container-related content and no reason
why such effects should appear with some argument types
but not others.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Jennifer Asmuth, Dan
Bartels, Serge Blok, George Newman, Andrea Proctor and
Eyal Sagi for their helpful suggestions and comments.

References
Ahn, W., & Graham, L. (1999). The impact of necessity and
sufficiency in the Wason four-card selection task.
Psychological Science, 10(3), 237-242.
Cummins, D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991).
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory and
Cognition, 19(3), 274-282.
Evans, J. St.B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). Human Reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lakoff, G., & Nunez, R. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes
From. New York: Basic Books.
Marcus, S., & Rips, L. (1979). Conditional reasoning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18,
199-223.
Thompson, V. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional
reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 22(6), 742-758.

161

Appendix A
Container content, “If” phrasing
If the individual is in the Hannley building, then the
individual is in the Science Center.

Group content, “All” phrasing
All individuals in the Spanish club are in the Poetry club.

G/C content, “All … if” phrasing
For all individuals, if they are in the Hannley building, then
they are in the Poetry club.
*Note: All contents were presented in all phrasings

