UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-Cultural Differences in the Input to Early Word Learnin

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15545365

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Snedeker, Jesse
Li, Peggy
Yuan, Sylvia

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-Cultural Differences in the Input to Early Word Learning
Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Peggy Li (pegs@wjh.harvard.edu)
Sylvia Yuan (yuansy@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland St.
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract
Young English learners typically have vocabularies
dominated by nouns, while their Mandarin learning
counterparts have relatively more verbs. Novice language
learners must initially learn words from the situational
contexts in which they appear, since they have limited access
to syntactic or semantic context. These studies explore
whether differences in these situational contexts could
account for the differences in early vocabulary composition.
We assessed the potency of this word-to-world mapping
procedure in each language by asking adults to identify nouns
and verbs from their extralinguistic contexts in maternal
speech. The full pattern is examined in English native
speakers given either English or Mandarin input (Exp. 1) and
Mandarin native speakers given English or Mandarin input
(Exp. 2). Results indicate that adults identify more nouns
than verbs in English input, but identify as many verbs as
nouns in Mandarin input. Thus cross-linguistic differences in
the information that is available in extralingistic contexts may
account for some of the differences in early vocabulary
composition.

Introduction
A child’s vocabulary is the product of a constantly evolving
interaction between the child and her experiences with
language. One of the primary challenges for research on
lexical development is unraveling the respective
contributions of the learner and the input and tracing how
this interaction changes over time. Crosslinguistic
investigation of vocabulary composition is critical to this
endeavor. By observing children whose language
experiences vary, we can map out both how the input shapes
the lexicon and the ways in which children are resistant to
variation.
For twenty years, research in this area has centered on
Gentner’s noun dominance hypothesis (1982). Gentner
compared parental reports of children’s early vocabularies
in a variety of languages. She found that nouns always made
up the majority of the child’s first words, even in languages
where verbs are perceptually salient and arguments may be
omitted. She argued that nouns are over-represented,
relative to their frequency in input, because they refer to
categories that are conceptually and perceptually simpler.
This claim has been challenged by researchers who maintain
that children learning Mandarin (Tardif, 1996), Korean
(Choi & Gopnik, 1995), and Tzeltal (Brown, 1998) have
early vocabularies in which the number of verbs equals or
surpasses the number of nouns.

1094

Our goal is not to judge whether language plays a role in
shaping vocabulary composition. Nor is it to determine
whether person and object labels are more easily learned
regardless of language. These two positions are both wellevidenced and compatible: Studies which have examined
the speech of children and adults have generally found both
an effect of language and a difference between the
composition of the input and the child’s vocabulary
(Tardiff, Shatz & Naigles, 1997; Tardif, Gelman & Xu,
1999; for a review see Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001). Our
goal instead is to explore one facet of the input that might
favor or hinder words from different classes.
Previous research on crosslinguistic differences in
vocabulary composition has focused on two ways in which
the input can shape children’s lexicons. First, many
researchers have examined the frequency of different types
of words in the input, making the plausible assumption that
the number of learning opportunities should effect the
likelihood that the child acquires a word. Mandarin, Korean
and Tzeltal, the languages argued to show early verb
dominance, all allow subject and object omission.
Consequently, casual speech in these languages includes
many utterances that contain a main verb but no nouns.
Children learning a language of this kind are exposed to
more verb tokens and fewer noun tokens than children
learning English (Tardif et al., 1997; Choi, 2000).
The second type of explanation places the explanatory
weight on the perceptual salience of nouns and verbs in
connected speech. Presumably a child can only learn a word
if she can segment the word-form from the ongoing speech
stream. Previous work suggests that this task is easier when
the word appears at the beginning or end of the utterance
(Fernald, McRoberts & Herrera, 1992; Newport, Gleitman
& Gleitman, 1977). Tardiff and colleagues (1997) analyzed
child-directed speech in Mandarin, Italian, and English to
explore whether differences in the typical position of nouns
and verbs in each language might account for the observed
variation in vocabulary composition. They found that in
Italian and English, languages where nouns dominated the
early lexicon, verbs were generally buried away in the
center of the utterance while nouns grabbed the salient
utterance final position. In contrast, Mandarin speaking
caregivers were more likely to produce sentences that ended
with a verb (for parallel findings in Korean see Au, Dapretto
& Song, 1994; Choi, 2000).
This work has been useful in understanding
crosslinguistic variation in vocabulary composition.
However, by focusing on the frequency and distribution of

word classes, researchers have overlooked another way in
which language could shape word learning. Learning a word
does not consist of merely of hearing the word and isolating
it from speech. To learn a word a child must also pair the
word-form with its meaning. Factors that influence the
child’s ability to perform this mapping, should also affect
vocabulary composition and are therefore a potential source
of crosslinguistic variation.
Early word learning is limited by the child’s initial
representation of the input. Because novice language
learners know few words and little syntax, they must
initially learn words from the real-world contexts in which
they occur. Thus we would expect that children’s early
vocabularies would be limited to words whose meanings
can be identified solely from the situational concomitants of
their use. To the extent that languages vary in their stock of
common nouns and verbs or in the pragmatic and situational
cues that are available for word learning, early vocabularies
should also vary.

The Human Simulations
Gleitman and colleagues have conducted a series of
experiments which illustrate the potential importance of the
mapping problem for explanations of vocabulary
composition (Gillette, Gleitman, Gleitman, & Lederer,
1999; Snedeker, Gleitman & Brent, 1999; Snedeker &
Gleitman, in press). They find that developmental changes
in vocabulary composition within a single language
(English) can be explained by changes in the child’s ability
to use linguistic context to solve the mapping problem. In
these studies adult subjects try to identify words from partial
information about the contexts in which they occur in
infant-directed speech. In some conditions the adults are
given only the extralinguistic context, information that is
available to novice language learners. In other cases they
are provided with linguistic information, like syntactic
context or co-occurrence, which would only be available to
savvy learners.
Conceptually, these experiments are analogous to
computer simulations in which a device, endowed with
whatever (“innate”) ideas and learning procedures its
makers program into it, is exposed to data of the kind
naturally received by the target learner it is simulating. The
measure of success of the simulation is how faithfully it
reproduces the learning function for that target using these
authentic data. These experiments provide us with an
estimate of the psychological potency of the cues to word
meaning that are available in the real learning situation.
In prior work, we adopted this paradigm to determine
whether the quality of the information in word-to-world
pairs was sufficient to account for the composition of early
vocabularies in different linguistic environments (Snedeker
& Li, 2000). The subjects in these studies attempted to
learn words by watching silent videotapes of the
extralinguistic contexts in which a word occurred in either
Mandarin or English input. In one experiment adult
Mandarin speakers were shown videos of the 24 most

1095

frequent nouns and verbs from a sample of Mandarin infantdirected speech. Their performance was compared with a
parallel study in American English (Snedeker et al, 1999).
We found a reliable interaction between language and word
type. Verbs were identified more often in Mandarin while
nouns were identified more often in English. There was
also a reliable difference in the response biases of the
Mandarin and American subjects, Mandarin subjects were
more likely than American subjects to give verb responses
regardless of the syntactic category of the target word.
This difference in bias illustrates a critical flaw in the
design of the previous study: the input language and subject
population were perfectly confounded. Mandarin adults
viewed the tapes from Mandarin speaking mothers and
American subjects viewed tapes from the English speaking
mothers. Thus the observed differences in noun and verb
identification could reflect either differences in the input
that children receive in the two language environments or
differences in the strategies and biases that the adult word
learners bring to the task. Verb performance in the
Mandarin study may have been better because the Mandarin
mothers were more likely to use verbs with observable
correlates, or performance may have been better simply
because the Mandarin speaking adults had a bias to assume
that all target words were verbs.
The current paper addresses this learner-input confound
by fully crossing the subject population with the input
language. In Experiment 1, we asked English-speaking
students to identify words based on the situations in which
they occur in Mandarin input. The results of this experiment
were compared with those of a parallel study in which
American students were given input from English speaking
parents (Experiment 1 from Gillette et al, 1999; henceforth
GGGL). In Experiment 2, we presented the same videotapes
of English and Mandarin input to Taiwanese students.
These experiments have two goals. The first is
methodological. Researchers using the human simulation
paradigm have argued that it provides a glimpse of the
information that is available in a particular representation of
the input (see Gillette et al., 1999; Snedeker & Gleitman, in
press). This argument is supported by examining the
parallels between the simulations and the pattern of lexical
development in children. In the current experiments we
attempt to validate that argument by directly examining the
sensitivity of this paradigm to manipulations of the input
and the learner. If the paradigm primarily reflects the
information that is provided in the videos then we would
expect similar patterns of performance from the American
and Taiwanese students. Our second goal is to explore
whether differences in the contexts of word use could
account for cross-linguistic variation in children’s early
vocabularies. English speaking children learn proportionally
more nouns than their Mandarin speaking counterparts. If
these differences are partially attributable to differences in
the difficulty of the mapping problem, then we would
expect that all our adult subjects would show a stronger
effect of syntactic category when given the English input.

Table 1: Target Words in Mandarin Input

Experiment 1
In this experiment English-speaking adults watched silent
videos of Mandarin-speaking mothers playing with their
children. They were asked to guess what word the mother
said each time a tone was sounded. Half of the target words
were nouns and half were verbs. On every trial subjects
were told whether the target word was a noun or verb. This
was done to eliminate the differences in response bias that
were found in Snedeker & Li (2000). The results of this
experiment were compared with those of GGGL, where
English-speaking adults were presented with videos of
English-speaking mothers playing with their children.
Because the subject population is held constant in this
comparison, we should be able to observe whether it is the
input that contributes to differences in the kinds of words
‘acquired’ by adults. If input does play a role, then these
adults should display different patterns of performance in
noun and verb identification given different language input.
In contrast, if it is not the input, but the biases or strategies
of the speakers that drove the differences we observed in
previous study, then we should expect to see the same
pattern of performance by these English speakers in the two
input conditions.

Methods
Participants 36 students at Harvard University participated.
All were native speakers of English.
Stimuli The stimuli were drawn from videotapes of mothers
playing with their 18-24 month old children. The six tapes,
each approximately one-hour long, recorded 2 boys and 4
girls with their respective mothers playing with a set of toys
provided by the experimenter. The mother was asked to
“play naturally” with her child. The situations in which the
children were taped, the toys that were provided and the
instructions that were given to the mother were based on
those used by GGGL.
The procedure for selecting the target words was identical
to that used by GGGL. The videotapes were transcribed and
the 24 most common nouns and verbs used by the mothers
were chosen as targets. Table 1 shows a complete list of
target nouns and verbs. We divided both the noun and verb
targets into 4 frequency groups. Three presentation lists
were constructed, each containing two words randomly
selected from each frequency group.
For each word, six instances in which the word was used
were randomly selected for inclusion in the study. For each
instance, a video clip was constructed that began 30 seconds
before the target word was used and ended 10 seconds after
it was said. In many cases, the mother said the target word
at another time during this 40-second period. In these cases,
the clip was expanded to include 30 seconds before the first
use and 10 seconds after the last. Each of the uses of the
word in a single clip counted as one of the six stimuli. The
audio was removed from the video clips and a tone was
inserted exactly where the word had been.

1096

Noun
qiu2
che1
quan1quan1
bing3gan1
bei1
gou3
wa1wa1
ya1ya1
xiang4
yan3jing1
ba4ba
shou3
mao4
tou2
ma1ma
ming2zi4
jie3jie
ren2
fei1ji1
dian4hua4
dong1xi1
wan3ju4
shui3
mei4mei

English
Meaning
ball
car
circle
cookie
cup
dog
doll
duck
elephant
eye
father
hand
hat
head
mother
name
older sister
people
plane
telephone
thing
toy
water
younger sister

Verb
chui1
jiao4
guan1
lai2
he1
che1
fei1
na2
gei3
qu4
you3
kan4
kai1
wan2
tui1
fang4
jiang3
chang4
zou4
shuo1
zuan3
zou3
yao4
hui4

English
Meaning
blow
call
close
come
drink
eat
fly
get
give
go
have
look/see
open
play
push
put
say
sing
sit
speak
turn
walk
want
will

Procedure Subjects were tested in groups of one to three.
They were told that they were going to watch some clips of
mothers playing with their children but were not told that
the mothers in the videos were speaking Mandarin. They
were asked to write down their best guess of the word the
mother was saying each time they heard a tone. After
hearing six tones, corresponding to six maternal utterances
of the same word, they were asked to reconsider all the
input and offer a final guess. The subjects were told
whether the target was a noun or a verb. This procedure
was repeated for 16 different words, half of them nouns and
half verbs.
Coding A response was coded correct if it was the direct
English translation of the target word. These judgments
were made by a bilingual speaker. 94% of the words had a
single English translation equivalent. The remaining cases
were either ones in which a single English word is used in
place of two Mandarin words (“sister” for both “jie3jie” and
“mei4mei”) or a single Mandarin word has the meaning of
two English words (“kan4” for “look” or “see”). In these
cases a permissive coding criterion was adopted.

Results

Percentage correct on final trial

Figure 1 shows the percentage of correct responses on final
trial for English speakers in both input conditions. The
results for English language input are taken from GGGL.
As we noted earlier, when asked to identify words solely
from situations in which they are used by American parents,
American college students identify many of the nouns but
do poorly on most of the verbs, resulting in a strong effect
of Syntactic Category on final responses (M = 45%, M =
15% for nouns and verbs respectively; F=12.57, p < 0.001).
50%

language in the first experiment are actually attributable to
differences in the input rather than differences in the
subjects’ cultural knowledge or sense of identification.
Furthermore, a comparison between the two experiments
allows us to determine whether there is any interaction
between input and the subject population being tested.

Methods
Participants 84 students from the National University in
Taiwan participated in the experiment (42 in each input
condition). All were native speakers of Mandarin.
Stimuli and Procedure We used the videotaped stimuli
from Experiment 1 for the Mandarin Input condition and the
videotaped stimuli from GGGL for English Input condition.
Table 2 shows the complete list of target words for English
tapes. The procedure was identical to Experiment 1 with
the exception that the written instructions and debriefing
were in Mandarin.

40%
30%
20%
10%

Table 2: Target words in English input (from GGGL)

0%
English input
Noun

Mandarin input
Verb

Figure 1: Correct Identification by English Speakers
The right side of Figure 1 illustrates the performance of
English speakers who are asked to “identify” words from
the situations in which they were used by Mandarinspeaking mothers. When given this input the American
students find it equally easy to identify words from the two
syntactic categories (M = 18% for nouns, and M = 20% for
verbs; F=0.483, p > 0.4).
To compare the performance of the subjects in the two
input conditions we performed an ANOVA with one within
subject variable (Syntactic Category) and one between
subject variable (Input Type). There was a strong interaction
between Input and Syntactic Category (F=40.310, p <
0.001), confirming that the discrepancy between noun and
verb identification varied with the language input. American
students were better at identifying nouns but only when they
were given English input.
The dramatically high
performance in noun identification for this group raised the
overall performance for English input and overall noun
identification across the groups, resulting in main effects of
both Syntactic Category (F=79.697, p < 0.001) and Input
(F=22.164, p < 0.001).

Experiment 2
A parallel experiment was conducted with Mandarinspeaking adults. In addition to showing Mandarin tapes to
Mandarin speakers, we also showed English tapes to another
group of Mandarin speakers. This gives us a second
opportunity to examine the effect of changing input within a
single population and ensure that the effects of input

1097

Noun
bag
ball
camera
daddy
drum
elephant
hammer
hand
hat
hole
kiss
mommy

music
nose
peg
people
pig
pilot
plane
shoes
swing
tail
things
toy

Verb
come
do
fall
get
go
hammer
have
know
like
look
love
make

play
pop
push
put
say
see
stand
think
throw
turn
wait
want

Coding For the Mandarin input condition, a response was
coded correct if it contained the target word. For the
English input condition, a response was coded correct if it
contained the direct Mandarin translation of the target word.
These judgments were made by one bilingual speaker. 92%
of the English target words had a single translation
equivalent. In the cases where there was no single
translation equivalent, we applied the same permissive
coding criterion that had been used in Experiment 1.

Results
The results for Mandarin speakers were quite similar to
those for English speakers. Figure 2 shows the percentage
correct on final trial for the two input conditions. Like
English speakers, Mandarin speakers who were given
Mandarin input performed equally well on noun and verb
identification (F=1.872, p > 0.15), whereas those given
English input identified more nouns than verbs (F=53.367, p
< 0.001). As with the English speakers, a comparison

Percentage correct on final trial

between the two Mandarin-speaking groups revealed a
significant interaction between Input and Syntactic Category
(F=10.542, p < 0.005), indicating that the discrepancy
between noun and verb identification indeed varied with the
input given. The high rate of identification for nouns in the
English Input contributed to a main effect of Syntactic
category (F=23.807, p < 0.001).
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
English input

Mandarin input
Noun

Verb

Figure 2: Correct Identification by Mandarin Speakers
Thus the results of both experiments indicate that when
we hold the subject population constant, there are reliable
effects of input language on the relative proportions of
nouns and verbs that are identified. Namely, when given
English input subjects correctly identify more nouns than
verbs whereas when given Mandarin input they perform
equally well in identifying both types of words. Additional
analyses were conducted to determine whether the subject
population would have any reliable effect on the
performance pattern. In other words, are the performance
patterns solely input-driven, or do adult subjects also have
an impact, depending on what language they have been
speaking?
Comparing subject populations A comparison of English
speakers and Mandarin speakers who received English input
revealed a significant main effect of Speaker Population
(F=16.610, p < 0.001), with English speakers identifying
more words overall than Mandarin speakers. Similarly, an
analysis of subjects who received Mandarin input also
yielded a reliable main effect of Speaker Population, with
Mandarin speakers doing better than English speakers
(F=4.831, p < 0.05). In other words, given the same tapes,
subjects whose native language matched the mothers’ did
better. This result could be explained in several ways. For
example, subjects who were watching tapes of mothers
speaking their native language might have been more
comfortable guessing what the mothers were saying.
Critically, the same performance pattern for noun and verb
identification held for different groups of speakers, given
the same language input. As the previous within-group
analyses indicated, both English speakers and Mandarin
speakers, upon receiving English input, identified more

1098

nouns than verbs, but when given Mandarin input,
performed equally well on identifying both types of words.

General Discussion
Our comparison of word-to-world mapping in Mandarin and
English unearthed a pattern of performance across syntactic
class that is similar to what we see in early vocabularies of
young children. When confronted with the input to young
children learning English, both American and Taiwanese
college students were able to identify more nouns than
verbs. In this environment, novice language learners appear
to get powerful situational information about the meanings
of nouns, but weak and misleading information about the
meanings of verbs (Gillette et al., 1999; Snedeker &
Gleitman, in press). In contrast, when they attempted to
identify words from Mandarin infant-directed speech, they
performed as well on verbs as they did on nouns. This
result confirms the findings of our previous study and
demonstrates that there is a difference in the information
available to infants in the two environments.
We have conducted initial analyses to explore three
possible explanations for these results. First, we examined
the social-pragmatic cues that were available in the
videotaped scenes. It has been suggested that American
mothers spend more time labeling objects for their children.
These labeling episodes are typically characterized by a
direct gaze at the object being named and often include
pointing. Across the two languages, we found that the
direction of the child’s gaze was a reliable predictor of
performance for noun targets. The direction of the mother’s
gaze was not and the effect of pointing was marginal.
Critically, we found no cross-linguistic differences in the
frequency of these cues.
Second, we examined the semantic characteristics of the
target words. In our previous work we found that the strong
performance on English nouns, is largely due to subjects’
ability to identify targets that pick out basic-level categories
of objects or animals (e.g., dog or cup). Performance on
superordinates (thing), relational nouns (uncle), and abstract
nouns (name) is generally no better than performance on
verbs (Snedeker et al., 1999). The Mandarin and English
noun targets were semantically similar. In both cases basiclevel object categories accounted for roughly half of the
nouns. Verbs were categorized as observable (e.g., actions
like walk) and unobservable (e.g., mental states like love).
In both languages subjects performed considerably better on
observable verbs (presumably because they are more likely
to have reliable perceptual correlates). The Mandarin input
contained greater proportion of observable verbs,
accounting in part for relative improvement in performance
for verbs as compared to nouns. But the differences between
the two sets of target words cannot fully explain the crosslinguistic differences in noun and verb learning. If we limit
our analysis to the targets that appear in both input
conditions, the interaction between syntactic category and
input language is still strong and reliable for both groups of
subjects (F’s > 8.36, p’s < 0.01).

Finally, we looked at the referents of the target nouns to
determine whether they were actually present in the scene,
whether they could be clearly identified and whether they
were acceptable members of that category. These measures
correlated with noun performance. Mandarin mothers were
far more likely than English mothers to use a noun to refer
to an object that did not actually belong to the semantic
category in question (p < .05). Often the mother used a
word that is common in infant directed speech (e.g.,
“cookie”) in place of a word that is less frequent (e.g.,
“potato chip”). In the Mandarin input condition one-third of
the targets noun sets included instances of lexical
replacement. The adult subjects who saw these scenes,
sometimes responded with the correct basic-level label for
the referent or a superordinate term. If these responses are
coded as correct, performance on noun targets improves in
both Mandarin input conditions (M=24%, M=28% for
English and Mandarin speakers respectively) resulting in a
marginal advantage for nouns over verbs (p’s < .1). In
future research we will attempt to determine whether this
difference in lexical replacements is a reliable feature of the
two linguistic environments or an artifact created by the set
of toys that were brought by the experimenter.
In this experiment we told our subjects the syntactic
category of the target word, both because it results in a
higher level of performance (making comparisons between
conditions more sensitive) and because it would eliminate
the differences in response bias between the Mandarin and
English speaking adults (Snedeker & Li, 2000). But real
infants are not given this information. Knowing the category
that a world belongs to simplifies the word-to-world
mapping problem. Furthermore, it does so asymmetrically:
in English at least, syntactic category labels benefit nouns
more than verbs (Snedeker et al., 1999). However, there is
no reason to believe that our experimental findings depend
on the provision of syntactic information. In Snedeker & Li
(2000) category labels were not provided, yet we observed a
similar pattern of performance (see introduction).
There are, undoubtedly, many reasons why children’s
vocabularies vary across languages and cultures. Prior
analyses of the input have focused on frequency and
perceptual salience. Here we explored the role that the
mapping problem may play. Even if children hear a word
often, segment it from the speech stream and establish a
phonological representation, they still must identify its
meaning by observing the contexts in which it is used.
These experiments demonstrate that the difficulty of
mapping a form to a meaning varies across word classes and
across linguistic and cultural environments. The information
available in extralinguistic contexts can account both for the
predominantly nominal initial vocabulary of English
learners and the more balanced vocabulary of Mandarin
learners.

Acknowledgments
The ideas in this paper owe much to our conversations with
Lila Gleitman and members of the Cheese Seminar (1996-

1099

2000). Any loose ends or inaccuracies are our own doing.
We are extremely grateful to Jane Gillette and Lila for
sharing their data with us and allowing us to use their
videotapes of English-speaking parents. We also thank
Becky Huang for her assistance with coding and Carol Chan
and Renee Lam for their help in preparing the videotapes of
Mandarin-speaking parents.

References
Au, Terry; Dapretto, Mirella & Song, You-Kyung (1994).
Input versus constraints: Early word acquisition in Korean
and English. JML, 33, 567-582.
Brown, P. (1998). Children’s first verbs in Tzeltal: Evidence
for an early verb category. Linguistics, 36, 713-753.
Choi, S. (2000). Caregiver input in English and Korean: Use
of nouns and verbs in book-reading and toy-play contexts.
Journal of Child Language, 27, 69-96.
Choi, S. & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs in
Korean: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of Child
Language, 22, 497-529.
Fernald, A., McRoberts, G. & Herrera, C. (1992). Prosodic
features and early word recognition. Paper presented at
the 8th International Conference on Infant Studies,
Miami, FL.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.A.
Kuczaj, II (Ed.), Language development: Vol 2. language,
thought, and culture. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., Lederer, A. (1999).
Human simulation of vocabulary learning. Cognition, 73,
135-151.
Newport, E. L., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. R. (1977).
Mother, I’d rather do it myself: Some effects and
noneffects of maternal speech stale. In C. Snow & C.
Ferguson (Eds) Talking to children: Language input and
acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Snedeker, J., Gleitman, L. & Brent, M. (1999). The
successes and failures of word-to-world mapping. In A.
Greenhill, et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Boston
University Conference on Language Development.
Snedeker, J. & Gleitman, L. (in press). Why it is hard to
label our concepts. To appear in Hall & Waxman (eds.),
Weaving a Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Snedeker, J. & Li, P. (2000). Can the situations in which
words occur account for cross-linguistic variation in
vocabulary composition? In J. Tai and Y. Chang (eds.),
Proceedings 7th International Symposium on Chinese
Languages and Linguistics.
Tardif, T. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before
verbs: Evidence from Mandarin speakers’ early
vocabularies. Developmental Psychology, 32, 492-504.
Tardif, T., Gelman, S. & Xu, F. (1999). Putting the ‘noun
bias’ in context: A comparison of English and Mandarin.
Child Development, 70, 620-635.
Tardif, T., Shatz, M. & Naigles, L. (1997). Caregiver speech
and children’s use of nouns versus verbs : A comparison
of English, Italian, and Mandarin. JCL, 24, 535-565.

