UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Culture and the Subversion of Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3705x8w3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Malone, Kareen Ror

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Culture and the Subversion of Cognition
Kareen Ror Malone (kmalone@westga.edu)
Department of Psychology, State University of West Georgia
Carrollton, GA 30117 USA
Abstract
This paper seeks to conceptualize some of the issues
at stake when cognitive science seriously takes up
the question of culture. A number of approaches
have begun to consider cultural context as more
than yet another variable, the complexity of which
will
simply
require
more
sophisticated
computational models. Rather these approaches
have undertaken to research the very form of
cognition differently, as situated, distributed, and as
a social practice. In these new endeavors, what is
the implicit model of culture that is being used? This
paper raises this essential theoretical question and
takes Michael Tomasello’s work on cognition,
language, and culture as an example of how recent
approaches in cognitive science can raise
foundational questions on the relationship of culture
to cognition.
Introduction: The Culture Question is Big
In the wake of a growing interest in the relationship between
cognition and culture, it is important to supplement
descriptive research and disciplinary debates with further
reflection on the meaning and theoretical function of culture
within cognitive science. What does the category of culture
do for the study of cognition? Further, what does an
interrogation of the concept of culture within cognitive
research reveal about the range and function of culture as an
analytic category? It would be a shame, at this time of
intellectual energy and innovation, to simply fall into a
default understanding of culture, imported and patched
together from other disciplines (such as anthropology,
sociology, or psychology). It would be equally dismaying to
pre-suppose what is meant by culture as being part and
parcel of other new factors current under the cognitivist eye
(such as embodiment or social practice).
A paper that fully examines culture as an analytic
category is extremely ambitious. Ideally, it would review all
the formulations of culture implied by different regnant
approaches to cognitive research and determine their
commonalities, scrutinize their biases, and cull a more
generalized formulation that would help push cognitive
science research forward. But the aims of this essay are
more modest. The paper begins by examining some of the
motivations that have inspired the turn to culture within
cognitive studies, not to rehearse arguments that are better
made by others, but in order to show the manner in which
these debates frame how culture has been viewed within
cognitive research. Then it teases out some of the

770

implications of the work of Michael Tomasello (1999) on
language, intersubjectivity and cognition to indicate how
both his and Vygotsky’s (1979) insights push the envelop of
the place of culture within cognition.
Although one can surmise from the tenor of my argument
that I would hope for a broader understanding of culture
within the science of cognition, it seems that many of the
important pieces for such a broad conceptualization of
culture are in place. New paradigms in cognitive research
that question the external/internal division, that look at
cognition as situated, embedded, and/or embodied provide
novel ways of conceiving the interface of culture and
cognition. A variant on the culture/cognition question, the
relation of science studies (cultural influences) to our
understanding of scientific objectivity and method
demonstrates what can happen to the culture/cognition
question if it is posed without an adequate orientation to the
specifics of its formulation. Science studies reiterate the
sway of political investment and social representational
practices on the production of scientific knowledge. Their
arguments are often compelling and it is indeed a naive
view of science that would be blind to political and social
forces within its midst. But seldom have science studies
adequately demonstrated how such influences are more than
correlative, supportive, or contextual. Surely not all human
activities are reducible to their socio-political preconditions
(Martin, 1994/1998). Predictably, the response to science
studies has been that cultural influences may contour the
rhetorical frame of the products of cognition or shape the
questions one asks (in the context of discovery), but culture
is not a constitutive part of scientific cognition. Thus the
question of how cultural influences are integral to the
process of knowledge making itself, if they are relevant,
remain unanswered or answered much differently depending
upon whom you ask (see also Longino, 1990).
A more productive path might pursue empirical research
into cognition in dialogue with historical practices and
cultural contexts. This approach can give us a better picture
of how these two interwoven dimensions work together (see
also Nersessian, 1996; Nersessian, forthcoming). The
emerging field of cognition and culture provides an
alternative to this standoff between proponents of a
culturalist view and those seeking to formulate objective
universal features of thought through experimental research
and computational models. Cognitive science has, albeit in
embryonic form, begun to articulate how one might
approach the very processes (language, social practices,
artifacts, community of practice) through which cultural
effects and the cognitive demands of our environment
conspire to give us something to think about (for a related

argument see Shore, 1996). Despites its promise, this line
of research also obviously requires continual theoretical
vigilance, as new ideas can be rather easily assimilated to
old disciplinary baggage and schisms.
Cognition and Culture
Within cognitive science, it seems that many of the elements
that have come to represent cultural context within the field
have been articulated within the framework of its particular
disciplinary evolution. Traditionally cognition has been
understood as a process that can be formalized. The formal
properties of cognitive processes represent idealized but
nevertheless predictive and universal laws of cognition. The
mind, the possession of any given individual, functions
more or less well within the criteria implied by these laws
and
representational
practices.
Methodologically,
hypotheses about cognition can be tested through generating
computer programming, in experiments of abstract problem
solving or through protocols of reasoning at various levels
of proficiency (given certain cohort constraints, e.g. age).
One thereby distills the essence of cognition, which can be
reduced to a computational form with context per se as a
confounding variable. Culture is merely an application of
formal operations or is construed as a subordinate variable
that will be eventually assimilated to a formalized
representational scheme.
In such research, cognition is typically treated as internal
to the individual (one brings it with them, BYOC) and
amenable to formalization in universal laws (which is why
we can study them in artificial conditions or through
simulations on a computer). Such assumptions have taken
cognitive science far but do not prove particularly helpful
for understanding the relationship between culture and
cognition. If culture is understood as “practices” or what we
do “out there,” then we cannot study culture and cognition
“in the zoo” abstracted both methodologically and
theoretically from its place of inter-articulation. We can no
longer countenance an understanding of cognition where
culture is either a “confound” or only an instantiation of
given (universal) cognitive functions. These points have
been forcefully made by Jean Lave (1988), who questions
the ecological validity of experimental studies on cognition,
where culture is treated solely as a source of “content,”
secondary to functionalist and formalized categories. Lave
writes:
Warehouse” and toolkit metaphors for the location of
culture in memory make it possible to abnegate the
investigation of relations between cognition and culture
by, in effect, defining culture as “what people have
acquired and carry around in their heads,” rather than as
an immediate relation between individuals and the
socio-cultural order within which they live their
lives....[Instead one needs to account for] generative
relations, between people-in-action and the social world
around them (91).

771

The first and for some primary change required to
articulate a more culturally embedded cognition is to
conceptualize cognition as it happens in context rather than
treating context as secondary. This challenges the internal
hypothesis and the formalization bias. One looks at
cognition in the wild, as Hutchins would call it. Note here
that the implicit idea of culture is that culture is the live
action context that transpires in and about every cognition.
Lave (1988) refers to culture as every day practices,
presumably ones that require some activity identifiable as
cognition. Edwin Hutchins, like Lave, has a number of
reservations about how culture has been understood within
the canon. He writes that cognitive science presumed
cognition to be reducible to brain functioning, which is then
understood in terms of computational models that are
instantiated in machines that run complex programs. This
process is then “re-inserted” into the mind as the individual
person. According to Hutchins, this view is mistaken.
Firstly, the computational model is tagged as representing
the brain or individual, as modeling a process that occurs
inside the skin. In contrast, Hutchins thinks these symbolic
transformations are actually found in the operation of
artifacts and various media that carry knowledge in the
world. In his view, cognition is created as humans interact
with artifacts and other humans- the whole system is
cognition. Once one considers the whole system as the
source of cognition, culture has joined the fray of cognitive
studies, rather than being an add-on for future studies.
Hutchins warns that “ [m]arginalizing culture by reducing it
to some ideational contents hides the many ways in which
cognition is part of cultural process” (Hutchins, 1996, p.
354). Thus, one treats culture and cognition, in a sense, as
interdependent. Hutchins defines culture as an adaptive
process aimed toward problem solving, and to understand
the “culture” of cognition we need to see how cognition is
lived within social practices. This entails embodiment;
social practices need hands and feet. So while Lave moves
to see culture as immediate on-going interaction between
social actors and their environment (a perspective that leads
to changes in how cognition is conceived), Hutchins wants
also to see how doing with others creates and manipulates
symbolic representations in order to solve problems.
Obviously, as one chooses to make context or “real life”
the touchstone of one’s studies in cognition, there is still a
wide diversity of ways in which cognition can be
conceptualized. Each different way provides a particular
avenue wherein the effects of culture can be considered.
Perspectives such as situated cognition and formulations of
distributed cognition (distributed cognition entails a number
of possible views itself) both include a broader
understanding of the role of instrumentation, environmental
scaffolding, and communication in cognition. Both are
forms of thinking about cognition that afford entry points
for the constitutive effects of culture.
Like Hutchins and Lave, one may emphasize action and
embodiment in the production of knowledge. The body-inaction – a sort of North American variant of Heidegger’s

Being-In-The-World – is treated as central to cognizing. By
central, I mean that actions and interactions (between
machines and persons) are theorized as lying within the
heart of cognition rather than serving as an application of
more formalized (perhaps universal) computational
processes. As is evident in the conceptions of both
Hutchins and Lave, when we treat culture as being
“embedded real life,” there are changes in the formulation
of cognition that are implied in this shift of perspectives.
Cognition as “real life” activity, becomes more contingent,
opportunistic, less idealized, and more fallible (Nercessian,
et.al., 2002). Accidents can happen. New parameters of
what defines cognition come into focus. Issues of history
and of instrumentation are seen as essential to understanding
current cognitive practices. Once cognition is seen in less
formalized terms, alternative views of thinking itself, e.g.
model-based reasoning and cross-domain analogies begin to
show their resilience for these more situated and immersed
forms of cognition. Mixed media models seem to serve as
better vehicles to explicate humans’ eclectic use of
artifacts, images, devices, representations and each other in
on-going real life forms of cognition. These are important
advances in that they allow us to interrogate how cognition
and culture are mutually constitutive, but we have just
begun to outline the sorts of questions that we should be
asking, finding the places that we should be looking. There
is much more work to be done.
Despite the indispensability of these new ways of
conceiving the relationship between cognition and culture or
location of places (or moments) to begin the interrogation of
culture, the conception of culture itself remains a bit
constricted. Culture is predominantly seen as the fact of this
embeddedness in the context of particular forms of
instrumental behavior. Of course, cognitive science must
parse the world in some way. Tracking a Valentine’s Day
seduction may not produce recognizable data for cognitive
science. But there is a eerie diminution of the meaning of
culture. Culture – whatever that category may come to
signify ultimately – appears to whirl around rather predefined notions of cognition and its independent effects are
assumed to be taken care of by the recognition of this fact of
embeddedness. Like rock and roll, cognition has a particular
(sub)culture that we can historically and contextually
examine. Cognitive science no longer employs a BYOC
model (internal) but a fairly predictable slice of the “real”
world is treated as the default model of culture. We begin to
have ways of conceptualizing cognition that are now open to
a cultural inflection but these formulations (action,
distribution, situatedness, embodiment) do not give us a
sufficient definition of culture as they are too tied to
disciplinary pre-suppositions that emerged when culture was
of secondary concern. The effort to illuminate culture and
cognition is incomplete.
Although the project of theorizing culture and cognition is
incomplete, the direction of research taken by thinkers such
as Hutchins and Lave is both promising and invigorating.
But one must realize that some implicit as well as explicit

772

theoretical presuppositions of cognitive science may come
under question, opening up new areas of research. Already
this paper has suggested that the turn to culture may widen
how we view the contextual elements that infuse “situated”
cognitive processes. Not only may cognitive science move
away from abstract computational models, cognitive science
may be required to entertain the inflection of the less
instrumental, less goal oriented aspects of those social
practices that sustain cognitive activity. The issue then
becomes a question of how one goes about approaching
these seemingly foreign ”social” elements in cognitive
science.
Put differently, as cognition and culture are better
elaborated and theorized, foundational philosophical
changes that under gird cognitive science are in the making.
For example, as is recognized, the move to distributed
cognition involves a blurring between what is in the “head”
or internal and the external environment. Re-framing this
boundary undoubtedly carries implications for the notion of
the person in cognitive science (as evoked say by Hutchins,
1996). Cognitive science traditionally put cognition and
agency “inside” the person. When cognition goes
“outdoors” what happens to the “shell” that previously
contained or produced cognition, i.e., the person. Perhaps in
the changes surrounding the move to distributed cognition,
cognitive science also begins to re-conceive what it must
mean to be a cognitive agent (see also Kurz-Milcke in
press). In other words, there is reason to consider the
epistemic/cognitive subject as also distributed within
different forms of knowledge making (Knorr-Cetina, 1999).
One way to understand the inflection of culture within
cognition is to examine more precisely the constraints and
forces that define the newly emerging notions of the subject
of cognition. Clearly, the inside/outside boundary of this
subject has been challenged. It has been also noted that this
subject has been thrown outdoors, the effects of culture
being seen in the embedded, opportunistic, participatory,
and less formalized nature of cognition. But this paper has
asserted that, even with this shift in emphasis, the
understanding of culture within cognitive science has been
limited by an overemphasis on the instrumental aims of
cognition. Sometimes cultural constraints are important for
cognition, nay even intrinsic to it, without being necessarily
assimilated into explicit problem-solving goals.
Language is an important example of an intermixing of
culture and cognition that may exceed instrumentality, even
though language is sometimes associated with the sorts of
symbolic manipulations that represent more traditional
computational models. If one does not equate language with
computational models of representation and symbolic
manipulation (and thus set it in opposition to more
embodied or multi-media models), one can see language as
a matter of a social practice that reveals and constitutes
cognition in particular ways (Vygotsky, 1978). For example,
in Vygotsky’s model, language traverses the inner/outer
divide. More to the point of this paper, it also adds a
subjective dimension to cognitive processes. This is

especially evident when looking at more distributed and
embedded models of cognitions. Once we understand that
cognition is based in interactions and is participatory (see
Greeno, 1998), we realize that its modalities (often
involving speech) enlist participants at more than one level.
We must talk about language as “an address” to an “other”
as well as language as a “tool.” Language as an address may
have a “yet to be articulated” place in the study of culture
and cognition.
The following specifies this general
assertion through examining the work of Michael
Tomasello. The next section aims to suggest how language
offers an opportunity to render a broader notion of culture
within an examination of cognitive processes themselves.
Intersubjectivity, Language and Cognition
Michael Tomasello’s (1999) well-argued book, The
Cultural Origins of Human Cognition, guides the reader
from research on joint attentional scenes to what the author
calls linguistic cognition. The latter moves the aim of
agency from the goal of operant effects on the environment
to an intentionality that is directed at the attention and
cognition of another mental agent. This special sort of
intentionality emerges out of linguistic capacities although
its task is to elaborate and bridge the problem of different
perspectives. Through the dialogic engagement of another’s
intentionality and attention, we extend a non-linguistic
capacity, con-specific recognition and goal directed activity,
to a level of recognition and interchangeability between
interlocutors. This additional level of cognition feeds back
into the process of cognition itself, the other (perspective)
becomes a perspective that monitors our own, as the
linguistic situation elaborates and bridges differing
perspectives.
From
these
gaps,
meta-cognitive
representational abilities are formed. Through this
specification of linguistic effects , Tomasello attempts to
make good Vygotsky’s claim that our cognition is the
internalization of another’s speech--a proposition that is
naively imputed to refer to a Whorfian type hypothesis, but
is really, according to Tomasello, to be understood
structurally.
Tomasello’s elegant writing leads one to believe that this
is a straightforward idea that describes a straightforward
process, but both are quite complex. Tomasello’s graphs
show the exchanges of perspective between dialoguing stick
figures (in chapters three and four) and seem to indicate a
notion of perspective that is grounded in a perceptual
location. But as Tomasello talks about the materiality of the
signifier and its intersubjective resistance to individual
meanings, one begins to see that the stick figures are moved
and stationed through speech. It is undoubtedly both a
location within a perceived world and a placement by
speech, but the distinction is important. In one, there is a
body in space securing a position, an aim, and linguistic
expression emerges from that (agentic) locus. In the
linguistically founded idea of perspective, (and Tomasello’s
own meditations on the gaps, traversals, and metonymic

773

chaining in language point in this direction), the perspective
is not locatable through spatial coordinates.
Just as there are two ways of construing Tomasello’s idea
of perspective, there are two ways of viewing intention. In
one take, intention is teleologically defined through a goal;
the goal is constrained by a social qua pragmatic situation.
The goal is some operant effect on the environment or some
other jointly undertaken problem-solving activity. But as
with perspective, intention can be re-framed from a
pragmatic “worldly” referent to a situation in which
intention refers itself to another intention. Intention is an
extrapolation from one’s position within a dialogical
situation and is not secured by a common object (it is not
the same as a joint attentional scene) or presupposed goal. In
this second scenario, intention is secured only by the
presumption that there must be some reason to the other’s
speech. Paraphrasing a quotation cited in Tomasello, if I am
saying X rather than Y, there must be a reason for it. But
does that reason refer to a goal or must it be based in an
extrapolation from a position determined primarily by the
fact of speaking? Are speaking and intersubjectivity
structural constraints on cognition? This is the question that
is posed by Tomasello’s careful argument.
One way to look at the creation of new cognitive
possibilities and certain cognitive difficulties that emerge
from intersubjectivity and language is to consider the
linguistic difference between the subject of enunciation
versus the subject of the utterance (Dör, 1997). The subject
of the enunciation is that set of attributes fleetingly
expressed in the sentence, e.g. I am going to the store. The
subject of the utterance, by contrast, is the implied position
of an intention, the position of any subject who speaks. It
is, in a sense, empty. Another path of understanding the
meaning of intention, one that is concordant with this idea
of an empty set, couches the idea of an intention toward
another’s attention in terms of the question of an other’s
desire. Just as we cannot assure another’s desire by
commanding our beloved to tell us that he or she loves us,
the solicitation implied in our address to another’s attention
awaits an uncertain fate. The question of specifically
human desire as the desire of another, articulated by Hegel,
is apparently a completely different matter than what might
interest a researcher into culture and cognition. But I believe
that the long-standing instrumental bias in cognitive
research will fail to produce a sufficiently complex notion of
what culture can do for cognition because it will not
entertain what culture does that creates additional issues for
cognition. The structural constraint of speaking may be one
such condition. Issues regarding impasses and possibilities
of culture can be bracketed, but such reticence is less
desirable when one begins to understand cognitive
development as gaining membership in a community of
social practices (Greeno, 1998), a community that in order
to generate perspective, gaps, and meta-cognition will
inevitably jangle the chain of mutual recognition, intention,
and the dialectics of human desire. If Tomasello can be used

in this instance, such issues emerge hand in hand with
human thinking.
The impasses of the Other and of human desire fomented
by inter-subjectivity and the impasses of language are not
Tomasello’s focus although he gives them a better hearing
than most. But one must note that these impasses and
questions do appear at the borders of his argument. Their
first appearance entails his allusions to the voice as moral
conscience. The voice is a non-specularizable object of
desire that we solicit from another, but in fact cannot be
given. It arouses desire and but provides no object. But what
has it given us? The nothing and everything that the voice
carries entails certain implications for what Tomasello notes
as moral conscience in relationship to norms of
communication. We might say that the voice carries the
“imperative” quality of another’s communication.
Secondly, Tomasello wisely notes that his view of language,
as metonymically multitudinous and dependent on attention
and intersubjectivity as guarantor, implies a significant role
for the question of authority. The issue of authority is
important, of course, in interpersonal and social
relationships, but also in relationship to how one generates
perspectives and knowledge and how one stabilizes and uses
representations (Kurz-Milcke, forthcoming). Finally, as
Tomasello notes, the delicate balance between alterity and
sameness that founds the very possibility of the contribution
of linguistic intersubjectivity to cognition (by multiplying
perspectives) can backfire as we see what is different as the
same, as in the case of anthropomorphization and other
(mis)identifications to which human knowledge is prone.
Tomasello repeatedly invokes the insight that we need to
examine the structural constraints of culture. He notes that it
is the fact that we speak, not what we say that serves to
generate new forms of cognition. Usually culture is seen
primarily in terms of its historicity (which is primarily
content). Tomasello directs his focus to the structuration that
language as a form of intersubjectivity must give to
cognition. Given this turn from culture as content to culture
as structure, Tomasello can begin to spell out how culture is
intrinsic to cognition rather than its filler. But buyers
beware; for the triad of language, intersubjectivity, and
cognition may nudge cognition off of its instrumental goaldirected aims and dislodge implicit notions of cognitive
agency. Consider for a moment how often the word, “other”
appears in Tomasello’s text. Agency seems to be located in
“inter-subjectivity”. Other parameters that are emerging
from the interface of culture and cognition, the place of
embodiment, knowledge as situated, distributed cognition,
the way that modeling may work as embedded cognition
rather than secondary to abstract symbol manipulation, are
similarly springboards to develop the idea of culture as an
analytic category. Once these dimensions are drawn out and
others inevitably added, we may gain a much better sense of
how culture is intrinsic to cognition and informs some its
possibilities as well as being a condition of perhaps
inevitable cognitive failures.

774

Acknowledgments
I would like to gratefully acknowledge the support of the
National Science Foundation ROLE Grant REC0106773.
References
Dör, J. (1997). Introduction to a reading of Lacan. J.
Gurewich & S. Fairfield (Eds.). New York: The Other
Press.
Greeno, J. (1998). The situativity of learning and research.
American Psychologist, 53, 5-26
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures: How sciences
make knowledge. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Kurz-Milcke, E.
(forthcoming).
The authority of
representations. In E. Kurz-Milcke & G. Gigerenzer
(Eds.), Experts, past and present. New York: Kluwer
Academic/ Plenum Publishers.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Longino, H. (1990). Science as social knowledge. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Martin, J. R. (1998). Methodological essentialism, false
difference and other traps. In B. McVicker, Clinchy, and
J.K. Norem (Eds.), The gender and psychology reader.
New York: New York University Press, pp. 10-33.
(Original work published in 1994.)
Nersessian, N. J. (1998). Kuhn and the Cognitive
Revolution. Configuration, 6, 7-120.
Nersessian, N. J. (forthcoming). Interpreting Scientific and
Engineering Practices: Integrating the cognitive, social,
and cultural dimensions. In M. Gorman, R. Tweney, & D.
Gooding, (Eds.), Cognitive models of science and
technology. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawerence Elrbaum.
Shore, B. (1996). Culture in mind: Cognition, culture, and
the problem of meaning. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nersessian, N.J., Newstetter, W., Kurz-Milcke, E., &
Davies, J. (2002). A mixed method approach to studying
distribute
cognition
in
evolving
environments
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Sciences (pp. 307-314).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawerence
Elrbaum.

