UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distributed Metacognition during Peer Collaboration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34t742ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Andersen, Christopher

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distributed Metacognition during Peer Collaboration
Christopher Andersen (andersen.18@osu.edu)
School of Teaching and Learning, The Ohio State University, 1179 University Drive
Newark, OH 43055 USA

methodology allowed for a fine-grained examination of peer
interactions and direct observation of the process of
development. It was hypothesized that the analysis of the
nature of peer interactions would find collaborative
processes that distribute cognition in a manner that benefits
participants’ weak metacognition.

Abstract
Current educational reform efforts stress the need for
educators to teach critical thinking skills and use group-based
pedagogical methods. However, the empirical literature is still
unclear under which circumstances they are best fostered. The
present study examined scientific reasoning as participants
worked on a causal reasoning task alone versus with a partner.
In previous work, individual working alone readily acquire
new strategies and add them to their existing repertoire but do
not abandon their less-effective strategies. The challenge of
cognitive development lies not in the construction of new
strategies, but rather in the consolidation of metastrategic
knowledge that allows individuals to effectively evaluate and
select strategies from their repertoire. The results of this
research suggest that special emphasis should be placed in
peer collaboration’s role in fostering metastrategic
understanding rather than focusing only on the development
of strategies. Further, it suggests a benefit of collaboration not
previously explored; the mutual reinforcement of each other’s
unstable metastrategic control through a process of distributed
metacognition. Instead of deep collaboration about simple
thought (theories and strategies), the benefits of collaboration
for these participants lie in simple collaboration about deep
thought (metastrategic knowledge).

Conceptual Framework

Introduction
The last decade has seen a new emphasis on systemic
educational reform in a variety of subject areas. Although
each framework approaches reform from a different content
perspective, they all emphasize that educators should use
pedagogical methods that encourage collaborative work
among students. Although the reform frameworks that have
been developed do not offer any specific strategies for
achieving these goals, a growing body of research suggests
directions for reform.
The present study investigated the effect of peer
collaboration on the development of scientific reasoning,
looking particularly at the differences in strategy use when
participants work alone versus when they work with a
partner. The task materials, procedure, data coding, and
analysis method are based on our previous studies of the
development of science reasoning in individuals (Kuhn,
Schauble, Garcia-Mila, & Andersen, 1992; Kuhn, GarciaMila, Zohar, & Andersen, 1995). In the present study,
participants worked on two isomorphic scientific reasoning
problems, one problem alone and the other with a partner.
By using a within-subjects design, the differences in
development of inferential reasoning strategies and
metastrategic knowledge between the single versus paired
condition could be viewed directly. The use of microgenetic

85

The research literature suggests that a spectrum of benefits
may co-exist within the collaboration of a single group. A
relatively low level of benefit is accrued from simple
exposure to other’s strategies (e.g., Zimmerman & Blom,
1983). More benefit is gained when peers operate on one
another’s thinking (e.g., Berkowitz & Gibbs, 1983). At the
highest level lies scaffolding (Wood, Bruner, & Ross,
1976), where a more-able partner structures and simplifies
the learning environment to foster a less-able partner.
The benefits outlined in the literature emphasize the
construction of new concepts and strategies. However, in
the case of strategies, previous work with individual
participants (e.g., Kuhn & Phelps, 1982) has shown that
participants readily acquire new strategies of scientific
reasoning and add them to their existing repertoire without
abandoning their less-effective strategies. The challenge of
cognitive development in this area lies not in the
construction of new strategies, but rather in the
consolidation of metastrategic knowledge (Kuhn et al.,
1995) that allows individuals to effectively evaluate and
select strategies from their repertoire. The present study
compares not only the effect of peer collaboration on the
construction of new reasoning strategies but also the role of
metastrategy in peer collaboration.

Method
Many early studies of peer interaction relied on differences
in pre- and post-test measures sandwiched around a period
of treatment in an individual or group situation (Azmitia &
Perlmutter, 1989). As empirical attention has focused on the
quality of interaction, some researchers have looked at
participants’ behavior during the course of the treatment or
even accelerated the course of development using
microgenetic methodologies (Siegler & Crowley, 1991).
However, when these fine-grained measurements have been
analyzed, they generally have been collapsed into a single
average across sessions instead of being analyzed as
repeated measures (e.g., Dimant & Bearison, 1991). The
present study takes full advantage of microgenetic
measurement by looking not only at pre/post differences in

reasoning but also examining the effect of peer
collaboration on the course of development.
Two reasoning tasks involving multivariable causal
inference were used, one involving the determination of
which features affect the speed of a computerized car, the
other involving determining which features affect the speed
of a model boat. These tasks were designed to be
isomorphic with respect to number and levels of variables,
number of outcomes, and the pattern of effects (or noneffects) of variables on outcomes and previous research has
shown them to be comparable in difficulty level (see Kuhn
et al., 1995, for a detailed description of the tasks and an
analysis of task comparability).
Participants were 12 pairs of fifth-grade students from an
elementary school in a lower-income urban area of a large
U.S. city. The self-reported ethnic background consisted of
12 Hispanics, 8 African Americans, and 4 non-Hispanic
Whites. There were 14 females and 10 males. All reported
English as their first language, though 10 participants spoke
some Spanish at home. Participants' mean age was 10 years,
6 months (range: 9 years, 10 month to 11 years, 5 months).
Participants worked weekly with one task alone and the
other (counterbalanced) with a same-sex partner over the
course of seven weeks. Sessions was audiotaped and
transcribed later for coding.

valid inference by singles and pairs was virtually zero (M =
.030, SD = .083, and M = .014, SD = .028, for singles and
pairs, respectively) and they improved in tandem in the
middle segment (M = .150, SD = .209, M = .153, SD = 236).
However, in the final segment, the pairs (M = .438, SD =
.368) improved markedly over the singles (M = .286, SD =
338). Repeated-measures ANOVA found a significant effect
for time period, F (2, 46) = 23.77, p < .001, and no main
effect for social condition, but a significant interaction
between social condition and time, F (2, 46) = 6.82, p < .01.
The higher performance by the pairs in the final segment
compared to the singles suggests that for emerging
strategies, collaborating with a peer yields higher cognitive
benefits than working alone (see Kuhn et al., 1995, for the
criteria for coding inferences as valid and invalid).

Results & Discussion

Figure 1: Proportion of valid inferences
over total inferences.

Previous studies with these tasks show that participants
possess a range of coexisting strategies (Kuhn et al., 1995).
Analysis of strategy use in the present study indicates that
collaboration did not benefit all strategies equally. For many
of the strategies, participants possessed some degree of
competence at the start of the study. For the number of
features they intend to explore in a given experiment, the
number of inferences they draw from experiments, and the
number of experimental results they invoke as evidence to
support an inference, participants performed at a moderate
level and improved with practice during the course of the
study. This suggests that for these strategies, participants
were not discovering new strategies but were rather
consolidating already existing strategies. There appears to
be little difference between singles and pairs in the rate of
improvement of these established strategies.

Use of Valid Inference
In contrast to the aforementioned strategies, valid
inference (i.e., using controlled comparisons to justify
causal and noncausal inferences) is a strategy that is only
beginning to be used by participants at this age group.
Figure 1 shows a pattern of development for this emerging
strategy that is different than the pattern found for
consolidated strategies. In the initial segment,1 the use of
1

For each single and pair, the total number of experiments carried
out within each task over the seven weeks (median = 33, range 3134, SD = .610) was divided by 3; each third constituted a segment.
Thus, a 2 x 3 (social condition x time) repeated measures Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) was performed, with social condition

86

1

0.75
Single
Pair

0.5

0.25

0
Initial

Middle

Final

Segment

Valid Inference Use in Individual Dyads Though the
results across pairs indicate that the pairs had greater
strategy gains than singles, an examination of each pair
separately shows a range of performance. The 12 pairs fell
into three patterns:
(1) dyads in which the pair made greater strategic gains than
either member alone (as measured by proportion of valid
inferences drawn in the final segment) (P>S);
(2) dyads in which one member of the pair made strategic gains
while the other made little or no gain. The performance of the
pair fell between the level of the two singles, reflecting a middle
ground between the more-able and less-able partners
(S1>P>S2);
(3) dyads in which little or no progress was made in the pair or
single condition (NP/P=S).

The Emergence and Consolidation of Valid Inference In
addition to their pattern of valid inference use, the three
groups were also distinguished by the extent to which they
explicitly intended to draw the valid inferences when they
constructed their instances. In the P>S and S1>P>S2 dyads,
valid inference of a feature tended to be preceded by a
corresponding intent to find out about that feature
specifically and an intent to experimentally isolate the
variable.
Once the dyad began using valid inference, the strategy
was often used in subsequent instances. However, when
(single, pair) as a within-subjects variable and time (initial, middle,
final segment) as a repeated measure.

NP/P=S dyads drew valid inferences, it appears that it was
only coincidence that the variable was controlled. When the
instance was constructed, dyads rarely intended to
specifically investigate the feature and there was no explicit
plan to isolate the variable. In immediately proceeding
instances, the strategy was not used again.
For instance, Pair J (a NP/P=S dyad) had their first valid
inference as a pair in Session 4. In Instance 4.4 (the fourth
instance in Session 4), J1 constructed a car with no apparent
plan to isolate muffler; in fact, Pair J did not speak at all
during car construction. J1 placed markers to indicate that
they intended to find out about all five of the features by
running this car. When she drew the inference, there was no
indication that she realized that the nonfocal variables had
been controlled:
J2: The first time it still went to number four and we
used the muffler. This time it still went to number four
and we didn't use the muffler.
After this valid inference, Pair J did not draw another
valid inference until Session 6.
Valid Inference Use in P>S Dyads In contrast to Pair J,
when Pair A (a P>S dyad) drew their first valid inference, it
was in the context of an explicit plan to design a controlled
comparison. As they chose the features for their boat in
Instance 4.1, A1 proposed that they test the features one at a
time:
A1: [Constructing new instance] Let’s do it one by one.
That’s how we figure out how they matter.
A1 has stated a simple form of Tschirgi’s (1980) “vary one
thing at a time” (VOTAT) strategy to isolate variables. 2 A1
placed a marker to signify that they intend to find out about
the boat size only. In constructing their boat, Pair A
explicitly indicated a single feature to investigate and the
intent to isolate the feature.
Participants commonly view a correct prediction of the
boat’s stopping point as proof of the correctness of their
causal and noncausal beliefs. After they ran the boat in
Instance 4.1 and it stopped at zone two as predicted, A2 was
ready to draw an inference about the weight (a favorite
feature of investigation for A2 in previous sessions), but A1
drew her back to the originally intended feature:
Experimenter: [After running boat] What did you find
out?
A2: We [found] out about the weight.
A1: No, about the boat size, that’s all.
A2: Oh, the boat size.
A1: Just talk about the boat size.
A1’s feedback in response to A2’s digression to the effect of
weight kept them heading down the path toward drawing a
valid inference on boat size later in Instance 4.2. They went
on to draw a false inference about the effect of boat size, but
2

Though isolation of variables and valid inference both involve
controlled comparison, they differ in that isolation of variables is a
strategy of investigation design (used when boats and cars are
being constructed) while valid inference is a strategy of data
analysis (generally used after a car or boat is run).

87

A1 quickly added that they intend to run a comparison boat
and change only the boat size:
A1: Doesn’t matter. The [boat size] doesn’t matter. And
we’re going to try it again.
A2: Doesn’t matter.
A1: We’re going to change the boat size to [a large]
boat.
In the next instance (4.2), A1 again took the lead in
constructing the controlled comparison, though A2 was
clearly in agreement in the use of the strategy:
A1: [Constructing new instance] Just change the small
size.
A2: Change it to the small size.
Experimenter: OK.
A2: And that’s all. And then that way we’ll know for
sure.
Experimenter: What features are you going to find out
by running this boat?
A2: The boat [places marker on boat size].
Though A1 only began isolating variables in the previous
instance, A2 already recognized its validity to test for
certain if the size of the boat in causal or not. Her immediate
adoption of A1’s new strategy suggests some readiness for
A2 to have constructed the strategy on her own.
They predict that the boat will stop at zone 2, but it
actually stops at zone 4. Though participants in previous
work with these tasks (e.g., Kuhn et al., 1992, 1995) had a
tendency to revert to invalid evidence-based or theory-based
justifications when faced with an unexpected outcome, Pair
A accepted the disconfirmation of their belief and drew a
valid inference of causality:
Experimenter: [After running boat] How do you know
that the boat size matters?
A2: Because, um, we did it...
A1: We did the, we did the, we tried it boat, we tried it
with the different size and there’s one with everything
but the size [i.e., same features except for size: Instance
4.1] and we changed it, so this one goes faster than this
one.
A2: So the small ones go faster than the big ones.
The strategies used by Pair A in their Session 4 instances
contrast with those used in their instances in the preceding
session. In Instance 3.1, A1 stated that “We already know
everything,” convinced that they understood the complete
causal structure of the task. However, they decided to test
the features again in order remain out of their regular
classroom for a period. A2 took the lead in designing which
boats to run and in making predictions in how far the boats
would travel. In Instance 3.2, it was A2 who suggested that
they investigate one feature at a time (VOTAT):
A2: Why don’t we just stick to one subject? Then we’ll
be like there quicker and without the card get all of them.
A2 constructed the instance, varying only boat size from the
previous instance (4.1). However, A1 wanted to vary two
features with the instance:
A1: I want to do this (boat size) and this (weight).
A1 became increasingly uncooperative with A2, with the

two reduced to name-calling by the end of the session.
In Session 4, Pair A had a new sense that they don’t know
the causal nature of the features and a renewed sense of
purpose. A2’s use of VOTAT in Session 3 and A1’s
isolation of variables at the start of Session 4 suggest that
they were at a similar point of readiness to start controlling
variables, though they appeared to have constructed the
strategies individually. There was little explicit talk of the
strategies as would be expected if scaffolding or joint
construction were being employed and neither ever justified
the use of the isolation of variables or valid inference
strategies. Though A2 tried to use another, less-effective
strategy at one point, A1’s feedback returned them to their
previous course. They went on to isolate variables and draw
valid inferences consistently for the remaining three
sessions, suggesting that their use of valid inference
consolidated very quickly.
When Pair D (another P>S dyad) drew their first valid
inference as a pair, they also showed an intent to isolate
variables. By the third session as a pair, D1 and D2 had not
draw any valid inferences while working together, though
D1 drew a single valid inference in the single condition
(Instance 2.3). In Instance 3.2, they drew a pair of false
inferences, but included in their inference justifications were
hypothetical propositions to isolate variables (e.g., “If we
would put the smaller boat with the weight with the small
sail, it will go I think to the black line, but if we would do
the same [configuration of features], only with the bigger
boat, I think it would go to the green”). The discussion
following each proposal was minimal (simple agreements
with no justifications), suggesting that the strategy may
have already been present in their minds though they had
not yet used it while together. The strategy did not emerge
in response to any apparent sociocognitive conflict nor was
there any co-construction beyond a simple statement of the
intent to isolate a variable.
In the next instance (4.3), D1 began to draw an invalid
inference about the effect of boat size, comparing the boat
they ran (Instance 4.3: small boat, small red sail, no weight,
deep water) to a previous boat that varied on weight but not
size. D2 interrupted with a valid comparison with a boat two
instances earlier (Instance 4.1, which varied from Instance
4.3 on boat size only):
Experimenter: Tell me about how you figured that out.
D1: In the smaller boat we put the weight...
D2: Our first boat, we put a smaller boat with no weight
and the features were the same [Instance 4.1] and this
one we put a bigger boat with no weight and the features
were still the same, but it went slower, it went to the
green and our first boat went to the red.
This interruption by D2 is reminiscent of the earlier example
when A1 pulled A2’s attention back to the feature that they
had isolated. Though both A1 and A2 demonstrated an
understanding of strategies such as valid inference and
isolation of variables, these strategic digressions show the
initial weakness of their metastrategic control over the new
strategies.

88

How might these strategic digressions be conceptualized?
Our previous work with individual participants (Kuhn et al.,
1992, 1995) has shown that an individual’s use of valid
inference is swayed by idiosyncratic biases in exploration
caused by their theories concerning the structure of the
causal system (confirmation vs. disconfirmation, causal vs.
noncausal), the affective investment in one’s own belief,
and social factors in the learning environment. The partner
in the pair condition provides a check for regressions to
false inference strategies due to unstable metastrategic
control. The partner’s feedback becomes an external version
of the internal metacognitive argument that occurs when a
strategy is selected for from an individual’s repertoire. The
intercession of the partners helped support an individual’s
faltering metastrategic debate; if A2 (for instance) had been
working alone, she likely would have drawn an invalid
inference. This metastrategic reinforcement provided by a
partner may account for the improved performance of the
pair condition over the single by these two dyads compared
to the other participants.
The other two P>S dyads (B and C) had much smaller
differences between the pair and single use of valid
inference than did Pairs A and D. Their use of valid
inference had some similarities but there were also notable
differences.
Though Pair B had their first valid inference in Session 2,
their use of valid inference resembled the NP/P=S pairs like
Pair J for much of the study. They never expressed an
explicit plan to isolate a variable and they did not begin
coordinating a single intent to investigate with a subsequent
valid inference until the end of Session 5. They began
consistent use of valid inference (coordinated with a single
intent) in Session 6. They gave no feedback that would
suggest metastrategic support of one another’s efforts.
Pair C did not show as rapid a rise in the use of valid
inference as Pair B, but their reasoning showed
characteristics that suggested that their use of valid
inference was not as serendipitous as that of the NP/P=S
dyads. When Pair C drew their first valid inference
(Instance 6.2), it was coordinated with a single intent,
though there was no explicit plan made to isolate the
variable. Their subsequent use of valid inference was
haphazard, with two additional valid inferences out of 11
total inferences. As with Pair B (who also showed erratic
use of valid inference after its first appearance), there were
no statements between them that suggest metastrategic
support.
Valid Inference Use in S1>P>S2 In the S1>P>S2 dyads,
the performance of the pair was intermediate between each
partner’s performance alone. For each of these dyads, one
participant drew all of the inferences for the pair in three of
the four pairs. In two of the four pairs (F and H), the partner
who drew more inferences (i.e., socially-dominant) was also
the partner with superior performance in the single
condition, suggesting that for these two pairs, the
performance of the pair can be accounted for exclusively by

the inferences drawn by the more-able partner. However, for
the other two pairs (E and G), it was the less-able partner
when single who drew the majority of valid inferences for
the pair, suggesting that in these pairs, the performance of
the pair is due to benefits of collaboration to the less-able
partner.
In Instance 4.2, H1 took the lead and constructed an
uncontrolled comparison of wheel size. When they drew an
inference about the effect of wheel size (a three-level
variable), they both noted that a third instance was needed:
Experimenter: [After running car] So which wheels go
fastest?
Both: Medium.
H1: I don’t know yet.
H2: We got to try, but I think it’s the medium.
H1: If we try the next car, then we’ll know between the
other two.
In the next instance (4.3), H1 tried to isolate wheel size.
However, H2 wanted to vary multiple features:
H1: [Constructing new instance] The same thing except
for the wheels. Change the wheels whatever way you
want.
H2: Why can't it be a big engine?
H1: No, because you're going to find out the wheels.
H2: The color white.
H1: No, alright?
Through the rest of Session 4 and through Session 5, H1
continued to isolate one variable at a time, while H2
consistently objected in vain to H1’s attempts. H1 tried to
explain the strategy to H2 on numerous occasions. Here,
they have run one car (5.4) with a fin to find out the effect
of fin. H2 was satisfied that the single instance
demonstrated the causal nature of the fin and she wanted to
change the muffler in Instance 5.5 to investigate its causal
nature:
H1: [Constructing new instance] Same exact car except
we want to change it to no fin. That one [5.4] went to
four, right?
H2: We have to go to the muffler.
H1: Let's try three.
H2: We have to go to the muffler now.
H1: No, we need to...we're still fin now.
H2: I know...oh, we are?
H1: Yeah, because you got to run it with and without the
fin. Then after this one, we get a chance to find out about
the muffler, not today but next time.
In Session 6, H2 stopped actively resisting H1’s efforts to
isolate one feature at a time and instead looked to H1 to lead
their investigation:
Experimenter: What type of car would you like to look at
first?
H2: [To H1] Small? Big? Hello? Come on, let's go.
Small? Hello? Wake up in there, wake up in there.
Experimenter: [After running car] What did you find
out?
H2: [To H1] Come on, let's go on. What did you find
out?

89

By the end of Session 6, H2 accepted H1’s isolation of
variables strategy, though H2 still was following the lead of
H1:
H1: [Constructing the car] Everything the same again.
H2: Everything the same.
Throughout the remaining sessions, H1 initiated nearly all
the car designs, intents, and inferences. Though H2 accepted
H1’s use of controlled comparison, H2’s lapses in its use
suggest a lack of understanding of the strategy. Here, H1
plans to test the effect of the fin, while H2 wants to change
the wheels:
H1: [Constructing car] OK--now we going to find out
about the muffler and leave that like that....Nononono,
that made it to 3, so let's try it like this. The muffler don't
matter. The fin, got to try the fin.
H2: Why don't you change the wheel?
H1: We're going to three, yeah, because the engine is big
so it's going to help the car go faster.
H2: Change the wheels.
H1: And the medium wheels are going to help, too,
because the big wheels and the little wheels go the same
speed, and that's it.
H2: Change the wheels.
H1: Nope, no, I say no no. It's too late.
And in H1’s later attempt to test the effect of the muffler,
H2 again wants to change the wheels as well:
H1: [Constructing car] I'll have the same car except I
want to leave off the muffler.
H2: Why won't you change the wheel?
H1: ‘Cause we're going to find out about the muffler.
Though H2’s resistance to H1’s strategies diminishes with
time, H2 never used isolation of variables or valid inference
herself (H1 drew all 12 valid inferences for the pair). Her
constant desire to design uncontrolled comparison suggests
that she hasn’t constructed the isolation of variables or valid
inference strategy yet. Unlike A1 and A2 and the other P>S
dyads, in which both partners understand the need to isolate
variables and seem to reinforce each other’s efforts, only H1
seems to understand the strategies being employed. Rather
than collaborating together, H1 is pulling the less-able H2
along.
H1’s social and intellectual dominance of the pair’s
interactions suggests that in the S1>P>S2 dyads, the moreable partner dominated the pair and that the valid inference
performance of the pair was due solely to the efforts of the
more-able partner. However, in two of the four dyads, it is
the less-able partner who draws more valid inferences for
the pair. In these two dyads (E and G), the less-able partner
(E1 and G2, respectively) benefited from the collaboration,
performing with their partner at a higher level than when
working alone.
For example, G1’s performance as a single was much
higher than G2’s, yet when they were paired, G2 drew more
valid inferences than G1 (four vs. three inferences). In
Instance 6.5 (one session after the pair’s first valid
inference), G1 and G2 worked together to change the car
from the previous instance to construct a controlled test of

engine size. After changing the size of the engine from large
to small, G2 tried to change another feature as well, but G1
brought her back to isolating one variable:
G2: Move this.
G1: No, you got to leave it the same, all these.
G2: OK.
They continued to construct the boat, and once again, G2
tries to vary another feature:
G2: Wait--big muffler.
G1: No, it's the same. Leave it the same.
G2: OK.
Had G2 been working alone, it appears she would have gone
on to draw an invalid inference using an uncontrolled
comparison. Through G1’s intervention, G2 returned to
isolating engine size and went on to draw a valid inference.
Though G1 and G2’s interactions suggest that
metastrategic reinforcement may play a role in fostering the
performance of the less-able partner, the verbal interaction
between E1 and E2 has little evidence supporting such a
hypothesis. Instead, the dyad appears to have divided the
subtasks between them. Beginning with their first valid
inference in Instance 7.1, the more-able E2 constructed all
of the inferences, chose the features they tended to pursue,
and placed the markers to indicate which features they
found out about. The less-able E1 drew the inferences. As a
result, E2 was performing the problematic processes of
intending to isolate the feature in question and coordinating
the intent to find out about a feature with the inference
subsequently drawn, strategies that are missing in the
haphazard valid inferences drawn by the NP/P=S group.
Though E2’s actions appeared to simplify the task to
allow E1 to draw a higher proportion of valid inferences
than he would otherwise working alone, there is no evidence
that E2 intentionally simplified the task for E1’s benefit.
Therefore, E2’s simplifications were not consistent with the
present study’s conception of scaffolding, which requires
the more-able partner to intentionally structure a task so as
to reduce its complexity or difficulty.
In all four of the S1>P>S2 dyads, one partner dominates
the pair when drawing inferences, though that does not
translate into intellectual dominance. In the cases of Pair F
and Pair H, the valid inference performance of the pair is
due exclusively to the more-able partner, whose use of
isolation of variables and valid inference strategies is
sometimes at direct odds with the intentions of the less-able
partner. However, in the cases of Pair E and Pair G, the lessable partner (E1 and G2, respectively) drew most of the
valid inferences and appeared to benefit from the presence
of the more-able partner.
In the present study, collaboration did not benefit all
reasoning strategies equally. For example, no significant
differences were found between the single and paired
condition for strategies that were familiar and often used,
nor were there differences in the emergence of new
strategies. Instead, the advantage of collaboration over
working alone was seen during the period immediately after
the appearance of a new strategy (in this case, the use of

90

controlled comparisons to draw valid causal inferences),
when the use of the strategy was being consolidated.
The case studies presented here suggest that the benefit of
collaboration for the participants in this study appears to be
in the distributed support of unstable metastrategic
knowledge rather than the construction of strategic
knowledge, as has been suggested by the research literature.
By providing a check for regressions to false inference
strategies due to unstable control of metastrategic
knowledge, the partner’s feedback becomes an external
version of the internal metacognitive argument that occurs
when a strategy is selected for from an individual’s
repertoire. The intercession of the partners helped support
an individual’s faltering metastrategic debate. This
metastrategic reinforcement serves as a form of distributed
metacognition and appears to account for the improved
performance of the pair condition over the single in this
study.

Acknowledgments
This research was made possible through the support of a
COTF/NASA Summer Faculty Fellowship and funding
from the S. J. Wittman Trust.

References
Azmitia, M., & Perlmutter, M. (1989). Social influences on
children's cognition: State of the art and future directions.
Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 22, 89144.
Berkowitz, M. W., & Gibbs, J. C. (1983). Measuring the
development of features of moral discussion. MerrillPalmer Quarterly, 29, 399-410.
Dimant, R. J., & Bearison, D. J. (1991). Development of
formal reasoning during successive peer interactions.
Developmental Psychology, 27, 277-284.
Kuhn, D., Garcia-Mila, M., Zohar, A., & Andersen, C.
(1995). Strategies of knowledge acquisition. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 60 (4,
Serial No. 245).
Kuhn, D., & Phelps, E. (1982). The development of
problem-solving strategies. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances
in child development and behavior (Vol. 17). New York:
Academic Press.
Kuhn, D., Schauble, L., Garcia-Mila, M., & Andersen, C.
(1992). A comparison of the development of scientific
reasoning skills in a laboratory versus computerized
environment. Proceedings of the European Conference
about Technology in Education: A critical insight (pp.
480-489). Barcelona: Congrés Europeu T.I.E.
Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1991). The microgenetic
method: A direct means for studying cognitive
development. American Psychologist, 46, 606-620.
Tschirgi, J. E. (1980). Sensible reasoning: A hypothesis
about hypotheses. Child Development, 51, 1-10.
Wood, S. S., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of
tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.

