UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distributed Tutorial Strategies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/805584c3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Katz, Sandra

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distributed Tutorial Strategies
Sandra Katz (katz+@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
tutoring system for basic mechanics called Andes (e.g.,
Gertner & VanLehn, 2000). In the problem-solving
excerpt, the student’s first equation signals a
misconception: that all force problems deal with
stationary objects. This misconception is also evident in
the student’s reply to the tutor’s question (problemsolving turn 2: “there’s no acceleration”). The overall
goal of the distributed dialogue is to resolve this
misconception and, correspondingly, to abstract the
correct principle (Newton’s Second Law) and a schema
associated with this principle.1 During problem solving,
the tutor makes the student aware of his error, gets him on
track, and lets the solution bring out a contradiction in the
student’ beliefs about acceleration, but the tutor does not
address the misconception directly. During the postsolution discussion, the tutor guides the student in
confronting the contradiction brought out by the solution
(post-solution turns 1-6) and reifies the principle that
explains it—Newton’s Second Law—and the schema that
maps onto the solution (post-solution turn 7). Because
distributed interactions that implement this strategy rely
on the solution to contradict the student’s reasoning, we
dub this strategy Let the Solution Speak for Itself.
Previous research has shown that tutorial dialogues that
are distributed between problem solving and post-solution
reflection, such as the one shown in Table 1, strengthen
conceptual understanding and promote near transfer—that
is, students’ ability to solve problems similar to those
discussed during tutoring (Katz, O’Donnell, & Kay, 2000;
Katz, Allbritton, & Connelly, in press). Not surprisingly,
Katz et al. (in press) found a transfer effect for distributed
dialogues whose overall goal was to generalize from the
case at hand, or to increase the student’s repertoire of
methods for achieving particular problem-solving goals.
The main motivation for the research discussed in the
current paper was to better understand the mechanisms by
which distributed dialogues achieve these instructional
functions—in particular, to determine whether there are
recurring distributed tutorial strategies for abstraction and
problem-solving skill-building that can be specified in
terms of their sub-goal composition and structure. We
identified several such strategies. Following a discussion
of the research methodology, we describe and illustrate a
framework for specifying distributed tutorial strategies.

Abstract
In one-on-one tutoring sessions, lessons are sometimes
distributed across several interaction episodes. We
observed recurring patterns in the way that physics tutors
parcel dialogue sub-goals between problem-solving
discussions and post-solution, reflective discussions. We
call these patterns “distributed tutorial strategies.” They
attempt to achieve two main functions: generalizing from
the current problem and building the student’s repertoire of
methods for achieving particular problem-solving goals.
This paper illustrates several distributed strategies that
physics tutors use to achieve these instructional goals and
presents a framework for describing the goal structure of
distributed tutorial strategies.

Introduction
A number of studies have demonstrated the effectiveness
of human one-on-one tutoring and its superiority over
traditional classroom-based instruction (e.g., Bloom,
1984; Cohen, Kulik & Kulik, 1982)—often called the “2
sigma effect.” In an attempt to explain this effect, several
researchers have investigated the tactics that tutors
implement (e.g., McArthur, Stasz, & Zmuidzinas, 1990;
Merrill, Reiser, Raney, & Trafton, 1992). A vast
repertoire of tactics have been identified, including giving
didactic explanations, scaffolding, hinting, engaging the
student in Socratic-style dialogues or “directed lines of
reasoning” (Hume, Michael, Rovick, & Evens, 1996), and
various forms of questioning (Graesser & Person, 1994).
Although this research has enhanced our understanding
of how tutors handle impasses and other situations that
occur at a single point during a problem-solving session,
it has little to say about lessons that are distributed across
several dialogue episodes. The distributed nature of
instructional interaction has been acknowledged by
several scholars (e.g., Akhras & Self, 2000), but the goal
composition and structure of distributed dialogues has not
been investigated. This paper stems from our observation
of recurring patterns of tutorial dialogue goals that were
distributed between physics problem-solving sessions and
post-solution, reflective discussions. We refer to these
patterns as “distributed tutorial strategies.”
Distributed tutorial strategies consist of a sequence of
dialogue sub-goals that collectively attempt to achieve a
higher-level instructional goal. Some sub-goals are
executed in the initial dialogue episode, while other subgoals are executed in one or more later episodes. Table
1 contains an example of a distributed tutorial dialogue.
(Annotations are in italics.) This dialogue took place via
teletyped interaction between a tutor and a student while
the latter was working on a problem in an intelligent

1
By “schema,” we mean a mental representation of the features
that all instances of a type of problem have in common—the
concept(s) and principle(s) associated with it, the quantities that
are given or need to be derived, and so on.

640

Table 1. Example of a Distributed Tutorial Dialogue
Andes Problem Statement:
In the figure at right, each of the three strings exerts a
tension force on the ring as marked. Use the labels S1, S2
and S3 to refer to the three strings. Find the components of
the net force acting on the ring.
Problem-Solving Dialogue
The student writes the following equation in the Andes
equations window:
(1) Fnet=0
The tutor interrupts to flag an error: the student wrongly
assumed that there is no acceleration, so he set the net
force (Fnet) equal to 0.
1. T: Hold on; How do you know that Fnet = 0?
2. S: there's no acceleration
3. T: That's not for sure; maybe there _is_ acceleration;
look at what the question is asking...
No more discussion takes place during problem solving.
The student enters the following main equations
(intermediate steps have been deleted), which solve the
problem and show that there is acceleration, because there
is a net force in both the x and y directions:
(2) Fnet_x= -S1 + S3 + S2cos(30)
(3) Fnet_x = -200 + 100 + 200cos(30) = 73.2
(4) Fnet_y = 200sin(30) = 100N

“debrief” and “no debrief.” At the start of each problem,
the experimenter told participants whether they would be
allowed to discuss the problem further after the student
solved it (i.e., debrief).
Students worked on twelve
problems in each of these within-subject conditions.
The full corpus consists of 315 transcripts, 160 from
“debrief” sessions, 155 from “no debrief” sessions. (Due
to time constraints and other factors, four students did not
complete the 24-problem set.) We focused on the
“debrief” sessions in the previous and current study. The
transcripts were segmented into dialogue episodes.
Problem-solving episodes typically begin with an
initiating query or statement and end with a student
action. Post-solution episodes (debriefs) begin at the point
where the tutor confirms that the student’s answer is
correct. We segmented each episode further into subdialogues—one sub-dialogue per topic—referred to
henceforth simply as “dialogues.”
Two raters coded the following dialogue features:
• Initiator:
who initiated the discussion—the
student or the tutor?
• Information status: This feature is only coded for
post-solution dialogues, but refers to problemsolving discussions. What is the informational
relationship between the post-solution dialogue and
problem-solving discussions?
Does the post-

Methods
The distributed dialogues analyzed in this study are a subcorpus of the corpus used to investigate the roles and
effectiveness of post-solution reflective dialogues, as
cited previously (Katz et al., in press). The study
procedure, corpus, and coding methods are described in
detail in that paper.
Here we summarize the
methodological features that are most pertinent to the
current study.
Fifteen student volunteers taking an introductory
physics course at the University of Pittsburgh were
randomly assigned to one of seven tutors. Tutors had
prior experience teaching physics in a classroom or oneon-one tutoring setting; some had done both. Student
and tutor participants were paid a nominal amount.
The study followed a pretest intervention posttest
design. The intervention consisted of 24 problems that
students worked on in the Andes physics tutoring system.
The tutor and student sat in separate rooms and interacted
via teletype. Andes’ automated coaching was suppressed
so that all of the help that students received came from the
live tutors. The system automatically logged students’
actions and conversations with their tutor. To highlight
the roles of post-solution dialogues and their potential
impact on student-tutor interaction during problem
solving, we presented the problems in one of two formats:

Æ

Post-Solution Dialogue
T: So let me ask you a question; looking at your
equations—is there any acceleration?
2. S: I guess so, is it because there is a force in the
positive x direction?
3. T: Not only a force in the positive x-direction...are
there any other net forces?
4. S: no
5. T: really? What is equation 4, then?
6. S: oh, the y direction also.
7. T: Yes. So you can see that there is a net force in the
x-direction, which would result in an acceleration in
the x-direction: Fnet_x = m * ax and similarly in the
y-direction: Fnet_y = m * ay. This is a very important
idea, and is called "Newton's Second Law". Is it
familiar to you?
8. S: yes.
9. T: Good. Are you ready to move on, or do you have
any more questions?
10. S: no. I am ready to move on.
11. T: Ok.
1.

Æ

641

Table 2. Abstraction and Skill Repertoire-Building Functions of Distributed Dialogues
Description

Frequency

Schema construction: enable the student to recognize the features that a set of problems have in common,
identify the associated schema (e.g., a projectile problem; a static force problem), and see how the current
problem maps onto this schema.
Schema extension: enable the student to see how a familiar schema applies to problems with different
surface features than the problems he or she has encountered so far—for example, to realize that the
formal representation of Newton’s Second Law (Net force = mass * acceleration) can not only be used to
solve problems involving stationary objects, but problems with moving objects as well.
Conceptual specialization: enable the student to understand the distinction between related concepts—e.g.,
the difference between instantaneous, average, and constant acceleration.
Tactical generalization: encourage and enable the student to use standard “tricks of the trade” for solving
quantitative problems, such as breaking complex problems into more manageable sub-goals, reading the
problem statement carefully, and expressing relations symbolically before instantiating variables.
Alternative method—optimal: broaden the student’s repertoire of problem-solving skills, by enabling the
student to see why a recommended procedure is preferable to the one that he or she applied.
Alternative method—equivalent: broaden the student’s repertoire of problem-solving skills, by enabling
the student to see why a recommended procedure is equivalent to the one that he or she applied.
Total

13(6,4,1,1,1)

5(5)

5(1,1,2,1)
11(4,1,3,1,2)

6(4,1,1)
2(2)
42

was more than one function, the primary function
was assigned as the overall goal descriptor.
The sub-corpus consists of 42 distributed dialogues that
have these three features. Table 2 shows the frequency
of distributed dialogues that attempt to achieve each
overall goal. The frequency notation signifies the total
number of dialogues in a category and the breakdown by
tutor. For example, a frequency of 13(6,4,1,1,1) for
schema construction means that there were 13 distributed
dialogues of this type, involving five student-tutor dyads;
one tutor initiated 6 distributed schema construction
dialogues, another tutor initiated 4, and three tutors
initiated one each.
Fifteen transcripts were selected at random to test for
inter-rater reliability. Thirteen transcripts contained a
post-solution dialogue and the two coders’ judgments of
whether a post-solution discussion occurred were in
perfect agreement (100%). Agreement rates were 92%
for initiator (kappa = .83), 85% for information status
(kappa = .78), and 94% for overall instructional goal
(Table 2) (kappa = .77).

solution dialogue bring a new topic to the table? If it
extends a problem-solving discussion about the same
topic, does the post-solution dialogue contain new
content or summarize the problem-solving dialogue?
Based on these distinctions, we code the information
status of a post-solution dialogue as “new,”
“elaboration,” or “summary.”
Given the current study’s focus on identifying the subgoal structure of distributed dialogues that attempt to
achieve abstraction and skill-building functions, the subcorpus used in this study consists of tutorial lessons with
the following features:
• Tutor-initiation. Because we are interested in
characterizing the strategies used by tutors,
problem-solving and post-solution dialogues had to
be initiated by the tutor.
• Distribution: The lesson contains at least one
problem-solving dialogue and one post-solution
dialogue, and the latter is a reprise of the former—
that is, the information status of the post-solution
dialogue was coded as “elaboration” or
“summary.” Typically there is only one problemsolving dialogue that corresponds to a postsolution reprise, but sometimes there are several, as
when a student repeats an error.
• Abstraction or skill-building as an overall goal.
The problem-solving and post-solution dialogues
collectively attempt to achieve one of the functions
described in Table 2. Our main interest here is to
specify how this inter-dialogue cooperation takes
place. We used a similar goal classification
scheme in the current study to the one used to
describe the roles of post-solution dialogues in
Katz et al. (in press). In the few cases where there

Specifying Distributed Strategies
Instructional dialogues whose sub-goals are distributed
between problem solving and post-solution reflection can
be described in terms of two main features:
• Sub-goal status. Is a sub-goal optional or necessary
for achieving the overall goal?
• Sub-goal staging. Where is each sub-goal
executed—during problem solving, during postsolution reflection, or distributed between these two
phases?

642

Table 3: Sub-goal Composition and Structure of Three Goals Described In Table 2
Overall Goal
Schema
construction

•
•
•

•
•
•
Schema
extension

•
•
•

Alternative
method—
optimal

•
•
•
•
•

Problem-solving Dialogue Goals
Post-solution Dialogue Goals
{If S has trouble getting started
S knows which • S understands the main features of a
problem schema
principle(s) to apply to the current problem}
{If S reaches an impasse in applying a principle
S • {S understands how the current solution
maps onto this schema}
knows how to apply principle to current problem}
{If error signifies a misconception and error
correction suffices to get S on track
S is aware
that S made an error, but may not understand the
underlying misconception}
S is aware that the current problem is a member of a class of problems (schema)
{S knows what the schema is called (identification)}
{If there is evidence of misunderstanding or tutor suspects that S is applying (applied) schema by rote
S understands the concept(s) and principle(s) associated with the schema}
{If S has trouble getting started
S knows which • {S’s understanding of how to apply
principle(s) to situation represented in the
principle(s) to apply to the current problem}
current problem is strengthened}
{If S reaches an impasse in applying a principle
S
• S understands how to apply the same
knows how to apply principle to current problem}
principle(s) to problem variation(s)
{If there is evidence of misunderstanding or tutor suspects that S is applying (applied) schema by rote
S understands the concept(s) and principle(s) associated with original problem and variation(s)}
• {S’s understanding of the superiority of
S understands tutor-recommended procedure
recommended procedure is strengthened}
S is convinced that S should replace sub-optimal
procedure with optimal procedure

Æ

Æ

Æ

Æ

Æ

Æ

Æ

S understands that original procedure is appropriate, though sub-optimal
S understands why suggested procedure is optimal
{If the two procedures are conceptually related, or one can be derived from the other
understands relationship between original and recommended procedures}

ÆS

schema abstraction—that is, enabling the student to
understand the core features of the schema (e.g., its slots
and associated principle(s)).
Schema awareness and
abstraction are achieved in post-solution turn 7 of the
Table 1 dialogue. Abstraction is typically supported by
other optional sub-goals, such as identifying the schema
and reifying how the current solution maps onto it. The
latter emerges through post-solution turns 1-7 of Table 1.
Sub-goals are optional when the student does not make
an error associated with the sub-goal, in response to tutor
preferences, and when other conditions apply. To the
extent that these conditions can be inferred from
representative dialogues, optional sub-goals can be
specified as productions (if-then rules). In Table 3, the
conditional part of optional sub-goals is shown in italics.
For example, in the schema construction goal frame, the
third problem-solving sub-goal states that the tutor can
defer addressing a misconception if flagging the error
suffices to get the student on track. This is precisely what
happened in problem-solving turns 1-3 of Table 1.
With respect to staging, some sub-goals must be
addressed during problem solving. Other sub-goals must
take place during post-solution reflection. Still other subgoals are “floating”—they can occur during either or both
phases.
“Floating goals” are shown spanning the

Table 3 presents a formal specification of three of the
instructional goals described in Table 2, in terms of these
features. The sub-goal composition and structure of these
goals was determined by analyzing matching cases in the
corpus (Table 2). We refer to the resulting specification as
an instructional goal frame (referred to henceforth as
“goal frame”). Below we illustrate the approach with
reference to the goal frame for schema construction
shown in Table 3 and the sample distributed schemaconstruction dialogue shown in Table 1.
As shown in Table 3, dialogue sub-goals can be stated
in terms of their perlocutionary effect (Austin, 1962)—the
intended effect on the hearer (in this case, the student)—
to the extent that this can be inferred from the content of
the tutor’s utterances and manner of presentation. In
tutorial discourse, the tutor typically tries to alter the
student’s mental state (e.g., increase understanding about
a concept, convince the student that a recommended
method is preferable to the one that the student has
implemented) and/or actions (e.g., enable the student to
apply a principle). Student is abbreviated as S in Table 3.
Optional dialogue sub-goals are in brackets in Table 3.
For example, the only sub-goals that all schemaconstruction dialogues share in common are making the
student aware that the problem represents a schema and

643

The goal frame for schema extension provides another
example of distributed tutoring. Some tutors appear to be
aware of the limited time that a typical physics course
affords for exposing students to the wide range of
physical situations that a given schema can be applied to.
Schema extension attempts to address this problem. It
typically happens through the What if… distributed
strategy specified in Table 5—named as such because the
tutor poses one (or more) problem scenarios to the student
during post-solution reflection which alter the physical
situation in the current problem.

problem-solving and post-solution sub-goal columns in
Table 3. For example, as part of schema construction, the
tutor will sometimes identify the schema at the start of a
problem-solving session, possibly to get the student on
course, as when one tutor said, “Hint: Newton’s second
law, only this time you are concerned with acceleration in
x and acceleration in y.” At other times, schema
identification
takes
place
during
post-solution
reflection—for example, with respect to a different
problem than the one shown in Table 1, a tutor asked,
“Did you see that this is work done by a variable force?”
A distributed tutorial strategy is one instantiation of the
goal frame for an overall goal. It consists of a subset of
the dialogue sub-goals in the goal frame, arranged in a
particular order. As discussed previously, the distributed
dialogue in Table 1 implements the Let the Solution Speak
for Itself strategy, which instantiates the goal frame for
schema construction. It consists of the sub-goal structure
specified in Table 4. Optional sub-goals in the goal frame
can be required by the strategy definition. For example,
the Let the Solution Speak for Itself strategy only takes
place when the student has a misconception about the
core principle associated with a schema. Error-flagging is
an essential (not optional) part of the problem-solving
discussion and reification of misconceived concept(s) and
principle(s) is an essential part of the post-solution
discussion.

Table 5: The What if… Strategy
Problem-solving Dialogue Sub-goals:
• {S knows which principle(s) to apply to the
current problem}
• {S knows how to apply principle(s) to the current
problem}
• {S understands principle(s) associated with current
problem}
Post-solution Dialogue Sub-goals:
• {S’s understanding of how to apply principle(s) to
situation represented in the current problem is
strengthened}
• S understands how to apply the same principle(s)
to problem variation(s)
• {S understands concept(s) and principle(s)
associated with original problem and variation(s)}

Table 4: The Let the Solution Speak for Itself Strategy
Problem-solving Dialogue Sub-goals:
• S is aware that S made an error, but may not
understand the underlying misconception
• {S knows which principle(s) to apply to the
current problem}
• {S knows how to apply principles to current
problem}
Post-solution Dialogue Sub-goals:
• S is aware that the current problem is a member of
a class of problems (schema)
• S understands the main features of the schema
• {S understands how the current solution maps onto
this schema}
• S understands the concept(s) and principle(s)
associated with the schema.

The primary goal of the problem-solving discussion (if
any) is to strengthen the student’s ability to apply the
schema and its associated principle(s) to the current
problem and similar ones that the student has
encountered. This is necessary before moving on to “new
territory.” The problem-solving dialogue that preceded
the sample post-solution excerpt shown below centered
around helping the student solve a typical static Newton’s
Second Law problem (to find the tension in a rope
holding a suspended bungee jumper). The “what if”
scenario posed during post-solution reflection challenges
the student to apply the schema to a dynamic situation (T
= tutor):
T: What if I now told you that this guy is going to
rappel down the cliff and the maximum tension in the
rope is 450 N. How could you find the minimum
acceleration he would need to not break the rope?
The post-solution discussion focused on enabling the
student to see that the formalism for Newton’s Second
Law (Net force = mass * acceleration) is the core of the
schema that maps onto both situations:
T: you need to think of these problems as the same in
the sense that when you are dealing with problems
where several forces are acting the first equation that
should enter your mind is Newton's 2nd law. Think of
it as a recipe because although the ingredients may
change the base is always that: F_net = m * a.

There are other ways that schema construction can take
place. The most common strategy—implemented in 8 of
the 13 schema construction cases—could be called the
Advanced Organizer strategy, because the tutor identifies
the schema or the central principle associated with it at
the start of the problem—for example, “I’ll get you
started…Conservation of energy.” The tutor then helps
the student, as needed, with applying the relevant
concept(s) or principle(s).
During post-solution
reflection, the tutor reifies the schema and how the current
solution maps onto it.

644

The sub-goal structure of a distributed strategy is fairly
stable. However, the particular tactics that tutors use to
implement each sub-goal can vary greatly. For example,
in the post-solution dialogue shown in Table 1, the tutor
takes an indirect approach to enabling the student to
realize the contradiction brought out by his solution.
Post-solution turns 1-6 illustrate a Socratic-style tactic
called a “directed line of reasoning” (Hume et al., 1996).
Alternatively, the tutor could have stated the contradiction
didactically, in the same manner as he summarized
Newton’s Second Law and its general, symbolic
representation in post-solution turn 7.

this paper—and others we identified—support conceptual
understanding and transfer, and whether similar effects
could be achieved through non-distributed interaction.
This research would provide valuable guidance for tutor
training and the design of effective automated tutors.

Conclusion

References

According to constructivist views of learning, learning
takes place through interactions between individuals and
their environment (e.g., Newman, Griffin & Cole, 1989).
Since interactions evolve over time, there has been
increasing interest in understanding the relationships
between instructional interactions, e.g.:
As a time-extended process, learning depends on the
relations that develop over time between aspects of
single interactions in situations. Therefore, the role of a
theory of time-extended processes of interaction is to
formalize the various ways that interactions relate to
one another over time in a course of interaction…
(Akhras & Self, 2000, p. 349)
In this paper, we proposed an approach to formally
specifying the intentional relationships that hold between
problem-solving and post-solution dialogues that
collectively attempt to achieve higher-level instructional
functions. At times, dialogue sub-goals are aligned in
patterns that we call “distributed tutorial strategies.”
Because tutors are rational beings, it is tempting to infer
that they consciously decide, during problem solving, to
parcel a lesson between problem solving and postsolution reflection. There is some evidence of deliberate
distribution in this corpus. For example, during a
problem-solving discussion, a tutor presaged a postsolution lesson as follows: “ok…let’s do it this
way...solve for the tension first and then I will ask you a
variation to show that the way you are thinking of it is not
good.” However, we believe that in most cases, reprises in
post-solution discussions are not pre-planned; they are
simply the result of the tutor seizing an opportunity to
extend a previous discussion. Further research is needed
to determine the degree to which distributed interactions
stem from deliberate planning, and to uncover the
constraints that determine which strategies tutors use in
particular contexts.
As Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, and Hausmann (2001)
have noted, descriptive studies of human tutoring need to
be followed up by outcome-based research—that is,
studies of the effectiveness of identified strategies and
tactics. Along these lines, further research is needed to
determine which of the distributed strategies described in

Akhras, F. N., & Self, J. A. (2000). System intelligence in
constructivist learning. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11, 344-376.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bloom, B. S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: the search for
methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one
tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13, 4-16.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., &
Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human
tutoring. Cognitive Science, 25, 471-533.
Cohen, P. A., Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C. L. C. (1982).
Educational outcomes of tutoring: a meta-analysis of
findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19,
237-248.
Gertner, A., & VanLehn, K. (2000). Andes: A coached
problem solving environment for physics. In Gauthier,
G., Frasson, C. & VanLehn, K. (Eds.), Intelligent
Tutoring Systems: 5th International Conference, ITS
2000. Berlin: Springer.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question asking
during tutoring.
American Educational Research
Journal, 31, 104-137.
Hume, G. D., Michael, J., Rovick, A., & Evens, M.
(1996). Hinting as a tactic in one-on-one tutoring.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(1), 23-47.
Katz, S., O’Donnell, G., & Kay, H. (2000). An approach
to analyzing the role and structure of reflective
dialogue. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
and Education, 11, 320-343.
Katz, S., Allbritton, D, & Connelly, J. (in press). Going
beyond the problem given: How human tutors use postsolution discussions to support transfer. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education,13.
McArthur, D., Stasz, C., & Zmuidzinas, M. (1990).
Tutoring techniques in algebra.
Cognition and
Instruction, 7(3), 197-244.
Merrill, D. C., Reiser, B. J., Raney, M., & Trafton, J. G.
(1992). Effective tutoring techniques: a comparison of
human tutors and intelligent tutoring systems. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(3), 277-306.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The
construction zone: Working for cognitive change in
school. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Office of
Naval Research (grant number N00014-97-1-0848). The
data and views expressed are not necessarily endorsed by
this agency.
The author thanks James Carlino and
Gabriel O’Donnell for their assistance and the anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments.

645

