UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effect of background knowledge on object categorization and generalization in preschool
children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vd4w61w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Gelaes, Sabine
Detiffe, Anne-Sophie
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effect of background knowledge on object categorization and generalization in
preschool children
Sabine Gelaes (sgelaes@ulg.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, 5 Boulevard du Rectorat
4000, Lige Belgium

Anne-Sophie Detiffe (AS.Detiffe@student.ulg.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, 5 Boulevard du Rectorat
4000, Lige Belgium

Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jpthibaut@ulg.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, 5 Boulevard du Rectorat
4000, Lige Belgium

Abstract
Lin and Murphy (1997) have studied how adults learn to
associate a new theory about an object with specific
perceptual features of the object. In the present experiment,
their paradigm was adapted for three- and four-year olds
who were compared with adults. The role of perceptual
similarity between the learning stimulus and transfer stimuli
was also assessed. Data show that children aged three were
able to understand the relationship between a new microtheory and perceptual data (the stimuli). However, their
generalization to new objects was more constrained by
perceptual similarity between the learning object and
transfer stimuli than adults generalization was.
Introduction
Categorization, a process by which people decides that an
instance belongs to a category, is usually thought as a
comparison between an instance and conceptual
representations. Several theories of conceptual
representations of categories have been developed such as
the classical view, the probabilistic approach or the
exemplar view (Rosch, 1978; Smith & Medin, 1981;
Nosofsky, 1992; Hampton, 1993; Lamberts & Shanks,
1997; Medin & Coley, 1998; Murphy, 2002). Typically,
these approaches assume that concepts are lists of
unconnected features, free of any influence from
background knowledge (Nakamura, 1985; Rips, 1989;
Murphy, 1993, 2002).
Theories and background knowledge can be defined as
beliefs about the relations between features (Keil, 1989;
Murphy, 1993). One important feature of theories is that
they allow the identification of relevant features (see also
Wisniewski and Medin, 1994). Theories also explain surface
similarities between members of the same category (Murphy
and Medin, 1985). They also provide coherence between the
dimensions that compose a stimulus (Keil, 1989).
Since the mid-eighties, the development of childrens
theories has been extensively studied. Most of these studies

focused on the content of childrens theories (Carey, 1985;
Keil, 1989; Wellman & Gelman, 1998, for reviews). On the
other hand, the role of theories in the acquisition of new
concepts, especially in young children has been less
investigated. Indeed, while there are numerous studies on
the interaction between nave theories and concept learning
in adults (see the impressive number of contributions by
Murphy and colleagues, Murphy, 2002), these studies
remain rare for children.
In the cognitive development arena, Barrett, Abdi,
Murphy and Gallagher (1993) have established the
importance of features associations related to a theory in
concepts definitions among children aged 6 to 9 years.
Items containing these associations elicited better
categorization and were judged as more typical. However,
this work has been completed with children aged 6 and
beyond, that is children who already have complex theories.
Moreover, the authors failed to find a significant difference
between the two groups, which suggests that the assessed
background knowledge was equally established in both
groups. By definition, this is not the best situation to study
the development of the interaction between theories and
stimuli. Krascum and Andrews (1998) have shown that 4and 5-year-old children could learn family-resemblance
concepts more easily when theories were available. In their
paradigm, authors capitalize on a priori nave theories
available in children, in this particular case theories about
aggressive and hiding animals. The experimenter explained
how a nave theory was related with perceptual features of
the animals (claws, etc.). It was shown that children who
had learned the relation categorized transfer items with only
one or two features of the learning items much better than
children in a condition in which each feature was mentioned
but had no function associated with it. Thus, in this
research, nave theories were available a priori, and transfer
stimuli were composed of a subset of the learning stimuli
features. Children had not to generalize to stimuli that
differed perceptually from the learning stimuli. More
recently, Carmichael and Hayes (2001) have found, with

444

children aged 4 to 10 years that theories and exposure to
exemplars work in conjunction during concept learning.
Here, participants were shown exemplars of fictitious
animal categories that were either unrelated or consistent
with their prior knowledge. When exemplars were
consistent with their theory, the theory was reinforced
whereas when the exemplars were not consistent with the
theory, participants revised it, especially in the case of older
children.
All the studies above suggest that a unifying theme
increases the speed of learning. It must be underlined that
most of these contributions are with six-year-old children
and beyond or compare four-year-olds with older children.
Furthermore, when the influence of theories was observed,
it was stronger with older children. However, it is important
to assess concept learning and its relationship with theories
in the case of younger children (lets say 3-to-4-year old
children) because they learn many concepts at this age and
children aged five or more have learned thousands of
concepts already. We need to know more about earlier steps
of concept learning when the conceptual system and
theories are less developed.
One reason for the small number of studies on concept
learning and theories with young children is that young
children are very poor in tasks that involve systematic
learning (Murphy, 2002): their use of new features is less
flexible, they cannot change their mind when the chosen
feature appears to be irrelevant for categorization, or they do
not take the experimenter feedback into account. In
experiments with adults, theories can easily be taught
verbally or can be assumed to belong to the participants
conceptual system. In the case of very young children,
teaching new theories verbally is difficult. For all these
reasons, one way to study the interactions between theories
and concept learning is to teach children a very simple
theory and implement it on a feature of an unfamiliar object
and see how they generalize this association to new objects.
In the experiment to be reported here, we rely on a situation
devised for adults by Lin and Murphy (1997). Our purpose
is to check whether young children will be able to learn the
theory and associate it with a particular feature of an object.
A second purpose is to manipulate the perceptual similarity
between the learning stimulus and transfer stimuli.
Lin and Murphy (1997) demonstrated with adults that
background knowledge influence learning and transfer of
concepts to new instances, i.e. conceptual generalization. In
their study, participants had to learn a new artificial object.
Half of them was given a specific interpretation of the
object (the object was described as a fertilizer and a specific
part was associated with this function) whereas the
remaining subjects received another interpretation (the
object was used for hunting and another part of the object
was associated with this function). Thus, both groups saw
the same learning exemplar but the crucial part in one
interpretation was different from the crucial one in the other
interpretation. Once participants had learned the object, they
were presented with three transfer items and had to decide
whether they belonged to the same category as the learned

object. They had also to rate typicality for objects that
elicited a positive response. One test item was consistent
with one interpretation of the object whereas a second one
was consistent with the other interpretation. A third test item
was inconsistent with both interpretations. Results showed
that background knowledge affect categorization and
typicality judgment. Participants gave four times more
positive responses to test items that retained the crucial part
consistent with the interpretation of the object they received
in the learning phase and rejected the inconsistent object. In
the present experiment, we compare adults (the Lin and
Murphys situation) with young preschool children.
Experiment
The goal of this experiment was to evaluate the effect of
background knowledge on object learning and
generalization in children. At each level of age, there were
two groups of participants; each group had to learn a
different interpretation of the same unfamiliar object. In one
condition, knowledge background emphasized the function
of one part of the object whereas in a second condition
another part was highlighted. In the transfer phase, the
influence of background knowledge was assessed through
transfer items that were transformations of the learning
phase stimulus. For example, the crucial part according to
one interpretation was kept in a transfer stimulus, while the
crucial part for the second interpretation was deleted,
whereas the reverse was true for a second transfer item.
Thus, these test items were consistent with one micro-theory
only. Background knowledge will influence performance
when participants who have learned one interpretation of the
object categorize the test item consistent with this
interpretation in the same category as the learning exemplar
and reject transfer items consistent with the other
interpretation of the learning phase stimulus. There were
also simplified test items, in which the crucial parts
associated with both micro-theories were deleted.
A second purpose of this experiment was to assess
whether young children would be able to generalize their
new theory to new stimuli that differed perceptually from
the learning phase stimulus. In other words, are young
children able to go beyond perceptual similarity (Jones and
Smith, 1993)? In these test items, the crucial part was
replaced by a part perceptually different but that could fulfill
the same function. If participants rely on knowledge to
make their categorical decisions, they should accept these
transformed objects as members of the same category as the
learning phase stimulus.

445

Methods
Participants Thirty children aged 3-to-4 (mean age = 3;6)
(i.e., group 1) and thirty children aged 4-to-5 (mean age =
4;5) (i.e., group 2), participated in this experiment. Informed
consent was obtained from their parents. Thirty students
from the University of Lige also participated in this study
as volunteers. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two interpretations, conditions A and B.
Materials Stimuli were created and transformed after those
designed by Lin and Murphy (1997). The learning exemplar
was a colored line drawing (i.e., old item). It was composed
of three parts, a pole, a loop at the end of the pole. The third
part was a sort of a container. The length of the stimuli was
more or less 12 centimeters. They were also colored in order
to make each stimulus more realistic (see Figure 1, first
cell). The object was called a puk, which is not a french
word.
The two conditions differed on the central feature they
highlighted. In the first condition (A), the important part of
the puk was the container. It was used for fishing. In
condition B, the crucial part was the loop supposed to be
used for closing shutters. Note that the crucial element in
condition A had no central role in condition B (the recipient
was useless for closing shutters), whereas the important part
in condition B had no role in condition A (one cannot catch
fishes with the fishes).

Learning/Old

Simplified

CA1

CA2

CB2

CAB1

CB1

CAB2
Figure 1: Type of test items.
Several test items were designed to assess whether
background knowledge influenced the way participants
interpreted the object (see Figure 1). The Old test item (Old)
was the learning object. Test items consistent with one
interpretation but not the other were constructed. CA1 and
CA2 were consistent with condition A but not condition B;
CB1 and CB2 were consistent with condition B but not
condition A. The difference between CA1 and CB1 on the

one hand and CA2 and CB2 on the other hand, was that for
the latter stimuli the crucial part had its shape completely
modified even though it could still fulfill the same function
as the corresponding part in the learning phase stimulus.
There were also test items consistent with either condition A
or condition B but one of the two important parts had its
shape modified even though its structure was the same as in
the learning item (CAB1): in one stimulus the container was
modified (Figure 1, CAB1 left) whereas in the other it was
the shape of the loop (CAB1 right). Two test items
consistent with conditions A and B were modified in such a
way that it was difficult to fulfill both functions (CAB2), in
one case because the pole was so short that it was useless
(or so) to catch something, in the other case because the
pole was replaced by a string (see CAB2). Last, a test item
was simplified with both conditions (S).
Procedure First, participants had to learn the function of the
novel object corresponding to the condition he belonged to
(A or B). The experimenter provided participants with a
description of the object that he illustrated with the picture
of the object. Participants in both conditions saw the same
puk. Additional pictures were used to explain the function
of the object to participants. In condition A (fish condition),
pictures showed how fishes were caught with the object,
whereas in condition B (shutter condition), pictures
illustrated the shutter use.
Participants in condition A learned that the exemplar was
an object used to catch fishes in a pool. The description was
as followed: Im going to show you an object that youve
never seen before. This object is called a puk and is used for
catching fishes in a pool. The puk is composed of a pole
with a loop on the top and a metal container on the bottom.
Im going to explain you how to use this puk. You put the
puk into water; then you bring the metal container near and
below a fish. You gently take back the puk until the fish is
caught in the container. Pictures were shown to implement
this description in a real situation.
Participants in condition B learned that the object was
used to close a shutter. They were provided with the
following description: Im going to show you an object
that youve never seen before. This object is called a puk
and is used to close shutter. The puk is composed of a pole
with a loop on the top and a metal container on the bottom.
Im going to explain you how to use a puk. You take the
puk and bring the loop round the shutter hook. You gently
take the puk back until the shutter reached the bottom of the
window. Again pictures were provided as a support. To be
sure that participants had correctly learned what was a puk,
they were asked to recall and explain its function to the
experimenter.
Note that in the Lin and Murphys description of the
object, each part had a function. However, in each of the
two interpretations of the object, one part was functionally
central whereas the other parts had a less central role. For
example, a less central part in one interpretation was used to
hang up the tool. In our case, each part was mentioned but
only the central part was given a function in the description.

446

This was done because, in preliminary experiments, we
noticed that, younger participants were completely lost and,
later, behaved either randomly or, on the other hand, in a
stereotyped way. In other words, interestingly, they failed to
integrate the description of the stimuli in a consistent way.
After the learning phase, the various test items shown in
Figure 1 were randomly presented to participants. For each
item, they had to decide whether it was a puk or not.

Results
Our first purpose was to see whether participants correctly
accepted the old stimulus while rejecting the simplified one,
especially children. It is a way to assess that children did not
answer randomly or produced too many errors. As shown by
Table 1, children, like adults, accepted the old stimulus and
rejected the simplified one correctly. In each condition,
comparisons of proportions revealed no significant
difference between the three groups for old and simplified
stimuli (p >.1).
A second purpose was to replicate Lin and Murphys
(1997) results. More precisely, participants in the fishing
condition had to categorize CA1 as a fishing device and
reject CB1 whereas participants in the shutter condition
had to categorize the test stimulus CB1 as a shutter device
and reject CA1.
One way to test this hypothesis is to compare the
proportion of positive categorizations for CA1 or CB1 with
the proportion of positive categorizations for old items.
When test items (CA1 and CB1) were congruent with their
theory (the fishing condition and the shutter condition,
respectively), we expected no difference between these
items and the old item. For example, in the fishing
condition, one expected no difference between the
proportion of positive categorizations for CA1 and the
proportion of positive categorizations for the old stimulus in
this condition. By contrast, when the test item was
inconsistent with a theory (e.g., CB1 with fishing) the
difference between the proportion of positive
categorizations for this item and the old item should be
significant. (Theoretically, while the proportion of positive
categorizations should be 100% for old items, it should also
be 100% for consistent test items and 0% for incongruent
test items.) For consistent test items, comparisons of
proportions revealed no significant difference between CA1
or CB1 and the corresponding proportion for the old
stimulus (p > .1). Comparisons of proportions were in the
opposite direction when CA1 or CB1 were not consistent
with the theory. CA1 or CB1 differed significantly from the
corresponding old item (p < .05), except for children aged
three, in the shutter condition, in which the difference did
not reach significance (p > .05).
A related way to investigate the effect of a theory is to
compare CA1 with CB1 for each age group. If participants
understood the relationship between each of the two target
parts and a theory, they should correctly accept the test item
consistent with a theory and reject the test item inconsistent
with the same theory. The results showed a reliable
difference between CA1 and CB1 stimuli for each group

and for both theories (p < .05), except for children aged 3 in
the shutter condition (p > .1).
We also compared CA1 with CA2 and CB1 with CB2.
Recall that for CA2 and CB2 the crucial part has been
transformed though they can still perform their function
(shut or fish). Comparisons of proportions showed that, for
children aged 3, there was a significant difference between
CA1 and CA2 in condition A (fishing), meaning that
children accepted CA2 less often than CA1 (p < .05). The
same was true for CB1 compared with CB2 in condition B
(shutter) (p < .05)(see Table 1). On the other hand, there
was no reliable difference these pairs of stimuli for children
aged 4 and adults (p > .1). As shown in Table 1, most older
children and adults correctly accepted consistent
transformations (though this is less clear for 4-year-olds in
the fish condition). Thus, for older children and adults
perceptually different parts that fulfill the same function are
members of the same category whereas this is much less the
case for younger children.
Old items were also compared with CAB1 and CAB2. For
the three groups, comparisons of proportions revealed no
significant difference between old items and CAB1 test
items in both conditions (p > .1). For children, comparisons
of proportions showed no significant difference between old
items and CAB2 (p > .1). For adults, the difference between
old items and CAB2 items reached significance in condition
B (fishing) (p < .05). Thus, for the three groups, a
transformation that did not affect the function of a part
(CAB1) had no impact on categorization. When the
transformation of the pole interfered with the object
function (CAB2: this is because, as seen in Figure 1, when
the pole is too short or is made of a non-rigid material, it
cannot fulfill (or less) its function, even though the crucial
part has not been transformed) there was a significant drop
of positive categorizations for adults and in the shut
condition only. In other words, both groups of children and
adults in the fish condition failed to reject CAB2 items
correctly
Table 1: Percentage of positive categorizations for each
type of test items.
Group
Condition
Old
Simplified
CA1
CB1
CA2
CB2
CAB1
CAB2

3-year-olds
Fish shut
100
93
0
20
93
67
20
73
50
17
20
33
83
83
93
93

4-year-olds
fish
shut
100
100
0
0
80
40
27
93
53
7
17
77
83
97
97
100

Adults
fish
shut
100
100
0
0
87
0
7
87
77
0
3
87
93
90
87
63

Discussion
Lin and Murphy (1997) showed that adults who had
learned the function of a specific part of a multicomponent
object (the learning phase stimulus) correctly generalized it
to objects displaying a part with the same function (CA1 or

447

CB1, depending on the theory) and rejected objects with
parts belonging to the training object but which could not
fulfill the same function (CA1 or CB1, depending on the
theory). We replicated this finding and, most importantly,
extended it to very young children. This means that children
were able to learn a micro-theory about an object and
implement it on a particular part of the object. Children
correctly rejected new items with parts of the original
stimulus that could not fulfill the function. In sum, children
and adults categorized transfer items according to the theory
they had learned. This result is important because it shows
that children can learn micro-theories and map them on
perceptual data.
The evidence that both adults and children generalize the
theories to new perceptual stimuli with the same function
rules out the explanation of the effect in terms of pure
perceptual similarity. As in Lin and Murphy, these
observations suggest that children could use the association
between a particular part and the theory about the object.
However, children differed from adults in important ways.
Even though they could learn which feature was related with
one of the two theories, they were more influenced by
perceptual similarity than adults. This is suggested by the
fact that 3-year-olds rejected less often items which were
not consistent with a theory (especially for CA1 in the
shutter condition) than other participants, and that they
generalized less often when the structure of the consistent
feature was transformed (i.e., CA2 and CB2). However,
young children were not influenced by small perceptual
transformations such as in CAB1. This means that they can
overcome small transformations consistent with the theory
whereas they interpret structural transformations as
instances of the same category less easily than adults.
It is also important to mention that they accepted more
CAB2 items than adults (especially with the shutter
interpretation). This suggests that children were less able to
see the relationship between the function of one part and
other features. For example, even though the pulling feature
is present, the object is difficult to use with this function if
the pole has been replaced by a rope.
There is a debate in the literature between authors who
posit a primacy of perceptual similarity over theories and
those who claim that children rely on theories from the very
beginning of their development (see Keil, Carter Smith,
Simons, Levin, (1998). In the first case, children are
supposed to process similarity first and use causal theories
later. First learning is perceptually driven, progressing to
forming abstract theories. The second group of authors
claims that similarity has to be constrained in some way by
general knowledge.
Our data suggest that this debate has to be thought in
terms of an interaction between these two sets of
information. Clearly children could learn to implement a
theory on a perceptual structure. Our data regarding CA1
and CB1 show that each micro-theory constrained the
interpretation of the perceptual information available. In
other words, the perceptual part of the learning item that
was highlighted depended on the background knowledge

associated with the learning item. In other words, a model
based on associative learning among properties would not
explain the data. Among others, it would not explain easily
how our brief 1-trial-exposition phase led to the focus on a
specific part we observed. However, perceptual data
influenced childrens categorizations more than adults
categorizations, as shown by the results obtained for CA2
and CB2 on the one hand and CAB1 on the other hand.
Our data call for a hybrid model of concept in which
similarity and rules are needed without reducing one to the
other (Keil et al., 1998), the important question being how
these two components interact. First, children understood
the theory and could implement it on perceptual data in the
same way as adults. Regarding this debate, the difference
between adults resides in the CA2, CB2, and the CAB2
items. The fact that children were less prone to generalize to
these items (CA2 and CB2) or reject them (CAB2) than
adults clearly shows that the perceptual structures that are a
good instantiation of a theory must be quite perceptually
similar to the original stimuli. This is probably because
probably because adults could rely on other pieces of
background knowledge (about fishing and pulling) so that
parts perceptually dissimilar could be evaluated in terms of
function within a more general theory. General theories in
adults also contributed to accept CA2 and CB2 objects.
In general, our data suggest that there is no opposition
between theory and perception (see Jones & Smith, 1993
and the debate raised by this paper). In fact, there is a subtle
dialogue between perceptual data and theories that evolves
during development. Both adults and children rely on
theories AND perceptual data. However, the difference
between these groups is in the generality of this connection
between theory and data. There is no qualitative difference
between children and adults in the construction of relations
between theories and data.
References
Barrett, S. E., Abdi H., Murphy, G. L., & Gallagher, J. M.
(1993). Theory-based correlations and their role in
children concepts, Child Development, 64, 1595-1616.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carmichael, C. A., & Hayes, B. K. (2001). Prior Knowledge
and exemplar encoding in childrens concept acquisition,
Child Development, 72, 1071-1090.
Gelman, R. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories, Cognitive Psychology,
20, 65-95.
Hampton, J. (1993). Prototype models of concept
representation. In I. Van Mechelen, J. Hampton, R.
Michalski, & P. Theuns (Eds.), Categories and concepts:
Theoretical views and inductive data analysis. New York:
Academic Press.
Jones, S. S., & Smith L. B. (1993). The place of perception
in childrens concepts, Cognitive Development, 8, 113139.

448

Keil, F. C. (1989). Concept, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keil, F.C., Carter Smith, W., Simons, D.J., Levin, D.T.
(1998). Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.
Krascum, R. M., & Andrews, S. S. (1998). The effect of
theories on childrens acquisition of family-resemblance
categories, Child Development, 69, 333-346.
Lamberts, K., & Shanks, D. R. (1997). Knowledge,
concepts, and categories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (1997). Effects of background
knowledge on object categorization and part detection,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 23, 1153-1169.
Medin, D. L., & Coley, J. D. (1998). Concepts and
categorization. In J. Hochberg, Perception and cognition
at centurys end: Handbook of perception and cognition .
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Murphy, G. L. (1993). Theories and concept formation. In I.
Van Mechelen, J. Hampton, R. Michalski, & P. Theuns
(Eds.), Categories and concepts: Theoretical views and
inductive data analysis. New York: Academic Press.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence, Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Nakamura, G. V. (1985). Knowledge-based classification of
ill-defined categories, Memory and Cognition, 13, 377384.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1992). Similarity scaling and cognitive
process models, Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 25-53.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou, & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Rosch E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch,
& B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and
Concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, R. (1998). Knowledge
acquisition in foundational domains. In W. Damon
(Edit.), Handbook of child psychology. New York: Wiley.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Medin, D. L. (1994). On the
interaction of theory and data in concept learning,
Cognitive Science, 18, 221-281.

449

