UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Event Reasoning as a Function of Working Memory Capacity and Long Term Working
Memory Skill

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rq8h7gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Jodlowski, Mark T.
Doane, Stephanie M.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Event Reasoning as a Function of
Working Memory Capacity and Long Term Working Memory Skill
Mark T. Jodlowski (mtj27@ra.msstate.edu)
Stephanie M. Doane, Ph.D. (sdoane@ra.msstate.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 6161
Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA

Abstract
The present research examined the relationship of working
memory (WM) capacity and long term working memory
(LTWM) skill in complex task performance as a function of
expertise. Individual differences in WM capacity and LTWM
skills of 62 aviation pilots (Expert = 25, Novice = 37) were
related to their performance on a task designed to measure
components of flight situation awareness (SA). LTWM skill
and WM capacity were not correlated, suggesting they are
distinct constructs. Experts have higher LTWM skill
compared to novices, and LTWM skill acts as a predictor of
Expert SA task performance. The implications of these results
are discussed.

There is currently a debate in the literature regarding the
explanation of individual differences in complex task
performance relative to WM capacity (e.g., Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974) and LTWM skill (e.g., Ericsson & Kintsch,
1995). The present research addresses this debate. Prior to
describing this research, a brief summary of the two theories
and the debate is provided.
Working memory (WM), defined as a limited, temporary
store for processing and storing information (Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974), has been studied extensively in various
cognitive tasks. Relevant to the present research, individual
differences in cognitive task performance are often
explained by WM capacity. For example, Just and
Carpenter (1992) proposed that WM capacity constrains text
comprehension. Once an individual’s WM capacity is
reached, the lack of available processing and storage hinders
the ability to use and retain new information as well as
intermediate products resulting from newly obtained
information, resulting in decreased comprehension. Further
research suggests a role of WM capacity in performing
additional cognitive tasks, such as spatial visualization
(Shah & Miyake, 1996), the ability to follow complex
directions (Engle, Carullo, & Collins, 1991), and computer
problem solving (e.g., Anderson & Jeffries, 1985; Doane,
McNamara, Kintsch, Polson, & Clawson; 1992, Doane,
Sohn, McNamara, & Adams, 2000; Sohn & Doane, 1997).
In this view, WM is thought to reside in short term memory
(STM); is believed to have a fixed capacity, although
individuals differ in their capacities; and an individual’s
WM capacity remains stable over time (e.g., Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974).
Alternatively, some researchers argue that WM capacity
is not fixed (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995) but instead varies as
a function of expertise within a specific domain. This theory

628

is referred to as Long Term Working Memory (Ericsson &
Kintsch).
LTWM is a theory of a memory process that explains
how individuals can extend WM capacity well beyond the
proposed seven plus or minus two chunks (Miller, 1956). In
LTWM theory, domain-specific knowledge and meaningful
experiences are thought to increase individual ability to
efficiently encode information into long term memory
(LTM) and to create easily accessible retrieval structures.
Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) defined a retrieval structure as
an organization of meaningful data into a stable structure
that can be used to rapidly encode information into and
retrieve information from LTM. LTWM uses these retrieval
structures as indices to situation-specific information that is
temporarily stored in LTM. Because the information is
temporarily stored in LTM, after a disruption, a task can still
be completed by activating the necessary indices required to
retrieve the situation-specific information. The indices
change dynamically as a function of the task at hand and the
individual’s expertise for that particular task.
In summary, the WM capacity and LTWM theories
differ in their views about whether WM capacity is fixed for
a given individual and how WM capacity responds to the
dynamics of task environments. In addition, at first glance
they appear to offer competing views of the mechanisms
that govern WM capacity and where they reside (STM or
LTM).
However, some evidence suggests that LTWM and WM
coexist, are independent constructs (Sohn & Doane, 2003),
and serve distinct roles in cognitive task performance. Sohn
and Doane devised a measure of LTWM skill, measured
individual WM capacity and LTWM skill, and related these
measures to performance on a complex cognitive task. They
found that WM capacity and LTWM skill were not
correlated, suggesting the two are independent constructs.
WM capacity predicted novice task performance, whereas
LTWM skill predicted expert task performance. In addition,
LTWM skill appeared to have a compensatory role for
experts with low WM capacity; experts with high LTWM
skill tended to have lower WM capacity.
The present study extends Sohn and Doane’s (2003)
research paradigm to further examine the roles of WM
capacity and LTWM skill in complex cognitive task
performance. Specifically, the relationships of WM capacity
and LTWM skill are related to aviation pilot performance on
a flight situation awareness (SA) task. SA is a term that can
be broadly defined as a pilot’s ability to understand his or

her current situation and anticipate future status (Endsley,
1995). SA has been cited as a leading cause in military
aviation mishaps involving human error (e.g., Hartel, Smith,
& Prince, 1991; Salas, Prince, Baker, & Shreshta, 1995).
Building SA is hypothesized to require both WM and
LTWM resources (Durso & Gronlund, 1999), and, as
previously mentioned, initial findings support this
hypothesis (Sohn & Doane).
To summarize, the purpose of this research is to examine
the relationship between WM capacity and LTWM skill in
complex task performance. Two different theories account
for performance differences. Capacity theory suggests that
WM is limited, fixed in size, and resides in STM. In
contrast, LTWM theory suggests that WM capacity is
unlimited, changes in size, resides in LTM, and is a function
of expertise.

Pilots were asked to remember the orientation of the
horizon line displayed on the attitude indicator and the
number below the attitude indicator (see Figure 1b). After
viewing all of the attitude indicators in sequence, pilots
were asked to keyboard in the number presented beneath the
first attitude indicator. They were then asked to indicate
their memory for the orientation of the horizon line in each
attitude indicator by selecting the square that indicated the
direction the horizon line was pointing towards (see Figure
1b). Although this does not seem to be an easy task to nonpilots, pilots have no difficulty completing this task. The
direction the horizon is pointed towards and the selected
square are shown in Figure 1b for the reader; they were not
shown in the experiment. Pilots first viewed a series of two
attitude indicators for five trials and progressed through a
series length of three and four, each containing five trials.

Method
Participants
Fifty-two U.S. Navy student and instructor pilots and 25
local pilots were recruited to participate in the experiment.
Each local pilot was paid $20 per hour for his/her
participation in the two-session (2.5-hour) experiment.
During the first session, pilot WM capacity and LTWM skill
were assessed. In the second session, pilots completed a task
designed to measure SA. Each of the three different tasks is
described in the subsequent sections.
In order to obtain information about piloting expertise,
each pilot completed a questionnaire before the experiment
began. Pilots were classified into different levels of
experience with a discriminant analysis based on
questionnaire data. As a result of the analysis, the pilots
were classified into two groups: expert (M = 2030 flight
hours, SD = 1235) and novice (M = 55 flight hours, SD =
60) groups contained 36 and 41 pilots, respectively. Eleven
of the expert pilots and 4 of the novice pilots’ data were not
used because of their failure to complete the SA task (i.e.,
skipping numerous trials).
WM Assessment. In order to assess individual WM
capacity, pilots completed an aviation-based WM capacity
assessment task. This task was developed as a combined
analog measure of both verbal WM (Daneman & Carpenter,
1980) and spatial WM (Shah & Miyake, 1996). In this task,
pilots viewed a series of attitude indicator displays
positioned in different flight orientations (see Figure 1a).
Each attitude indicator displayed one of 14 different
positions. The attitude indicators displayed an aircraft as
being pitched up or down with a bank angle of either 30, 60,
90, or 0 degrees to the left or right of straight and level
flight. In addition, a number between 15 and 33,
corresponding to common headings on the heading
indicator, appeared immediately below the attitude indicator
(see Figure 1a). The possible numbers were 15, 18, 21, 24,
27, 30, and 33. Each attitude indicator was presented for
2,200 ms. Upon presentation, pilots were asked to say aloud
whether the aircraft was pitched up or down.

629

LTWM Assessment. To assess LTWM skill, a domainspecific piloting task similar to chess experiments (e.g.,
Charness, 1976; de Groot, 1965) was developed. In this
task, pilots simultaneously viewed two cockpits for 40
seconds (see Figure 2a-b). One cockpit was displayed on the
top half of the screen, with the second cockpit displayed
directly below the first. After 40 seconds elapsed, the
computer presented a number and asked the pilot to count
backwards aloud by threes for 30 seconds, starting from the
presented number. For example, if the number presented
was 342, pilots should respond aloud: 339, 336, 333, 330,
327, and so on. After counting backwards by threes for 30
seconds, the computer prompted the pilots to recall the
situation-specific values displayed in either the top or the
bottom cockpit. Pilots did not know in advance which
cockpit they would be asked to recall. Pilots used a sheet of
paper containing the seven instruments with no values and a
pen to fill in the situation-specific values for each
instrument. No time limits were imposed on pilot recall of
the instrument values. When the pilots completed the first
trial, they pressed the “Return” key on the keyboard, and the
next trial was automatically presented.
In six of the trials, the two cockpits were related. That is,
the bottom cockpit represented the future state of the aircraft
5 to 10 seconds after applying one or two control
movements to the top cockpit (see Figure 2a). Three trials
consisted of two unrelated cockpits; both depicting
nonmeaningful flight configurations (see Figure 2b). For
example, the attitude indicator would display the aircraft

pitched up and banked to the right, whereas the turn
coordinator would display the aircraft as being banked to the
left. In addition, the vertical speed indicator might display
the aircraft as descending.
The LTWM task was designed to demonstrate the effect
of retrieval structures. Use of both meaningful and
nonmeaningful situations allowed us to differentiate
between retrieval originating from the use of LTWM
retrieval structures and retrieval originating from the use of
STM, respectively. Because WM capacity is thought to be
temporary and limited in size, counting backwards by three
from a given number requires processing and storage that
would use WM processes, thus WM capacity could not
account for pilot ability to recall cockpit information.
Furthermore, because there are an infinite number of cockpit
situations, it is difficult to argue that a specific situation is
retrieved as a pattern stored in LTM.
SA Task. In the SA task, each trial consisted of a series of
four screens that depicted a desired flight status, a current
flight situation (cockpit 1), questions about methods to
achieve the desired status (control movement selection), a
future flight situation intermediate to the desired status
(cockpit 2), and one of two types of inquiries about a change
in flight status. Figure 4 depicts the names of each screen
and a schematic of a trial. The present paper focuses on the
consistency judgment that takes place after viewing cockpit
2. The task required for response to the fourth screen of
each trial and the data from those trials will not be discussed
further. What follows is a detailed description of the task as
it relates to the first three screens of each trial.
The first screen contained text described as a desired
heading, altitude, and airspeed. It also depicted a flight
situation. Pilots were asked to assess the flight situation and
the desired flight status specified in the goal statement and
click “Next” when they felt they knew what flight control
movements would be required to reach the goal. For
example, Figure 4 shows an altitude of 3,530 feet and
airspeed of 95 knots. The goal is to get to an altitude of
3,430 feet and airspeed of 105 knots. To reach the goal, the
pilot would need to descend by moving the elevator
forward. Therefore, on the control movement selection
screen, the pilot would select “Forward pressure on
elevator.”
After selecting a control movement(s), pilots clicked
“Next” to view the third screen (cockpit 2). The third screen
depicted a future flight situation that resulted from the
application of one or two control movements to the starting
situation (cockpit 1). Cockpit 2 was not affected by the
pilots’ control movement selection. The pilots’ task was to
determine if cockpit 2 accurately depicted a flight situation
that would reach the goal described in the first screen
(cockpit 1) within the next 5 to 10 seconds of mentally
simulated flight. Pilots pressed the keyboard key labeled
“C” if the flight situation was consistent with obtaining the
goal in the next 5 to 10 seconds. If the situation was
inconsistent with obtaining the goal within the next 5 to 10

630

seconds, they pressed the key labeled “I.” Referring again to
cockpit 2 in Figure 4, it appears that the control movement
applied to cockpit 1 was “Forward pressure on elevator”
(the attitude indicator and VSI indicate that the plane is
flying level in cockpit 1 and descending in cockpit 2). The
pilot should indicate that cockpit 2 is consistent with
obtaining the goal within the next 5 to 10 seconds of
simulated flight by pushing key labeled “C” on the
keyboard.

second delay, in which pilots had to process and store
information in WM.

Results
WM and Expertise
Individual WM span was scored using a modification of
Daneman and Carpenter’s (1980) reading span measures.
WM capacity scores for novices (M = 2.05, SD = 0.89) and
experts (M = 2.14, SD = 0.99) did not differ as a function of
expertise, F(1, 61) = 0.13, p < .72. This is consistent with
the capacity theory view that individual differences in the
amount of resources available to process and store
information in WM are independent of acquired skills.

Predicting Performance

LTWM and Expertise
The difference between the recall accuracy scores for
meaningful and nonmeaningful flight situations for the
delayed recall task was used to measure LTWM skill. Recall
that this difference allows us to differentiate between
retrieval originating from STM (nonmeaningful) and that
originating from LTWM (meaningful). We obtained the
expected expertise effects. Expert accuracy for meaningful
situations (M = 0.68, SD = 0.10) was greater than novice
accuracy (M = 0.61, SD = 0.12), F(1, 61) = 5.95, p < .02.
For the nonmeaningful trials, expert accuracy (M = 0.34, SD
= 0.13) was not statistically different from novice accuracy
(M = 0.40, SD = 0.12), F(1, 61) = 3.30, p < .07. As
expected, mean LTWM scores for experts (M = 0.34, SD =
0.09) were greater than for novices (M = 0.21, SD = 0.12),
F(1, 61) = 19.63, p < .01, suggesting that expert pilots are
better able to create retrieval structures. One interpretation
of these results is that expert pilots create retrieval structures
that enable rapid access to LTM, which in turn enables them
to recreate the situation. This result was obtained after a 30-

631

Mean accuracy of consistency judgments served as a
measure of performance. Signal detection theory (Green &
Swets, 1966) was used to calculate observer sensitivity (d').
Correct judgments for consistent trials and incorrect
judgments for inconsistent trials represented hits and false
alarms, respectively. Overall, there were no significant
differences in observer sensitivity as a function of expertise
F(1, 61) = 0.18, p < .68. However, there were differences in
performance as a function of expertise. As can be seen in
Figure 5, when expert pilots chose the correct controls
(control movement selection), their consistency judgment

Figure 5. Accuracy of consistency judgments based on
selecting the correct versus incorrect controls as a
function of expertise.

Figure 6. Relation of LTWM skill to d' as a function of
expertise.
Table 1. Results of hierarchical regression analyses
predicting novice and expert pilot performance.

General Discussion
The present research contributes to understanding the
role of WM capacity and LTWM skill in complex task
performance. What follows is a discussion of how our
findings support WM capacity and LTWM skill as
distinct cognitive constructs and the implications of our
findings.

accuracy increased compared to when they chose the
incorrect controls. This was not true for novices, as
evidenced by a significant expertise x performance
interaction as a function of control selection accuracy F(1,
60) = 6.59, p < .02. We state these findings to justify the
analyses of WM capacity, LTWM skill, and SA
performance as a function of expertise.
The focus of the present paper is to highlight the role
of WM capacity and LTWM skill in predicting complex
task performance. To test this, hierarchical regression
analyses tested whether LTWM skill, WM capacity, or
both predicted performance on the flight consistency
judgment. The analyses were conducted in three steps:
LTWM skill was entered in the first step; WM capacity
was entered in the second step; and the cross-product was
entered in the third step. Hierarchical regression analyses
examine the effect of one variable, while controlling for
the effects of remaining variables (Cohen & Cohen,
1983).
The results of the hierarchical regression analyses for
LTWM skill, WM capacity, and their interaction for
predicting pilot accuracy on flight change consistency
judgments are summarized in Table 1. Looking at the
table, it appears that LTWM skill is a performance
predictor for experts [Inc. R2 = 0.15, B = 2.27; F change
(1, 23) = 5.35, p < .03]. As can be seen in Figure 6, as
LTWM skill increases for experts, d' increases as well.
This effect was not observed in novice pilots [Inc. R2 =
0.01, B = -0.72; F change (1,35) = 1.43, p < .24].
Previous research has implicated WM capacity as a
predictor of complex task performance for novices. This
result was not replicated and is left unexplained.
However, one hypothesis is that the present task involved
extensive processing and storage, resulting in a WM
capacity overload for all individuals.

WM Capacity and LTWM Skill
There is a clear theoretical difference between how
WM capacity and LTWM skill account for human
performance differences. Capacity theory postulates that
performance is based on the ability to actively maintain
presented information (e.g., Daneman & Carpenter, 1980;
Just & Carpenter, 1992; Shah & Miyake, 1996). The
information is temporarily stored in STM. In addition,
capacities are fixed and stable within an individual but
differ between individuals. In contrast, LTWM theory
suggests that performance differences are a function of
the ability to temporarily and efficiently store information
in and retrieve information from LTM (Ericsson &
Kintsch, 1995). The ability to store and access
information quickly results in a flexible WM capacity that
changes as a function of expertise.
Previous research has indicated that WM capacity and
LTWM skill are distinct constructs in an experimental
task (e.g., Sohn & Doane, 2003) and our results support
this finding. If individual differences in LTWM skill
reflected differences in WM capacity or vice versa, a high
correlation between LTWM skill and WM capacity
measures would be expected. Correlations between WM
capacity and LTWM skill were weak and unreliable.
Thus, the present results provide further evidence that
WM capacity and LTWM skill coexist.
Further support of WM capacity and LTWM skill as
distinct constructs was seen in the findings from the
LTWM task. Expert pilots outperformed novices in
meaningful situation re-creation. However, novice and

632

expert pilot nonmeaningful situation re-creation were
equivalent. This is consistent with the hypothesis that
expert pilots can create and use retrieval structures (a
function of LTWM).
It could be argued that the expert pilots were better
able to chunk the instrument values. However, it is
believed that STM is time sensitive (e.g., Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974). Therefore, it is likely that the processing
and storage (counting backward by three) would replace
the contents of STM. It could also be argued that the
recall of the meaningful situation is a result of activating
specific patterns stored in LTM. However, because there
are an infinite number of situations possible, it is unlikely
that a pattern with specific values would reside in LTM.
One final piece of evidence suggesting that WM and
LTWM coexist as distinct constructs comes from the
hierarchical regression analyses. LTWM skill predicted
complex task performance for expert pilots. This was an
expected finding. If pilots have the ability to use retrieval
structures to re-create situations, it is reasonable to
assume that they can use retrieval structures to enhance
performance. No additional predictors were found. If WM
capacity was a function of LTWM, WM capacity would
be expected to be a predictor of complex task
performance.
In conclusion, this study provides further evidence of
the roles WM capacity and LTWM skills serve in
supporting complex cognitive task performance.

Durso, F. T., & Gronlund, S. D. (1999). Situation
awareness. In F. T. Durso, R. Nickerson, R.
Schvaneeldt, S. Dumais, S. Lindsay, & M. Chi (Eds.),
The handbook of applied cognition, (pp. 283-314).
New York: Wiley.
Endsley, M. R. (1995). Toward a theory of situation
awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors, 37(1),
32-64.
Engle, R. W., Carullo, J. J., & Collins, K. W. (1991).
Individual differences in working memory for
comprehension and following directions. Journal of
Educational Research, 84, 253-262.
Ericsson, K. A. & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term
working memory. Psychological Review, 102(2), 211243.
Green, D. L., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection
theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Hartel, C. E. J., Smith, K., & Prince, C. (1991). Defining
air crew coordination: Searching mishaps for
meaning. Paper presented at the Sixth International
Symposium on Aviation Psychology, Columbus, OH.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory
of comprehension: Individual differences in working
memory. Psychological Review, 99, 122-149.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Salas, E., Prince, C., Baker, D. P. & Shreshta, L. (1995).
Situation Awareness in team performance:
Implications for measurement and training. Human
Factors, 37(1), 123-136.
Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (1996). The separability of
working memory resources for spatial thinking and
language processing: An individual differences
approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 125(1), 4-27.
Sohn, Y. W., & Doane, S. M. (1997). Cognitive
constraints on computer solving skills. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3, 288-312.
Sohn, Y. W., & Doane, S. M. (2003). Role of working
memory capacity and long term working memory skill
in complex task performance. Memory & Cognition,
31(3), 458-466.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Jeffries, R. (1985). Novice LISP
errors: Undetected losses of information from working
memory. Human-Computer Interaction, 1, 133-161.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory.
In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 8, pp. 47-89). New York: Academic
Press.
Charness, N. (1976). Memory for chess positions:
Resistance to interference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2, 641653.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral
sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.
de Groot, A. D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess. The
Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Doane, S. M., McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, W., Polson, P.,
& Clawson, D. M. (1992). Prompt comprehension in
UNIX command production. Memory & Cognition,
20, 327-43.
Doane, S. M., Sohn, Y. W., McNamara, D. S., & Adams,
D. (2000). Comprehension based skill acquisition.
Cognitive Science, 24, 1-52.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the
Office of Naval Research (ONR) #N000140210898. The
authors wish to thank ONR Program Manager Dr. Tanja
Blackstone for her support of this effort. The authors also
wish to thank LTjg. Phil Fatolitis, USN of Navy
Submarine Medical Research Lab for his data collection
effort and Mr. Tommy Sledge of Delta State University
for his pilot recruitment efforts.

633

