UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explaining Color Term Typology as the Product of Cultural Evolution using a Bayesian
Multi-agent Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46w2s0gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Dowman, MIke

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explaining Color Term Typology as the Product of
Cultural Evolution using a Bayesian Multi-agent Model
Mike Dowman (Mike@it.usyd.edu.au)
School of Information Technologies, F09, University of Sydney,
NSW2006 AUSTRALIA

Abstract
An expression-induction model was used to simulate the
evolution of basic color terms in order to test Berlin and
Kay’s (1969) hypothesis that the typological patterns
observed in basic color term systems are produced by a
process of cultural evolution under the influence of universal
aspects of human neurophysiology. Ten agents were
simulated, each of which could learn color term denotations
by generalizing from examples using Bayesian inference.
Conversations between these agents, in which agents would
learn from one-another, were simulated over several
generations, and the languages emerging at the end of each
simulation were investigated. The proportion of color terms
of each type correlated closely with the equivalent
frequencies found in the world color survey, and most of the
emergent languages could be placed on one of the
evolutionary trajectories proposed by Kay and Maffi (1999).
The simulation therefore demonstrates how typological
patterns can emerge as a result of learning biases acting over
a period of time.

Introduction
This paper describes computational modeling experiments
performed to explain the typological patterns observed in
the color term systems of human languages. Color terms are
simply words which are used to denote the property of
color, and in most languages, a special subset of such words
can be identified, which Berlin and Kay (1969) named basic
color terms. Berlin and Kay listed a number of criteria
which they used to distinguish basic color terms from other
words used to denote color. They considered color terms to
be basic only if they were known by all speakers of the
language and were highly salient psychologically, and if
they did not just name a subset of the colors denoted by
another color word and their meanings were not predictable
from the meanings of their component parts. Application of
these criteria seems to distinguish clearly between basic and
non-basic color terms in most languages, although there can
still remain some questionable cases. English has 11 basic
color words, red, yellow, green, blue, orange, purple, pink,
brown, grey, black and white. Terms such as crimson,
blonde and royal blue are not considered to be basic.
white
black

red

green
yellow

Basic color terms have prototype properties (Taylor,
1989) as there is usually a single color, the prototype, which
speakers of the language consider to be the best example of
the color term. Colors become increasingly less good
examples of the color category as they become more
dissimilar to the prototype, and the category boundaries are
fuzzy, as speakers are unsure about the exact range of colors
denoted by each color term.
There has been a considerable amount of research into the
properties of basic color terms cross-linguistically. Perhaps
the most important study was that of Berlin and Kay (1969).
They examined a sample of 98 languages, and found that
there was very wide variation between the color terms of
different languages, in that the actual ranges of color
denoted by each term differed between languages. However,
they found that this variation was certainly not completely
random. While the number of color terms varied between
languages, which combination of color terms existed in any
given language seemed to be at least partly predictable.
Berlin and Kay found that all languages have between 2
and 11 basic color terms. For 20 of the languages in their
study, they asked informants to map both the outer
boundary of each of the basic color terms on an array of
Munsell color chips, and to identify the best or most typical
example (the prototype) of each term. They discovered that
the boundaries of the areas of color denoted by color terms
varied greatly between languages, but that the locations of
the prototypes of most basic color terms were clustered in a
few parts of the color space.
A further finding emerged when Berlin and Kay
investigated the combination of color terms existing in any
particular language. They produced the implicational
hierarchy shown in Figure 1 to explain the regularities
which they found. All languages appeared to have terms
with their prototypes at black and white, but some languages
had no other basic color terms. However, if a language had a
term for any of the colors further right in the hierarchy, it
always had terms for all the colors appearing to the left of
that point.
Berlin and Kay proposed that this hierarchy described the
general patterns seen in color term systems crosslinguistically, but they did acknowledge the existence of

blue

brown

Figure 1. Berlin and Kay’s Implicational Hierarchy.

360

purple
pink
orange
grey

some exceptional languages which could not be placed on
the hierarchy. Since Berlin and Kay published their original
study, there has been a great deal of interest in basic color
terms, and much more data has been collected. These
studies have in large part confirmed Berlin and Kay’s
original findings, though several modifications have been
made to the hierarchy to accommodate languages of types
which were not attested in the original study.
A very large survey of the color term systems of 110
minor languages, the World Color Survey (Kay, Berlin, and
Merrifield, 1991), has now produced a wealth of high
quality data allowing a much more complete picture of color
term systems worldwide to be obtained. Using this new
data, Kay and Maffi (1999) produced a new classification of
color term systems, which has modified the original
hierarchy of Berlin and Kay (1969) considerably, but which
still shows that the attested color term systems are only a
small subset of those which are logically possible.
There appear to be six fundamental colors, corresponding
to the colors which are usually the prototypes of red, yellow,
green, blue, black and white color terms. The order of
emergence of terms containing these fundamental colors is
fairly predictable, but the order of emergence of other basic
color terms, such as purple and orange terms, is less
predictable. Kay and Maffi’s (1999) classification of color
term systems was made by considering only terms whose
denotation included at least one of the fundamental colors,
but Kay, Berlin and Merrifield (1991) noted that purple and
brown terms tend to emerge before orange or pink ones.
Kay and Maffi (1999) found that 83% of the languages in
the World Color Survey lie somewhere along the trajectory
shown in Figure 2, which represents a progression in which
languages evolve from a state in which they contain only
two basic color terms, to states in which each of the
fundamental colors is represented by a different basic color
term. Kay and Maffi also proposed side branches to the
main trajectory in order to accommodate some less common
language types, such as those containing yellow-green-blue,
yellow-green or black-blue composites. There were four
languages which Kay and Maffi were unable to place
anywhere on their trajectories, and which were simply
classed as exceptions. This paper attempts to address the
issue of what causes these typological patterns, by relating
them to fundamental properties of the human visual system.
white-red-yellow
white +
white +
white +
white +

+

red-yellow

black-green-blue
+

red-yellow +
red +

red +

black

yellow
yellow

black-green-blue

+
+

+

green-blue

black
black

+
+

A Bayesian Model of Color Term Acquisition

green-blue
green

+

However, this proposal appears to be too restrictive, because
it implies a limited set of universal color categories, while
the empirical evidence shows that the boundaries of color
term denotations are quite variable, and that it is only the
prototypes of color terms that are consistent across
languages.
Four special red, yellow, green and blue hues have also
been identified by psychological evidence, and they are
termed unique hues, because they can’t be described as
blends of other colors. Heider (1971) showed that children
are more likely to pick unique hues rather than other colors
out of selections of color chips, and so she proposed that
unique hues are especially salient. In Heider (1972) she
showed that people are best able to pick out a previously
seen color from an array of color chips when that color is a
unique hue, which suggested that unique hues can be
remembered more easily than other colors. We should note
that Heider did not distinguish between the four unique hues
and the colors which formed the prototypes of color terms
such as purple and orange, but a large amount of other
evidence points to the special status of unique hues. Also
Kay and Maffi (1999) have questioned whether the unique
hues apparent from the linguistic and psychological studies
really correspond to those found using neurophysiological
techniques. However, the consensus of opinion seems to be
that the four unique hues have a special psychological
status, regardless of its cause.
The computer model described in this paper is a kind of
expression-induction model. These models, the first of
which was described in Hurford (1987), aim to simulate
cultural evolution of language, usually over a number of
generations. They contain several agents, each of which is
capable both of learning some aspect of language, and also
using the language which they have learned to express
themselves, hence creating example utterances from which
other agents can learn. Usually expression-induction models
are run several times, so that the general properties of the
languages which emerge in them can be observed. If all the
emergent languages have a particular property which is also
a universal in real languages, or if the emergent languages
show a limited range of variation, reflecting typological
patterns, then the model can be said to explain why these
universals or typological patterns exist. Expressioninduction models have been developed to account for a wide
range of linguistic phenomenon. Belpaeme (2002) used such
a model to simulate color term evolution, but his model did
not account for typological patterns.

blue

Figure 2. The Main Line of the Evolutionary Trajectory.
De Valois and Jacobs (1968) showed that Macaque
monkeys had four kinds of opponent cells, each of which
responded maximally in the presence of light of a particular
red, yellow, green or blue hue. Kay and McDaniel (1978)
proposed that the output of the opponent cells would map
directly to fuzzy set membership in color term categories.

361

The acquisitional part of the expression induction model of
color term evolution learns the denotations of color words,
but it learns in a similar way to a concept learning program
developed by Tenenbaum (1999). In order to create the
acquisitional model it was necessary to make a number of
assumptions about how children learn color words. It was
assumed that, before people begin to learn the meanings of
color terms, they must have some sort of conceptual color
space. We experience color as having a three-dimensional
structure, where the three dimensions are hue, saturation
and lightness. The Bayesian model is at present concerned

only with the dimension of hue, which is a circular
dimension, as shown in Figure 3. This simplification, which
is the primary limitation of the model, means that it is not
possible to account for the meanings of some color terms,
such as black or white, but the acquisition of red, orange,
yellow, green, blue and purple terms can still be modeled.
red
orange
purple

yellow

a learner’s belief concerning the probability that each
individual example is correct.
The model learns using Bayes’ rule, given in (1). Each
word is learned separately from all the others, and so the
data, d, will consist of all the observed example colors for
one color word, and the hypothesis, h, will correspond to the
range of color which the word denotes. Hypotheses can vary
in size from taking up one unit of the color space, to
including the whole of the color space, and can correspond
to any contiguous range of colors. It is proposed that
children will consider all such hypotheses to be equally
likely a priori, so that the model has no inbuilt bias to prefer
color terms corresponding to one part of the color space as
opposed to any another, and so the term P(h) will have the
same value for all hypotheses.

blue

(1) P ( h | d ) =

green
Figure 3. The Conceptual Color Space.
Another assumption is that the unique hues are not evenly
spaced in the color space. The color space was divided into
40 discrete colors, and so each individual color could be
indexed with a number between 1 and 40. Using this
coordinate system, the red unique hue point was placed at
hue 7, yellow at 19, green at 26, and blue at 30, so that the
largest distance between adjacent unique hue points is 17
units between blue and red, and the smallest is just 4 units
between green and blue.
The motivation for placing the unique hues at these points
is primarily that it results in an explanation of the
typological patterns, as will be shown below. MacLaury
(1997) reported that there is some evidence to suggest that
the green and blue unique hues are in some way closer than
any of the other hues are to each other, but there is no clear
objective way to measure distances in the conceptual color
space, and so we could obtain different conceptual distances
depending on what method was used to measure them.
The special salience and memorability of the unique hues
was simulated by associating with each color a probability
corresponding to how likely a person was to remember an
example of it. These values will be written Rc, and were set
at 0.05 for colors which did not correspond to unique hue
points, and at 1 for unique hues, so that it was 20 times as
likely that examples of unique hues would be remembered
as examples of other colors.
The next issue to be considered is what data is available
from which people can learn color words. Children are
typically not taught the full range of the denotations of each
word they know explicitly, in terms of exactly what it can
and cannot be used to denote, and so they must learn the
meanings of color words primarily by observing what colors
other people use those words to refer to. Hence the data
from which the model learns consists of examples of colors
which a color term can denote. Learning then involves
generalizing from those examples to the full range of colors
which come within the word’s denotation. Because it is
possible that some examples could be erroneous, a
parameter, p, was added to the model, which corresponds to

362

P (d | h ) P (h )
P(d )

The probability of the data with respect to a hypothesis,
P(d | h), will depend on how accurately the hypothesis
predicts the observed examples. If an example is accurate,
then it must appear within the range of the hypothesis. If
that is all we know about an example, then it’s equally
likely for that example to have been observed on any of the
colors with the range of the hypothesis1, assuming that the
hypothesis is correct. However, because some examples will
be forgotten, the proportion of examples which we would
expect to have remembered for each particular color would
be equal to the probability of remembering examples of that
color, divided by the sum of the probabilities of
remembering examples on all the colors within the range of
the hypothesis, which will be written as Rh. This ratio,
which is given in (2), would correspond to the probability of
an example, when that example was within the range of the
hypothesis, and when we knew both that the hypothesis was
correct, and that the example was accurate.
(2)

Rc
Rh

Erroneous examples are equally likely to be observed
anywhere in the color space, and so the probability of an
erroneous example being remembered at any particular
color, is equal to the probability of remembering an example
if it occurs at that color, divided by the sum of the
probabilities of remembering examples of all colors
throughout the color space (Rt). This ratio is expressed in
(3).
(3)

Rc
Rt

(2) and (3) apply when we know whether an example is
accurate or not, but in reality, when a person has
remembered an example they won’t be sure whether it is
accurate. If we see an example outside of the hypothesis
space, we know that it must be inaccurate. Because the
probability that an example is accurate is p, the probability
1

This assumes that people are equally likely to observe
examples of colors anywhere in the color space.

that it is not accurate is (1-p). Hence the overall probability
of an example, e, which comes outside of the range of a
hypothesis, is given by multiplying (3) by this value, as
shown in (4).
(4) P (e | h) =

(1 − p ) Rc
Rt

If an example is within the scope of the hypothesis then
we can’t be sure whether it is accurate or not (because it
could have come within the range of the hypothesis simply
by chance). So, in the case of such an example, we have to
add its probability assuming that it is accurate, to what its
probability would be if it was erroneous, each of which
must be weighted by the probability of examples being
accurate (p), or inaccurate (1-p). The resulting overall
probability of such examples is given by (5).
(5) P (e | h) =

pRc (1 − p) Rc
+
Rh
Rt

Equations (4) and (5) allow us to calculate the
probabilities of individual examples with respect to a
hypothesis, but usually we will have several examples for a
particular color word, so we need to combine these
individual probabilities to obtain an overall probability for
all the data. This can be done simply by multiplying
together the probabilities of each individual example, e,
from the set of all examples, E, as shown in (6). For every
example we must use either equation (4) or (5) to calculate
P(e | h), depending on whether or not the example is within
the scope of the hypothesis.
(6) P ( d | h) =

∏ P (e | h )
e∈E

In order to determine hypotheses' a posteriori
probabilities, we also need to be able to calculate the
probability of the data irrespective of any particular
hypothesis, P(d). We can calculate this probability by
multiplying the probability of the data given each individual
hypothesis by the a priori probability of the hypothesis, and
then totaling the resulting probabilities for each hypothesis
in the set of all possible hypotheses, H. This is expressed
mathematically in (7).
(7) P ( d ) =
h∈H

[P(h) P(d | h)]

If we substitute (7) into Bayes’ rule, we obtain equation
(8), which we can simplify by canceling out the constant
terms P(h) and P(hi ). (The h’s of equation (7) now have a
subscript i to distinguish them from the specific hypothesis
under consideration, h. However, as the a priori probability
of all hypotheses is equal, each P(hi ) will be equal to P(h).)
(8) P ( h | d ) =


P ( h) P ( d | h)
=
[P(hi ) P(d | hi )]

hi ∈H



P ( d | h)
P (d | hi )

hi ∈H

Equation (8) lets us calculate the probability of individual
hypotheses corresponding to possible denotations of the
color word. However, if we use the standard Bayesian
procedure of hypothesis averaging, it is possible to calculate
how likely it is that any particular color can be denoted by
the color word. We can do this by calculating the a

363

posteriori probability of each hypothesis which includes the
color within its range, and adding together all these
probabilities. This will determine the overall probability that
the color comes within the denotation of the color word. If
such values are calculated for all colors, then we can derive
a fuzzy set by equating the probabilities with degree of
membership in the set.
The ability of the model to learn color term systems was
investigated by presenting it with examples corresponding
to the color term system of Urdu, and the learned color term
system is shown in Figure 4. Example colors were generated
based on the denotations of Urdu color terms shown on a
chart in Berlin and Kay (1969), and these examples were
passed to the model until it had remembered 40 of them.
Each of the color terms which contains a unique hue point
has that point as its prototype, and the degree of
membership declines gradually moving away from this
point, which is consistent with empirical findings. This
shows that the model is able to learn the color term system
of a real language, but it does not explain the typological
data, because color term systems of unattested types could
also be learned by the model.
1

Nila

0.8

Hara

0.6

Banafshai

0.4

Lal

0.2

Pila

0
Hue (red at left to purple at right)

Unique
Hues

Figure 4. Learned Denotations for Urdu Color Terms.
(Y-axis shows degree of membership in color category.)

Simulating Color Term Evolution
In order to simulate a whole community of people, ten
copies of the acquisitional model were created, each of
which acted as an agent. Conversations between the agents
were simulated over several generations, and at the
conclusion of these simulations the emergent languages
were analyzed to determine whether they reproduced the
typological patterns identified by Kay and Maffi (1999).
In the initial state of the model, each agent had observed a
different color term together with one completely random
example of it, and each agent was assigned a random age
between zero and the maximum age which agents could live
to. The simulations proceeded by first selecting one agent at
random to speak, and another to hear. A color for the
speaker to name would then be chosen. The color would be
randomly selected, but each unique hue was chosen 20
times more often than each of the other colors. The speaker
would then find the word which they thought most likely to
be the correct label for the color, based on all the color
examples which it had observed up to that point. This word,

Mean number of basic colour
terms in emergent languages

together with the corresponding color, would then be
observed by the hearer and remembered by it as an example.
One time in every thousand, instead of the speaker choosing
the best word based on the observations they had made, it
would be creative instead, and make up a new word.
A parameter in the model controlled how long each agent
lived for, measured in terms of how many times an agent
would speak during its lifetime. The actual life span of each
agent was varied randomly by an amount of up to 20%
either above or below the chosen average life span. Once an
agent reached the end of its life span it would be replaced by
a new agent which had not observed any color term
examples. (If an agent was chosen as the speaker before it
had observed any color terms, then the program would just
go back and choose another agent instead.)
These simulations were repeated 425 times, with the
average lifespan set variously at 18, 20, 22, 24, 25, 27, 30,
35, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110 or 120, with 25 separate
simulations being made in each condition. The simulations
were all run for a time equal to twenty average life-spans,
and the results reported below are based on the languages
spoken by the agents at the end of the simulations.
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
0

50

100

Num ber of colour exam ples
rem em bered during an average lifetim e

Figure 5. Number of Color Terms in Emergent Languages.
In order to analyze the results it was necessary to develop
some procedures for classifying the languages emerging in
the simulations. Throughout all the analyses, only agents
whose age was greater than or equal to half the average
lifespan were included, and only color terms for which they
had observed at least 4 examples were considered. Using
these criteria, the mean number of color words spoken by
agents for each setting of the life expectancy parameter, was
calculated, and these means are plotted in Figure 5. There is
a clear positive correlation between how often agents used
color terms and the number of color terms in their language.
This effect is not because more color terms allowed the
agents to communicate more accurately, as the agents were
not rewarded for successful communication. This suggests
that languages with large numbers of color terms may have
so many color terms simply because the people who speak
those languages frequently talk about color, rather than
because of any functional benefit arising from a larger color
vocabulary.

364

In order to investigate whether the typological patterns
identified by Kay and Maffi (1999) were replicated in the
simulations, it was necessary to classify each language in
terms of which kinds of basic color terms it contained. For
every hue, the color term which the agent would use to
name that hue was found, and the denotation of each color
term was then considered to be the smallest range of colors
which included all those hues which that term would name.
(This could potentially include some hues which would be
named by a different color term, because there might be
another term which had greater confidence values for some
of the hues within the range of hues named by the first
term.) Color terms were classified as red, yellow, green or
blue if their denotations included the corresponding unique
hue. Terms whose denotations didn’t include any unique
hue points were classified as orange, lime, turquoise or
purple, depending on which unique hue points their
denotations came between. If a color term included more
than one unique hue point it would be classified as a
composite of those unique hue points, for example redyellow or yellow-green-blue.
The next stage of the analysis consisted of determining
which color terms the language spoken by each community
as whole could be said to contain. This was not
straightforward because, like with real color term systems
(MacLaury, 1997), the agents did not agree exactly on the
denotation of each word, and nor did they necessarily use
identical sets of color words. A color term was included in
the analysis only if at least half the agents had observed at
least four examples of it. If all the agents did not agree on
the classification of a term, then that classification which
was supported by the greatest number of people would be
chosen. If two or more possible classifications were
supported by equal numbers of people, then if one of the
terms contained fewer unique hue points it would be chosen,
but otherwise the whole language would be excluded from
the analysis. Agents who had not observed at least four
examples of two or more color terms were also not
considered. After the application of all these criteria, a
unique classification was obtained for the languages
emerging in 420 of the 425 runs of the simulation.
The proportion of terms which were classified as being of
each type in all the emergent languages is shown in Figure
6. Figure 6 also contains equivalent data from the world
color survey (WCS), as reported in Kay and Maffi (1999).
Kay and Maffi did not take account of color terms which
did not contain a unique hue point in making their
classifications, hence the relevant data on these terms does
not appear here, and the counts of color terms for the world
color survey do not include terms from languages which
were in transition between evolutionary stages, or which did
not fit on the evolutionary trajectories at all. Color terms
which are either achromatic or distinguished from other
colors on the basis of some dimension other than hue have
simply been excluded from the analysis, while composite
terms which included, white or black and one or more
unique hues were treated as if they only contained the
unique hue.
Figure 6 clearly shows a close relation between the
frequency of each term in the world color survey and in the

hues better than other colors. These assumptions produced
learning biases which affected the way that languages
evolved. The language which each agent in the simulation
learned was a product both of the agent’s learning
mechanism, and of the language spoken by the other agents,
and this suggests that human languages can be understood
only as a product of both innate biases and cultural
pressures interacting over a period of several generations.

simulations. The key differences are that the simulations
produce somewhat too many Yellow-Green-Blue
composites, and too few Green-Blue ones. There were 80
purple terms in emergent languages, but only 20 orange
ones, which is consistent with the finding that purple terms
tend to emerge before orange ones. There were no turquoise
terms, which is also in line with expectations, as no
language has a turquoise basic color term.
The simulations did produce a few terms of types which
have not been attested empirically. There was 1 Blue-Red
composite, 1 Red-Yellow-Green composite, 3 Green-BlueRed composites and 4 Lime terms. The presence of a small
number of previously unattested color terms should not be
surprising. The evolutionary model does not place absolute
restrictions on the types of color terms which can evolve,
but simply introduces biases, so that some kinds of color
term emerge much more frequently than others. If the
typological patterns seen in real languages are produced in
the same kind of way, we would expect to occasionally
discover new types of color terms as we looked at greater
numbers of languages. As linguists have examined the color
terms of more and more languages, color terms of types
which were not found in Berlin and Kay’s original survey
have been discovered, but it is possible that some very rare
types of color term remain undiscovered.
Looking at the languages overall, 340 could be placed on
Kay and Maffi’s (1999) evolutionary trajectories. 9
languages deviated from the trajectories because they
contained unattested color terms, 35 because no term
consistently named one or more of the unique hues, and 37
because there was more than one term which could name
one of the unique hues, or there was more than one purple
term. What is clear from these results is that there is a small
set of color term systems which occur very frequently, and
that the color term systems of the majority of languages can
be classified as belonging to one of these types. A
significant number of languages diverge from the
trajectories in some way or another, but this is consistent
with empirical findings.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my Ph.D. supervisor Judy Kay and
everyone else who has helped me with this research which
was supported by IPRS and IPA scholarships.

References
Belpaeme, Tony (2002). Factors influencing the origins
of color categories. Ph.D. Thesis, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel.
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969). Basic Color Terms.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
De Valois, R. L. & Jacobs, G. H. (1968). Primate color
vision. Science, 162, 533-540.
Heider, E. R. (1971). “Focal” Color Areas and the
Development of Color Names. Developmental
Psychology, 4 (3), 447-445.
Heider, E . R. (1972). Universals of Color Naming and
Memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93, 10-20.
Hurford, J. R. (1987). Language and Number The
Emergence of a Cognitive System. New York: Blackwell.
Kay, P., Berlin, B. & Merrifield, W. (1991). Biocultural
Implications of Systems of Color Naming. Journal of
Linguistic Anthropology, 1 (1), 12-25.
Kay, P. & McDaniel, K. (1978). The Linguistic
Significance of the Meanings of Basic Color Terms.
Language, 54 (3), 610-646.
Kay, P. & Maffi, L. (1999). Color Appearance and the
Emergence and Evolution of Basic Color Lexicons.
American Anthropologist, 101, 743-760.
MacLaury, R. E. (1997). Color and Cognition in
Mesoamerica: Construing Categories as Vantages.
Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press.
Taylor, J. R. (1989). Linguistic Categorization:
Prototypes in Linguistic Theory. Oxford University Press.
Tenenbaum, J. B. (1999). A Bayesian Framework for
Concept Learning. Ph.D. Thesis, MIT.

Conclusion
The computer model has shown that the typological patterns
observed in basic color term systems can be explained if it
is assumed that the unique hues are not evenly spaced in the
conceptual color space and that people remember the unique

25
20

WCS

15

Model

10

G-B-R

Y-G-B

R-Y-G

B-R

G-B

Blue

Green

Yellow

Red

Y-G

5
0

R-Y

Percent of terms
of this type

30

Type of colour term

Figure 6. Percentage of Color Terms of each type in the Simulations and the World Color Survey.

365

