UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Facilitated Rule Discovery in Wason’s 2-4-6 Task: The Role of Negative Triples

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3p92t94t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Gale, Maggie
Ball, Linden J.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Facilitated Rule Discovery in Wason’s 2-4-6 Task: The Role of
Negative Triples
Maggie Gale (M.Gale@derby.ac.uk)
Institute of Behavioural Sciences, University of Derby
Western Road, Mickleover
Derby DE3 9GX, UK

Linden J. Ball (L.Ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

Abstract
One key paradigm that has been used to investigate
hypothesis-testing behaviour is Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6
task. This exists in two main forms: The standard version
requires participants to induce a single rule, whilst the
logically identical Dual Goal (DG) version, introduced
by Tweney et al. (1980), asks participants to discover
two related rules. In the standard version success rates of
20% are typically reported, whereas DG instructions
increase solution rates to over 60%. One hypothesized
explanation for this facilitated effect is the Goal
Complementarity Theory (Wharton, Cheng & Wickens,
1993), which proposes that facilitated performance is
mainly attributable to the complementary nature of the
two unknown rules in the DG task. The present study
investigated this theory by manipulating the to-bediscovered rules in order to produce both complementary
and non-complementary DG versions of the task. Results
did not lend support to the Goal Complementarity
Theory. However, a close analysis of the triples
generated by participants led to the formation of a new
account of the facilitatory effect of DG instructions that
centred on the role played by negative triples (and
especially descending ones) in promoting task success.

Introduction
Hypothesis testing can be viewed as a fundamental
mode of mental functioning that is, for example, vital
for the development of effective language skills (e.g.,
Poletiek, 2001), important for everyday problemsolving and decision making activity (e.g., Manktelow,
1999), and critical for expert reasoning in domains such
as scientific discovery (e.g., Klahr, 2000). Given its
central importance, hypothesis-testing behaviour has
long been of considerable interest to psychologists and
cognitive scientists alike. One important experimental
paradigm that has been employed in studying people’s
hypothesis-testing is Wason’s (1960, 1966) 2-4-6 task
(see also Johnson-Laird & Wason, 1970). In the
standard form of the 2-4-6 task participants are asked to
discover a rule, known to the experimenter, that
generates sequences of three numbers (referred to as

438

triples). The experimenter provides an example triple of
2-4-6 as being one that fits the rule. Participants are
then asked to generate further triples that the
experimenter classifies as either fitting or not fitting the
to-be-discovered rule. Participants are encouraged to
produce triples until they reach a point where they are
confident that they know the rule, at which point they
announce it. The to-be discovered rule is ‘ascending
triples’.
Despite the apparent simplicity of the 2-4-6 task
actual success rates for first time announcements are
very low, with frequencies of around 20% commonly
being reported (e.g., Tukey, 1986; Wason, 1960;
Wharton, Cheng & Wickens, 1993). Incorrect
announcements are typically more restricted versions of
the rule such as ‘numbers increasing with intervals of
two’ (Wason, 1960). Wetherick (1962) has argued that
the initial exemplar of 2-4-6 leads participants into
forming such overly restrictive hypotheses. Recent
work by Van der Henst, Rossi and Schroyens (2002)
also supports this view, and invokes a ‘relevance’
explanation for this effect.
Although Van der Henst et al.’s research is timely
and informative, it focuses only on the question of why
overly-restricted hypotheses are formed in the first
place, and therefore remains silent on the equally
important issue of why participants fail to test such
initial overly-restrictive hypotheses using the Popperian
ideal of falsification. Indeed, apparently lured by the
plausibility of their initial hypotheses, participants are
typically observed to produce many test triples that
conform to it, for example, ones such as 6-8-10, 12-1416, 20-22-24, and the like, in the case where the initial
hypothesis of ‘numbers increasing with intervals of
two’ is formed. As these triples are a subset of the true
rule, they always receive positive feedback, thus
increasing the participant’s confidence in the
correctness of their working hypothesis. It is clear, then,
that to discover the true rule a participant needs to
change their strategy of producing positive instances of
their working hypothesis so as to discover that it is

overly limited (i.e., that whilst it may be a sufficient rule
to account for the available evidence it is not a
necessary one).

Dual-Goal Instructions
Although reported success rates on the 2-4-6 task are
typically low, one reliable method of increasing the
frequency of correct initial rule announcements is to use
what has become known as the Dual Goal (DG)
paradigm. Introduced by Tweney, Doherty, Worner,
Pliske, Mynatt, Gross and Arkkelin (1980), this is a
formally equivalent version of the task in which
participants are asked to find two rules, one called
DAX, and the other MED. The DAX rule is the usual
‘any ascending numbers’ rule, while the MED rule is
‘all other triples’. The participants are presented with an
exemplar DAX triple of 2-4-6, and feedback is given in
the form of either DAX or MED. Using this modified
version of the task success rates increase dramatically;
Tweney et al. (1980) reported a success rate of 60% for
first rule announcements, and this finding has been
replicated many times (e.g. Farris & Revlin 1989a,
1989b; Tukey, 1986; Wharton et al., 1993). Although
the facilitatory effect of DG instructions is well
documented there is, to date, little agreement as to the
cause of enhanced rule discovery. Tweney et al. (1980)
themselves felt unable to offer a theoretical account
beyond noting their belief that the explanation lay in the
relationship between the way that participants
conceptualized the problem, and the way that empirical
evidence was related to that conceptualization.
Wharton et al. (1993) proposed two possible accounts
for the effect. The first, which they labeled the
Information-Quantity
Theory,
derived
from
observations that: (1) solvers given Single Goal (SG)
instructions generate more triples than non-solvers
(Farris & Revlin, 1989; Wason 1960); and (2) DG
instructions lead to the generation of more triples before
initial rule announcement than do SG instructions
(Gorman, Stafford & Gorman, 1987). Wharton et al.
claimed to have undermined this theory themselves
since they controlled for the minimum number of triples
that participants could generate before announcing the
rule and still found a DG solution advantage over
individuals receiving SG instructions. However,
Wharton et al. only demanded the production of a
minimum number of triples, and participants in their DG
condition were actually seen to generate reliably more
triples than those in the SG condition before making a
first rule announcement. Wharton et al.’s manipulation
cannot, therefore, be construed as a strict test of the
Information Quantity Theory of DG facilitation.
A second explanation of DG facilitation proposed by
Wharton et al. (1980) is their own GoalComplementarity Theory. According to this account,
the beneficial effect of DG instructions can be

439

attributed to a combination of the complementary
nature of the DAX and MED rules, and the tendency for
people to adopt a positive test strategy (Klayman & Ha,
1987) that leads to the generation of triples that match
the participant’s current hypothesis. Wharton et al. thus
propose that the initial DAX exemplar of 2-4-6 induces
the participant to hypothesize a restricted rule for DAX
such as ‘numbers ascending by two’ (cf. Wetherick,
1962) that they then test with further positive triples.
However the requirement to search for a second, MED,
rule forces the participant to generate a second
hypothesis for MED triples (e.g., ‘numbers ascending
by other than two’) that they also test using the same
positive test strategy (e.g., proposing a triple such as 23-10). Such a test of MED would result in unexpected
DAX feedback, that, in turn, would cause the
participant to vary their DAX hypothesis to
accommodate this new information. The cycle would be
repeated until the participant had produced appropriate
rules for both DAX and MED.
It is noteworthy that the Goal-Complementarity
Theory assumes that success on the task is attributable
to the generation of triples (like 2-4-10) which ValléeTourangeau, Austin and Rankin (1995) refer to as being
variable positives (or ‘posvars’). These posvars are
ascending triples but ones in which numbers do not
increase by equal increments. Contrary to the critical
role that posvars should play in promoting DG
facilitation, however, a recent study by Gale and Ball
(2002) showed that although the production of at least a
single posvar was associated with task success, the
production of at least a single negative triple showed a
far more marked association with correct rule
discovery. This latter observation may also link to
Wason’s (1960) finding that solvers produce a higher
ratio of negative triples than non-solvers. It also points
to the intriguing possibility that the generation of
negative triples may well be more central to DG
facilitation effects than posvar production.
Wharton et al. (1993), however, have claimed support
for the Goal-Complementarity Theory in a study where
they showed that if the complementary nature of the
DAX and MED rules is not made explicit to
participants then DG instructions likewise do not lead
to facilitated performance. This was the first reported
incidence of a failure of DG instructions to improve
performance (although it is noteworthy that in the
original Tweney et al., 1980, study the relationship
between the rules was not made clear and success rates
remained high). Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (1995), on the
other hand, have claimed to have undermined the GoalComplementarity Theory in an experiment that
manipulated the apparent nature of the relationship
between the DAX and MED rules such that they were
no longer presented as being complementary to one
another. Vallée-Tourangeau et al. demonstrated that

high success rates were still evident even when
participants were testing such non-complementary
DAX and MED rules. It should be noted, however, that
although Vallée-Tourangeau et al. told their participants
that triples could be DAX, MED, or neither (and, in
another condition, DAX, MED, or both), it remained
the case that the standard DAX and MED rules were
still used. What this means is that unbeknownst to
participants, the logical relationship between the two
rules actually remained strictly complementary and they
never, therefore, received any feedback other than DAX
or MED. It could be argued that because the
relationship of the rules was not truly manipulated by
Vallée-Tourangeau et al., then their methodology
contains inherent flaws that may have led to the
production of artefactual evidence against Wharton et
al.’s (1993) Goal-Complementarity Theory.
Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (1995) have proposed a
further theory as to why DG instructions facilitate
performance on the 2-4-6 task. They suggest that DG
requirements foster a more creative exploration of the
triple space as indexed by the variety of triples
generated by participants, and that it is this sheer
breadth of hypotheses tested that leads to success. To
test their proposal they formulated a system of
codifying both negative and positive triples. As noted
earlier, triples receiving positive (DAX) feedback may
increase by variable increments (posvars) or by constant
increments. There are also eight possible types of
triples, termed ‘negtypes’ by Vallée-Tourangeau et al.,
that could receive negative (MED) feedback, such as
descending triples and identical-number triples. The
possible set of eight negative types is captured by the
following rules proposed by Vallée-Tourangeau et al.:
(1) a > b > c; (2) a = b = c; (3) a > b < c; (4) a < b > c;
(5) a = b < c; (6) a = b > c; (7) a > b = c; (8) a < b = c.
Vallée-Tourangeau et al. reported that use of the DG
inferential context led to both a greater number of
posvars compared to the traditional single goal
procedure, and also a greater number of negtypes.
Solvers and non-solvers in the two conditions could
also be differentiated on these measures.
Although it is useful to have a system for codifying
the range of triples generated by participants, the
suggestion that a greater variety of triple types is
indicative of the range of hypotheses considered was
not directly tested by Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (1995).
It is also evident that many hypotheses may be
entertained that are not centred on the relationship of
the numbers to one another, but that are more
concerned with properties that the numbers have in
common, for example, even numbers, positive or
negative numbers, or numbers produced by some
arithmetical formula such as those adding to less than
20. As such, whilst Vallée-Tourangeau et al.’s findings
may capture important aspects of participants’ triple-

440

generation behaviour at a fairly gross level of analysis,
the precise relationship between participants’ triplegeneration activity and their actual working hypotheses
during task performance remains elusive.
The present study aimed to investigate further the
Goal Complementarity Theory by explicitly
manipulating the logical relationship of the DAX and
MED rules in the DG paradigm so that these rules were
no longer complementary. The Goal-Complementarity
Theory would predict that when the two rules lack
mutual complementarity then the facilitatory effect of
DG instructions should be undermined (Wharton et al.,
1993; Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 1995). In addition, the
Goal Complementarity Theory would predict that it is
the production of at least a single posvar that should be
necessary for successful initial rule announcement,
rather than production of negative triples. These latter
predictions can be tested by analyzing the types of triple
generated across conditions. The analysis of triples
types also enables an assessment to be made of
predictions deriving from Vallée-Tourangeau et al.’s
(1995) Triple-Heterogeneity Theory to the effect that it
is the variety of triples tested by participants that is
central to success with DG variants of the 2-4-6 task.
As a final point, we note that because of the
contradictory nature of the evidence surrounding the
Information Quantity Theory it was decided to impose a
strict control for information quantity by requiring
participants in all conditions to generate exactly 10
triples before stating their best guess at the rule (at
which stage the experiment terminated).

Method
Participants
Eighty students from sixth-form colleges in Derbyshire
took part in the study on a voluntary basis. None had
received any teaching relating to reasoning or logic.

Design
An independent-measures design was employed with
four conditions: Single Goal (SG), Standard Dual Goal
(DG), Dual Goal Three (DG3) in which feedback
consisted of DAX, MED, and neither DAX nor MED,
and Dual Goal Four (DG4), in which feedback
consisted of DAX, MED, neither DAX nor MED, and
both DAX and MED. Twenty participants were
randomly assigned to each of the four conditions.

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of four, with each
group being read standardized instructions. Participants
in the SG group heard instructions referring to a unique
rule: “I have in mind a rule that specifies how to make
up sequences of three numbers (triples), and your task

is to discover this rule”. Participants then produced 10
triples and received DAX or MED feedback for triples
fitting or not fitting the experimenter’s rule,
respectively. After the 10 triples participants were
asked to write down their best guess at the rule.
Instructions for all other conditions asked participants
to discover two rules, one called DAX and one called
MED. The DAX rule in each of these conditions was
‘ascending numbers’. For the standard DG condition
the MED rule was ‘any other triple’, while for the DG3
condition the MED rule was ‘descending numbers’, and
for the DG4 condition the MED rule was ‘odd
numbers’. Thus in the DG3 condition triples could be
classified as conforming to the DAX rule, the MED rule
or neither, while in the DG4 condition triples could be
DAX, MED, neither or both. As in the SG condition,
participants were asked to produce exactly ten triples
before writing down their best guess at the rules.

Results and Discussion
Solution Success Across Conditions
Table 1 shows the frequency of correct initial rule
announcements for the DAX rule in each of the
experimental conditions. It is clear that those in the
DG4 condition had the greatest difficulty with the task,
with correct solutions being offered in only 15% of
cases. In contrast, the frequency of correct solvers in the
DG3 condition is comparable (and indeed marginally
superior) to that of the standard DG condition, whilst
the frequency of correct solvers in the SG condition is
lower than that seen in the DG and DG3 conditions. A
chi square analysis showed these differences to be
highly significant, χ2 = 18.24, df = 3, p < .001. The
high levels of solution success in the noncomplementary’ DG3 condition appear at odds with the
Wharton et al.’s (1993) Goal Complementarity Theory.
Table 1: Frequency of correct DAX rule announcements.
Condition
SG
DG
DG3
DG4

N
20
20
20
20

Solver
7
13
15
3

Non-solver
13
7
5
17

Triple Types Across Conditions
Vallée-Tourangeau et al.’s (1995) Triple-Heterogeneity
Theory claims that DG instructions facilitate
performance on the 2-4-6 task by fostering the
generation of a wider range of hypotheses as indexed by
the variety of triples produced. Vallée-Tourangeau et al.
argue that triple variety can be quantified in terms of
the number of triples receiving negative feedback, the
number of posvars generated, and the number of

441

negtypes produced. The mean scores by condition on
each these indices are presented in Table 2. Wharton et
al.’s Goal Complementarity Theory also assumes a
critical association between posvar generation and DG
instructions. To examine such predictions we applied a
series of one-way, between-participants analysis of
variance (ANOVA) tests to the three indices of triple
variety. A significant effect of condition was found for
the number of triples receiving negative feedback,
F(3,76) = 3.61, p < .05. Post hoc Bonferroni tests
indicated that more triples received negative feedback
in the DG condition than in the SG condition (p < .05),
however, there were no differences between the other
conditions. The ANOVAs revealed no effect of
condition on either the negtype or the posvar measures.
These latter findings are, again, contrary to the GoalComplementarity and Triple-Heterogeneity Theories.

Triple Type and Solution Success
The mean number of negative triples produced by
solvers was 4.41 (SD = 1.99) and by non-solvers was
2.22 (SD = 2.24). This difference was highly reliable,
t(78) = 5.12, p < .001. A significant difference was also
found in the mean number of negtypes produced by
solvers (2.22, SD = 1.23) and non-solvers (1.41, SD =
1.37), t(78) = 3.11, p < .01, but not in the mean number
of posvars produced by solvers (1.8, SD = 1.81) and
non-solvers (2.02, SD = 1.93), t(78) = 0.53, p > .05.
Gale and Ball (2002) demonstrated that the
production of at least a single triple receiving negative
feedback (‘negpres’) was more closely associated with
success on the 2-4-6 task than the production of a single
posvar (‘posvarpres’). To clarify the relative influence
of negpres and posvarpres on task success we modeled
the present dataset using logistic regression. An initial
model in which the predictor variable of negpres
(yes/no) was regressed onto solution success
(solver/non-solver) was highly significant, B = 3.05,
Wald = 8.35, p < .001, demonstrating that the presence
of at least one negative triple was closely associated
with task success. A second model regressing
posvarpres onto success failed to reach significance, B
= .512, Wald = 1.16, p > .05, supporting the view (Gale
& Ball, 2002) that the production of posvar triples may
have a limited link to successful rule discovery on the
2-4-6 task.
Since the production of negative triples appeared to
have such a strong association with task success we
decided to examine what specific property of negative
triples might underpin this success. It became clear
upon scrutinizing the negative triples generated by
participants that the great majority of these were
‘descending’ in nature, and that most other types of
negative triples were generated only very occasionally.
For this reason we collapsed all negative triples apart
from descending ones of the form a > b > c into a single

Table 2: Mean number of triple types produced by condition, with standard deviations in parentheses.
SG
Negative feedback
Negtypes
Posvars

2.05 (2.31)
1.05 (1.15)
1.15 (1.81)

DG

4.05 (1.90)
2.00 (1.30)
1.80 (1.61)

pool. We then compared the effect of producing versus
not producing at least one descending triple on task
success. Logistic regression showed that participants
generating a descending triple were twelve times more
likely to solve the task than those not producing such a
triple. This effect was highly reliable, B =2.55, Wald =
14.24, p < .001. Production versus non-production of at
least one other type of negative triple was not predictive
of success, B = .427, Wald = .89, p > .05.

Path Analysis
Our final exploration of the dataset involved conducting
a path analysis to establish whether producing versus
not producing at least one descending triple played a
mediating role in task success (i.e., intervening between
the type of task instruction and task performance at
initial rule announcement). Because quantitative logic
does not work appropriately with logistic regression, it
was necessary to use linear regression for the analyses.
We acknowledge that this is not ideal given the
dichotomous nature of the relevant variables, but have
included comparisons of obtained p values for logistic
and linear regressions (Table 3) to illustrate the high
level of comparability of the calculations, and to
thereby go some way toward validating the use of the
linear-regression procedure with the present dataset. It
should also be noted that examination of the data
revealed little difference in triple-generation behaviour
between the standard DG and the DG3 conditions, and
for this reason these conditions were collapsed for the
path analysis. In addition, data for participants in the
DG4 condition were excluded from this analysis as so
few people in this condition solved the task, and
examination of their protocols suggested they had found
the task so difficult that they had generated triples
without employing any discernible strategy.
.35
Goal

.38

Success
Descending

Condition
DG3

.51

Figure 1: Path diagram showing the mediating role of
producing at least one descending triple on task success.

442

DG4

3.75 (2.31)
1.95 (1.05)
1.75 (2.34)

2.50 (2.52)
1.55 (1.57)
2.85 (1.93)

Figure 1 shows the path diagram obtained when the
mediating role of the production of at least one
descending triple was examined to assess its effect on
task success. A Sobel test showed this mediating effect
to be significant, Goodman (1) = 2.62, p < .01.

General Discussion
Our results appear to challenge Wharton et al.’s (1983)
Goal-Complementarity Theory of DG facilitation in
two respects. First, when the relationship between DAX
and MED rules is manipulated such that they are no
longer logically complementary (i.e., triples can be
produced that fit neither rule) then performance on the
DG version does not suffer. This contradicts the
assumption of the Goal Complementarity Theory that it
is the complementary nature of the DAX and MED
rules that is the crucial factor underpinning facilitated
performance on DG tasks. Second, the Goal
Complementarity Theory also assumes that it is the
production of posvars that promotes insightful rule
discovery. The results from our logistic regression
analysis demonstrate that this is not the case. Our path
analysis likewise reveals that it is production of at least
one descending triple that mediates task success.
The results also undermine the Information Quantity
Theory since DG instructions led to greater success on
the task than SG ones, despite the fact that all
participants generated the same number of triples. We
also challenge the Triple Heterogeneity Theory that DG
instructions facilitate performance by fostering
consideration of a broader range of hypotheses (as
indexed by the greater variety of triples produced),
since the only significant difference we detected on the
measures of triple heterogeneity across conditions was
the number of triples receiving negative feedback. It
cannot readily be argued that this is a true measure of
heterogeneity as it really only records the number, and
not the range, of negative triples generated.
We can, however, make some new and positive
observations as to the possible causal mechanism of
success on the 2-4-6 task. Our data indicate that it is the
production of at least a single negative triple that leads
to task success. From this we can assume that there
must be some property inherent in a negative triple that

Table 3: Comparison of p values from logistic and linear regressions associated with the path analysis.
Variables in the regression analysis
Goal regressed onto Descending triple
Goal regressed onto Success
Descending triple regressed onto Success
Goal & Descending triple regressed onto Success

Goal
Descending triple

Linear Regression

Logistic Regression

.009
< .001
< .001
.168
< .001

.004
.012
.001
.164
< .001

Note: Descending triple: present vs. absent; Success: yes vs. no; Goal: SG vs. DG
promotes the formation of a correct DAX hypothesis.
We further report that it the production of at least a
single descending triple that is most closely associated
with task success. This observation suggests that the
testing of a triple such as 6-4-2 that leads to MED
feedback may cause ‘descending’ to become the salient
dimension of MEDness. This, in turn, may promote the
realization that ‘ascending’ is the salient feature of
DAXness by the provision of a useful contrast class.
This is clearly a novel idea that requires further testing.
Future work also needs to clarify why DG instructions
lead to the production of negative triples. As Wharton
et al. (1993) note, a restricted rule for DAX such as
‘numbers ascending by two’ may lead to a hypothesis
of ‘numbers ascending by other than two’ for MED, but
it not clear why such a hypothesized MED rule will
lead to the production of a negative triple. Closer
analysis of the protocols produced by participants may
be useful in elucidating this issue.

References
Farris, H., & Revlin, R. (1989a). Sensible reasoning in
two tasks: Rule discovery and hypothesis evaluation.
Memory and Cognition, 17, 221-232.
Farris, H., & Revlin, R. (1989b). The discovery process:
A counterfactual strategy. Social Studies of Science,
19, 497-513.
Gale, M., & Ball, L. J. (2002). Does positivity bias
explain patterns of performance on Wason’s 2-4-6
task? In W. D. Gray, & C. D. Schunn (Eds.)
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 340344). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Gorman, M. E., Stafford, A., & Gorman, M. E. (1987).
Disconfirmation and dual hypotheses on a more
difficult version of Wason’s 2-4-6 task. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 39A, 1-28.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Wason, P. C. (1970). A
theoretical analysis of insight into a reasoning task.
Cognitive Psychology, 1, 134-148.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and
development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

443

Klayman J., & Ha, Y-W. (1987). Confirmation,
disconfirmation and information in hypothesis
testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Manktelow, K. I. (1999). Reasoning and thinking.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Poletiek, F. H. (2001). Hypothesis-testing behaviour.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Popper, K. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery.
London: Hutchinson.
Tukey, D. D. (1986). A philosophical and empirical
analysis of subjects’ modes of inquiry in Wason's 24-6 task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 38A, 5-33.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., Worner, W. J., Pliske,
D. B., Mynatt, C. R., Gross, K. A., & Arkkelin, D. L.
(1980). Strategies of rule discovery in an inference
task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
32, 109-123.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Austin, N. G., & Rankin, S.
(1995). Inducing a rule in Wason's 2-4-6 task: A test
of
the
information-quantity
and
goalcomplementarity hypotheses. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48A, 895-914.
Van der Henst, J-P, Rossi, S., & Schroyens, W. (2002).
When participants are not misled they are not so bad
after all: A pragmatic analysis of a rule discovery
task. In W. D. Gray, & C. D. Schunn (Eds.)
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 902907). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate
hypotheses in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.),
New horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Wetherick, N. E. (1962). Eliminative and enumerative
behaviour in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 14, 129-140.
Wharton, C. M., Cheng, P. W., & Wickens, T. D.
(1993). Hypothesis-testing strategies: Why two goals
are better than one. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46A, 743-758.

