UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Factors Involved in the Use of In and On

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84r239g9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Feist, Michele I.
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Factors Involved in the Use of In and On
Michele I. Feist (m-feist@ northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
What factors influence people’s use of spatial
prepositions? In this paper, we examine the influence of
four factors – geometry of the Ground, function of the
Ground, animacy of the Ground, and animacy of the
Figure – on the use of English in and on. We find
evidence for all four of these factors. We conclude that
spatial prepositions appear to involve a complex set of
spatial and non-spatial interacting factors.

Introduction
In recent years, the semantics of spatial relational terms
has excited substantial interest in linguistics and
cognitive science. This is due in part to a paradox
presented by spatial terms. On the one hand, spatial
terms seem simple, tractable, and obvious.
For
example, there is no doubt in the minds of native
speakers of English which term to use to describe the
position in each of the pictures in Figure 1 of the
located object, which following Talmy (1983) we’ll be
referring to as the Figure, with respect to the reference
object, or Ground. Despite this, as many researchers
have shown (e.g., Bowerman & Pederson, 1996;
Cienki, 1989; Levinson, 1996), there is marked crosslinguistic variability in how linguistic terms map on to
the world.
For example, the three-way English
distinction presented in Figure 1 corresponds to a twoway distinction in Spanish, where the situations
described by English on and in are both described by
Spanish en, and to a separate two-way distinction in
Japanese, where the scenes described by English over
and on are both described by Japanese ue.

over
sobre
ue

on
en
ue

in
en
naka

Figure 1: English, Spanish, and Japanese descriptions
of the same scenes

390

As a result of this variability, spatial relational terms
are among the most difficult expressions to acquire
when learning a second language. They are also slow
to be acquired by children, relative to their high
frequency. Investigations into the semantics of spatial
relational terms across languages have shown that they
encode a variety of factors of the scenes they are used
to describe (Bowerman, 1996; Levinson, 1996; Sinha &
Thorseng, 1995). Among these are the geometry of the
Ground (Jackendoff & Landau, 1991; Landau &
Jackendoff, 1993; Talmy, 1983), the geometry of the
Figure (Brown, 1994; Levinson, 1996), the geometrical
relation between the Figure and the Ground (Bennett,
1975; Bowerman & Pederson, 1996;
CarlsonRadvansky & Regier, 1997; Herskovits, 1986; Miller &
Johnson-Laird, 1976; Regier, 1996; Talmy, 1983), the
functional relation between the Figure and the Ground
(Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod 1994; Vandeloise,
1991, 1994), and the qualitative physics of the scene
(Bowerman & Choi, 2001; Bowerman & Pederson,
1996; Forbus, 1983, 1984; Talmy, 1988). Interestingly,
very little importance is accorded in English to the
Figure object, which is often treated as though it were a
point (Landau & Jackendoff, 1983; Talmy, 1983).
In this paper, we examine the influence of four of
these factors on the applicability of the English spatial
prepositions in and on. In particular, we test the
influence of (a) the geometric relation between the
Figure and the Ground, as a function of the Ground’s
geometry; (b) functional information about the Ground;
(c) the animacy of the Ground; and (d) the animacy of
the Figure.
To do this, we adapted Labov’s (1973) classic
method for studying complex interacting factors on the
use of English nouns such as cup, bowl, and vase.
Labov varied the width-to-depth ratio on a series of
cuplike objects and asked speakers what the objects
would be called in various contexts. In this way, he
could independently vary geometric and functional
information.
He found that both manipulations
influenced participants’ naming choices.
Based on Labov’s technique, we used an analogous
design to independently vary information about the four

factors we wished to test. Then we presented the
resulting pictures to English speakers and asked them to
choose which preposition – in or on – best applied.
Before describing the study, we discuss the set of
factors.

Rationale Behind the Factors
Geometry of the Ground
Geometric factors reflect the topology of the situation,
including specifics of the shapes of the Figure and the
Ground and information about contact between the
Figure and the Ground. Geometric approaches to the
semantics of spatial prepositions in English tend to
stress that the Figure must be located at the interior of
the Ground (which, as a result, must have an interior)
for an appropriate use of in, while the Figure must be in
contact with the surface of the Ground (which, as a
result, must have a surface) for an appropriate use of
on. By placing the Figure in contact with the surface of
the Ground, then manipulating the concavity of the
Ground such that the surface in contact with the Figure
becomes an interior, one can manipulate the extent to
which the geometry portrayed fits the requirements of
either in or on. This is illustrated in Figure 2: the
Ground in Figure 2a has high concavity, resulting in the
presence of an interior which would allow the use of in;
the Ground in Figure 2b has low concavity, resulting in
the existence of a flat surface which is in contact with
the Figure, allowing the use of on.

Animacy
There are many reasons to believe that animacy may
affect the applicability of English spatial relational
terms. First, animacy plays a role in other linguistic
phenomena, including the dative alternation1 (Levin,
1993) and classifier usage (Comrie, 1981; Lucy, 1992).
Additionally, the animacy of the Figure plays a role in
the use of the Dutch preposition op, which is used when
“a living figure finds support in any orientation”
(Bowerman, 1996, p.153). Finally, an animate Ground
may be able to exert volitional control over other
objects, and specifically over the location of the Figure.
Arguably, if the Ground is able to exert volitional
control over the location of the Figure, it can better
serve as a container for the Figure, as it can prevent the
Figure from exiting the configuration. As the Ground
better serves as a container for the Figure, the
applicability of in should increase. In keeping with this
hypothesis, previous research found that scenes
depicting an animate Ground did receive a higher
proportion of in responses than did scenes depicting an
inanimate Ground (Feist & Gentner, 1997).
Conversely, the fact that an animate Figure is able to
exert control over its own position, thereby entering and
exiting a configuration at will, suggests that it might be
a less ideal participant than an inanimate Figure in what
Vandeloise
(1991,
1994)
has
called
the
container/contained relationship.
As the Figure
becomes less “containable”, the applicability of in
should decrease.

Why include properties of the Figure?
(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Two scenes differing in the concavity of the
Ground

Function of the Ground
Functional factors important to spatial semantics
include the typical function of the Ground and the
extent to which the Ground is fulfilling this function.
Coventry and his colleagues (Coventry et al., 1994)
found empirical evidence that information about the
typical function of the Ground influences the use of
English spatial prepositions. In their study, the usage of
in was found to be more prevalent when solid Figures
(such as apples) were placed with respect to a bowl
(which typically holds solids) than when they were
placed with respect to a jug (which typically holds
liquids). They concluded that knowledge about the
particular function typical of an object contributes to
preposition use.

391

Most previous research has concluded that the Figure
has little or no effect on the use of English prepositions
(e.g., Landau & Stecker, 1990; Talmy, 1983).
However, this is clearly not the case for all languages,
as demonstrated by the myriad spatial terms dependent
on the Figure found in Mayan languages such as Tzeltal
(Brown, 1994; Levinson, 1996). Because there are
potentially many ways in which the Figure could have
an effect on the use of spatial terms, a closer
examination of the Figure’s role in English terms may
be in order.
In this study, we decided to explore the possibility
that the animacy of the Figure influences preposition
choice in English, motivated in part by the discussion
above. Additional motivation comes from the research
of Sinha and Kuteva (1995), who noted indirect effects
of the animacy of the Figure on preposition selection.
1

The dative alternation refers to the equivalence of alternate
forms such as I sent the book to Sue and I sent Sue the book.
However, the recipient of the action must be animate in order
to appear outside of a prepositional phrase; we can only say
I sent the book to Spain and not I sent Spain the book.

For example, preposition choice is influenced by the
motive, if any, attributed to the Figure for entering the
spatial relation. This is illustrated by the contrast
shown in (1) and (2) (Sinha & Kuteva, 1995, examples
(27) and (28)). The use of in suggests that the Ground
is the Figure’s final destination, while the use of at
suggests that the Figure has merely reached the Ground
en route to its final destination.
(1) Rommel is in Cairo. (Figure’s attributed intention
= Ground as goal)
(2) Rommel is at Cairo. (Figure’s attributed intention
= Ground as sub-goal)

Testing the Factors
In previous work we used an inanimate Ground that
was described as an artifact and found that functional
information about the Ground mattered in the choice of
in vs. on (Feist & Gentner, 1998). In the current study
we included two conditions in which the Ground is
described as a non-artifact (a slab and a rock) so as to
test an extended range of functionality. We also added
an animate Ground to test for effects of the animacy of
the Ground.

Method
Manipulating the factors
We individually
manipulated each of the factors we tested – the
geometry of the Ground, the function of the Ground,
the animacy of the Ground, and the animacy of the
Figure – so as to separate out each of their influences
on the use of in and on.
The difference in the applicability of in and on for a
flat Ground vs. a concave one motivated the variations
in the geometry of the Grounds depicted in the set of
scenes used in our experiment.
Assuming the
importance of geometry to prepositional choice, we
predict that greater concavity of the Ground will
correspond to a higher proportion of in responses from
our participants.
To vary the perceived function of the Ground, we
varied the label applied to it. This takes advantage of
the relation between nominal label and perceived object
function to specify the Ground’s function (Labov,
1973).
Coventry et al. (1994) found that this
manipulation influenced the usage of in and on when
the Ground object, a shallow dish, was labeled as either
a dish or a plate.
In order to investigate the possibility that functional
information about the Ground, as communicated
through its label, influences the use of the English
spatial prepositions in and on, we varied the noun
applied to the inanimate Ground in our experiment.
The five labeling conditions introduced the animate
Ground as a hand and the inanimate Ground as one of:

392

dish, plate, bowl, slab, or rock. Taken in isolation, the
noun bowl tends to denote objects that function as
containers; the noun plate, objects that function as
surfaces; the noun slab, afunctional surfaces; and the
noun rock, afunctional solids. The fifth noun, dish, is a
superordinate of both bowl and plate and is therefore
expected to have a function that is ambiguous between
a container and a surface: a dish might sometimes be
considered a container and other times a surface.
Assuming the importance of functional information
about the Ground, we predict that we will find the
highest proportion of in responses for the inanimate
Ground when it is labeled as a bowl, a somewhat lower
proportion when it is labeled as a dish, a still lower
proportion when it is labeled as a plate, and the lowest
proportion when it is labeled with the afunctional slab
and rock.
We investigate the role of the animacy of the Ground
by having each of the scenes shown to participants
depict either a hand (animate Ground) or a dishlike tray
(inanimate Ground). We predict that the usage of in
will be more prevalent for scenes involving the animate
Ground than for those involving the inanimate one. We
investigate the role of the animacy of the Figure by
having each of the scenes shown to participants depict
either a firefly (animate Figure) or a coin (inanimate
Figure). We expect to find a lower proportion of in
responses to scenes depicting the animate Figure than to
comparable scenes depicting the inanimate one.
Participants Ninety-one Northwestern University
undergraduates received course credit for their
participation in this experiment. All reported being
fluent speakers of English.
Stimuli We used a set of concavity-matched stimuli
created using Autodesk 3D Studio (see Feist &
Gentner, 1997). These stimuli depicted two Grounds
(an ambiguous dishlike tray and a hand) paired with
two Figures (a firefly and a coin) at three levels of
concavity, for a total of twelve pictures. The model for
the inanimate Ground was overlaid on the model for the
hand at each concavity level to ensure that the
concavities and the placement of the Figures would be
identical. Example stimuli are shown in Figures 3 and
4.2
Procedure Stimuli were presented in two randomized
blocks, each consisting of the entire set of twelve
pictures. Each of the stimuli was presented for five
seconds on a computer screen. Participants were given
answer sheets containing sentences of the form:
The Figure is IN/ON the Ground.
2

The actual stimuli shown in the experiment were full color.

concavity was .38; medium concavity, .46; and high
concavity, .54, F(2,172) = 28.34, p < .0001.

Figure 3: Dishlike tray paired with firefly at three
concavity levels: low (approximately flat), medium,
and high (deeply curved)

proportion in responses

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
low

medium

high

concavity level

Figure 5: Proportion of in responses as a function of
concavity

where Figure was filled in with the noun referring to
the Figure (i.e., firefly or coin), and Ground was filled
in with hand when the animate Ground was shown and
the noun corresponding to the labeling condition (dish,
plate, bowl, slab, or rock) when the inanimate Ground
was shown.
Participants were told to circle in or on to make each
sentence describe the corresponding picture on the
computer screen.
Design We used a 2 (Ground: hand or dishlike tray) x
2 (Figure: firefly or coin) x 3 (concavity) x 5 (labeling
condition) design. Ground, Figure and concavity were
varied within subject and labeling condition was varied
between subjects. Each participant was given only one
of the five labels for the inanimate Ground.

Results
As predicted, we found that participants’ choice
between in and on to describe the scenes was
influenced by the labeling condition as well as by the
concavity of the Ground, the animacy of the Ground,
and the animacy of the Figure. These results were
confirmed by a 2 (Ground: hand or dishlike tray) x 2
(Figure: firefly or coin) x 3 (concavity) x 5 (labeling
condition) repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA).
The effect of the Ground’s concavity was
demonstrated by an increase in in responses with
concavity (Figure 5). (The proportion of on responses is
just 1-proportion of in responses.) Averaged across both
Figures, both Grounds and all five labeling conditions,
the proportion in responses to scenes depicting low

393

Participants’ choice between in and on was also
influenced by functional information about the Ground,
as communicated by the label applied to it (F (4,86) =
10.77, p < .0001). (There was also an interaction
between the animacy of the Ground and the functional
labeling condition (F(4,86) = 5.43, p = .001), reflecting
the fact that the label was only changed for the
inanimate Ground). Averaging across all concavities,
when the inanimate Ground was referred to as a bowl,
which should function as a container, the proportion of
in responses was highest (M = .65). When we referred
to the inanimate Ground as a plate, which should
function as a surface, the proportion of in responses was
quite low (M = .09). When it was labeled as a dish, (the
superordinate term for bowl and plate) the proportion of
in responses was in between (M = .50). Finally, the
proportion of in responses was quite low when the
afunctional labels rock and slab were applied (Ms for
slab = .08; for rock = .07) (Figure 6).
1
proportion in responses

Figure 4: Hand paired with firefly at three concavity
levels: low (approximately flat), medium, and high
(deeply curved)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
bowl

dish

plate

slab

rock

Figure 6: Proportion in responses to the inanimate
Ground as a function of labeling condition
Scenes depicting an animate Ground received a
higher proportion of in responses than did those
depicting an inanimate one (Figure 7), demonstrating an
influence of the animacy of the Ground on the use of in
and on. Averaged across both Figures, all five labeling
conditions and all three concavities, the proportion in
responses to scenes depicting the hand was .63; to

scenes depicting the dishlike tray, .28, F(1,86) = 65.59,
p < .0001.
proportion in responses

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

hand

inanimate

Figure 7: Proportion in responses as a function of the
animacy of the Ground.
Finally, participants were more likely to choose in to
describe scenes depicting the inanimate Figure than to
describe those depicting the animate Figure (Figure 8),
demonstrating an influence of the animacy of the
Figure. Averaged across both Grounds, all three
concavities, and all five labeling conditions, the
proportion in responses for coin as Figure was .49; for
firefly as Figure, .43, (F (1, 86) = 9.69, p < .005).

proportion in responses

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
coin

firefly

Figure 8: Proportion in responses as a function of the
animacy of the Figure

Discussion
The results of these studies suggest that the appropriate
use of spatial prepositions in English is influenced by a
complex set of interacting factors. We found evidence
that the geometry of the Ground, functional information
about the Ground, the animacy of the Ground, and the
animacy of the Figure are all taken into account when
choosing an appropriate preposition to apply to a scene.
It appears that to appropriately capture the meanings of
English spatial relational terms, one must incorporate
the influences of multiple factors of spatial scenes.
An important future direction is to broaden the
systematic studies of spatial semantics beyond English
spatial prepositions. The languages of the world have
been shown to encode a variety of different factors into
the meanings of their spatial terms (Bowerman, 1996;
Bowerman & Pederson, 1996; Levinson, 1996).
Factors identified in one language may be worth
investigating in languages where they have not yet been

394

identified. As a case in point, although previous studies
had suggested that the nature of the Figure does not
contribute to the use of English spatial prepositions
(e.g., Landau & Stecker, 1990), we were led to
investigate this factor by noting the findings for Mayan
languages such as Tzeltal, in which properties of the
Figure play a prominent role in spatial terms (Brown,
1994; Levinson, 1996). The effect of the Figure’s
animacy that we found, while small, nonetheless shows
that some aspects of the Figure do influence English
prepositional usage. It might have been overlooked had
we not taken inspiration from the spatial semantics of
other languages. What other insights might be gleaned
from broader cross-linguistic work?
Cross-linguistic studies could also illuminate the
aspects of animacy that matter for spatial language. In
our study we used a fairly broad definition of animacy:
things that are capable of self-determination (e.g.,
human hands and fireflies) were taken as animate,
while objects incapable of self-determination (e.g.,
dishes and coins) were not. But the notion of animacy
itself varies cross-linguistically. One way in which
animacy is manifest is in such syntactic distinctions as
whether something can be counted or pluralized. For
example, in English, there is a count-mass distinction
such that humans, animals, and objects (all typically
denoted by count nouns) can be counted simply (e.g.,
four chairs); but substances (denoted by mass nouns)
require a unitizer (e.g., four pieces of wood). In
Yucatec Mayan, however, this ‘countability’ privilege
extends only to animate entities (humans and animals);
and in Japanese, the cut is made after humans; even
animals require a classifier to be counted (Imai &
Gentner, 1997). It is intriguing to ask whether this
“animacy continuum” (Lucy, 1992) in grammatical
distinctions influences the semantics of spatial terms.
Our results indicate that a broad range of factors
enter into the semantics of English spatial prepositions.
Their use is influenced not only by the geometry of
scenes, but also by nonspatial factors such as function
and animacy. Underlying the seemingly simple task of
localizing objects is a host of subtle factors to which
humans naturally and fluently attend.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF-LIS award SBR9720313 and NSF-ROLE award 21002/REC-0087516.
We thank Kathleen Braun for help in conducting and
analyzing the study.

References
Bennett, D. C. (1975). Spatial and temporal uses of
English prepositions: An essay in stratificational
semantics. London: Longman.

Bowerman, M. (1996). The origins of children's spatial
semantic categories:
Cognitive vs. linguistic
determinants. In Gumperz, J. and Levinson, S. (Eds.),
Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Bowerman, M. & Choi, S. (2001). Shaping meanings
for language: Universal and language specific in the
acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In M.
Bowerman & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Language
acquisition
and
conceptual
development.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bowerman, M., & Pederson, E. (1996). Crosslinguistic perspectives on topological spatial
relationships. Manuscript in preparation.
Brown, P. (1994). The INs and ONs of Tzeltal locative
expressions: The semantics of static descriptions of
location. Linguistics, 32, 743-790.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Regier, T. (1997). An
empirical and computational investigation into the
shape of linguistic spatial categories. Paper presented
at the Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Workshop on Language and Space.
Cienki, A. J. (1989). Spatial cognition and the
semantics of prepositions in English, Polish, and
Russian. Munich, Germany: Verlag Otto Sagner.
Comrie, B. (1981). Language universals and linguistic
typology: Syntax and morphology. Oxford, UK:
Basil Blackwell.
Coventry, K., Carmichael, R., & Garrod, S. C. (1994).
Spatial prepositions, object-specific function, and
task requirements. Journal of Semantics, 11, 289309.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1997). Animacy, control,
and the IN/ON distinction. Paper presented at the
Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Workshop on Language and Space,
Providence, RI.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1998). On plates, bowls,
and dishes: Factors in the use of English IN and ON.
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, 345-349.
Forbus, K. D. (1983). Qualitative reasoning about
space and motion. In D. Gentner & A. L. Stevens
(Eds.), Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative process theory.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition:
An interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in
English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic
study of early word meaning: Universal ontology
and linguistic influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Jackendoff, R., & Landau, B. (1991). Spatial language
and spatial congnition. In D. J. Napoli & J. A. Kegl

395

(Eds.), Bridges between psychology and linguistics
(pp. 145-169). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Labov, W. (1973). The boundaries of words and their
meanings. In C-J. N. Bailey and R. W. Shuy (Eds.),
New ways of analyzing variation in English.
Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Landau, B.
(1996).
“Multiple geometric
representations of objects in languages and language
learners.” In Bloom, P., Peterson, M. A., Nadel, L.,
and Garrett, M. F. (Eds.), Language and Space.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and
“where” in spatial language and spatial cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Landau, B., & Stecker, D. S. (1990). Objects and
places: Geometric and syntactic representations in
early lexical learning. Cognitive Development, 5,
287-312.
Levin, B.
(1993).
English verb classes and
alternations: A preliminary investigation. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Levinson, S.C. (1996). Relativity in spatial conception
and description. In Gumperz, J. and Levinson, S.
(Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press
Lucy, J. A. (1992). Grammatical categories and
cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(1976).
Language and perception. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.
Regier, T. (1996). The human semantic potential:
Spatial language and constrained connectionism.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sinha, C., & Kuteva, T. (1995). Distributed spatial
semantics. Nordic Journal of Linguistics, 18, 167199.
Sinha, C. & Thorseng, L. A. (1995). A coding system
for spatial relational reference. Cognitive Linguistics,
6-2/3, 261-309.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.
Pick and L. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation:
Theory, research, and application. New York:
Plenum Press.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49-100.
Vandeloise, C. (1991). Spatial prepositions: A case
study from French. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Vandeloise, C. (1994). Methodology and analyses of
the preposition in. Cognitive Linguistics, 5 (2), 157184.

