UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gender Difference in Effects of Conflict on Cognitive Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/50097949

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Tomida, Eiji
Maruno, Shunichi

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gender Difference in Effects of Conflict on Cognitive Change
Eiji Tomida (e.t.edu@mbox.nc.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Department of Behavioral and Health Sciences, Graduate School of Human-Environment Studies,
Kyushu University, Hakozaki6-19-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8581 JAPAN
Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science

Shunichi Maruno (syunedu@mbox.nc.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Department of Human Sciences, Faculty of Human-Environment Studies,
Kyushu University, Hakozaki6-19-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8581 JAPAN

Abstract
The aim of this study was to examine whether gender
difference mediates the effects of conflict on cognitive
change through social interaction. Forty three
undergraduate participants were divided into 10 groups
and asked to jointly construct a “naïve path model”
explaining intuitively the cause of Japanese teenager’s
aggression through discussion. They were also asked to
personally construct a similar naïve model before and
after the discussion sessions. These personal models
were compared within subjects and the degree of change
in the explanation was individually assessed. Coding the
transcriptions of all discussion sessions, we counted the
frequencies of utterance, for example, counter-arguing,
interpreting, and agreeing etc. Examining the
relationships between frequencies of something being
uttered by others and the degree of change in the
explanation, we found that the degree of change in the
explanation correlated with the frequency of “being
interpreted”, but not with “being counter-argued”.
However, only in case of counter-argument, male and
female samples showed different types of relationship
with the degree of change in explanation. Specifically,
whereas females had a negative relationship, males had a
positive one. This result indicates that we need to
examine effects of personal attributes affecting the
interpretation of specific utterances to fully explicate the
mechanisms of cognitive change through social
interaction.

Theoretical Background
One of distinctive differences between inter-personal
and intra-personal information processing is that the
former includes an interpretation of the message. Due to
this nature, a message cannot always be identical
between senders and receivers in interpersonal
communication (Bakhtin, 1979; Clark, 1997). This
inconsistency of interpreted messages is partially
attributed to the hierarchical nature of communication,
as pointed out by the anthropologist Bateson (1972). In
verbal communication, an uttered verbal message is not
only determined by the literal meaning but also by the
contingent information available in the context, such as
countenance, manner, and intonation. The contingent

1164

information is used by the receiver as signals to
determine how to interpret the uttered message, known
as “meta-message”. In addition, the process that metamessage determines the meaning of message is called
“framing”.
Following a theoretical frame developed by Bateson,
socio-linguists have demonstrated that individual
differences in cultural backgrounds, gender, and
personal preferences strongly affect how to frame a
message. For instance, in a small group discussion for
problem solving, people sometimes engage in conflict.
In this situation, some people might recognize it as a
kind of game to compete with each other and feel it to
be interesting. However, others might feel personal
hostility from the conflict and be discouraged from
being involved in these exchanges.
On the other hand, many researchers on cognitive
development and conceptual change have examined the
effects of certain verbal behaviors on cognitive change.
For example, the facilitative effects on moral
development of transactive discussion, which is largely
characterized by reasoning that operates on the
partner’s statement, has been examined (Berkowitz, &
Gibbs, 1983; Kruger, 1993). And Leitão (2000)
demonstrated that counterargument in conversation has
the function of slightly revising the original claim. All
these studies have only focused on the functions of
overt conversational moves and have largely neglected
the covert interpretational aspects behind them.
However, taking into consideration the fact that
individual differences in personal backgrounds
contribute to a variety of interpretations of one message,
it is reasonable to infer that certain verbal moves works
differently on knowledge construction processes
depending on the personal attributes. If we know better
what types of verbal move work different depending on
what types of personal attribute, these findings would
help to make our everyday discussion more effective.
In present study, it was explored whether the effect
of certain verbal move on knowledge construction
through collaborative reasoning interacts with the
participant’s personal attribute. Specifically, we

examined the effect of conflict, which was assumed to
interact with gender differences, on the degree of
cognitive change. The reason we focused on conflict is
that conflicting utterances such as counter-argument
have been intensively examined in order to explore
their facilitative effect on cognitive change (e.g. Kruger,
1993; Leitão, 2000; Tomida & Maruno, in preparation).
Concerning gender, sociolinguists (e.g. Tannen, 1994)
have exemplified how two distinctive gender-related
styles of conversation might lead to misunderstandings
in conflicting talk between men and women. In general,
it has been reported that male speakers have a
competitive style and are inclined to engage in conflict
and female speakers have a cooperative style and are
inclined to avoid conflict (e.g. Tannen, 1996). Because
of this difference in conversational style, if a man
encounters the other’s counter-argument, he would
easily accept the conversational style and concentrate
more on replying to the prior utterance. In case of a
woman, however, she would try to avoid the conflict
and less concentrate on replying. If these inferences are
the case, gender difference is expected to mediate the
effect of conflict. More specifically, men would change
their beliefs or views through confrontations of counterargument in conversation, but women would not.
To investigate this hypothesis, we used an available
data set which was collected as a part of our project.
This data set was consisted mainly of observational data,
which was collected in small group discussion situation
where the student participants were given the task of
solving the ill-defined task collaboratively. The
transcriptions from the data were coded and the
frequencies of utterance categories were counted as
personal scores. Then we compared the effects of these
frequencies of utterance on cognitive change in terms of
gender difference. As well as counter-arguing, we also
examined the effect of interpretation. The reason is that
interpretation is one of the cooperative activities which
has been regarded as a key to cognitive facilitation in
social interaction by developmental psychologists (e.g.
Damon & Killen, 1982). Comparing the effects of

counter-argument and interpretation, we can verify
whether the assumed gender difference is specific to the
effect of conflict or not.
In
addition,
we
investigated
participants’
conversational style using self-rating scales to evaluate
their behavioral tendency in an everyday context to
ascertain the theoretical assumption adopted here. For
this aim, a short version of Maruno-Kato Discussion
Inventory (MKDI), which constituted of 13 scales to
measure a wide range of factors including discussion
skills, monitoring abilities, and attitudes/values toward
discussion, was employed (see Appendix). Among
these scales in skill domain, strategic inquiring, critical
thinking, and discussing with fairness are related to
behavioral tendency to engage in conflict. If the
assumption adopted in this study is appropriate for the
samples, it is expected that males would have higher
scores on these conflict-related scales than females. As
well as the self-rating scores, gender difference in
frequencies of utterance is also expected. Similar to the
self-rating scores, males would produce conflict-related
utterances more often than females and females would
do cooperation-related utterances more often than males.

Method
Participants
Forty-three undergraduate students (16 males and 27
females, M = 20.1 years old) enrolled in a psychology
course, were asked to participate in our sessions. They
received research participant credit for their
introductory psychology course.

Questionnaire
A short version of the MKDI (64 items) was mainly
employed. It consists of the three domains with (1) 6
scales for discussion skill (strategic inquiring,
modulation of speech to the level of others’
understanding, discussion goal directedness and
necessary self-regulation, lack of interpersonal patience,
critical thinking, and discussing with fairness), (2) 4
scales for different types of monitoring in discussion

Table 1 Main categories in coding scheme (translated and excerpted from Tomida & Maruno (2000)).
Brief descriptions
Coding categories
Providng one's own ideas which are relevant to the solution for the problems
Suggesting
discussed there.
Counter-arguing

Providing one's own ideas in opposition to others' ideas.

Denying

Denying others' ideas without stating any reasons or alternative ideas.

Doubting

Doubting certainty of others' ideas or knowledge shared with the members.

Pointing out problems

Pointing out the problems in other's previously provided ideas.

Chiming in

Offering agreeable response to others when they are talking.

Interpretation

Interpreting what others mean by their previous utterances.

Confirming

Making sure whether he/she understands what others stated correctly.

Agreeing

Making responses which explicate that they hold same opinion to others.

1165

situation (self/other monitoring, situational monitoring,
collective monitoring, and time monitoring) and (3) 3
scales for attitude/value toward discussions (lack of
self-confidence, valuing the importance of discussions,
and self-obtrusiveness). Detailed descriptions of the
inventory are shown in Appendix. Although other
several questionnaires were administered at the same
time, they were not examined here.

Procedure
Participants completed the MKDI one week before
discussion sessions took place. They were asked to rate
the MKDI items on a 7-point scale how descriptive
statements are of themselves. Based upon their selfrating scores, participants were assigned into one of 10
groups (each including 4-5 members) so that the
average level of discussion skill is equally counterbalanced among groups by their total MKDI score. A
10-minute session was repeated 3 times. Each group
was told for the goal of their discussion session to come
up with hypothetical causes for Japanese teenagers’
aggressive behavior and to draw a naïve path-model
that explains the causal relation among them using a
whiteboard and markers. Before and after these
discussion sessions, each participant repeatedly drew a
naïve path model on a personal answer sheet,
independent from the collective decisions of their own
groups. The personally constructed path models before
and after the group sessions were compared and the
degree of change in knowledge domain included in
these path models were assessed. All discussion
sessions were videotaped.
Assessment of Change in Explanation To calculate

the degree of change in the explanation, we initially
coded explanations included in the path model which
each participant constructed. The coding system we
employed consisted of 24 domain categories including
“lack of sympathy for others”, “inability to tolerate
frustration”, and “exposure to violence in early
childhood” (Tomida & Maruno, in preparation). After
coding, each participant’s number of domain category
included in his/her path model was counted. All
explanations were coded by the first author. About 20%
of all explanations were randomly selected and
independently recorded and the inter-rater reliability
was calculated. The degree of agreement obtained was
sufficiently high, Cohen’s Kappa = .78. Finally, the
number of domain categories which were adopted into
each participant’s naïve model and one which was
rejected from his/her model through discussions was
counted respectively. Both of these variables indicate
the degree of change in the explanation. In this study,
however, only the frequency of rejection was subject of
further analysis because people easily adopt a new
explanation category without any reflection and the
frequency of adoption was considered inappropriate for
the index of change in belief or view.
Coding of Discourse All videotaped discussions were
transcribed. All transcriptions were coded by the first
author with a coding scheme shown in Table 1. The
analysis unit for coding was the conversational turn.
Each turn was identified as one of the categories in the
coding system. Total frequencies of utterance for each
category were calculated as the speaker’s personal score.
In addition to the speaker’s frequencies of utterance,
frequencies of being uttered by others (e.g. frequency of
being counter-argued by the other) were counted as the

Table 2 Gender differences in frequencies of utterance and the MKDI subscores in the skill domain.
Female (N = 27)
Male (N = 16)
M
SD
M
SD
t value p value
13.33
1.72
2.18
0.04
Chiming
in
7.19
2.24
＜
CooperationInterpreting
2.31
0.56
2.67
0.43
related
utterance
Comfirming
3.13
0.88
4.44
0.68
categories
Agreeing
5.94
1.20
5.78
0.92
Counter-arguing
2.63
0.57
1.63
0.44
ConflictDenying
0.38
0.15
0.11
0.11
related
utterance
Doubting
1.25
0.33
1.22
0.25
categories
Pointing out problems
1.88
0.39
1.41
0.30
0.23
2.94
0.01
Strategic inquiring
3.35
0.30
＞ 2.22
Modulating of speech
4.48
0.28
3.98
0.22
Goal directedness
MKDI
5.23
0.21
4.93
0.16
& self-regulation
subscales
(skill domain)
0.23
2.29
0.03
Critical thinking
4.25
0.30
＞ 3.38
Discussing with fairness
4.73
0.22
0.17
2.21
0.03
＞ 4.13
Lack of patience
4.63
0.34
4.73
0.26

1166

Results and Discussion
Gender Difference in Utterance

Relationship between Self-rating Scores and
Frequencies of Utterance
Table 3 shows correlations between the MKDI scores in
skill domain and frequencies of utterance. All the scores
on conflict-related scales have at least one significant
relationship with conflict-related categories of utterance.
On the contrary, there was no significant relationship
between the other self-rating scores and any frequencies
of utterance. It might indicate that the participants’
general behavioral tendency of engaging in conflict was
reflected in the discussion sessions we observed here.

10
8
6
4
2
0
-1

0

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency of being counter-argued

9

Figure 1: A Relationship between frequency
of being counter-argued and degree of change
in explanation.

12

Change in explanation

Table 2 shows gender differences in frequencies of
utterance and the MKDI sub-scores in the skill domain.
As indicated in the upper part, the only significant
effect of gender difference was found in the frequency
of chiming in (t (41) = 2.18, p < .05). It indicates that
females more frequently chimed in more frequently
than males. On the other hand, as indicated in the lower
part, the MKDI scores on strategic inquiring, critical
thinking, and discussing with fairness were significantly
higher in males than in females (t (41) = 2.94, p < .01;
2.29, p < .05; 2.21, p < .05). Concerning frequencies of
utterance, hypotheses were only partially supported.
However, scores on the conflict-related MKDI scales
were clearly consistent with hypotheses.

12

Change in explanation

personal scores of the directed participant. To assess
inter-rater reliability, about 20% of all sessions were
randomly selected and independently recorded. The
obtained degree of agreement was sufficiently high,
Cohen’s Kappa = .65 - .80 (M = .73).

10
8
6
4
2
0
-1

Gender Difference in Effects of Utterance

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Frequency of being interpreted

9

10

Figure 2: A Relationship between frequency
of being interpreted and degree of change in
explanation.

Figure 1 is a scatterplot, which shows the relationship
between frequency of being counter-argued by other
participant and degree of change in explanation through

Table 3 Correlations between the MKDI sub-scores in the skill domain and frequencies of utterance.
Conflict-related utterance categories
Cooperation-related utterance categories
CounterPointing out Chiming Interpret- ComfirmDenying Doubting
Agreeing
MKDI subscales
arguing
problems
in
ing
ing
Strategic inquiring

.26 †

.11

.11

.09

-.08

.32 *

.04

.11

Modulating of speech

.14

.08

-.14

-.05

.01

.26 †

.12

.08

Goal directedness
& self-regulation

.12

.04

-.16

-.02

-.10

.17

.30 †

Critical thinking

.25

.31 *

.07

.25

.21
<.01

.18

.24

<.01

Discussing with fairness
Lack of patience

.28 †

.36 *

.14

.08

.35 *
.29 †
<.01

Note: † p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01.

1167

.30 *
.13

-.18

.24

-.08

-.02

.26 †

-.20
.40 **

discussions. The ellipses fitted to the plot indicate
bivariate normal distribution with 90% probability. The
ellipse with a solid line shows male samples’
distribution and a dotted line shows female samples’
distribution. When we calculated correlation coefficient
with all samples, there was no correlation (r = .04).
However, when samples were divided into male group
and female group, two different types of relationship
emerged. As shown in Figure 1, whereas female
samples have a negative relationship (r = -.26, p = .18),
male samples have a positive relationship clearly (r
= .39, p = .13). Even though sufficient statistically
significant levels were not achieved, the gender
difference was prominent. However there is possibility
that the negative correlation in females due to an
outliner. To eliminate this possibility, we re-calculated
the correlation without the outliner. As a result, we
obtained r = -.34 (p = .08) with female sample. It was
found that the gender difference we obtained was not an
artifact.
On the other hand, as shown in Figure 2, a bivariate
distribution between the frequency of being interpreted
and the degree of change in explanation was clearly
different. Both the relationship in male samples (r = .47,
p = < .10) and the corresponding in female samples (r
= .45, p = < .05) were highly consistent with the
combined samples (r = .43, p = < .01). Based on the
theoretical assumption employed here, these results
could be interpreted as evidence that gender difference
in the framing process of conflict-related utterance
made males engage more in the explorative process.
However, the interest of this paper is not limited for the
effects of gender difference themselves. Rather, the
implication we draw from the data is that specific
personal attributes such as gender difference can
mediate interpretation of messages in verbal interaction
for problem-solving.

Limitations and Conclusion
This study has the following limitations. As we utilized
an available data set, a number of samples large enough
to generalize the results obtained here wasn’t collected
at the present moment. In addition, we have not
operationalized the utterance categories which are
closely related to coordination. Furthermore, we
haven’t operationalized the personal background which
was assumed to be used to frame other’s utterance and
the reflection process in the framing. Finally, the results
shouldn’t be interpreted that one gender is more in
favor of discussion or problem solving than another.
Despite these limitations, we found a substantial
gender difference in the facilitative effect of conflict on
cognitive change and the gender differences in verbal
behaviors partially backing up the theoretical
assumption we employed here. These results indicate,
we think, that the framing process should be taken into

1168

consideration to have a better understanding of
conflict’s effect on cognitive change.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Japanese Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research to the second
author (PI: S. Maruno, Project No:11301004, 19992001) for research planning and data collection and to
the first author (PI: E. Tomida, Research No: 14008959,
2002-2003) for analysis.

References
Bakhtin, M. M. (1979). Estetika slovesnogo tvorchestva
[The aesthetics of verbal creation]. Moscow:
Iskusstvo.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind. New
York: Ballantine book.
Berkowitz, M. W., & Gibbs, J. C. (1983). Measuring
the developmental features of moral discussion.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 29, 399-410.
Clark, H. H. (1997). Dogmas of understanding.
Discourse Processes, 23, 567-598.
Damon, W. & Killen, M. (1982). Peer interaction and
the process of change in children’s moral reasoning.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 28, 347-367.
Kato, K. & Maruno, S. (2000, August). Development of
Maruno-Kato Discussion Inventory (MKDI). Poster
presented at the 108th Annual Convention of the
American Psychological Association, Washington, D.
C.
Kruger, A. C. (1993). Peer collaboration: conflict,
cooperation, or both? Social Development, 2, 165-182.
Leitão, S. (2000). The potential of argument in
knowledge building. Human Development. , 43, 332360.
Tannen, D. (1994). Gender and discourse. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tannen, D. (1995). Talking from 9 to 5: women and
men in the workplace: language, sex and power. New
York: Avon Books.
Tomida, E. & Maruno, S. (2000). Exploring the
distinctive patterns of verbal interaction which
contribute to change discussants’ views in everyday
reasoning. Journal of Cognitive Processes and
Experiencing, 9, 1-23. (In Japanese with an English
summary)
Tomida, E., & Maruno, S. (in preparation). What types
of utterance are related to explanatory change in
discussion?: A discursive approach to everyday
thinking.

Appendix The MKDI sub-scales in the skill domain (Kato & Maruno, 2000, Translated from Japanese version).
Subscales
Strategic inquiring

Brief Descriptions
Skills that one can pose
opposite ideas or views to
others intentionally, aiming
at extention of others' ideas
or revitalization of the
discussion.

Modulation of speech
to the level of
others' understanding

Ability to modulate one's
own speech to the level of
others' understanding, by
changing the vocabulary or
the method/complexity of
the explanation.

Goal directedness
and necessary
self-regulation

Critical thinking

Ability to check the
direcition of the discussion
and ability to bring one's
own or the group's speech
back in line with the
direction of the original goal.
Ability to think skeptically
about what is believed to the
truth or a fact.

Sample Items
1. To revitalize discussions, I intentionally pose opposite
opinions/ideas.
2. To make people aware of the crucial issue here, I
intentionally pose opposite opinions/ideas.
3. To check on others' understanding, I intentionally pose
opposite opinions/ideas.
1. Depending on the level of others' knowledge, I try to
modulate the way I speak.
2. I try to choose expressions and explanation so that others
would better understand me.
3. Depending on the level of the others' knowledge, I change
my words and ways of explanation.
1. When my opinion gets out of tune with what others are
discussing, I try to figure out how I got off the line.
2. I try to think what the essential issue is for the discussion.
3. When our discussion keeps doubling back on itself and gets
nowhere, I try to think for what purpose we begin our
discussion in the first place.
1. I try to be skeptical of what is believed to be a fact.
2. I try to think critically of what is believed to be a fact.
3. I try to doubt what people usually assume to be true.

Discussing
with fairness

Lack of interpersonal
patience

A personal tendency to say
what they think, even when
their speech would lead to
negative results such as
putting the speaker in bad
positions or effect the social
relationships negatively.

1. Even if I might be held for responsible, I would dare to
express the opinions I believe in.

A personal tendency to be
impatient at social
interactions and to readily
get frustrated with other's
behavior.

1. I tend to chip in when I get frustrated with others' slow
understanding.
2. I tend to chip in on others' talking.

2. Even when I would be put in a bad position, I would express
my opinions with fairness.
3. My concern with possible negative consequences on our
relationship stops me from expressing my honest opinions.

3. I get frustrated when others think slowly.

1169

