UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grounding Functions of Instrument Plays in Dialogue: a Case-Study of Piano Duos in Joint
Practice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tx4b9k4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Oshima, Chika
Shimojima, Atsushi

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grounding Functions of Instrument Plays in Dialogue: a Case-Study of
Piano Duos in Joint Practice
Chika Oshima½ and Atsushi Shimojima½ ¾
½ School of Knowledge Science
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1 Asahi-dai, Tatsunokuchi, Nomi-gun, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
¾

ATR Media Information Science Labs
2-2 Hikari-dai, Seika, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan
cooshi,ashimoji@jaist.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper reports an exploratory study of the grounding functions of instrument plays in dialogue. Grounding
theories of dialogue (Clark & Schaefer 1989, Clark 1996,
Traum 1994) have been mainly modeled on exchanges
in spoken language, and the contributions of non-verbal
media to the grounding process are a largely untouched
area. We used the Clark-Schaefer contribution model as
a core theory, and analyzed six dialogues conducted in
joint practice session of a piano duo play. We found
that the two general functions of external representations,
namely, a cognitive function for personal manipulation of
information and a communicative function for interpersonal presentation of information, were co-present and
integrated in piano plays in our data.

A series of studies by Clark and others (Clark &
Schaefer 1989, Clark 1996, Traum 1994) has persuasively shown that many features of human dialogue can
be understood as measures and endeavors for grounding,
the process to increase a set of beliefs that are agreed
upon by all participants of dialogue. The set of beliefs
thus established at a given stage of dialogue are called the
common ground of that stage, and any beliefs in the common ground can be presupposed in subsequent stages.
Participants are engaged in grounding as a joint project,
and they ensure effective grounding by taking various
measures, including efﬁcient presentation of information
and compact exchanges of understanding signals.
Although grounding can involve both verbal and nonverbal presentation of information in principle, theories
of grounding has been mainly modeled on face-to-face
dialogue conducted by spoken language. The grounding
process involving a substantive use of non-verbal representations such as gestures, drawings, and instrument
plays, is largely an open question. How do people establish a common ground when a non-verbal representation system is available in addition to spoken language?
Is the grounding process signiﬁcantly different from the
one involving only spoken language? If so, what exactly
are the impacts of the presence of a non-verbal system
on the grounding process?
In addition to a long tradition of semiotic research,
there has been a renewed interest in the cognitive function of external non-verbal representations, especially of
drawings (e.g., Zhang & Norman 1994, Shimojima 1995,
Stenning & Oberlander 1995, Suwa &Tversky 1997).

892

The focus of research, however, has been on the way
external non-verbal representations facilitate a personal
process of designing and problem-solving, rather than on
their functions in communicative settings such as dialogue.
Some recent research has focused on the impacts of
non-verbal representations on spoken dialogue. For example, McNeil (1995) was concerned with gestures in
face-to-face conversation; Neilson & Lee (1994) with
drawings in collaborative design, and Umata et al. (2000)
with drawings in collaborative problem solving. These
studies, however, have been rather sporadic, examining
different aspects of dialogue on which non-verbal representations extend their impacts. None have studied their
impacts on the grounding process particularly.
Clark & Brennan (1991) offers a conceptual comparison of different communicative settings (e.g., face-toface dialogue, telephone dialogue, letter correspondence,
video conferencing) in terms of their impacts on the
grounding process. Communicative settings generally
restrict the available types of representations. For example, telephone conversation allows only spoken language
but an addition of a shared whiteboard introduces written
text and various types of drawings. Thus, Clark & Brennan’s research should have some direct implications on
the impacts of certain non-verbal media on the grounding process. The exact implications are yet to be explored
however.
In this paper, we are interested in the impacts of instrumental plays on grounding processes. Instrumental
plays are non-verbal representations, just as drawings
and gestures are. They are however non-persist representations that occur and diminish in a limited time span. In
this respect, they differ from drawings whose traces usually remain on drawing surfaces until somebody erases
them. Instrument plays differ from written text in the
same sense. They also differ from gestures in being auditory media as opposed to visual media. Instrument plays
are actually closer to spoken language in these respects.
Their distance from more typical non-verbal representations and their closeness to spoken language make instrument plays a particularly interesting subject of study.
By comparing the use of instrument plays with that of
gestures and drawings, we can abstract away special features of particular non-verbal media and extract more
general functional differences between non-verbal repre-

sentations and spoken language in grounding processes.
A study of instrumental plays from the grounding perspective has practical implications too. Ideas about music, concerning how to play it, how it should sound, and
how it sounded, are notoriously difﬁcult information to
convey in spoken language. Players, composers, instructors, and students however manage to exchange such
ideas in everyday conversation. Detailed studies of how
people use instrumental plays in dialogue should lead to
an analysis of their communicative expertise, suggesting
an efﬁcient methodology of presenting and grounding
musical ideas.

Method
Subjects

series of piano sounds, segmeted by (1) the occurrence of
a silence followed by speech and (2) a change of players.
Using this deﬁnition, we identiﬁed a total of 404 play
units in the six dialogues we recorded. Table 1 shows the
distribution of different categories of play units and thier
mean durations.
Of the play units we identiﬁed, 273 were partial plays
of the music by single players, accounting for 67.5% of
all play units; 74 were partial plays by pairs; 55 were full
plays of the music by pairs; only 2 were full plays by
single players. The average duration of play units was
4.2 seconds in the solo/partial case, 17.4 seconds in the
duo/partial case, 92.4 seconds in the solo/full case, and
93.0 seconds in the duo/full case.

Contribution Tagging

Our subjects consisted of one male pair and one female
pair of graduate students, in the age range from 23 to
32. The members of each pair were unfamiliar with
each other. One member of each pair had beginning
piano-playing skill, having ﬁnished a Beyer primer: the
other member had intermediate skill, having practiced
for about nine years.

Task
The music used in our observation was F. Chopin’s Prelude Op.28–15, commonly known as Rain Drop. We
used a shorter version rearranged for duo play, consisting
of 28 bars. The part for Primo was signiﬁcantly easier
than the part for Secondo, and was assigned to the beginner member of each pair. The Secondo part was assigned
to the intermediate member. Each part was estimated to
be easy enough for the respective players to learn after a
reasonable amount of practice.
Each pair was asked to jointly practise duo play of
Rain Drop in three joint practice sessions. The joint sessions for each pair were held over a period of approximately 10 days, with each session being 40 minutes in
length. Each subject was instructed to practice her part
in advance of the joint practice series, at least until she
could play through her part without mistakes. The subjects received limited monetary compensation for both
their personal practice and their participation in the joint
practice sessions.

Observation setting
The joint practice sessions were held in a sound-proof
room, using the piano model YAMAHA C5. We videotaped the subjects’ hand movements on the music scores
on the piano keys, the subjects’ faces, and their foot
movements on the pedals with separate video cameras.
The sound and speech were recorded on compact discs
through four microphones.

Play units
We transcribed the speech of the six dialogues that we
recorded, with special attention to the timing of piano
plays relative to speech. For our purpose, a play unit is a

893

According to Clark & Schaefer (1989), grounding proceeds through basic units of exchanges, called contributions. A contribution consists of the following two
stages:
Presentation phase Speaker presents utterance  for
does so on the assumption
partner  to consider.
that, if  gives evidence  or stronger, can believe
that  understands what means by .

Acceptance phase  accepts utterance  by giving evidence ¼ that  believes  understands what means
by .  does so on the assumption that, once regwill also believe that  underisters evidence ¼ ,
stands.
Our immediate goal was to analyze the roles of piano
plays in the grounding process, so a natural ﬁrst step was
to apply the Clark-Schaefer model to our data. Thus we
attempted to classify utterances and play units in terms
of which play units they belong to, and which phase of
the contribution they belong to.
The endeavor, however, immediately turned disastrous. Numerous instances of play units in our data resisted straightforward classiﬁcation of this scheme. The
following is an excerpt from our dialogue data:1
Secondo: dono kuraikana
(How fast should it be?)

Play bar1 [Secondo]: 3.78
(2.94)[
kono kuraide
(Let us play at this tempo

or so.)
This sequence occurred at the beginning of the second joint practice session by the female pair. The pair
had agreed to play through the music as a starter for this
1
We generally follow the Jefferson convention of transcription. The Japanese trasnscription of each utterance is followed
by an English gloss in parentheses. An underlined text represents a play unit, with an indication of the part of music and the
duration of play.

Table 1: Frequencies and mean durations of play units, classiﬁed to solo/partial plays, duo/partial plays, solo/full
plays, and duo/full plays.
categories
Solo/Partial
Duo/Partial
Solo/Full
Duo/Full
Total

frequency
273 (67.6%)
74 (18.3%)
2 (0.5%)
55 (13.6%)
404 (100.0%)

day’s session, and Secondo was apparently trying to ﬁnd
the appropriate tempo for the joint play. In this context,
Secondo’s question “dono kuraikana (How fast should it
be?)” was directed more to herself than to the partner. In
fact, without waiting for the partner’s response, Secondo
went on to play a part of his part, as though she was experimenting on his play. This play, therefore, apparently
started as a personal experiment rather than a presentation to the partner. It sounded as a “monologue play”, so
to speak.
Our data contains many examples of such monologue
plays. According the Clark-Schaefer model, such a play
cannot be classiﬁed neither as a presentation nor an acceptance, since it is not what the player presents for the
partner to consider or to register as evidence of understanding.
However, we cannot dismiss such monologue plays as
irrelevant to the grounding process. For in some cases,
a play that started as a monologue play was used as a
presentation to the partner. For example, towards the end
of the monologue play in the above excerpt, the speaker
made a proposal clearly directed to the partner, saying
“kono kuraide (Let us play at this tempo or so)”. Here,
the speaker used “kono (this)” to refer to the tempo of the
play that she just performed. Thus, the play was used as
a presentation after all. It was a “monologue play turned
to be a public exhibition”, so to speak.
As we will see later, our data contained several other
types of play units that are “irregular” to the standard
Clark-Schafer model of contributions. The grounding
functions of piano plays in our data appears more complex, and we had to signiﬁcantly extend the standard
model to do justice to this complexity. The rest of this
section describes our strategy.
We focused our attention on the case of solo/partial
plays, the dominant case accounting for nearly 70% of all
play units in our data. For each play unit in this category,
we ﬁrst judged whether it belongs to a “presentation” or
an “acceptance”.2 For our purpose, a presentation is a set
of verbal or non-verbal signals (such as piano plays) presented for some participant of the dialogue to consider,
and an acceptance is a set of verbal or non-verbal sig2
On the Clark-Schaefer model, a presentation in one contribution usually works as an acceptance in another contribution,
and even an entire contribution can work as an acceptance in
another contribution. Here, we simplify the terminology by reserving the term “presentation” for those presentations in contributions that do not work as acceptances in other contributions. Any other presentations are called “acceptances”.

894

mean duration (seconds)
4.2
17.4
93
92.4

nals for some participant of the dialogue to consider as
an evidence of understanding of the prior presentation.
This conception of presentation and acceptance extends the original Clark-Schaefer deﬁnition, in that it permits a presentation of signals to the presenter her/himself
and an acceptance from the presenter her/himself. Thus,
when a play unit was judged to serve to a presentation,
we further judged (1) the target of presentation, namely,
to whom the presentation was directed, and (2) the acceptor of presentation, namely, from whom the presentation
received an acceptance. For the target of presentation,
we employed the following criteria:

¯ A play unit belongs to a to-other presentation if either itself is a Clark-Schaefer presentation, or the
player issues a positive signal that is a part of a
Clark-Schaefer presentation.
¯

belongs to a to-self presentation if itself is not a
Clark-Schaefer presentation, and before or during ,
the player issues no positive signal that is a part of a
Clark-Schaefer presentation.

Note that the to-other case and the to-self case are not
mutually exclusive. Both deﬁnitions apply if the player
issues a relevant signal only after is ﬁnished, while
itself is not a Clark-Shaefer presentation and no relevant
signal is issued before or during . We labeled such a
play as belonging to a to-both presentations.
Our criteria for the acceptor of presentation was the
following:

¯ A presentation  receives a from-other acceptance if
 receives a Clark-Schaefer acceptance from the partner.
¯  receives a from-self acceptance if the presenter
her/himself issues a signal of understanding of  as
though  were presented by the partner.
A presentation was labeled as from-both if it receives
both types of acceptances; a presentation was labeled as
from-none if it receives none of these types of acceptances.
In view of the complexity of information required for
tagging, we employed the method of consensus labeling.
An inter-labeler reliability test will be administered in
future research.
In the following, a presentation is called a playing presentation if one or more play units belong to it. Since a
single presentation may contain more than one play unit,

the number of plays units are generally larger than the
number of playing presentations in a given dialogue.

Play a G tone several times [secondo]: 2.04
[[
korega renzoku suru janaidesuka=

Results

(this is repeated, isn’t it?)

Overall, 260 play units belonged to presentations and 13
to acceptances, making up the total of 225 presentations
and 13 acceptances involving piano plays. Thus, most piano plays served as presentation components rather than
as acceptance components; most acceptances were done
in speech only.
Table 2 shows an analysis of the 225 presentations involving play units in terms of their targets and acceptors.
As shown in at the right-most column, a majority of presentations involving plays are directed to the dialogue
partner (134 cases, 59.6%), whereas a signiﬁcant number are directed to the presenter her/himself (86 cases,
38.2%). Some presentations are directed to both presenter and partner (5 cases, 2.2%). Thus, the presenters’ behaviors already suggest multiple functions of piano plays
in the dialogues we observed.
Turning to the bottom row, we see that about half of
the presentations obtain acceptances from the dialogue
partner (112 cases, 49.8%), whereas again a signiﬁcant
number of presentations are accepted by none (54 cases,
24.0%) or by the presenter her/himself (46 cases, 20.4%).
Some are even accepted by both presenter and partner
(13 cases, 5.8%). Thus, the accepters’ behaviors also
suggested a deviation from the standard grounding exchange consisting of a presentation to and an acceptance
from the partner. Therefore, it’s no wonder our data
looked chaotic at ﬁrst glance in terms of this standard.

Primo:

=hai
(Yes.)

Here, Secondo makes a conﬁrmation question (“this is
repeated, isn’t it?”) as he plays a G tone repeatedly.
Thus, his play clearly works as informational augmentation of his utterance: at minimum, it provides a referent for “kore (this)” by issuing a G tone and emphasizes repetitiveness through repeated issues of the G tone.
This reinforced presentation is immiediately accepted by
Primo’s conﬁrmation (“Yes”).
The high frequency of this type of playing presentation
indicates that piano plays, just as linguistic utterances,
can be integral components of a presentation in standard
interpersonal grounding exchanges.3
Self/none case Although other/other presentations
were most frequent, they are by no means dominant.
Accounting for only 43.1% of all playing presentations,
they do not even constitute the majority of cases.
We observed the self/none case as the second most frequent type of case (43 cases, 19.1%). In a self/none case,
the playing presentation is directed to the presenter herself, and it receives no signals for acceptance. The following is an example from our data:
Primo:

chotto matte kudasaine
(Wait a second, please.)

Discussions

[[
Play bar 1 [primo]:1.39
(Pointing to a part of the music) ja kono-henmade zenbuha hikenainode

What, more exactly, does this result imply about the
functions of piano plays in spoken dialogue? Let us discuss its implications by looking more closely at Table 2
and examining actual examples of playing presentations
taken from our data.

(Well, shall we play until around here?
Because I can’t play all.)

Two functions of playing presentations
We start with “other/other” cases, namely, playing presentations classiﬁed as “to-other” and “from-other”. (We
use abbreviations such as “other/self” and “self/both” in
the same way.)
Other/other case Although Table 2 looks chaotic at
ﬁrst glance, it shows that the most frequent use of piano
plays are still for standard grounding exchanges. There
are 97 cases of “other/other” presentations (namely, presentations classiﬁed as “to-other” and “from-other”),
which account for 43.1% of all playing presentations.
These are cases where the presentation is directed to
the partner and accepted by the partner, constituting a
paradigmatic interpersonal grounding exchange. The
following is a typical example taken from our data:
Secondo: nanka kono amadare yakara
(Well, because these... are rain drops,)

895

The ﬁrst utterance requests a momentary withdrawal
from the joint process, and the speaker immediately goes
on to a short play of her part. This play, therefore, is
a typical to-self presentation. In fact, there is no signal
for acceptance from the partner, and the speaker immediately goes on to her next utterance, whose content—a
proposal on the next practice playing—indicates her return to the joint process.
Clearly, the piano play in this case performs a different
function than the interpersonal grounding function in the
other/other case. The play is more personal than communicative, as evidenced by the prior request for withdrawal
from the joint process. The point of playing appears to
be a personal experiment, for the purpose of checking or
3

As indicated before, we also found several instances of piano plays used as signals of acceptance to partner presentations.
This provides further evidence of standard grounding functions
of piano plays.

Table 2: Distribution of presentations involving solo/partial play units, classiﬁed by the targets and the acceptors of
presentation.
To-self
To-other
To-both
total

From-self
28(12.4%)
18(8.0%)
0(0.0%)
46(20.4%)

From-other
11(4.9%)
97(43.1%)
4(1.8%)
112(49.8%)

From-both
4(1.8%)
9(4.0%)
0(0.0%)
13(5.8%)

learning how it would sound when a particular sequence
of notes is played in a certain way or under a certain condition. The piano is an external site for an informational
experiment by the player, just as sketching paper is for architects (Suwa & Tversky 1997), artists (Grabska 2001),
and problem-solvers (Zhang & Norman 1994, Stenning
& Oberlander 1995).
For case of reference, we may call the function of
such piano plays the cognitive function, as opposed to
the communicative function typically performed by piano plays in other/other presentations.

Secondo: nanyaro
(What shall I do?)

Play a C tone many times:3.43
e::to=
(Hmm....)

=Play bar10 [Secondo]: 2.74
are
(What?)

In this excerpt, the speaker makes three consecutive utterances, inserting two piano plays in between. He issues
no explicit signal that directs his plays to the partner, and
in fact no signals of acceptance are issued from the partner. It is the presenter himself who issues acceptance signals in the utterances “e::to (Hmm)” and “are (What?)”.
Thus, again the play is more personal experimentation
than interpersonal exhibition, and its main function is
cognitive rather than communicative.
Our data contains 28 cases of self/self presentation,
which, together with self/none cases, account for as
much as 31.6% of all playing presentations. Consequently, the piano plays contained in dialogue processes
are not homogeneous. There is a large class of presentations performing the communicative function but also a
comparatively large class performing the cognitive function. Plays with radically different functions can co-exist
in dialogue processes.

Continuity of the two functions

total
86(38.2%)
134(59.6%)
5(2.2%)
225(100.0%)

functions are actually continuous, as shown by the following three types of playing presentations.
Self/other case The following is a typical self/other
presentation, where the presentation is directed to the
presenter her/himself but accepted by the partner:
Secondo: mattene
(Give me a moment.)

Primo:
Self/self case The cognitive function is also manifested
in self/self presentations. The following is an example
from our data:

From-none
43(19.1%)
10(4.4%)
1(0.4%)
54(24.0%)

Play a part [primo]: 7.60
(5.46) [
aa kimochi motto tameteirutte
kannji desukane
(Oh, you’re holding a bit longer,
aren’t you?)

Secondo’s utterance requests a momentary withdrawal
from the joint process between her and the partner, and
she goes on to a 7.60 second play. This play, therefore,
is a to-self presentation, and its primary function should
be cognitive, an experimentation on how it sounds when
she plays the partner’s part in a certain way. Primo the
partner, however, issues an acceptance to this presentation, making a comment on Second’s performance. This
indicates that certain information about Secondo’s preferred way of playing is exhibited to Primo, and Primo in
turn signals her comprehension of the information. This
completes a grounding process. Thus, Secondo’s playing
presentation clearly has a communicative effect as well
as cognitive effect.
We observe 11 presentations of this type. We also observed 4 cases of self/both presentations, where the playing presentation is accepted by the partner and the presenter her/himself, although the play is directed to the
presenter only. These cases together account for 6.7% of
all playing presentations. They exemplify one particular
way in which the cognitive and communicative functions
of piano plays are integrated: a piano play done for personal experimentation publicly exhibits certain information to be accepted by the partner.
Other/self Still another integration pattern is exhibited
by other/self cases, where the presentation directed to the
partner is accepted by the presenter herself. For example:
Secondo: a ja kon kurai kana

This, however, does not mean that the communicative
and the cognitive functions are “discontinuous”, always
distributed to separate classes of presentations. The two

896

(Oh, okay, how about something like this?)

Play a part [secondo]: 1.22=
=n

(Eh?)

The piano play in this example clearly started out as
a demonstration of the content of “kon (this)” in the
preceding utterance. Yet, the presentation process is
suspended by the presenter’s own utterance “n (Eh?)”,
which signals that the presenter has caught something
probably unsatisfactory in his performance. Thus, this
play ends up functioning as a personal experiment, returning somewhat negative information.
Our data contains 18 presentations of this type. We
also observed 9 cases of other/both presentations where
the presentation is accepted by the presenter as well as
the partner, although it starts out as a presentation to the
partner. The cases of other/self and other/both together
make up 12% of all playing presentations. They exemplify a second type of cognitive and communicative integration in playing presentations: a play done for public
exhibition functions as personal experimentation to be
accepted by the presenter herself.
Both/other case Although small in number, both/other
presentations exemplify the third variety of the cognitive
and communicative integration: a play starting with an
experimentation function acquires an exdhibition function during the play. The following is an example from
our data:
Primo:
chotto kyokutan sugitaka
(Well, a bit too extreme.)

Play bar 6–7 [primo]: 10.77
ttekanjide doudesuka
(...is sounding all right?)

Secondo: hai iidesune
(Yes, it is good.)

Before and during the play, there is no public signal that
it is a part of any Clark-Schaefer presentation. Thus to
this point, its main function is personal experimentation.
Nevertheless, the play is then embedded in the next utterance that asks for the partner’s evaluation of the play.
At this point, therefore, the play acquires an additional,
interpersonal function of augmenting the content of a
question to the partner. The communicative function is
attached to the cognitive function during the very piano
play.

Conclusion
We extended the Clark-Schaefer model of contribution
to analyze the grounding functions of piano plays found
in our data. We identiﬁed two distinct functions of piano plays, as an expression tool to present complex ideas
about a music, and as an experimentation tool to acquire
a great amount of information about a performance that
would be hard to predict otherwise. These two functions were also continuous in that plays with one function
can acquire the other function during or after the performance. Whichever function a play may be intended for,

897

it is necessarily a public event when done in dialogue,
and it comes with certain unpredictability even for experienced performers. Thus, a play with one function always has a chance to acquire the other. This plausibly explains particularly rich structures of grounding afforded
by instrument plays.
Our study was exploratory in nature, and the above
picture must be further tested on larger samples involving a greater number of subject pairs. The playing skills,
social relationship, and personal styles of communication of subject pairs may well affect the target/acceptor
combinations of playing presentations, generating different distributions of the cognitive and communicative
functions of instrument plays. It would be particularly
interesting to study how these different distributions in
turn affect the efﬁcacy of grounding process, as measured by the types and amount of information successfully grounded in dialogues.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Dr. Kazushi Nishimoto,
Researcher of PRESTO, JST, for his supporting our research and suggestive advices.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. E. (1989). Contributing to discourse, Cognitive science, 13, 259–294.
Clark H. H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L.B. Resnick, J. Levine & S. Teasley, (Eds.),
Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington DC:
APA Press.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Grabska, E. (2001). Emergent shapes in graphical design. In
D.M. Dubois, (Ed.), Computing Anticipatory Sytems, Proceedings of American Institute of Physics.
McNeil, D. (1995). Hand and Mind. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Neilson, I., & Lee, J. (1994). Conversations with Graphics:
Implications for the Design of Natural Language/Graphics
Interfaces. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 40, 509–541.
Shimojima, A. (1995). Operational Constraints in Diagrammatic Reasoning. In J. Barwise & G. Allwein (Eds.), Logical Reasoning with Diagrams (pp. 27–48). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A Cognitive Theory of
Graphical and Linguistic Reasoning: Logic and Implementation. Cognitive Science, 191, 97–140.
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (1997). How Do Designers Shift
Their Focus of Attention in Their Own Sketches? In M.
Anderson (Ed.), Reasoning with Diagrammatic Representations: Papers from the 1997 AAAI Spring Symposium (pp.
102–108). Cambridge, MA: AAAI Press.
Traum, D. R. (1994). A computational theory of grounding in
natural language conversation.University of Rochester.
Umata,I., Shimojima, A., & Katagiri, Y. (2000). Talking
through Graphics: An Empirical Study of the Sequential
Integration of Modalities. The Proceedings of the TwentySecond Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 529–534).
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87–122.

