UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
I’ll Never Grow Up: Adult and Child Understanding of Aspect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7299b9fg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Wagner, Laura

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

I’ll Never Grow Up: Adult and Child Understanding of Aspect
Laura Wagner (lwagner@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, William James Hall
Cambridge, MA 02138

The basic pattern of temporal/aspectual grouping found in
the first language acquisition production data is summarized
in Table 1.

Abstract
This paper revisits the aspectual under-extension found in
children’s production data, in which children preferentially
link telic predicates with perfective/past morphology and
atelic predicates with imperfective/present morphology. I
argue that these aspectual groupings reflect a deep property of
linguistic/conceptual organization and are manifested in
various ways throughout the lifespan. The results of a new
sentence comparison task show that adults judge sentences
which conform to the children’s under-extended groupings as
better than those which do not.

Table 1: Temporal/Aspectual Groupings

Lexical Aspect
Grammatical Aspect
Tense

Group 1

Group 2

Telic
(punctual)
Perfective
Past

Atelic
(durative)
Imperfective
Present

Introduction
There is a well-documented pattern of under-extension in
children’s early production of verbal morphology. Until
some time around the age of 2;6, children acquiring a
variety of languages produce telic verbs with past and/or
perfective morphology and they produce atelic verbs1 with
present and/or imperfective morphology. That is, children
often say things like riding (atelic + imperfective) and broke
(telic + perfective) but very rarely say things like rode
(atelic + perfective) or breaking (telic + imperfective).
These temporal/aspectual groupings have been discussed
often because of their potential significance for the problem
of language acquisition. This paper will argue that the
groupings found in acquisition are just one manifestation
among many others of a deep organizational property of
language (or possibly cognition) itself. The departure point
for this argument comes from the prototype account of
Shirai & Andersen (1995; Andersen & Shirai 1996). This
paper supports and extends their account, and provides new
experimental support for the potency of the groupings in
adults.
This paper is organized as follows: after briefly reviewing
the temporal/aspectual groupings as identified through the
acquisition data, several additional examples beyond the
first language acquisition domain will be identified; finally,
a sentence comparison experiment will be reported in which
adults judged sentences which corresponded to the
acquisition groupings as better than those which did not.
1

The telic/atelic distinction does not, of course, rely just on the
verb but on features of the entire predicate (e.g. Tinkerbell ate is
atelic; Tinkerbell ate a pizza is telic). However, entire predicates
are rarely available in early child speech, and the classifications
here, as elsewhere, are based on plausible interpretations of the
verb in context.

1200

Each row of the table shows an independent dimension of
grammar. Lexical aspect (Aktionsarten) refers to inherent
properties of a predicate. The primary semantic division is
between telic predicates (i.e. achievements and
accomplishments) and atelic predicates (i.e. activities and
states); a secondary division in this domain concerns the
subjective duration of the event – durative predicates
describe events which last for some time while punctual
predicates describe those which subjectively take no time at
all. Grammatical aspect (or Viewpoint aspect) refers to the
perfective/imperfective distinction. Tense refers to the
distinction between past and present. In principle, each of
these dimensions is independent of the other (with a few
well known exceptions). The practice in children’s early
production, however, is to combine the values for each
dimension into sentences according to the groups outlined in
the columns. This grouping leads to a productive underextension, as children fail to utter legitimate cross-group
options, such as telic-imperfective-present sentences
(Wendy is making a sandwich) or atelic-perfective-past
sentences (Peter flew).
The existence of these groups in first language acquisition
production has been well documented for a variety of
languages, including English (Bloom, Lifter & Hafitz 1980,
Shirai & Andersen 1995), French (Bronckart & Sinclair
1973), Italian (Antinucci & Miller 1976), Polish (Weist et
al. 1984, Bronckart & Sinclair 1989), Mandarin (Li 1990),
Japanese (Rispoli 1981), and Hebrew (Berman 1983).
Children’s early comprehension abilities appear to be
somewhat more flexible, and children three years of age and
slightly younger have been shown to be able to understand
cross-group pairs, particularly telic-imperfective pairings
(Weist 1991; Weist, Atanassova, Wysocka & Pawlak 1999;
Weist Lyytinen, Wysocka & Atanassova 1997; Smith

Naigles & Wagner 2002). However, other studies have
found evidence for the continued influence of the groupings
(though sometimes in a weakened form) even in
comprehension (Wagner 2002, Wagner 2001a, Li &
Bowerman 1999, Stoll 1998).
A variety of explanations have been proposed to account
for children’s early reliance on these temporal/aspectual
groups. Some have proposed that children have a radically
different semantic organization compared to the adult
grammar (cf. Bronckart & Sinclair 1973; Bloom, Lifter &
Hafitz 1980) while others have proposed that children have
a subtly different semantic organization (Wagner 2002).
Olsen & Weinberg (1999) derive the groupings as a product
of children’s application of the subset principle, while
Bickerton sees the influence of the universal language bioprogram (1981).
The account put forward by Shirai & Andersen (1995;
Andersen & Shirai 1996; see also Li & Bowerman 1998 for
a related position) argues that the groups reflect prototypes
which anchor the temporal/aspectual categories; cross-group
pairings reflect less prototypical cases. The under-extended
use of tense and aspect morphology in early production is a
result of children clinging strongly to the prototype. The
precise force of this proposal depends largely on what the
prototypes themselves are taken to be: they could reflect a
radically different semantic organization (cf. Shirai &
Andersen 1995) or they might reflect conceptual
organization (see further the discussion in this paper).
Regardless, because the prototypes are not, in and of
themselves, products of the language acquisition process,
one strong prediction made by the prototype account is that
these aspectual groupings should be found in other
situations.
For example, Andersen & Shirai (1996) considered adults
engaged in the process of learning a language, that is, L2
acquisition. They surveyed a variety of studies examining
aspectual knowledge and usage in L2 learners and found
evidence that in general, they produced more combinations
that corresponded to the prototypical temporal/aspectual
groupings and appeared to understand these combinations
better as well. Similarly, Bickerton (1981) has found
evidence for the prototypical groupings in pidgins and
creole languages, further bolstering the claim that these
aspectual groups are important in language acquisition
under all sorts of circumstances.
Another approach was taken in Shirai & Andersen (1995).
They analyzed the speech of 3 parents talking to children
and found that the adult production showed the prototypical
groupings as strongly as the children’s speech did. It is
unclear if this is a general phenomenon in adult speech (see
Olsen, Weinberg, Lilly & Drury 1998 for evidence that it is
not wholly general even in speech to children) but it is
suggestive that under some circumstances, adults may talk –
aspectually speaking – like children.
Turning to the domain of comprehension, Wagner
(2001b) found evidence that adults’ understanding was
subtly affected by the prototypical groupings.
She

1201

conducted a sentence-to-picture matching task in which
subjects had to pair a telic-perfective sentence such as The
girl painted a flower to a picture in which there was a
completed flower, and a telic-imperfective sentence such as
The girl was painting a flower to a picture showing an
incomplete version of the same event. In a parallel set of
trials, subjects also matched an atelic-imperfective sentence
such as The boy was sleeping to a picture showing ongoing
sleeping, and an atelic-perfective version such as The boy
slept to a picture showing a boy playing next to a rumpled
bed. The performance of children (aged 3 to 5 years old) in
this task was better for the prototypical groupings; the effect
was particularly pronounced for trials in which the pictures
contained less information (i.e., children did worse when
they had to choose between completed and incomplete
flower paintings than when the picture choices also included
the agent of painting).
Adult performance was well above chance in all
conditions – clearly adults were able to understand nonprototypical groupings. However, within the narrow ceiling
range of adults’ success, a significant statistical interaction
was found, in the direction of the prototypical groupings.
That is, the few errors adults made were virtually all in the
non-prototypical groupings (telic + imperfective or atelic +
perfective). Thus it is possible to interpret these results as
showing that the difference between adults and children in
this task is not one of kind (adults understand something
children do not) but one of degree: adults and children agree
about what is hard, but adults are comparatively better at
dealing with hard cases.
The aim of the current sentence comparison study is to
investigate whether adults will be influenced by the
prototype groupings in a completely different domain.
Unlike previous investigations with adults (and with
children), the current task requires subjects neither to freely
generate items nor to make any explicit assessment of
meaning. Subjects are not asked at any level to compare
these sentences to situations in the world, but simply to
consider them as sentences of their language.
Subjects are presented with two sentences, both of them
grammatically correct, acceptable sentences of English. The
sentences vary only in how well they correspond to the
prototypical groupings. The subject’s task is to choose
which sentence is the better one. For example, in one trial,
subjects were asked to choose between The teacher carried
the box and The child was tapping the table; in another trial,
between The man has built a house and The woman is
winning the race.
If adults are influenced by the prototypical groups, then
we expect them to consistently choose sentences which
conform to the prototype as being better compared to those
which do not. In particular, the telic + punctual + perfective
+ past sentence (The woman won the race) and the atelic +
durative + imperfective + present sentence (The teacher is
carrying the box) should be chosen as the better sentences
when compared against every other sentence in the set
(except, perhaps against each other). Moreover, because

subjects must make a full range of judgments (including
many variants of non-prototypical cases), the results should
allow us to understand the nature of the prototypical
groupings in more detail.
For example, is there some subset of grammatical
information that forms the core of the prototype? One likely
candidate is a generalized notion of (potential) completion
which links the lexical aspect dimension of telicity and
grammatical aspect. Comrie (1976) has suggested that
telicity and perfectivity express the same information in the
lexical and grammatical domains respectively: telic
predicates are those which have the potential to complete
and perfective aspect signals actual completion; atelic
predicates and imperfective aspect mark the opposite.
Another potential core for the prototype might be created
out of grammatical aspect and tense. In many languages,
these two dimensions of meaning are conflated into unified
forms (cf. English simple past which conflates past and
perfective and French imparfait which conflates past and
imperfective). Indeed some languages even opt to mark
only one of these two, relying on adverbial expressions and
pragmatic implications to signal the missing meanings (e.g.
Mandarin marks only grammatical aspect and Modern
Hebrew marks only tense). Alternatively, it may be that all
the dimensions are equally important for the prototype and
all that matters is how many dimensions come from the
same group.

grammatical aspect. One base set is shown in Table 3 in the
full four forms.

Procedure

Subjects

Subjects were seated in front of a computer. Via written
instructions on the screen, they were told “You will see two
sentences presented to you. Your task is to indicate which
sentence you think is better. This may strike you as a funny
question – you may believe that both sentences are perfectly
OK. If you are unsure which sentence is better, just go with
your gut instinct. In some cases, the differences between
the two sentences will be very small, so please read the
sentences carefully.” Subjects were also informed to press
the “T” key if they chose the top sentence as better and the
“B” key if they chose the bottom sentence as better.
Following the instructions, subjects were presented with
every possible pairing of the 16 sentences for a total of 120
judgments. The two sentences appeared in 24 pt. font and
were easily readable by the subjects. To encourage subjects
to read both sentences before making their choice, the top
sentence was presented alone for 500 ms, and 500 ms after
both sentences were present on screen a row of three pink
asterisks was flashed in the middle of the screen. Subjects
were unable to choose either sentence until after the
asterisks had flashed (subjects were informed of this on the
instructions screen). Both sentences remained on the screen
until subjects made a choice. Sentences were presented
with Psyscope; presentation order was randomly generated
by the program. Subjects were given two breaks during the
study. The task took less than 20 minutes to complete.

12 undergraduate adults participated. They were recruited
at NYU and given course participation credit for their time.

Scoring

Methods

Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of 16 sentences. Four base sentences
were constructed by combining the two lexical aspect values
of durativity and telicity (see table 2). All the sentences
were transitive. Although there is a correlation in English
between transitivity and telicity (telic predicates are more
likely to be transitive and atelic predicates intransitive) it
was thought that variation in argument structure would
simply add a confound to the study.

Atelic

Durative

The man BUILD a house.

Punctual

The woman WIN the race.

Durative

The teacher CARRY the box.

Punctual

The child TAP the table.

Table 3: Full set of forms for one base
Past

Table 2: Base sentences
Telic

Every time a sentence was chosen, it received 1 point. The
mean number of points a sentence received across all
subjects was taken and used to create an overall score for
each of the sentences. The scores could range, therefore,
from 0 (a sentence that was never chosen as better,
regardless of what it was in competition with) to 15 (a
sentence was chosen as better against every other sentence
in the set).

Imperfective
Perfective

Present

Imperfective
Perfective

The woman was winning the
race.
The woman won the race.
The woman is winning the
race.
The woman has won the race.

Results
Each of these base sentences appeared in four forms
corresponding to all the combinations of tense and

1202

The scoring method used creates a ranking of all the test
sentences for each subject (though with higher scores
corresponding to lower ranks). Accordingly, the data were
treated as ordinal and non-parametric tests were conducted.

Higher scores indicate that a sentence was more often
chosen as better. A non-parametric Friedman Anova was
conducted on the scores of the full set of 16 sentences to
determine if there were overall differences among the
sentences. This analysis was highly significant: Χ2(15) =
79.65, p < 0.0001.
As predicted by the prototype account, the highest scoring
sentence was in fact a prototypical one: telic + punctual +
perfective + past, The woman won the race (mean score =
11.75). The complementary prototype sentence was the
fourth highest scoring sentence: atelic + durative +
imperfective + present, The teacher is carrying the box
(mean score = 9.5). The lowest scoring sentence was very
non-prototypical,
drawing
equally
from
both
temporal/aspectual groups: atelic + punctual + perfective +
present, The child has tapped the table (mean score = 2.75).
Indeed, all of the four lowest scoring sentences contained
two values from each temporal/aspectual group.
To directly test the prototype account, the test sentences
were re-coded for the number of values they contained that
were drawn from the same temporal/aspectual group. The
two most prototypical sentences (discussed above) drew all
four of their values from the same group; an additional eight
sentences drew three of their values from the same group;
and five sentences split their values equally between the
groups. A non-parametric Friedman Anova conducted over
the scores of items sharing two, three, and four values from
the same temporal/aspectual group was significant: Χ2(2) =
22.17, p < 0.0001. Wilcoxan matched-pairs signed-ranks
tests were used to compare the items. These tests showed
that sentences sharing three values from the same group
received higher scores than those sharing only two (Z = 2.9,
p < 0.004; 11/12 pairs showed pattern) and those sentences
sharing four values received higher ranks than those sharing
only three (Z = 3.1, p < 0.002; 12/12 pairs showed pattern).
The values of the scores for the three categories is shown in
table 4.
Table 4: Mean score (std dev)for sentences sharing 2, 3, and
4 values from the same temporal/aspectual group

2 values shared
3 values shared
4 values shared

Mean Score (std dev)
6.61 (0.7)
7.73 (0.3)
10.63 (1.28)

The fact that the scores are influenced by how consistent a
sentence is in drawing its values from the same group
suggests that all the grammatical dimensions are important.
Nevertheless, it may still be the case that some dimensions
may be more closely linked than others. To investigate this
possibility, the sentences were re-coded to indicate which
grammatical dimension values were coming from the same
group.
The first analysis of this concerned the semantically
related dimensions of lexical aspect telicity and grammatical
aspect.
A Wilcoxan matched-pairs signed-ranks test

1203

showed that sentences which drew telicity and grammatical
aspect values from the same group scored higher than those
which did not (i.e. telic + perfective and atelic +
imperfective scored higher than telic + imperfective and
atelic + perfective): Z = 3.06, p <0.002; 12/12 pairs showed
this pattern. Similar support was also found for the
dimensions of grammatical aspect and tense. Sentences
which drew grammatical aspect and tense values from the
same group scored higher than those which did not (i.e. past
+ perfective and present + imperfective scored higher than
past + imperfective and present + perfective): Z = 2.55, p <
0.01; 11/12 pairs showed this pattern.
Table 5: Mean scores (std dev) for sentences drawing values
from the same or different groups
Same Group
Telicity and
Grammatical Aspect

8.6 (0.71)

Different
Groups
6.4 (0.71)

Tense and
Grammatical Aspect

9.23 (1.54)

5.77 (1.54)

Analysis of the dimension of durativity showed that, just
as with the other lexical aspect feature of telicity, sentences
which drew durativity and grammatical aspect from the
same group were better than those which did not (i.e.
punctual + perfective and durative + imperfective scored
higher than punctual + imperfective and durative +
perfective): Z = 2.22, p <0.26, 8/12 pairs showed this
pattern. However, there was only a marginal advantage to
having telicity and durativity values drawn from the same
group (i.e. telic + punctual and atelic + durative scored
slightly higher than telic + durative and atelic + punctual): Z
= 1.94, p < 0.053; 7/12 pairs showed this pattern) and no
advantage at all to having durativity and tense values drawn
from the same group.
The only comparisons which went directly counter to the
prototype account concerned the analysis of tense and
lexical aspect. Sentences which drew tense and telicity
values from the same group actually scored significantly
lower than those which drew from the same group (i.e. past
+ telic and present + atelic did worse than present + telic
and past + atelic): Z = 2.11, p < 0.034; 9/12 showed this
reverse pattern.
One potential concern with these effects arose from exit
interviews with the subjects. A few subjects apparently
allowed an odd sort of prescriptive judgment to interfere
with their comparisons. They had mistakenly analyzed the
present progressive constructions as passives and reported
that they knew passive sentences were “bad”. Other
subjects reported finding the present perfect construction
unnatural and unlike anything they would say. This claim is
not unreasonable given the relative infrequency of the

construction2. Clearly these subjects are linguistically
unsophisticated, but it is nevertheless possible that present
tense interpretations are more difficult without any linguistic
or contextual support, and this could have affected subjects’
comparison judgments.
To insure that the effects found are not being driven
solely by a dis-preference for certain present tense
sentences, the previous analyses were re-performed using
just test items in the past tense. This restricted analysis
produced very similar results to the complete analysis.
Solely within the past tense set of sentences, there continues
to be an advantage for sentences which draw lexical and
grammatical aspect values from the same group, and for
sentences containing perfective aspect (i.e. past + perfective
scores higher than past + imperfective). What’s more, there
is now also the expected prototypical effect between telicity
and tense (i.e. telic + past scores higher than atelic + past, Z
= 2.04 p < 0.04 with 9/12 pairs showing the pattern). The
connection between durativity and grammatical aspect is
reduced to a marginal effect (Z = 1.88, p < 0.06), but the
connection between durativity and telicity is raised to
significance (Z = 2.18, p < 0.029 with 9/12 pairs showing
the pattern). Thus, even discounting potential interference
from subjects’ unsophisticated meta-linguistic analyses, the
effects of the prototypical groupings remains strong.

Discussion
The results of the sentence comparison experiment reported
here support the existence of prototypical groupings of
temporal/aspectual information in adults. Although the
original impetus for positing these groups comes from
patterns of production found in young children, the data
here converge with other results in the literature in
suggesting that these prototypical groupings are a durable
part of our language representations and last throughout the
lifespan.
Adults were asked to compare pairs of sentences which
conformed to various degrees to the temporal/aspectual
prototypes found in children’s early production of language.
Despite the fact that all the sentences were acceptable
grammatical sentences in English, adults consistently rated
more prototypical sentences as being better.
Four
dimensions of the prototype were varied: tense, grammatical
aspect, the lexical aspect feature of telicity, and the lexical
aspect feature of durativity. The results suggested that how
good a sentence was judged to be depended on how many of
these dimensions were drawn from the same group, by and
large, regardless of which dimensions were grouped
together. Thus, although there are principled reasons to
expect certain of these dimensions to be linked conceptually
(telicity and grammatical aspect share a similar semantic
2

Another issue is the particular semantics of the present perfect
construction. It has been argued that the perfect construction
requires a telic predicate to be felicitous, and indeed, the reverse
effect between telicity and tense appears to stem largely from the
fact that telic + present + perfect scores substantially higher than
atelic + present + perfect.

1204

basis while grammatical aspect and tense share a similar
syntactic form), and although the dimension of durativity
did appear to be somewhat less important than the
remaining three, nevertheless, the prototype appears to
draw strongly from all dimensions.
One important implication of this view is to seriously
constrain the interpretations of the first language acquisition
data. The starting point for this line of research was the
finding that children preferentially produce (and possibly
comprehend) combinations of verbs and morphology that
conform to the prototypical groups. Accounts of this
phenomenon which argue that children have qualitatively
different representations from adults – whether
conceptually, semantically, or syntactically – are far less
plausible in light of the current data. The difference
between adults and children appears to be one of degree, not
one of kind. Acknowledging this fact is not in itself a
complete analysis of the children’s performance and many
open questions remain. For example, why do children resist
the non-prototypical cases with the force that they do? How
do they become more tolerant of these cases as they get
older? Is it a development in the conceptual, linguistic,
processing, or some other domain that allows children to
better deal with the non-prototypical cores?
Further
support
for
the
existence
of
the
temporal/aspectual prototypes need not come from the
domain of language acquisition. This paper reviewed
several strands of evidence that adults are equally subject to
the prototypes: Adults may also produce prototypical forms
more frequently, they acquire them better in second
language acquisition, they comprehend prototypical forms
better, and finally, based on the experiment reported here,
they judge them to be better sentences. Additional support
for the temporal/aspectual prototypical groups as a general
organizing force in language comes from historical
linguistics. In their examination of the historical evolution
of tense, mood and aspect morphology, Bybee, Perkins &
Pagliucca (1994) present strong evidence for the
prototypical groupings, at least for tense and grammatical
aspect. For example, past and perfective markers are
typically grammaticized out of the same sorts of linguistic
elements (often completive and resultative markers).
Similarly, imperfective and present tense markers are
typically grammaticized out of a different set of linguistic
elements (often progressives, or lexical items related to
being or standing). Bybee et al. do find evidence for the
existence of the dimensions of tense and grammatical aspect
independent of the prototypical groupings (e.g., historically,
the development of past perfective marking seems to depend
on the prior existence of overt past imperfective marking),
but the genetic lines, so to speak, operate over the
prototypical temporal/aspectual groups.
Let us turn at last to a slightly more speculative question,
namely, what is the nature and origin of the
temporal/aspectual prototypes? Shirai & Andersen (1995;
also Andersen & Shirai 1996) suggest that the prototype
groupings reflect a form of linguistic categorization; that the

groupings presented here constitute the prototypical cores of
the meaning of the grammatical dimensions (tense,
grammatical aspect, and lexical aspect) themselves. This
position seems difficult to defend on many grounds, not
least of which is the violence it does to our intuitions about
what the meanings of notions like PAST and IMPERFECTIVE
actually are. But there is an alternative way to make sense
of the temporal/aspectual prototypes.
Perhaps the
prototypical groups reflect conceptual and not linguistic
organization. The particular combinations of information
conveyed in each group may reflect an ideal situation in the
world for illustrating, and possibly, assessing each
grammatical dimension. That is, the situations that are most
likely to make us want to talk about pastness also happen to
be the ones that portray completion (i.e. perfectivity applied
to an event described with a telic predicate). Similarly, the
situations that most make us want to talk about presentness
also happen to be ones that portray ongoing activities (i.e.
imperfectivity applied to an event described with an atelic
predicate). These prototypical situations are anchors in our
cognition of events, and the linguistic descriptions simply
follow along the path of our thoughts. Moreover, given the
enduring nature of these paths throughout the lifespan, it
appears that our fundamental understanding of the events
happening around us remains constant in development.

Acknowledgments
This research benefited from discussions with and technical
aid from Ed Kako, Justin Halberda, Lisa Feigenson, Jesse
Snedeker, and Dan Reynolds. The study reported was
conducted while the author was supported by NRSA grant
#MH12225.

References
Andersen, S. W. & Shirai, Y. (1996) The Primacy of
Aspect in First and Second Language Acquisition: The
Pidgin-Creole Connection. In W. C. Ritchie and T. K.
Bhatia (eds.) Handbook of Second Language Acquisition.
Academic Press.
Antinucci, F. & Miller, R., (1976) How Children Talk about
What Happened. Journal of Child Language 3, 167-189.
Bickerton, D. (1981) Roots of Language. Ann Arbor:
Karoma.
Bloom, L. & Harner, L., (1989) On the Developmental
Contour of Child Language: A Reply to Smith and Weist.
Journal of Child Language 16, 207-16.
Bloom, L., Lifter, K. & Hafitz, J., (1980) Semantics of
Verbs and the Development of Verb Inflection in Child
Language. Language 56 (2), 386-412.
Bronckart, J.P. & Sinclair, H., (1973) Time, Tense and
Aspect. Cognition 2 (1), 107-130.
Bybee, J., Perkins & Pagliucca (1994) The Evolution of
Grammar. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Comrie, B. (1976) Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Li, P., (1990) Aspect and aktionsarten in child Mandarin.
PhD dissertation, Leiden, The Netherlands.

1205

Li, P. & Bowerman, M. (1998) The Acquisition of Aspect in
Mandarin. First Language 18. 311 – 350.
Olsen, M. B. & A. Weinberg (1999) Innateness and the
Acquisition of Grammatical aspect via Lexical aspect. In
A. Greenhill et. al (eds), BUCLD 23 Proceedings, 529 –
540.
Olsen, M.B., A. Weinberg, J.P. Lilly, & J.E. Drury (1998)
Acquiring Grammatical Aspect via Lexical Aspect: The
Continuity Hypothesis. Maryland Working Papers in
Linguistics.
Rispoli, M., (1981) The Emergence of Verb and Adjective
Tense-Aspect Inflections in Japanese. Masters Thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.
Shirai, Y. & Andersen, R., (1995) The Acquisition of
Tense-Aspect Morphology: a Prototype Account.
Language 71 (4), 743-762.
Smith, C. (1991) The Parameter of Aspect. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Smith, M, L. Naigles & L. Wagner (2002) Comprehension
of Aspectual Morphology in 22 and 26 month olds. Talk
given at BU Conference on Language Development,
November 2002.
Stoll, S. (1998) The role of Aktionsart in the acquisition of
Russian aspect. First Language 18, 351 – 377.
Wagner, L. (2002) Children’s Comprehension of
Completion Entailments in the Absence of Agency Cues.
Journal of Child Language 29, 109 – 125.
Wagner L. (2001a) Aspectual Influences on Tense
Interpretation. Journal of Child Language 28, 661 – 681.
Wagner, L. (2001b) Evidence for Localism in Children’s
Early Interpretation of Verbal Morphology. Poster
presented at SRCD bi-annual conference, Minneapolis,
MN.
Weist, R., (1991) Spatial and Temporal Location in Child
Language. First Language 11, 253 - 267.
Weist, R., Atanassova, M., Wysocka, H., & Pawlak, A.
(1999) Spatial and Temporal Systems in Child Language
and Thought: A Cross-Linguistic Study. First Language
19, 267 - 311.
Weist, R, Lyytinen, P., Wysocka, J., & Atanassova, M.,
(1997) The Interaction of Language and Thought in
Children’s Language Acquisition: A Crosslinguistic
Study. Journal of Child Language 24, 81-121.
Weist, R, Wysocka, H. & Lyytinen, P. , (1991) A Crosslinguistic Perspective on the Development of Temporal
Systems. Journal of Child Language 18, 67-92.
Weist, R., Wysocka, H., Witkowska-Stadnik, K.,
Buczowska, E. & Konieczna, E., (1984) The Defective
Tense Hypothesis: On the Emergence of Tense and
Aspect in Child Polish. Journal of Child Language 11,
347-374.

