UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Imagistic Simulation in Scientific Model Construction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vz3k6mm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Clement, John J.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Imagistic Simulation in Scientific Model Construction
John J. Clement (clement@srri.umass.edu)
Scientific Reasoning Research Institute
College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics
and School of Education
Lederle GRT 434
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003 USA

Abstract
The role of mental simulation in scientific learning processes
is poorly understood. This paper examines video taped model
construction protocols from an expert and a student to
generate initial hypotheses concerning: the relationship
between “runnable” schemas and imagery during mental
simulation; and how assembling a scientific model from
simpler runnable schemas can “transfer runnability” to the
model. By the end of their learning episodes both the expert
and the student appear to have acquired something more than
a new symbolic relationship. They appear to have an
imageable, runnable model where the imagability and
runnability have been transferred or “inherited” from a source
analogue. One source of support for this finding comes from
observing similar depictive hand motions as subjects thought
about the analogue case and later about the developing target
model. Understanding schema driven imagistic simulations
may eventually help us resolve the apparent paradox involved
in learning from “running a new thought experiment in one’s
head.”

(2)

(1)

Figure 1

Imagistic Simulation in Scientific Discovery
Studies that examine the link between schematic
knowledge, complex learning and imagistic reasoning have
been largely unexplored. One of the basic needs is to
characterize various types of imagistic reasoning as well as
observational correlates for them. The purpose of this study
is to generate hypotheses that have initial grounding in
multiple observations from transcripts in two case studies
where subjects appears to mentally simulate the behavior of
a system via imagery. One type of motivation for the study
comes from other studies indicating the important role of
thought experiments in scientific discovery (Nersessian,
2001). Another comes from the need to understand how
students can best develop runnable mental models of
scientific phenomena. The data base for the first case study
comes from ten professors and advanced graduate students
in scientific fields who were recorded while thinking aloud
about the following problem, illustrated in Figure 1:
Spring Problem: A weight is hung on a spring. The
original spring is replaced with a spring made of the same
kind of wire, with the same number of coils, but with coils
that are twice as wide in diameter. Will the spring stretch
from its natural length more, less, or the same amount under
the same weight? (Assume the mass of the spring is
negligible.) Why do you think so?

258

This data base has yielded previous findings on analogies
and creative model construction cycles (Clement, 1988,
1989, 1998; Griffith, Nersessian, and Goel, 2000). For
example, the 1988 paper coded frequencies for different
types of analogies across all subjects in the data base, and
the 1998 paper extended this analysis to other tasks. But the
present work on imagery is at an earlier stage, because we
do not yet have a stable set of observation concepts and
theoretical concepts relevant to the use of imagery and
simulation that have any grounding in clinical studies. For
these purposes the present study develops exploratory case
studies for two protocols from an expert and a student.
Given the previous work of others I will assume the
existence of analog imagistic representations that have
explanatory power for cognitive theory at a certain level of
processing and assume that these subjects are capable of
generating imagery. But this still leaves other important
questions. Can it be used in higher level cognition? Can we
develop observation concepts allowing us to tell where in a
protocol a subject is using imagery? Can it be kinesthetic?
Can subjects interrogate a newly formed image of a novel
situation to learn from it? What is its relation to schemas
and mental simulation?
I will first consider a case study of expert subject S2;
video tapes for S2 have recently been reanalyzed to identify
depictive hand motions and other observations that are
potentially relevant to imagery and simulation use. S2 is not
an engineer or physicist and is therefore working at the
frontier of his own personal knowledge on an unfamiliar
problem here. For the spring problem subject S2 first
generated an analogy in which he predicted that a long

horizontal rod fixed at one end would bend more than a
short one (with the same weight attached to the other end of
each rod), inferring that segments of the wider spring would
bend more and therefore stretch more (a correct conclusion.)
However, he was concerned about the appropriateness of
this model at a deeper level because of the apparent lack of
a match between bending producing an increasing slope in
the rod and a lack of increasing slope in the wire in a
stretched spring. One can visualize this discrepancy here by
thinking of the increasing slope a bug would experience
walking down a bending rod and the constant slope the bug
would experience walking down the helix of a stretched
spring. (This is my own descriptive analogy for purposes of
clarity- not the subject’s.) This discrepancy led him to
question whether the bending rod was an adequate model
for the spring.
Protocol Section 1
“But then it occurs to me that there’s something clearly
wrong with that [bending rod] metaphor, because ..it
would (raises hands together in front of face) droop
(moves r. hand to the right in a downward curve) like
that, its slope (retraces curved path in air with l. hand)
would steadily increase, whereas in a spring, the slope of
the spiral is constant… ”
This anomaly or mismatch appears to bother him
considerably and drives further work on the problem. In the
case of the rods though, he says:
“I have a strong intuition--a physical imagistic intuition-that this [longer rod] will bend a lot more than that
[shorter rod] will.”
I will use underscored type to identify observations that
have potential as evidence for imagery (both kinesthetic and
visual) and simulation use, such as the depictive hand
motions and the spontaneous imagery report above.
Polygonal Springs After spending nearly 30 minutes
considering this and other analogies, he generates the
polygonal coil models in Figures 2 & 3. While analyzing the
hexagon in terms of bending effects below, it occurs to him
in an Aha episode that there will also be twisting effects in
the segments.

c
b

x

X
Figure 2

d
a

y

Figure 3

Protocol Section 2
“Just looking at this it occurs to me that when force is
applied here (at arrow in Figure 2), you not only get a

259

bend on this segment, but because there's a pivot here
(point x), you get a torsion [movement and strain
produced by twisting of the wire] effect. Aha!! Maybe
the behavior of the spring has something to do with twist
(makes twisting motion with right hand) forces as well
as bend forces. That's a real interesting idea.”
Twisting of the wire and the resulting torsion is in fact a
key element in the analysis of spring behavior as understood
by engineers. Its discovery here represents a major insight
in finding a new causal mechanism. The torsion discovery
and Aha! phenomenon above is an interesting process in
itself and is discussed in Clement (1988,1989). However in
this paper I want to focus on examining the possibility that
imagistic simulation plays a role in evaluating and making
inferences from these new models. The subject continues:
"Let me accentuate the torsion force by making a square
where there's a right angle. I like that, a right angle. That
unmixes the bend from the torsion. Now I have two
forces introducing a stretch. I have the force that bends
this segment a (Figure 3) and in addition I have a torsion
(makes twisting motion with right hand) force which
twists (rod b) at vertex, um, x" (as if side a were a
wrench acting to twist side b.)
“Now let’s assume that torsion and bend (makes bending
motion with hands together) don’t interact…does this
(points to square) gain in slope--toward the bottom?
Indeed, we have a structure here which does not have
this increasing slope as you get to the bottom. It's only if
one looks at the fine structure; the rod between the Y and
the X, that one sees the flop (moves left hand
horizontally in a downward curve) effect."
”Now I feel I have a good model of sp- of a spring.”
Because bending and twisting still allow the slope to “start
over from zero” at each corner, the square coil is a new
model in which the accumulating slope difficulty does not
occur, suggesting a way to resolve his previous anomaly. He
goes on to ask about the effect of coil width for the square
coil model.
"Now making the sides longer certainly would make the
[square] spring stretch more… The longer the segment,
(holds hands up in front as if holding something between
them ) the more (makes bending motion with right hand)
the bendability. “
Protocol Section 3
"Now the same thing would happen to the torsion I think,
because “If I have a longer rod (moves hands apart), and
I put a twist on it (moves hands as if twisting a rod), it
seems to me--again, physical intuition--that it will twist
more. " I'm (raises hands in same position as before and
holds them there continuously until the next motion
below)… imagining holding something that has a certain
twistyness to it, a-and twisting it…Again, now I'm
confirming (moves right hand slowly toward left hand)
that by using this method of limits. As (moves right hand
slowly toward left hand until they almost touch at the

word “closer”) I bring my hand up closer and closer to the
original place where I hold it, I realize very clearly that it
will get harder and harder to twist. So that confirms my
intuition so I'm quite confident of that….“
(The reader may wish to try this thought experiment with
images of coat hanger wire, bent to have “handles” at each
end of the wire.) Later the subject distinguishes between
confidence in the answer to the spring problem and
confidence in his understanding of it, and indicates that the
torsion analysis has increased his subjective feeling of
understanding:
“Before this torsion insight, my confidence in the answer
[for the spring problem] was 95% but my confidence in
my understanding of the situation was way way down, I
felt that I did not really understand what was happening.
Now my confidence in the answer is near 100% and my
confidence in my understanding is like 80%.”
At this point S2 appears to have a mental model of the
spring as working like a square coil that contains elements
that both bend and twist. Both of these factors predict
correctly that the wider spring will stretch more. The model
also suggests that the slope of the stretched spring will be
constant throughout (also correct), resolving S2’s previous
anomaly about increasing slope.
Use of Imagistic Simulation Underscored type above in
Section 3 identifies examples of several imagery-related
observation categories, in the following order: personal
action projections (spontaneously redescribing a system
action in terms of a human action, consistent with the use of
kinesthetic imagery), depictive hand motions,
and
imagery reports. The latter occurs when a subject
spontaneously uses terms like "imagining," "picturing," a
situation, or "feeling what it's like to manipulate" a situation.
In this case it is a dynamic imagery report (involving
movement or forces). These observations appear alongside
new predictions at many points in the protocol, including
predictions for novel situations like the square coil.
None of these observations are infallible indicators on
their own, but I take them as evidence for imagery,
especially when more than one appear together. (There is
not space for a review here, but an increasing variety of
studies of depictive gestures suggest that they are
expressions of core meanings or reasoning strategies and not
simply translations of speech. Others indicate that the same
brain areas are active during real actions and corresponding
imagined actions.) Taken together with the subject’s new
predictions, the observations above can be explained via
what I have called imagistic simulations wherein: (1) the
subject: has activated a somewhat general and permanent
perceptual motor schema that can control the action of
twisting real objects; (2) the schema assimilates an image of
two rods of different lengths that is more specific and
temporary; (3) the action schema “runs through its program”
vicariously without touching real objects, generating a
simulation of twisting the two rods, and the subject
compares the effort required for each. Such a simulation

260

may draw out implicit knowledge in the schema that the
subject has not attended to before--e.g. in this case the
simulation may draw out knowledge embedded in analog
tuning parameters of a motor schema. In other words, a
hypothesis can be made, with initial grounding in data such
as that in protocol section 3, that the subject is going
through a process in these episodes wherein a general action
schema assimilates the image of a particular object and
produces expectations about its behavior in a subsequent
dynamic image, or simulation.
A perceptual motor action schema is hypothesized to
contain three major subprocesses: a subprocess for
assimilating (instantiating) objects in the environment based
on preconditions for application; a subprocess for
implementing and tuning or adjusting the action so that it is
appropriate for this particular object; and a third subprocess
for generating expectations about the results of the action in this case, an image of how far the rod will turn. The idea
that a schema can have generality through a pattern of
actions and expectations over time with parameters adjusted
to a particular situation in a process of tuning has early
precedents such as Schmidt (1982). The important cognitive
role played by actions involved in scientific experimental
practice has been documented by Tweney (1986) and
Gooding (1992). Perceptual motor schemas may not be the
only kind of schemas capable of generating imagistic
simulations, but in the examples discussed here they appear
to serve as an important type that is amenable to initial
analysis.
Hegarty (2002) points out that visualizations can exist
both externally, as in a drawing, or internally, and that
various relations are possible between these. Other images
in this protocol (e.g. the square coil in section 2) are
supported by external drawings. But the images are not
fully comprised by the external drawings, since the
drawings do not capture his conceptions of movement and
deformation that is such a prominent feature of these
protocols. “Projections” of imagery onto drawings has also
been studied by Trickett and Trafton (2002). And although
the hand motions themselves could also be considered to be
an external representation, there are also a number of similar
instances of reasoning about twists and bends in the
complete protocol where one of the other imagery indicators
in bold type above may appear without a hand motion.
Therefore I have hypothesized the use of internal dynamic
imagery that is sometimes expressed via depictive hand
motions. In this study I am primarily interested in depictive
hand motions as providers of evidence for internal imagery
when they do appear.
Imagery Enhancement The extreme case episode in
Section 3 above poses an interesting challenge for theory
because it simply seems to repeat the same reasoning as the
previous twisting episode, but yields a much higher level of
confidence. Weld (1990) has proposed that one mechanism
for the effectiveness of an extreme case is to allow access to
the second of two data points (pairs) for the values of two

related variables. If one assumes a monotonic relationship
one can predict an increasing or decreasing function from
knowing two data points. But how can considering the
extra extreme case above add so much confidence since S2
has already just consulted his knowledge on this issue and
already has the equivalent of at least two “data points”? It is
difficult to see how this small change in the value of one
variable could generate a new deduction about the variables
to produce considerably greater conviction. And his saying “
I realize very clearly that it will get harder” indicates there is
something special about the extreme case that makes it
count more than simply adding a third data point from
which to induce a pattern. A hypothesis that explains this is
the following. Given the above observations it is more
plausible to interpret this process as “imagery enhancement”
(or “simulation enhancement”)— that the role of this
extreme case is to enhance the subject’s ability to run or
compare imagistic simulations with high confidence, and
that this comes from increasing the difference between the
two images being compared and making that difference
more detectable under inspection of the images. In this case
the main source of conviction in the simulations appears to
be the tapping of implicit knowledge embedded in a motor
schema and its conversion into explicit knowledge. The
extreme case makes differences in implicit expectations
more “perceivable” in this case. A second problem that
questions the adequacy of describing this as “accessing a
stored data point” is its difficulty in explaining the hand
motions and imagery reports. Why did the subject bother to
run through an extra (extreme case) simulation? The fact
that he did so suggests the view that he was applying
knowledge that was not stored as a linguistic description.
For if it were already explicitly described, then why form
an image of the situation and make the effort to run through
a simulation of it? Why not just report it? Thus the
imagistic simulation concepts developed so far can explain
the effectiveness of the extreme case at the end of the
transcript above as an example of “imagery enhancement,” a
phenomenon difficult to explain in other ways.
Can the phenomena above be explained by imagery alone
without positing a role for schemas? There is evidence for a
negative answer here in favor of the theory of having
schemas be separate entities from the more specific images
they assimilate and operate on. The same twisting schema
appears to be able to run on different images here (long,
short, and very short rods, as well as the square and
hexagonal coils). And conversely, one can find evidence in
other cases of a single image being assimilated by different
schemas, as in the case of both the bending and twisting
schemas applied to the single image of the square coil; or
applied to the single image of a straight rod. These
considerations motivate the idea of having a two element
theory for an imagistic simulation with one or more schemas
operating on a specific image. In an exploratory clinical
study, even within the protocol of one subject, accounting
for multiple instances like these helps constrain the theory
by the need for it to explain different episodes. This theory

261

of imagistic simulation is developed more fully for data
from more expert subjects in Clement (1994).
Thought Experiments The twisting rod episode above is
also an example of an untested thought experiment in the
broad sense, a term I have used to refer to the act of
predicting the behavior of an untested, concrete, but absent
system (the “experiment") (Clement, 2002). Aspects of the
experiment must be new and untested in the sense that the
subject is not informed about their behavior from direct
observation or from an authority. How can S2 learn
anything by focussing on the particular example of the rod
and running through the experience of twisting it? How can
it give the sensation of "doing an empirical experiment in
one's head" (Nersessian, 1991)? This raises what I term the
fundamental paradox of thought experiments, expressed
as: How can findings that carry conviction result from a new
experiment conducted entirely within the head?
One can use the imagistic simulation concepts developed
so far to conjecture several possible sources of new
information and conviction in thought experiments
including: perceptual motor schemas that are general
enough to generate and run imagistic simulations with
conviction in a variety of situations within their domain of
application; the flexible extended application of such a
schema to a case outside of its normal domain of
application; or the tapping of implicit knowledge in the
schema. More general spatial reasoning processes may also
be involved, such as the constraint that solid objects may
not occupy the same space. One can point to such sources as
potential origins of new information and conviction in
thought experiments, to help us begin to explain the
fundamental paradox. Under the above definition, running a
newly constructed model like the square coil is also an
untested thought experiment--analyzed here as a compound
simulation involving two runnable schemas working
together on a common image. The ability to run compound
simulations is another important possible source of new
information in thought experiments. These ideas suggest
directions for further study.
Transfer of Imagery and Runnability To Models One
can also pose the hypothesis that a model constructed using
runnable schemas can inherit the simulation-generating
capability (runnability) of those schemas. I refer to this as a
“transfer of runnability” from a runnable schema (source
analogue) to a more complex model. For example, the
square coil model constructed by S2 appears to tap runnable
schemas for bending and twisting as sources. Evidence for
transfer of runnability is provided by the twisting rod
episode, since he gives evidence from similar hand motions
for imagining twisting in the rod and twisting in the square
coil, and for making predictions from each of these. The
similar hand motions suggest that the form of the imagery is
similar in both cases. Because the torsion idea plays the
role of an axiom or grounding primitive in this solution, this
also illustrates the idea that such an axiom can have content

that is expressed imagistically, and that in some cases can be
embodied in the perceptual-motor system. That is, this
expert’s explanation is grounded in concrete intuitions from
perceptual motor schemas that play a role somewhat like
axioms as the foundation for his other arguments, but which
also appear to play a role as primitive sources of
sensemaking that make his model a satisfying locus of
understanding.
Compound Simulations These observations suggest that he
is generating new information by running the twisting and
bending schemas repeatedly for different sides within the
square coil model and within its spatial and geometric
constraints as a new compound simulation, rather than
making a set of formal deductions from previous facts.
(Transferring runnability from a source analogue schema in
this way does not guarantee a correct model or even the
ability to run the entire model if the schema provides only a
piece of the model, but it does provide an important part of
what is needed to run the model.) I hypothesize that the
runnability of these elements in a compound simulation in
the square spring model, along with the imagistic
“summing” or canceling of the effects of these applications
via spatial reasoning, is what allowed him to “interrogate”
the model to generate the emergent property of no
cumulative bending in the coil, as well as the prediction that
a wider coil will stretch more. This suggests that compound
simulations of novel systems can support physical/spatial
inferences about trajectories and additive or non additive
effects. Transfer of runnability from the twisting schema to
the square coil model appears to enable the generation of
new emergent properties from that model. Because these
resolve an earlier anomaly, this lends credence to his model.

Imagistic Simulations and Transfer of
Runnability in Instruction
It is possible that the runnability of a scientific model can
support desirable properties such as flexible interrogatability
for other implicit properties, and flexibility of application of
the model to other cases or transfer problems. Clement and
Steinberg (2002) analyzed video tapes of a high school
student being tutored in an electricity curriculum which
used analogies to attempt to construct models of electric
potential (voltage) and charge flow (current) that were
anchored in the student’s intuitions about (perceptual motor
schemas for) pressure and air flow. The student was given
eight hours of interactive tutoring over five days. Care was
taken over several instructional sessions to develop an
imagable model by starting from concrete analogue
examples of pressure (e.g. a leak in a tire) and using student
generated drawings with a color coding scheme for different
levels of “electric pressure”. This subject was able to map
and apply an air pressure and flow analogy to electric
potential and current as her tutor helped her build a model
for electric circuits. This led the authors to hypothesize a
transfer of runnability from the analogue air pressure
conceptions to the electric potential model. and continued to
exhibit traces of it in a posttest interview on a relatively far
transfer problem after instruction. The hypothesis is
supported here by evidence from the subject’s spontaneous
use of similar depictive hand motions over drawings during
the original air analogy, and during the instructional circuit
examples, indicating that she was using a similar type of
imagery in both cases.

Table 1: Similar Depictive Hand Motions as Evidence for Transfer of Runnability
Stage
Tire
Analogy

Context
Leak in Tire

Applying
Pressure
Ideas
to
Circuit

Capacitor
discharging
to light a bulb
for 2 sec.

Application
of Model in
Post
Test
Transfer
Problem

Complex
circuit with 4
bulbs, switch
and battery

Gesture
Moves fingers over path of escaping air in
drawing
(Puts hands together as if surrounding a
5” diameter object)
(Puts hands together as if surrounding a
5” diameter object, then pulls them apart)

Quotation
“You’re going to allow an escape for the
air.”
You have a high concentration of air in the
tire, which is really under a lot of pressure
Once it's [the charge built up in capacitor]
got that room to move -- that place to expand
”...

Moves fingers over path in circuit
drawing
(Color codes drawing for pressure levels)

The pressure is gonna take that path

Moves finger down over bulb at lower
left
Repeats motion
Moves finger from right to left over wire
in drawing

Greater movement, greater flow across -through this bulb

262

It will start out as yellow...”

So there will be a charge moving through
that wire coming from this area of higher
pressure to an area of lower pressure.”

Table 1 shows examples of some of these parallel
gestures. Although there is not space in this paper to
describe each problem in detail, they are discussed in
Clement and Steinberg (2002). Gestures for both pressure
and flow appear in the tire analogy and then during
instructional problems on circuits. This is similar to the
same “transfer of runnability” process noted for the earlier
expert protocol, pointing to a possible new type of expertnovice similarity. Such expert-novice similarities have
provided important insights for curriculum development in
science (Clement, 1998.) The possibility of transfer of
runnability may expand our notion of the role of analogy in
theories of scientific discovery and of science instruction.
Furthermore, after more instruction, she continued to
exhibit some of these hand motions in a correct posttest
solution for a relatively far transfer problem. By the post
test, her expressions of her representation for pressure have
changed to color coding strategies developed in the
instruction, but hand motions for current flow still remain.
Her conceptual terms are not perfect, but quotations such as
those at the bottom of Table 1 provide evidence that the
instruction fostered development of a dynamic mental
model of fluid-like flows of current caused by differences in
“electric pressure”, that could generate new imagistic
simulations for understanding a relatively difficult transfer
problem. This example also suggests a generalization from
the concept of perceptual motor action schema developed in
the first half of this article. It is not clear that the concepts
of pressure and flow used here are simple actions like
bending and twisting. If they are represented internally by
“actions” it would appear to be in a more metaphorical way.
Yet they seem capable of driving imagistic simulations.
This case study suggests that the transfer of runnability
achieved by grounding a new model in a runnable prior
knowledge schema as a source analogue may foster a type
of model flexibility that aids the use of the model in transfer
problems. Model flexibility would seem to be a very
important feature of scientific knowledge for both experts
and students.
Further studies that can evaluate and extend our
knowledge of the nature of imagistic simulation and model
construction in experts and students are very much needed.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants RED-9453084 and REC0231808. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation.

References
Clement, J. (1988). Observed methods for generating
analogies in scientific problem solving.
Cognitive
Science, 12: 563-586.
Clement, J. (1989). Learning via model construction and

263

criticism: Protocol evidence on sources of creativity in
science. Glover, J., Ronning, R., and Reynolds, C. (Eds.),
Handbook of creativity: Assessment, theory and research.
NY: Plenum, 341-381.
Clement, J. (1994). Use of physical intuition and imagistic
simulation in expert problem solving. In Tirosh, D. (Eds.),
Implicit and explicit knowledge. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Publishing Corp.
Clement, J. (1998). Expert novice similarities and
instruction using analogies. International Journal of
Science Education, 20(10), 1271-1286.
Clement, J. (2000) Analysis of clinical interviews:
Foundations and model viability. In Lesh, R. and Kelly,
A., Handbook of research methodologies for science and
mathematics education (pp. 341-385). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Clement, J. (2002). Protocol evidence on thought
experiments used by experts. In Wayne Gray and
Christian Schunn, Eds., Proceedings of the TwentyFourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society 22, 32. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clement, J. and Steinberg, M. (2002). Step-wise evolution
of models of electric circuits: A “learning-aloud” case
study. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11, 389-452.
Gooding, D. (1992). The procedural turn: or, Why do
thought experiments work? In Giere, R. (Ed.) Cognitive
models of science. Minneapolis: U. of Minnesota Press.
Griffith, T. W., N. J. Nersessian, and A. Goel (2000).
Function-follows-form transformations in scientific
problem solving. In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science
Society 22, 196-201. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Hegarty, M. (2002). Mental visualizations and external
visualizations. In Wayne Gray and Christian Schunn,
Eds., Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society 22, 40.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nersessian, N.J. (1991). Why do thought experiments work?
In Thirteenth Annual Proceedings of the Cognitive
Science Society . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Inc.
Nersessian, N. J. (2001). Maxwell and the method of
physical analogy: Model-based reasoning, generic
abstraction, and conceptual change. In Reading Natural
Philosophy: Essays in History and Philosophy of Science
and Mathematics in Honor of Howard Stein on his 70th
Birthday edited by D. Malamet. LaSalle, IL: Open Court.
Schmidt, R. A. (1982). Motor control and learning.
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Publishers.
Trickett, S. and Trafton, J. G. (2002) The instantiation and
use of conceptual simulations in evaluating hypotheses:
Movies-in-the-mind in scientific reasoning. In Wayne
Gray and Christian Schunn, Eds., Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society 22, 878-883. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tweney, Ryan D. (1986). Procedural representation in
Michael Faraday's scientific thought. PSA 1986, 2.
Weld, D. (1990) Exaggeration. Artificial Intelligence,
43(3):311-368.

