UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Incubation in Problem Solving as a Context Effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zn1k7s9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Seabrook, Rachel
Dienes, Zoltan

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Incubation in Problem Solving as a Context Effect
Rachel Seabrook (rseabrook@brookes.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University
Gypsy Lane Campus, Headington, OX3 0BP, UK

Zoltán Dienes (dienes@biols.susx.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, Sussex University
Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QG, UK

Abstract
Anagrams were used to test the hypothesis that
incubation is the result of a change in context between
two attempts at a problem. The context was manipulated
between two sessions of work on the anagrams by
presenting word searches containing words from a single
category (either animals or fruit and vegetables) prior to
each session of problem solving. Some of the anagrams
had solutions from one of these two categories; these
were compared with distracters, the solutions of which
belonged to neither category. The anagrams subject to
the context manipulation showed an incubation effect
(superior performance for items attempted in two
sessions relative to controls attempted in only one
session) whereas distracters did not, thus supporting the
hypothesis.

Introduction
Despite an abundance of anecdotes, the incubation
effect has proved elusive in controlled experiments. The
experience of leaving a difficult problem for a period of
time, then finding that the difficulty evaporates on
returning to the problem, or even more striking, that the
solution comes “out of the blue” (the insight
experience) when thinking about something else, is
widespread. Many guides to effective thinking and
problem solving advise the reader to set problems aside
for a time.
The most widely adopted paradigm for investigating
incubation involves comparing problems on which
participants take a break during solving with problems
on which participants work for a continuous period. The
total time spent on each problem is equated across the
conditions and the incubation period is usually filled
with an unrelated activity to prevent further conscious
work on the problem (e.g. Fulgosi & Guildford, 1968;
Kaplan, 1990; Silveira, 1971). Superior performance on
problems for which work is split over two sessions is
taken as evidence for the incubation effect, which is
thus operationally defined as any benefit of a break
during problem solving.
It is important to emphasize that the definition of
incubation adopted in this paper is atheoretical. It does
not refer to a given type of processing and in particular

1065

does not presuppose unconscious work on the problem.
Furthermore, the scope is relatively wide; incubation is
taken to be a benefit of any break in problem solving
relative to continuous work. This leaves open the
possibility that, for example, an interruption per se may
be beneficial, rather than processing that occurs during
the break.
Research has not supported the unconscious work
hypothesis; for the most part, investigators have heeded
Woodworth and Schlossberg’s (1954) advice that this
should be put aside until other possibilities have been
thoroughly investigated. Of the various theories that
have been put forward for incubation, the two that have
most support are fixation and opportunistic
assimilation. Both of these ideas have their roots in the
Gestalt school of psychology.
The concept of functional fixedness was originally
proposed by Duncker (1945) as a source of difficulty in
problem solving. When presented with a problem,
solvers would be hindered by existing, unhelpful
associations with elements of the task. In particular,
they would have trouble using tools in a novel way.
Duncker argued that an incubation period would allow
time for the fixation to recede, leaving the solver to
address the problem without such hindrance. More
recent work (Smith & Blankenship, 1989; 1991) has
demonstrated this effect using word puzzles. If
misleading cues are presented with the problem, an
incubation period is beneficial, as the disruptive effects
of the cues lessen over time.
Maier (1931) investigated priming as a mechanism
for incubation. In his famous two-string experiment, he
found that by “accidentally” brushing past one of the
strings, he could increase the probability that the
participant would solve the problem (by setting one of
the strings swinging as a pendulum), yet the participant
would not see the association between this event and
the solution. Priming is a central feature of Seifert et
al’s (1995) opportunistic assimilation hypothesis. They
propose that when an impasse is reached in problem
solving, the problem is flagged as an open question in
long-term memory. Any relevant information
encountered during the incubation period is then

assimilated into the problem representation, facilitated
by the stored open question.
In this paper it is argued that these two approaches
may be incorporated into a single theory, taking
Occam’s razor to the facilitatory effect of stored open
questions. We propose that incubation is the benefit of a
change in context between two attempts at solving a
problem. Fixation is simply the unhelpful effect of
being in an inappropriate context on the initial attempt;
the use of environmental cues is a means of generating
a context more conducive to solving the problem at a
subsequent attempt.
Under this approach, the context experienced at the
second attempt is not necessarily more helpful than the
first in solving the problem. The first context may be
useful and the problem may be solved straight off.
However, for a problem that is not solved initially, a
change of context introduces additional cues and
potential associations. The incubation period simply
allows for this increase in available cues, which may
then be brought to bear on the problem.
A recent paper by Dodds, Smith and Ward (2002; see
also Smith, Sifonis & Tindell, 1998) directly addressed
the use of environmental clues in incubation. During an
incubation period, participants were exposed to either
the solutions to unsolved problems, or words
semantically related to the solutions. Half of the
participants were instructed to make use of the clues.
Dodds et al. found that only deliberate use of solution
words was beneficial. They did not find evidence for
related words, or even actual solutions, priming the
problem solutions without participants intending to
make use of them in solving the problems.
The experiment reported in this paper made use of a
stronger context manipulation than that used by Dodds
et al. (2002). A single semantic context was established
for each of two testing sessions, either animals or fruit
and vegetables. The problems then attempted by
participants were anagrams, which had solutions drawn
from one of the two categories (additional, distracter
anagrams were also included). This procedure is a
simpler and more powerful manipulation of context
than presenting words related to each of a number of
different problems.
The paradigm employed compared problems for
which work was split over two sessions (incubated)
with those worked on in one continuous session
(control). The control anagrams were presented in the
second session, mixed with incubated anagrams that
had already been attempted. A different semantic
context was established for each problem solving
session.
To illustrate, in the first session a participant might
have the “animals” context established, then attempt a
mixed set of anagrams, of which those with animal
solutions would be easier. In the second session, the

1066

“fruit and vegetables” context would be established,
then further anagrams attempted, including both
previously unsolved and new (control) items. Of these,
the anagrams which had fruit or vegetable solutions
would be easier. Overall, the participant would be
expected to solve more of the anagrams presented in
both sessions since these would benefit from both
context manipulations.
We hypothesize that incubation is simply a benefit of
working in two different contexts, and thus increasing
the probability that one of the contexts will prove
conducive to solving the problem. Therefore, it is
predicted that a set of anagrams presented in two
semantic contexts (including items related to both) will
have a higher solution rate than a similar set presented
in just one context.
The hypothesis of change in context contrasts with
Dodds et al’s (2002) finding of deliberate use of clues.
Therefore, steps were taken to disguise the connection
between the context manipulations and the problem
solving sessions. Not only were participants not
instructed to use clues in solving the anagrams, the
clues were presented as a different, unconnected
experiment, performed by a different experimenter.
This design is intended to preclude, as far as possible,
deliberate use of clues.

Method
Participants
Sixty undergraduates of Warwick University took part
in this experiment.

Materials
A large pool of anagrams, 5 – 7 letters long, was
generated by moving letters of words up to two places
from their original positions, e.g. OKMNEY. From
these, a set of anagrams of intermediate difficulty was
selected by giving eight participants unlimited time to
attempt each one. Those that were solved by some, but
not all of the participants were retained. The final set of
36 anagrams consisted of 12 whose solutions were
animal names, 12 whose solutions were fruit or
vegetable names and 12 distracter items. For the
purpose of rotating items across conditions (incubated
and control), these were divided into three sets, with
equal numbers of anagrams from each category in each
set. The specific letter rearrangements were matched
across anagram set and semantic category.
For the context manipulation, two word searches
were created, each 20 x 18 letters in size. One contained
the names of 20 animals and the other contained the
names of 20 fruit and vegetables, none of which was the
solution to any of the anagrams. The words were

Table 2: Experimental sessions

written horizontally, vertically and diagonally, in a
forwards direction (i.e. left to right; top to bottom).

Design and procedure
A within-subjects design was used, with three factors:
Incubated versus control anagrams, time period, and
solution category. Incubated anagrams were those for
which work was split over two sessions, whereas
control anagrams were presented only in the second
session. The first and second blocks of fifteen seconds’
work on each anagram constituted the two time periods
analyzed. The three solution categories were contextrelevant, context-irrelevant, and distracters.
Incubated anagrams (24 items consisting of 8 from
each category) were each presented for 15 seconds, then
those that had not been solved were presented for a
further 30 seconds following a context manipulation. Of
the second presentation, only the first fifteen seconds’
work was included in the analysis. Control anagrams
(12 items consisting of 4 from each category) were
presented for 30 seconds each in the latter session. This
is set out schematically in Table 1.
Table 1: Time spent on each incubated and control
anagram in the two sessions
Session
Context 1
Anags 1
Context 2
Anags 2
1st 15s
Anags 2
2nd 15s

Incubated

Control

1st 15 sec work
INCUBATION PERIOD
2nd 15 sec work
1st 15 sec work
rd

3 15 sec work
Discarded

Session
Context 1

Duration
7 min. total

Anagrams 1

15 sec. per anag.

Context 2

7 min. total

Anagrams 2

30 sec. per anag.

Tasks presented
First
word search
Incubated
anagrams
Second
word search
Previously
unsolved incubated
anagrams and
control anagrams

For the word search task, the letter grid was presented
on paper and participants were given seven minutes to
highlight and write down as many words as they could
find of the appropriate category (animals or fruit and
vegetables). For the anagram task, each anagram was
printed on card and presented for 15 or 30 seconds (for
the first or second anagram session, respectively). At
the end of the experiment, participants were fully
debriefed as to the nature of the experiment and the
connection between the tasks.
The order of presentation of the anagrams was
randomized, with incubated and control anagrams
mixed in the second session. The assignment of
anagrams to incubation and control conditions was
counterbalanced, as was the order of presentation of the
word searches.

Results
Performance on the anagram task was measured as the
proportion of anagrams solved within each time period.
This is summarized in Table 3, which also shows which
session of work each measurement is based on.

nd

2 15 sec work

Each session of anagram solving was immediately
preceded by a context manipulation, such that a
different context was created for each session. The
manipulation consisted of a word search containing the
names of either animals or fruit and vegetables.
Anagrams with solutions from the same category as this
were termed context relevant, those with solutions from
the other category were termed context irrelevant and
the remaining anagrams were termed distracters (these
were, of course, also context irrelevant).
Participants were not informed of the connection
between the context manipulations and the anagrams.
They were led to believe that they were taking part in
two
different
experiments,
interspersed
for
convenience. The word searches and anagrams were
administered by different experimenters and
participants were given a cover story for each task. The
four sessions of the experiment are detailed in Table 2.

1067

Table 3: Mean proportion of incubated and control
anagrams, of each solution category, solved in each
time period. Standard deviations in parentheses.

Session
Context 1
Anags 1

Incubated
CR
CI
D
.55
(.21)

.46
(.25)

Control
CR
CI

D

.39
(.22)

Context 2
Anags 2
.50
.19
.15
.57
.50
1st 15s
(.33) (.23) (.16) (.27) (.29)
Anags 2
.30
.21
2nd 15s
(.37) (.31)
CR: context relevant, CI: context irrelevant,
D: Distracter

.38
(.28)
.19
(.29)

From Table 3 it can be seen that anagrams presented
in a relevant context are more likely to be solved than
those presented in an irrelevant context (t(59) = 4.65,
p < .0001, combining incubated and control items and
collapsing across time periods). Note that each
incubated item was either context relevant in the first
session and context irrelevant in the second, or vice
versa.
To assess the incubation effect, performance on
incubated anagrams in the second session (i.e. after the
break) should be compared with performance on control
anagrams in the equivalent time period (the latter 15s of
work). However, this is complicated by the effect of
practice, since participants tend to solve anagrams more
quickly in the second session. This produces an item
selection bias in the control anagrams, in that most of
the easier items are solved in the first fifteen seconds,
leaving only the more difficult items to be attempted in
the latter fifteen seconds. This would tend to produce an
apparent incubation effect as an artifact, and therefore
must be accounted for if incubation is to be assessed.
Ideally, we need to know what the incubation effect
would be if there were no practice effect.
This can be done if incubation is measured as the
difference in performance between incubated and
control items in the latter fifteen seconds of work, and
practice is measured as the difference in performance
between incubated and control items in the first fifteen
seconds of work. A regression analysis can then be
conducted, regressing incubation on practice. The
calculated intercept is an estimate of the incubation
effect when no practice effect is found.
The above analysis was conducted twice; for the
distracter items and for items from the other two
categories. For the distracter items, the intercept was
not significantly different from zero (intercept = -0.05,
t(53) = -1.2, p = .23)1. For items subject to the context
manipulation (collapsing across context relevant and
context irrelevant items), the intercept was significantly
greater than zero (intercept = 0.13, t(53) = 2.7, p =
.009). Therefore, after partialling out the effect of
practice, the proportion of incubated items solved after
a break is estimated to be 0.13 higher than the
corresponding proportion of control items solved.
The difference in incubation effect for distracters
versus context-manipulated items was assessed by
taking the difference between the incubation
measurements for the two sets of items for each
participant and regressing this difference score on both
the practice scores (for distracter and contextmanipulated items). The resulting intercept was
1

Five participants were excluded from these analyses on
account of missing data. If all anagrams in a given category
were solved in the first 15s none remained to be attempted in
the latter 15s.

1068

significantly greater than zero (intercept = 0.19, t(52) =
2.7, p = .01), indicating that the incubation effect for
context manipulated anagrams was significantly greater
than that for distracter anagrams.

Discussion
The incubation effect was demonstrated for problems
that had been subject to a context manipulation, but not
for those that had not. A direct comparison between
anagrams that had been presented in a relevant context
with equivalent anagrams presented in an irrelevant
context showed clearly that the context manipulation
was effective.
The benefit of incidentally presented hints, as found
in this experiment, may be similar to that found by
Kokinov, Hadjiilieva and Yoveva (1997). They
presented a hint, in the form of a diagram,
simultaneously with the problem attempted by
participants. They found that the hint was most valuable
when presented as part of another problem, not
attempted by the participants and unconnected with the
task they were instructed to work on. If the same hint
was presented as a clue, with explicit instructions to use
it, performance was actually worse than in a no-hint
condition.
That incidental hints or context manipulations should
be helpful in some cases, whereas only deliberate use of
direct clues is helpful in other cases (such as Dodds et
al., 2002), poses an interesting question. There is not
sufficient evidence available at present to resolve this
question, but we may speculate on a plausible
explanation. Where the hint provides a single concept,
such as the structure conveyed in a diagram, or a
category label, this may influence the problem solver
without
requiring deliberate attention, or even
awareness. Conversely, more complex information,
such as multiple concepts related to a number of
different problems, cannot prime solutions effectively,
but require attention in order to be utilized.
This paper has demonstrated the effectiveness of a
context manipulation in producing incubation. Whilst
this does not rule out the possibility of other
mechanisms, it implies that the incubation effect may
be no more than the benefit of a change in context.
Working on a problem in two different contexts simply
extends the range of contextual cues available for use in
solving that problem.
Yaniv, Meyer and Davidson (1995) argued for the
role of a special memory representation of the unsolved
problem. They proposed that this would facilitate the
formation of associations between the unsolved
problem and relevant information encountered
incidentally. Their experiments in the area of memory
retrieval showed that the solution presented prior to
attempting a problem would be more valuable if the
problem had been seen before, provided that the delay

between the first attempt at the problem and the
presentation of the solution was sufficiently short. The
restricted conditions required for this facilitation
(presentation of the exact solution soon after an initial
attempt) and the lack of convincing evidence for this
effect in problem solving (as distinct from memory
retrieval) lead us to question the value of this aspect of
their theory, as it relates to incubation. A more
parsimonious account of incubation is the benefit
attempting the problem in multiple contexts, as
demonstrated in this paper.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Elizabeth Allen and Katherine
Wilmshurst, who conducted the experiment reported
here as their undergraduate research project.

References
American
Psychological
Association.
(1994).
Publication Manual (4th ed.) Washington DC:
Author
Dodds, R. A., Smith, S. M., & Ward, T. B. (2002). The
Use of Environmental Clues During Incubation.
Creativity Research Journal, 14, 287-304.
Duncker, K. (1945). On Problem Solving.
Psychological Monographs, 58, (5, Whole no. 270).
Fulgosi, A. & Guilford, J. P. (1968). Short term
incubation in divergent production. American Journal
of Psychology, 81, 241-248.
Kaplan, C. (1990). Hatching a theory of incubation:
Does putting a problem aside really help? If so,
why? Doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh.
Kokinov, B., Hadjiilieva, K. & Yoveva, M. (1997). Is a
hint always useful in problem solving? The influence
of pragmatic distance on context effects. Proceedings
of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (p. 974). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Maier, N. R. F. (1931). Reasoning in humans: 2. The
solution of a problem and its appearance in
consciousness. Journal of Comparative Psychology,
12, 181-194.
Seifert, C. M., Meyer, D. E., Davidson, N., Patalano, A.
L. & Yaniv, I. (1995). Demystification of Cognitive
Insight:
Opportunistic Assimilation and the
Prepared-Mind Perspective. In R. J. Sternberg &
Davidson, J.E. (Eds.), The Nature of Insight.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Silveira, J. M. (1971). Incubation: The effect of
interruption timing and length on problem solution
and quality of problem processing. Doctoral
dissertation, Oregon, Eugene.
Smith, S. M. & Blankenship, S. E. (1989). Incubation
Effects. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 27, 311314.

1069

Smith, S. M. & Blankenship, S. E. (1991). Incubation
and the persistence of fixation in problem solving.
American Journal of Psychology, 104, 61-87.
Smith, S. M., Sifonis, C. M., & Tindell, D. R. (1998).
Hints do not evoke solutions via passive spreading
activation. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1003-1006). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Yaniv, I., Meyer, D. E. & Davidson, N. S. (1995).
Dynamic memory processes in retrieving answers to
questions: Recall failures, judgments of knowing and
acquisition of information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21,
1509-1521.

