UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Information Aggregation in Groups: The Approach of Simple Group Heuristics (SIGH)

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02b8t0cm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Reimer, Torsten
Hoffrage, Ulrich

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Information Aggregation in Groups:
The Approach of Simple Group Heuristics (SIGH)
Torsten Reimer (t.reimer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition (ABC),
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, D-14195 Berlin, Germany

Ulrich Hoffrage (hoffrage@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition (ABC),
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, D-14195 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
A new framework is introduced that models group
decision making by using simple group heuristics
(SIGH). We report results of a set of simulations that
systematically varied (a) the group members’ strategies
(compensatory unit weight model, UWM, and a
noncompensatory lexicographic heuristic, LEX), (b) the
distribution of cue validities (J-shaped vs. linear), and (c)
the quantity and quality of shared information. Individual
decisions were aggregated by using a majority decision
rule (proportionality in case of ties). (1) The simulations
revealed strong effects of the distribution of cue
validities on group performance. When validities were
linearly distributed, UWM gained an 8% better accuracy
than LEX by considering all cues. Yet, if cue validities
followed a J-shaped distribution, the much more frugal
LEX surpassed the UWM by achieving a 16% higher
accuracy. (2) This effect was robust across different
quantities of shared information. (3) Systematic
allocation of information in favour of valid or invalid
cues showed that the performance of UWM mainly
depended on mean validity, whereas the performance of
LEX was more strongly affected by the degree to which
the most valid cues were shared.

Introduction
A widely spread assumption in research on group
decision making is that good decisions require
exhaustive information processing. For example,
studies on the hidden-profile effect revealed that group
decisions may be strongly affected by the quantity of
shared information, that is, by the amount of information that is known by all individual group members at
the onset of a group decision process (cf. Stasser &
Titus, 1985; see Wittenbaum & Stasser, 1996, for an
overview). However, it may be questioned whether this
robust empirical finding supports the general claim that
less information yields inferior group decisions: In
research on the hidden-profile effect, the correct choice
is not defined by an outside criterion, but by a particular
strategy−namely by a unit weight linear model, UWM,
which sums up the cue values of each object and
chooses the alternative with the highest sum score

(Dawes & Corrigan, 1974). A consequence of taking
UWM as the gold standard is that (a) group decisions
cannot get better if they are based on a partial set of
information, and (b) judgements that deviate from this
standard are not only classified as distinct but as
inferior.
In the simulations reported in the present paper, we
deviated from this tradition and introduced an outside
criterion. Each alternative in a choice task was
described by several cues that were probabilistically
related to the criterion. This allowed us to compare the
performance of several strategies for cue based
inferences, where performance was measured in terms
of correct predictions of the outside criterion rather than
their matches of UWM’s choices.
Contrary to the claim that using more information
yields a better performance, recent comparisons
between compensatory strategies and noncompensatory
heuristics suggested that this is not necessarily true
(Czerlinski, Gigerenzer, & Goldstein, 1999).
Noncompensatory heuristics such as Take The Best
(TTB) search sequentially for information and stop as
soon as a cue is found that discriminates between a
given pair of alternatives. The decision is then based
only on this cue (one reason decision making). TTB can
successfully compete with much more complex
strategies (such as multiple regression or unit weight
models): It is not only more frugal but sometimes also
reaches an even higher percentage of correct inferences
(see also Martignon & Hoffrage, 2002).
In the present work, we apply this framework of fast
and frugal heuristics as proposed by Gigerenzer, Todd,
and the ABC Research Group (1999) to group decision
making, a field that has not yet been treated within this
framework. Conversely, research on group decision
making has not yet paid much attention to decision
strategies used by the individual group members or to
the validities of the available cues (for an exception, see
Gigone & Hastie, 1996, who conceptualized group
decision making in the framework of the Brunswikian
lens model). Hence, the present approach of Simple
Group Heuristics (SIGH) bridges a gap and promises to
make a contribution to both fields.

982

Task
The task is as follows: Consider a four-member
personnel committee that has to decide which of three
candidates is best suited for a position (cf. Davis, 1973;
Stasser & Titus, 1985). These three candidates are
randomly drawn from a reference class that consists of
20 potential job applicants (for the concept of a
reference class, see Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, &
Kleinbölting, 1991). Each candidate has a particular
value on an objective criterion that allows to rank order
the candidates according to their qualification. Thus,
there exists a correct decision for every potential triple
of candidates with whom the group may be faced.
Group members do not know the criterion but have
information on 20 dichotomous cues (cue values are
'+1' or '-1') that are positively related to the criterion
(i.e., a positive value indicates a higher qualification
than a negative cue value does). Each group member
has access to a certain amount of information on the
three candidates (unknown cue values are indicated by
'0'). Based on the information a group member has, he
or she is able to form an individual decision first.
Subsequently, the group integrates the individual
decisions into one group decision.
Decision strategies for individuals In the
simulations reported below, we compared the
performance of three decision strategies a group
member may use: (1) a unit weight model (UWM), (2) a
simple heuristic that eliminates candidates on the basis
of randomly drawn cues (elimination by random cue,
ERC), and (3) a lexicographic heuristic (LEX) that
looks up cues according to their validity.
UWM, which serves as the gold standard in research
on the hidden-profile effect, is based on sum scores.
UWM has been used as a model for individual (e.g.,
Bröder, 2000; Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999) as well as
for group decision making (e.g., Stasser & Titus, 1985;
for a model that considers unequal weights, see Gigone
& Hastie, 1996). For each alternative (here, candidate),
UWM computes an overall score by summing up the
values on all available cues (which amounts to
subtracting the number of negative cue values from the
number of positive cue values, while ignoring the
number of unknown cue values). UWM then predicts
that the candidate with the higher sum score has the
higher criterion value. Note that this strategy uses all
available information and is compensatory in that cues
with positive values can be compensated by those with
negative values.
In contrast, the heuristics defined by Gigerenzer et al.
(1999) are simpler to execute because they do not
require any computation, and they are more frugal
because they stop information search as soon as one cue
that discriminates between the alternatives has been
found. The elimination by random cue heuristic (ERC)

draws cues randomly. ERC consists of the following
building blocks:
Search rule: Draw a cue randomly (among those that
have not yet been used) and look up the cue values of
all candidates who are still in the choice set.
Stopping rule: Eliminate all candidates who have a
lower value than the candidate with the maximum
value. (Thereby, unknown cue values are treated as a
third category, i.e., both the pairs '1/0' and '-1/0' are
assumed to discriminate). If only one candidate remains
or if all cues have been looked up already, then stop
search and proceed with the next step; otherwise search
for another cue.
Individual decision rule: If all but one candidate are
eliminated after search has been stopped, predict that
this candidate is the one with the highest criterion
value. If more than one candidate is left but search
cannot be continued because all cues have already been
looked up, then choose randomly among the remaining
candidates.
If a decision maker has an idea about the validity of
the cues, he or she may draw the cues not randomly but
in an order established by their (perceived) validity.
The lexicographic heuristic (LEX) first compares the
three candidates on the basis of the most valid cue
(following Gigerenzer et al., 1991, validity is defined as
the proportion of correct inferences in a complete
paired comparison between the objects of the reference
class; for other definitions see Martignon and Hoffrage,
2002). If this cue discriminates by allowing an
unequivocal decision, no further information is
considered and the candidate with the highest value is
chosen. If two candidates share the highest cue value,
the third competitor is excluded from the choice set,
and competition among these two continues (for other
heuristics that may be used to choose among more than
two alternatives, see Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999).
Decision strategies for the integration of individual
decisions into a group decision How can groups
integrate the individual decisions into a joint group
decision? (1) Groups may ignore the individuals’
decisions and randomly draw an alternative (equal
probability), (2) draw alternatives with probabilities
proportional to the number of group members who
favour them (proportionality), (3) decide for a correct
decision if it is favoured by at least one group member
(truth wins), or (4) use a voting strategy (majority).
Research on the social decision scheme approach (see
Davis, 1973; Laughlin & Ellis, 1986; Hinsz, Tindale, &
Vollrath, 1997) has consistently shown that groups
adapt their social combination rule according to the task
at hand. In general, if a task has a correct solution
(intellective task), which is known by at least one group
member who is able to demonstrate its correctness
(Laughlin & Ellis, 1986), then the likelihood is high

983

that this group member will dominate the group
decision (truth-wins scheme). On the contrary, if a task
has no demonstrable correct solution (judgmental task),
groups are more likely to apply a voting rule (majority
scheme). Because the current simulation focussed on
the individual decision strategies, we restricted ourself
to the majority rule. This rule seems to be plausible
given that the current task is a judgmental task that has
an objectively correct solution that is not demonstrable,
because none of the group members has knowledge
about the candidates’ criterion values.
Group decision rule: Predict that the candidate with
the most votes has the highest criterion value. If there is
a tie with respect to the number of votes, then choose
the decision of one group member by random.

simulation differ with respect to their overall means (Lhigh vs. L-low), whereas the two J-shaped distributions
differ in their skewness, which mainly affects the
validity of the most valid cues (J-flat vs. J-steep).
As shown in Table 1, the L-high distribution has a
much higher mean validity than the other three.
Secondly, the L- and J-distributions differ
systematically in their standard deviations (SDs)
according to their skewness. The validities in the L-low
and the J-flat distributions have equal means, but their
SDs differ by a factor of two.
Table 1. Mean cue validities based on pairs (VP) and
triples (VT), and correlations between both.
Distributions of cue validities
L-high
L-low
J-flat
J-steep

Environments:
Distributions of cue validities
The performance of a particular strategy and hence
the result of a comparison between strategies may
depend on the environment in which this performance
is evaluated (Martignon & Hoffrage, 2002). To check
for the robustness of our results across different environments and to explore the ecological rationality of
the strategies introduced above, we ran the simulations
in four different types of environments (generated with
a random error method, constrained such that different
distributions of cue validities result; see Figure 1).
Validity

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1

3

5
L-high

7

9

11
Cues

L-low

13
J-flat

15

17

19

J-steep

Figure 1: Distributions of cue validities.
In two of the four environments, the distribution of
cue validities is linear (L), and in the other two they
follow a J-shaped distribution (J). J-shaped distributions
are ubiquitous: Not only the values of many continuous
variables of the objects in many environments follow
such a distribution (Hertwig, Hoffrage, & Martignon,
1999), but the validities of dichotomous cues also tend
to be J-shaped, as a reanalysis of the environments used
in Czerlinski et al. (1999) has shown. The two linear
distributions that we generated for the present

M (VP)
SD (VP)
M (VT)
SD (VT)
r(VP x VT)

Validity based on pairs of candidates (VP)
.80
.60
.60
.56
.06
.06
.12
.09
Validity based on triples of candidates (VT)
.68
.43
.42
.37
.08
.09
.17
.13
.93

.90

.99

.96

In each environment and for each cue, the
discrimination rate was kept constant at the possible
maximum (i.e., half of the candidates had a positive and
half had a negative value on each cue throughout). The
validities were computed on the basis of all pairs of
candidates: The validity of a cue was determined by
dividing the number of pairs in which the candidate
with the higher criterion value also has the higher cue
value by the number of pairs in which two candidates
have different cue values. Because this task consisted of
choosing among three candidates, we additionally
computed cue validities on the basis of all possible
triples by dividing the number of triples in which the
best candidate had the highest cue value (correct
decisions) by the number of triples in which any
candidate had a higher cue value than the remaining
two candidates (number of discriminating cases).
As shown in Table 1, the pattern of triplewise
validities (VT ) turned out to be very similar to the
pattern of pairwise validities (VP), and the correlations
between both are very high (at least .90). The main
difference between these two measures consists in their
mean values. The VT yields lower means but higher
SDs throughout.
Because the accuracy of LEX was not strongly
affected by the validity measure according to which
cues have been ordered, only the results based on the
ordering established by VP will be reported in the
remainder.

984

Overview of the simulations
The first simulation compared the accuracy of
individuals’ decision strategies and the resulting group
decision for the four distributions of cue validities when
each group member knew all available information. The
second simulation systematically varied the quantity of
shared information by providing group members with a
certain amount of randomly chosen cue values. Finally,
the third simulation tested whether the quality rather
than quantity of shared information affected group
performance.
Group members did not have contradictory
information in any of the simulations (i.e., all had either
veridical or no information) and the group as a whole
always had access to all available information (i.e.,
each piece of information was known by at least one
group member). For each of the four environments, all
possible triples of candidates (n=1140) were generated.
Then, the available information for each triple was
randomly distributed among group members according
to the constraints of the respective condition (of
Simulation 2 and 3). For each single condition (defined
by the distribution of cue validities, the respective
triple, and the number of shared information), ten runs
were realized. When applying LEX, each group
member used the same order of cues, namely the one
based on the validities computed in the environment.

Simulation 1: Does the distribution of cue
validities matter?

group and individual decision making yields almost
identical results unless ERC is used. If cues are drawn
randomly, the majority rule yields somewhat more
accurate decisions (4% difference on average).
Table 2. Performance of three decision strategies,
averaged across all individuals (Ind) and across group
decisions (Maj) in two types of environments with
linear distributions of cue validities.
L-high
Frugality Accuracy
Ind
Maj
Ind
Maj
Ind
Maj

Unit weight model (UWM)
20.0
88
20.0
60
20.0
89
20.0
61
Elimination by random cue (ERC)
2. 4
70
2. 2
46
2. 4
77
2. 2
51
Lexicographic (LEX)
3. 0
78
2. 2
56
3. 0
78
2. 1
56

Note. Performance is measured in terms of frugality (average
number of cues looked up) and accuracy (% correct).

J-shaped distributions If decisions are made in
environments with cues that follow a J-shaped
distribution with respect to their validities, the results
are different (see Table 3).

The first simulation compared the three strategies in
each of the four environments. In this simulation, group
members shared all available information. Accuracy is
reported both for the decisions of the individual group
members (Ind) as well as for group decisions based on
the majority rule (Maj).
Linear distributions We first turn to the two linear distributions. As Table 2 shows, the strategies differ in the
number of cues they consider. Whereas the UWM used
all 20 cues, the simple heuristics used on average not
more than 3 cues to form a decision. The small
difference between ERC and LEX in the L-high condition (2.4 vs 3.0) is due to the fact that within the set of
cues with very high validities, candidates were more likely to have the same cue values as compared to the set
of cues with moderate or low validities. What costs do
the simple heuristics have to pay for their frugality? In
the condition of high (low) cue validities, UWM gains a
12% (5%) increase in accuracy by considering all cues.
LEX and ERC achieve almost equal accuracy if cues
have a high validity (1% difference). Regardless of
what strategy is used, performance is higher in the Lhigh than in the L-low distributions—the differences
vary between 22% (LEX) and 28% (UWM). Finally,

L-low
Frugality Accuracy

Table 3. Performance of three decision strategies,
averaged across all individuals (Ind) and across group
decisions (Maj) in two types of environments with Jshaped distributions of cue validities.
J-flat
Frugality Accuracy
Ind
Maj
Ind
Maj
Ind
Maj

J-steep
Frugality Accuracy

Unit weight model (UWM)
20.0
55
20.0
46
20.0
55
20.0
46
Elimination by random cue (ERC)
2. 3
43
2. 3
38
2. 2
47
2. 2
39
Lexicographic (LEX)
2. 4
73
2. 2
61
2. 4
73
2. 2
61

Overall, the flat J-shaped distribution leads to more
accurate decisions than the steep distribution in which
cues are less valid on average (cf. Table 1). And, again,
the noncompensatory heuristics are much more frugal
than UWM. However, in these J-shaped environments,
LEX gains from ignoring most information by yielding

985

an 18% (15%) higher accuracy in the flat (steep) Jshaped distribution than UWM, which differs from
ERC by only 8%.

Simulation 2: Does the quantity of shared
information matter?
The second simulation tested whether this difference
between the strategies is robust across different percentages of shared information. Recall that in Simulation 1,
each group member had access to all available
information. Does performance decrease if group
members have less information? The second simulation
systematically varied the quantity of shared information
under the restriction that each piece of information was
always known by at least one group member. Thus, in
the most extreme case, in which no single piece of
information was shared by group members, each of the
four members received 15 (25%) of the 60 cue values.
This number was systematically increased in ten steps
by adding 5 cue values per step (20, 25, 30, ... up to 60).
Table 4 shows the percentage of correct decisions (a)
when each group member had access to half of the
information (50%, i.e., when each piece of information
was, on average, shared by two group members); (b)
when all information was unshared (25%); and (c)
across the nine cases, in which group members only had
access to a partial set of information (M(25-92%)).
Table 4. Accuracy (% correct) of group decisions
according to quantity of shared information.
Distributions of cue validities
L-high L-low J-flat J-steep
M (25-92%)
50%
25%
M (25-92%)
50%
25%
M (25-92%)
50%
25%

Unit weight model (UWM)
85
59
53
45
85
58
53
45
82
57
51
43
Elimination by random cue (ERC)
66
45
42
38
64
45
42
37
62
43
42
37
Lexicographic (LEX)
68
52
69
60
65
51
67
60
68
54
66
56

As the results show, the quantity of shared
information does not matter much (the largest
difference amounts to 4%) even though performance is
somewhat better if all information is shared (see Tables
2 and 3), in particular in the L-high condition. Thus, the
relationships between the decision strategies and the
environments reported above remain stable and are
robust across different amounts of shared information.

Simulation 3: Does the quality of shared
information matter?
By now, group members’ distributions of cue
validities have, on average, matched the distributions of
cue validities in the environment. To see what happens
if this match is distorted, we ran another set of
simulations in which information was distributed in a
biased way such that information either on the most
valid or on the least valid cues had a higher chance of
being shared (see Table 5).
(3a) In this simulation, the available information was
first randomly distributed among group members as
before. Each group member then filled up his or her set
of known cue values to 50% by randomly choosing
additional information from the ten most or ten least
valid cues (most vs. least valid cues). As can be seen in
Table 5, this variation did not exert strong effects on the
performance of ERC and LEX. However, it strongly
affected the performance of UWM in the two environments, in which average cue validities were moderately
high (i.e., in the L-low and J-flat environment; see the
framed numbers in Table 5, Simulation 3a).
Table 5. Accuracy of group decisions according to the
validity of shared information.
Distributions of cue validities
L-high L-low J-flat J-steep
Simulation 3a
Most valid cues
Least valid cues
Most valid cues
Least valid cues
Most valid cues
Least valid cues

Unit weight model (UWM)
85
69
60
44
84
48
46
43
Elimination by random cue (ERC)
67
47
46
40
64
42
39
36
Lexicographic (LEX)
68
52
70
62
67
54
67
56

Simulation 3b
Ten most valid cues
Ten least valid cues
Ten most valid cues
Ten least valid cues
Ten most valid cues
Ten least valid cues

Unit weight model (UWM)
83
73
65
46
81
44
42
40
Elimination by random cue (ERC)
78
56
52
42
74
44
40
37
Lexicographic (LEX)
78
56
73
61
70
42
31
39

(3b) Because LEX looks up cues in an order
established by their validity, this heuristic should be

986

mainly affected by the degree to which the most valid
cues are shared. In order to demonstrate this relationship, in Simulation 3b, three group members had all
information either on the ten most valid or on the ten
least valid cues (ten most vs. ten least valid cues). The
remaining cue values were allocated to the fourth group
member. Whereas in Simulation 3a and 3b, UWM
performed almost equally well, this is only partly true
for the noncompensatory heuristics. If a majority of
group members only had access to the ten least valid
cues, performance of LEX dropped dramatically in line
with the assumption that the accuracy of LEX depends
on the degree to which the most valid cues are shared
(see the framed numbers in Table 5, Simulation 3b).

Conclusion
Contrary to a widespread claim in research on group
decision making, our simulations revealed that good
group decisions do not necessarily require exhaustive
information processing. The performance of the strategies and therefore also the result of the comparison between the compensatory UWM and the noncompensatory heuristics depended on how cue validities were
distributed in the environment. Overall, the accuracy of
UWM was mainly affected by mean cue validity,
whereas the performance of LEX was more strongly affected by the degree to which the most valid cues were
shared. As a consequence, when validities were linearly
distributed, UWM gained an 8% higher accuracy than
the more frugal LEX. However, if cue validities
followed a J-shaped distribution, LEX surpassed the
UWM by achieving a 16% higher accuracy on average.
The quantity of shared information did not strongly
affect accuracy which also supports the claim that less
information does not necessarily yield poorer decisions.
Despite the attraction that the frugal, simple noncompensatory heuristics may offer to decision making
groups (Reimer & Hoffrage, 2003), it remains to be
seen in empirical studies to what extent groups use
simple heuristics when forming a decision (for an
example, see Reimer & Katsikopoulos, 2003). Thereby,
the distributions of cue validities should be taken into
consideration given that the performance of strategies
depends on such environmental properties.

References
Bröder, A. (2000). Assessing the empirical validity of
the 'Take The Best' heuristic as a model of human
probabilistic inference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26,
1332–1346.
Czerlinski, J., Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G.
(1999). How good are simple heuristics? In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, and the ABC Research
Group, Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp.

97–118). New York: Oxford University Press.
Davis, J. H. (1973). Group decision and social
interaction: A theory of social decision schemes.
Psychological Review, 80, 97–125.
Dawes, R. M., & Corrigan, B. (1974). Linear models in
decision making. American Psychologist, 34,
571–582.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbölting, H.
(1991). Probabilistic mental models: A Brunswikian
theory of confidence. Psychological Review, 98,
506–528.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research
Group (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Gigone, D., & Hastie, R. (1996). The impact of
information on group judgment: A model and
computer simulation. In E. H. Witte & J. H. Davis
(Eds.), Understanding group behavior: Consensual
action by small groups (Vol. 1, pp. 221–251).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hertwig, R., Hoffrage, U., & Martignon, L. (1999).
Quick estimation: Letting the environment do the
work. In G. Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, and the ABC
Research Group, Simple heuristics that make us
smart (pp. 209–234). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Hinsz, V. B., Tindale, R. S., & Vollrath, D. A. (1997).
The emerging conceptualization of groups as
information processors. Psychological Bulletin, 121,
43–64.
Laughlin, R. P., & Ellis, A. L. (1986). Demonstrability
and social combination processes on mathematical
intellective tasks. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 22, 177–189.
Martignon, L., & Hoffrage, U. (2002). Fast, frugal, and
fit: Simple heuristics for paired comparison. Theory
and Decision, 52, 29–71
Reimer, T., & Hoffrage, U. (2003). Simulating group
decision making by noncompensatory heuristics.
Unpublished manuscript.
Reimer, T., & Katsikopoulos, K. (2003). Group
decision making, recognition heuristic, and less-ismore effect. Unpublished manuscript.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (1999). When do people
use simple heuristics, and how can we tell? In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, and the ABC Research
Group, Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp.
141–167). New York: Oxford University Press.
Stasser, G., & Titus, W. (1985). Pooling of unshared
information in group decision making: Biased
information sampling during discussion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1467–1478.
Wittenbaum, G. M., & Stasser, G. (1996). Management of information in small groups. In J. L. Nye &
A. B. Brower (Eds.), What’s Social About Social
Cognition? (pp. 3–28). London: Sage.

987

