UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interaction Organization in Graphical Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h3883v5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Umata, Ichiro
Shimojima, Atsushi
Katagiri, Yasuhiro
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interaction Organization in Graphical Communication
Ichiro Umata

Atsushi Shimojima

umata@atr.co.jp

ashimoji@jaist.ac.jp

ATR Media Information Science Laboratories; Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology;
Seika Soraku Kyoto, 619-0288 Japan
1–1 Asahi Tatsunokuchi Nomi Ishikawa 923-1292 Japan
Yasuhiro Katagiri

Nik Swoboda

{katagiri/nswoboda}@atr.co.jp

ATR Media Information Science Laboratories;
Seika Soraku Kyoto, 619-0288 Japan
Abstract
In this paper, we examine interaction organizations in
communication through drawing. We report that both sequential and parallel interaction organizations take place
in actual human graphical communication, despite the
fact that the media use involved in drawing has resource
characteristics that better match parallel organizations.
We argue that activity-dependent constraints imposed by
the task performed in the interaction play a significant
role in determining the interaction organization. We propose two types of sequentiality constraints and demonstrate that they can override the resource characteristics
of the drawing media, thereby enforcing a sequential turntaking organization similar to those observed in verbal interactions.

Introduction
Turn taking and simultaneous action are two contrasting
organizational principles for multi-party joint activities.
People take turns to speak in conversation, whereas musicians play their instruments simultaneously in orchestra. One possible explanation for this contrast is that the
resource characteristics of the media use involved in the
activity dictates the style of interaction. The media use
for speech affords only one person’s speech sounds at a
time, whereas the media use for music affords multiple
instrument sounds simultaneously.
Sacks et al. (1974) regard verbal turns as an economic
resource, which are distributed to conversation participants according to turn organization rules. According
to them, one of the main effects of these turn organization rules is the sequentiality of utterances, namely, the
almost complete absence of parallel or simultaneous utterances from conversation. “Overwhelmingly, one party
talks at a time,” they observe. On the other hand, Brennan (1990) reported that non-verbal signals, such as the
movement of a cursor, did not observe the turn organization rules. Condon (1971) even claims that the gestures
and other bodily movements of participants in conversation exhibit mutual synchrony with each other. These
findings apparently suggest that verbal and non-verbal
media in interaction do not necessarily adhere to the
same turn organization rules and that these differences
may derive from the contrasting resource characteristics
of the media used in the interaction.
The first purpose of this paper is to investigate whether
the turn organization holds for drawing interaction. Peo-

1170

ple engaged in spoken conversation often draw letters,
text, figures, and pictures on a piece of paper, a chalkboard, or whatever affords a drawing surface. Do such
drawing expressions also obey certain turn organization
rules? In particular, are they organized sequentially,
without substantial temporal overlapping? Or do people
freely draw in parallel?
The second purpose is to elucidate the dominant factors in deciding between the two interaction organizations for drawing. Exactly when is sequential turn taking
for drawing mandated? When is simultaneous drawing
possible? 1
Although theoretical in nature, these questions have
been mainly addressed in HCI literature, receiving conflicting answers. Stefik et al. (1987) report on a computational facility where multiple people engaged in spoken dialogue can simultaneously “draw” on a shared
video display. The design idea was that this functionality
would liberate drawing expression from the sequentiality
constraint typical in spoken expressions, giving everyone
more chances to express herself. Thus, a key assumption of their work is that people would use simultaneous
drawing for communication, given a facility to do so.
This assumption was also partially supported by Whittakker et al. (1991), who observed six groups of subjects
using a virtual shared whiteboard for long-distance communication. They found frequent instances of simultaneous drawing on the whiteboard, especially, when diagrams and tables were drawn or modified.
Tatar et al. (1991), however, give a contradictory picture in their observational study of two groups of subjects
using the same system that Stefik et al. (1987) described.
They found that despite the potential for simultaneous
drawing, the subject interactions were largely sequential,
trying to take drawing turns as well as speaking turns.
They explained this fact by claiming that human communication generally proceeds incrementally, grounding expressed information one by one in real time. According
to them, the facility for simultaneous drawing is based on
an incorrect model of human communication, redundant
at best and troublesome at worst.
We argue, in this paper, that the resource characteris1 Here

by simultaneous drawing we mean drawing activities in which more than one participant is drawing at the same
time. This phenomenon excludes instances when simultaneous
drawing and erasing or erasing and erasing occur.

tics of the media involved are not sufficient to provide a
full account of the interaction organization, and that constraints imposed by the task performed in the interaction
also play a significant role. We propose two types of task
constraints and show how they work in organizing interaction through the examination of data we collected in
experiments on human communication by drawing over
electronic shared whiteboards.

Hypothesis
One may attempt to understand the reasons for the sequentiality of speaking turns by citing two factors. The
first is the non-persistence of speech. Speech occurs,
passes away, and leaves little trace once it is over. Speech
therefore must be comprehended in real time, and its content must be grounded without too much delay, usually
before the next substantial utterances are made. Grounding of verbal utterances must be thus incremental.2
The second factor is the restricted bandwidth of
speech as a communication medium. Because of the limitations of human auditory processing, two or more utterances made at the same time are difficult to understand
separately. Thus, it is unusual for more than one message to be simultaneously transmitted through speech,
except when they are acoustically similar to make socalled “sync talk”.
Given this non-persistence and bandwidth limitation,
it is very difficult to ground two spoken utterances made
at the same time. You cannot comprehend them together
because of the bandwidth limitation, while you cannot
delay the comprehension of one utterance until later, because of its non-persistent character. Thus, it is preferable that verbal utterances be organized in sequential
turns, without substantial temporal overlap.
If one follows this explanation, one naturally thinks
of cases where such sequential turns are not mandatory.
Drawing is one interesting example of such a case. First,
it is usually persistent. The drawing activity itself occurs
and passes away just as speech does, but it leaves a trace
on the drawing surface. Thus, the grounding of drawing
content does not have to be made in real time, and can
be delayed until later. Second, with a sufficiently large
drawing surface, two or more drawing operations can occur at the same time, without the fear of their content being mixed in an incomprehensible manner. Thus, drawing has larger bandwidth than speech does. For these reasons, one may expect that drawing can occur in parallel,
without sacrificing natural communication. Simultaneous drawing may be even preferred, since it enables the
expression of a larger amount of information in a given
time than sequential drawing does.
This theory endorses the assumption underlying the
communication facility reported by Stefik et al. (1978),
that people use simultaneous drawing when possible. It
also explains the frequent occurrences of simultaneous
2 See Clark & Schaefer (1989), Clark (1996), and Traum
(1994) for the notion of grounding. Chapter 8 of Clark (1996)
contains a detailed discussion of incremental grounding.

1171

inputs observed by Whittaker et al. (1991). The theory, however, sharply contradicts the finding and claim
by Tatar et al. (1991).
Let us therefore call this theory Parallelism. It claims
that drawing expressions in communication have no
mandatory sequential structure. In contrast, Sequentilalism is the view that sequentiality is a requirement on
drawing expressions.
In this paper, we will posit and test yet another view as
our hypothesis. According to this view, sequential structure is mandatory in drawing in some cases but not in
others. More specifically:
Sequentiality Constraint Hypothesis
1. Drawing interaction occurs in sequential turns
under either of the following conditions:
(a) Information Dependency Condition: when there
is a dependency among the information to be expressed by drawing,
(b) Event Alignment Condition: when drawing operations themselves are used as expressions of
the proceedings of target events.
2. Sequential turns are not mandatory in drawing
activities when neither condition holds (and persistence and certain bandwidth of drawing are
provided.)
The rationale for the information dependency condition is the intuition that when one piece of information
depends on another, the grounding of the former piece
of information is more efficient after the grounding of
the latter has been completed. This should be the case
whether a particular speaker is explaining the logical dependency in question to her partners, or all participants
are following the logical steps together.
For example, suppose you and your partner are collaboratively drawing a map of a town on the basis of your
memory. Figure 1 is the map that is currently on their
sheet of paper. Given this map, the information (3) is a
logical consequence of the information (1) and (2):
(1) The Bank is in front of the Post Office across Seventh
Avenue.
(2) The City Hall is in front of the Bank across Maple
Street.
(3) The building represented by the blank square is the
City Hall.
Our point is that when you are grounding these pieces
of information, you will do so incrementally, starting
from (1) and (2), and then moving onto (3). The dependency of the information encourages or even enforces
incremental grounding.
Note that once incremental grounding is employed, interactions take place solely on a local area of the drawing
surface where the relevant information is expressed. The
size of the drawing surface therefore becomes irrelevant,
and the bandwidth afforded by it remains unused.
In this case, because the persistency and bandwidth
of drawing is not being effectively used, drawing is in

Maple

Oak

6th

Post Office

7th

Figure 1: A townmap on which information (1), (2), and
(3) will be drawn.

the same situation as speech. Sequential turn structure is
mandatory, generating sequential drawing turns. In the
above example, you would draw an icon labeled “Bank”
first, ground the expressed information, and then label
the blank square as “City Hall”.
Event alignment is a strategy for expressing the unfolding of an event dynamically, using the process of
drawing itself as a representation. For example, suppose you are reporting how you spent a day in the town
depicted in Figure 1. You might say that you walked
from Oak and Seventh to Maple and Sixth via Maple and
Seventh. If you report this process while drawing a line
along the route in the map, saying “I started from here
and turned left at here...”, you are using the drawing process as a representation of your walking process. You
are aligning the drawing event with the walking event to
express the latter dynamically.
Our hypothesis is that simultaneous drawing is unlikely while this strategy of event alignment is employed.
Under this condition, the movement or process of drawing is the main carrier of information. The trace of drawing has only subsidiary informational roles. Thus, in this
particular use of drawing, its persistency is largely irrelevant. The message must be comprehended and grounded
in real time, and bandwidth afforded by the drawing surface becomes also irrelevant. This requirement effectively prohibits the occurrence of any other simultaneous
drawing.

Method
An experiment in which subjects were asked to communicate graphically was conducted to examine the effect
of the two factors presented above on their drawing activities. In these experiments, 24 pairs of subjects were
asked to work collaboratively on four problem solving
tasks using virtual whiteboards.

Experimental Setting
In the experiments being reported here, two subjects collaboratively worked on four different problem solving
tasks. All the subjects were recruited from local universities and were paid a small honorarium for their participation. The subjects were seated in separate, soundproof
rooms and worked together as a pair using a shared virtual whiteboard (50 inches) and a full duplex audio connection. The subjects were video-taped during the ex-

1172

periment. They also wore a cap-like eye-tracking device
which provided data indicating their the eye-gaze positions. The order in which the tasks were presented was
balanced between the 24 pairs so that the presentation
order would not have an affect on the results. The time
limit for each task was six minutes.
At the start of each task, an initial diagram was shown
on both of the subject’s whiteboards and then subjects
were free to speak to one another and to draw and erase
on the whiteboard. The only limitation to this drawing activity was that they could not erase or occlude the
initial diagram. All drawing activity on the whiteboard
was performed with a hand-held stylus directly onto the
screen, and any writing or erasing by one participant
appeared simultaneously on their partner’s whiteboard.
The stylus controlled the position of the mouse pointer,
and when not drawing, the position of both subject’s
mouse pointers was displayed on their partner’s whiteboard.

Tasks
Deduction Task with an Event Answer (1e) A logical
reasoning problem with a correct answer. The problem
asks that the subjects describe the arrangement of people
around a table and the order in which people sit down.
This seating arrangement and order must satisfy some
restrictions (e.g. “The fifth person to sit is located on
the left-hand side of person B”). A circle representing a
round table was shown on the whiteboards at the start of
the task. This task has strong informational dependency
and strong event alignment.
Deduction Task with a State Answer (1s) A logical
reasoning problem with a correct answer asking that the
subjects design a seating arrangement satisfying some restrictions (e.g. “S cannot sit next to M”). A circle representing a round table was shown on the whiteboards at
the start of the task. This task has strong informational
dependency and loose event alignment.
Design Task with an Event Answer (2e) A task with
an open-ended answer, asking subjects to make an excursion itinerary based on a given town map. A complete
town map was shown on the whiteboards at the start of
the task. This task has weak informational dependency
and strong event alignment.
Design Task with a State Answer (2s) A task with an
open-ended answer, asking the subjects to design a town
layout to their own likings. An incomplete town map
was shown on the whiteboards at the start of the task.
This task has weak informational dependency and loose
event alignment.

Data
During each task all drawing, erasing, and mouse movements by each subject was recorded in a data file. Using this data, the amount of simultaneous drawing was
calculated as the percentage of the total time spent drawing simultaneously of the total time either subject spent
drawing (i.e. the sum of the time intervals in which both

0.10


230


180


130


0.00

80


State (s)

Event (e)

State (s)

Event (e)
Deduction (1)

Deduction (1)
Design (2)

Design (2)

Interaction between problem type and solution type

Interaction between problem type and Solution type



Figure 2: Amount of simultaneous drawings

Figure 3: Average distance of simultaneous drawings

subjects drew simultaneously divided by the the sum of
the time intervals in which at least one of the pairs drew
on the whiteboard). The average distance between the
pens during each simultaneous drawing event was calculated based upon the averaging of the distances in pixels
between the two pens sampled every 200 msec during all
simultaneous drawing events.

Evidence for the sequentiality of constraints

Results
The Amount of Simultaneous Drawing
As is shown in Figure 2, the proportion of simultaneous
drawing time to total drawing time was the largest in the
design state (2s) condition. This data was entered into a 2
x 2 Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). Both problem type
(deduction and design) and by solution type (state and
event) were treated as within subject factors. Analyses
revealed a main effect of problem type F(1,23)=15.25,
p<.001 and solution type F(1,23)=32.033, p<.001 which
was qualified by an interaction F(1,23)=8.33, p<.01.
This interaction was caused by an effect of solution type
on the design task F(1,23)=42.88, p<.001. No effects
were found for the solution type on the deduction task
F(1,23)=2.13, p<1 nor for the problem type on the event
solution F<1.
Thus, it was shown that simultaneous drawing tends to
be blocked when the task has either strong informational
dependency or tight event alignment, or both of them.

The Average Distance of Simultaneous
Drawings
Figure 3 illustrates the average distances between the
pens during simultaneous drawing. It can be seen that
the event tasks had shorter average distance than the state
tasks. This data was again entered into the same 2 x 2
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) used in the last section.
Analyses showed a simple main effect of solution type
F(1,23)=23.19, p<.001 and no effect of problem type nor
interaction Fs<1.
Thus, it was found that simultaneous drawing happens
closer to each other when the task has strong event alignment.

1173

The sequentiality of constraints manifest themselves in
the actual behavior of participants in graphical communication. We found evidence in the recorded data of interactions that indicate the effects of the constraints.

Information dependency
Figure 4 shows a snapshot of the drawing interaction that
took place between two collaborators working on the design state task (2s). The upper row and the lower row
indicate the drawing behaviors of subjects A and B, respectively. No information dependency was imposed by
the task, and the event alignment strategy was neither
necessary nor plausible. A and B agreed to divide the
design task into two sub-tasks, the design of a station
plaza and the design of a park, and started to work on
each separately. A is now drawing a forest icon, while
B is drawing a station sign simultaneously. They declare
what they intend to draw when they start drawing, but
they do not acknowledge the drawing produced by their
partners until they finish their own drawings. This example indicates that, without the sequentiality constraints,
collaborators are free to adopt rather coarse-grained incremental grounding activity style, which in turn permits
parallel drawing.
We observed quite different behaviors in the deduction
state task (1s). Information dependency is created here
by the logical dependency between seating assignments.
Two subjects A and B are discussing at one point during
the course of their interaction which seat to assign to a
particular person S at a round table before moving on to
work on other people. After enumerating relevant conditions posed in the problem, they start agreeing on one
particular slot. While they are both verbally referring to
the position of the slot, A starts drawing the mark S in the
slot to indicate the placement of S. B, who also started
to initiate the same drawing action, stops in the middle when he observed A’s drawing action, and verbally
acknowledges A’s action instead. This example clearly
shows that the information dependency constraint posed
in the task brings about fine-grained incremental grounding activity between collaborators by making them work
in close agreement regarding the state of their partial so-

Figure 4: Drawing interaction exhibiting coarse-grained
incremental grounding in the design state condition.

Figure 5: Drawing interaction without the event alignment strategy in the deduction state condition.

lution and aligns decisions about which seating slot to
assign to whom. This activity style, then, forces them to
observe sequential turn-taking organization and to avoid
simultaneous drawing.

force incremental grounding interaction styles, it is still
possible to find room for parallelism within each incremental step, as long as the pieces of information expressed during simultaneous drawing are not subject to
any information dependency constraints. On the contrary, the event alignment strategy enforces close coordination of attention to the same object at the same time
between collaborators. This requirement for coordination works strongly to favor the sequential organization
of the interaction, because it effectively prevents collaborators from exploiting both the persistence and the bandwidth of the drawing media.

Event alignment
The event alignment strategy was evident in the design
event task (2e). A typical case was observed in which
subjects A and B, while jointly designing a tour in the
virtual town, have agreed to visit the museum next and
have just begun discussing the choice of transportation
means. A first proposes to go on foot. B makes a counterproposal to go by a train. A agrees. A and B both start
to initiate the drawing of the line for the move on the
map. B is the first to actually initiate the drawing. B
draws the line to the museum icon while simultaneously
describing the movement by the utterance “go like this.”
A, upon looking at B’s drawing already initiated, pulls his
hand away from the whiteboard, and produces verbal acknowledgment to B’s drawing action. B’s drawing here
embodies B’s adoption of the event alignment strategy.
The event of moving the pen to the museum icon represents the event of being transported by train to the museum in the designed tour. The event alignment strategy
enforces the sequential organization of the interaction.
Evidence for this hypothesis is given in the example by
the fact that they avoided jumbled drawing and restrict
themselves to turn taking in their drawing productions.
Figure 5 shows a snapshot from the deductive state
task (1s). The logical dependency between seating assignments works as the information dependency constraint, but the event alignment strategy does not occur
here. Subjects A and B are discussing who to seat next to
M. B draws the sign N as one candidate, while A simultaneously draws the sign O, saying “O is also possible.”
Simultaneous drawing occurs for disjunctive pieces of
information. This example suggests that when the event
alignment strategy is not adopted, the information dependency constraint alone leaves room for parallelism.
Even though information dependency constraints en-

1174

Discussions
Sequentiality hypothesis and drawing turns
Our sequentiality hypothesis predicts that even with persistent media, e.g., a whiteboard, collaborative activities
would exhibit sequential turn-taking organizations when
the joint task conducted using the media demands either or both of the information dependency and the event
alignment constraints be satisfied. Our experimental results shown in Figure 2 supports the prediction. We observed frequent occurrences of simultaneous drawing in
the design state task condition. About one sixth of one’s
entire drawings were made simultaneously with those
by her partner. But, significantly less temporal overlap
in drawing were observed in the other three task conditions: design event, deduction state and deduction event.
Simultaneous drawing is possible when neither of the
two sequentiality constraints are imposed by the task,
whereas turn-taking behaviors are enforced by either of
the sequentiality constraints.

Simultaneous drawing distance
Even though both the information dependency and the
event alignment constraints work equally in enforcing
the sequential turn-taking organization, these two factors manifest themselves in different drawing behaviors
when two participants draw simultaneously, as was observed in Figure 3. Simultaneous drawing produced in

the state conditions was placed, on average, farther away
from each other than those produced in the event conditions. It appears the event alignment strategy, which
is a good match for working in the event conditions, is
the major factor in determining how close simultaneous
drawing can take place. This is understandable when
we consider that the event alignment strategy effectively
suppresses the bandwidth characteristics of drawing media by forcing collaborators to focus on the same region
of the whiteboard. Simultaneous drawing must be the
accidental crash of drawings, similar to the crash of utterances observed in verbal interactions. As long as the
event alignment strategy is not adopted, the information
dependency constraint alone, which is effective in the
logic state condition, still leaves room for collaborative
simultaneous drawing, as we saw in the example in Figure 5, which can be produced in farther away positions.

Parallelists vs. Sequentialists
How do our results compare with claims by Parallelists
and Sequentialists? Parallelists claim that the persistence of media eliminates the requirement of incremental grounding in interaction, making it possible for interactants to produce drawings in parallel. However,
even though persistent media makes it possible, in principle, for collaborators to adopt non-incremental grounding strategies, there can be other sources, e.g, the sequentiality constraints, that demand incrementality in grounding. When the task itself demands the participants to observe certain information dependencies, either logical or
temporal, the collaborators have to design their activities
so that they attain the alignment of knowledge and the
agreement of their decisions before they move on to the
next step. Otherwise their activities diverge from each
other so that they quickly lose track of dependency relationships between pieces of information and run the risk
of unsuccessfully completing the task.
On the other hand, Sequentialists criticize the parallel use of persistent drawing media in interaction on the
grounds that natural interaction needs to be sequential.
Our design state task condition, as well as other studies on parallel drawing activities, clearly show that natural parallel drawing interactions are possible. This is
because where neither the information dependency constraint nor the event alignment strategy is effective, collaborators can fully make use of the persistence of the
drawing media to separate the production and the comprehension of drawings, thereby making one’s production of drawings independent from that of her partner.
In short, the characteristics of the media is not the
only determinant of the turn-taking organization in interaction. The constraints in the task and the strategies
adopted for the activities both play significant roles in
what kind of organization structures emerge in collaborative interactions.

the HCI field, we first postulated two types of constraints
that mandate sequential drawing turns. We conducted
an experimental analysis of actual human graphical interactions over an electronic shared whiteboard, putting
them under the four conditions corresponding to the presence and the absence of the postulated constraints. Differences were observed both in terms of the amount of
and the distance between simultaneous drawings, which
confirmed the effectiveness of the constraints in determining sequential/parallel interaction organizations. A
detailed examination of the data also revealed additional
evidence for the effectiveness of the constraints. These
results lead us to a new picture of interaction organization mechanism in which both the activity-level constraints imposed by the task and the resource-level constraints imposed by the media’s physical characteristics
affect the interactional styles in communication. These
findings suggest that task-level constraints need to be
taken into consideration when designing interactions in
HCI and CSCW systems. Exactly how they should be
considered, of course, depends on further elucidation of
the task-level constraints and the roles they play in various types of interactions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Telecommunications Advancement Organization of Japan.

References
Brennan, S. E. (1990). Seeking and providing evidence
for mutual understanding. Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford
University.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. and Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259–294.
Condon, W. S. (1971). Speech and body motion synchrony of the speaker-hearer. In D. L. Horton and J.
J. Jenkins (Eds.), Perception of Language, Columbus,
Ohio: Merrill, 150–173.
Sacks, H., and Schegloff, E. A., and Jefferson, G. (1974).
A simplest systematics for the organization of turntaking in conversation. Language, 50, 696–735.
Stefik, M., Foster, G., Bobrow, D., Kahn, K., Lanning,
S., and Suchman, L., (1987). Beyond the Chalkboard: Computer Support for Collaboration and Problem Solving in Meetings. Communications of the
ACM, 30 (1), 32–47.
Tatar, D., Foster, G., and Bobrow, D. (1991). Design for
Conversation: Lessons from Cognoter, International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 34(2), 185–210.
Traum, D. (1994). A computational theory of grounding
in natural language conversation. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Rochester.
Whittaker, S., Brennan, S., and Clark, H. (1991). Coordinating activity: an analysis of computer supported
co-operative work. In Proceedings of CHI 91 Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 361–367, New York:
ACM Press.


Conclusions
We examined how interactions are organized in graphical
communication. Following the mixed results obtained in

1175

