UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Grammatical Constructions in a Miniature Language from Narrated Video
Events

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/51v3c2dn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Dominey, Peter Ford

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Grammatical Constructions in a
Miniature Language from Narrated Video Events
Peter Ford Dominey (dominey@ isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut des Sciences Cognitives, CNRS
67 Blvd. Pinel, 69675 Bron Cedex, France

recognize events including pick-up, put-down, and
stack based on their characterization in an event logic.
The use of these intermediate representations renders
the system robust to variability in motion and view
parameters. Most importantly, Siskind demonstrated
that the lexical semantics for a number of verbs could
be established by automatic image processing.

Abstract
The objective of this research is to develop a system for
miniature language learning based on a minimum of prewired language-specific functionality, that is compatible
with observations of perceptual and language capabilities
in human development.
In the proposed system,
meaning is extracted from video images based on
detection of physical contact and its parameters.
Mapping of sentence form to meaning is performed by
learning grammatical constructions that are retrieved
from a construction inventory based on the constellation
of closed class items uniquely identifying the target
sentence structure. The resulting system displays robust
acquisition behavior that reproduces certain observations
from developmental studies, with very modest “innate”
language specificity.

Sentence to meaning mapping:

Introduction
Feldman et al. (1990) posed the problem of
"miniature" language acquisition based on <sentence,
image> pairs as a "touchstone" for cognitive science.
In this task, an artificial system is confronted with a
reduced version of the problem of language acquisition
faced by the child, that involves both the extraction of
meaning from the image, and the mapping of the paired
sentence onto this meaning.

Extraction of Meaning
In this developmental context, Mandler (1999)
suggested that the infant begins to construct meaning
from the scene based on the extraction of perceptual
primitives.
From simple representations such as
contact, support, attachment (Talmy 1988) the infant
could construct progressively more elaborate
representations of visuospatial meaning. Thus, the
physical event "collision" is a form of the perceptual
primitive “contact”. Kotovsky & Baillargeon (1998)
observed that at 6 months, infants demonstrate
sensitivity to the parameters of objects involved in a
collision, and the resulting effect on the collision,
suggesting indeed that infants can represent contact as
an event predicate with agent and patient arguments.
Siskind (2001) has demonstrated that force dynamic
primitives of contact, support, attachment can be
extracted from video event sequences and used to

354

Once meaning is extracted from the scene, the
significant problem of mapping sentences to meanings
remains. The nativist perspective on this problem
holds that the <sentence, meaning> data to which the
child is exposed is highly indeterminate, and
underspecifies the mapping to be learned.
This
“poverty of the stimulus” is a central argument for the
existence of a genetically specified universal grammar,
such that language acquisition consists of configuring
the UG for the appropriate target language (Chomsky
1995). In this framework, once a given parameter is
set, its use should apply to new constructions in a
generalized, generative manner.
An alternative functionalist perspective holds that
learning plays a much more central role in language
acquisition. The infant develops an inventory of
grammatical constructions as mappings from form to
meaning (Goldberg 1995). These constructions are
initially rather fixed and specific, and later become
generalized into a more abstract compositional form
employed by the adult (Tomasello 1999). In this
context, construction of the relation between perceptual
and cognitive representations and grammatical form
plays a central role in learning language (e.g. Feldman
et al. 1990, 1996; Langacker 1991; Mandler 1999;
Talmy 1998).
These issues of learnability and innateness have
provided a rich motivation for simulation studies that
have taken a number of different forms. Elman (1990)
demonstrated that recurrent networks are sensitive to
predictable structure in grammatical sequences.
Subsequent studies of grammar induction demonstrate
how syntactic structure can be recovered from
sentences (e.g. Stolcke & Omohundro 1994). From the
“grounding of language in meaning” perspective (e.g.

Feldman et al. 1990, 1996; Langacker 1991; Goldberg
1995), Chang & Maia (2001) exploited the relations
between action representation and simple verb frames
in a construction grammar approach, and Cottrell et al.
(1990) associated sequences of words with simple
image sequences. In effort to consider more complex
grammatical forms, Miikkulainen (1996) demonstrated
a system that learned the mapping between relative
phrase constructions and multiple event representations,
based on the use of a stack for maintaining state
information during the processing of the next embedded
clause in a recursive manner.
In a more generalized approach, Dominey (2000)
exploited the regularity that sentence to meaning
mapping is encoded in all languages by word order and
grammatical marking (bound or free) (Bates et al.
1982). That model was based on the functional
neurophysiology of cognitive sequence and language
processing and an associated neural network model that
has been demonstrated to simulate interesting aspects of
infant (Dominey & Ramus 2000) and adult language
processing (Dominey et al. 2003).

Objectives
The goals of the current study are fourfold: First to
test the hypothesis that meaning can be extracted from
visual scenes based on the detection of contact and its
parameters in an approach similar to but significantly
simplified from Siskind (2001); Second to determine
whether the model of Dominey (2000) can be extended
to handle embedded relative clauses; Third to
demonstrate that these two systems can be combined to
perform miniature language acquisition; and finally to
demonstrate that the combined system can provide
insight into the developmental progression in human
language acquisition without the necessity of a prewired parameterized grammar system (Chomsky 1995).

The Training Data
The human experimenter enacts and simultaneously
narrates visual scenes made up of events that occur
between a red cylinder, a green block and a blue
semicircle or “moon” on a black matte table surface. A
video camera above the surface provides a video image
that is processed by a color-based recognition and
tracking system (Smart – Panlab, Barcelona Spain) that
generates a time ordered sequence of the contacts that
occur between objects that is subsequently processed
for event analysis (below). The simultaneous narration
of the ongoing events is processed by a commercial
speech-to-text system (IBM ViaVoiceTM). Speech and

355

vision data were acquired and then processed off-line
yielding a data set of matched sentence – scene pairs
that were provided as input to the structure mapping
model. A total of ~300 <sentence, scene> pairs were
tested in the following experiments.

Visual Scenes and analysis
For a given video sequence the visual scene analysis
generates the corresponding event description in the
format event(agent, object, recipient).

Single Event Labeling
Events are defined in terms of contacts between
elements. A contact is defined in terms of the time at
which it occurred, the agent, object, and duration of the
contact. The agent is determined as the element that
had a larger relative velocity towards the other element
involved in the contact. Based on these parameters of
contact, scene events are recognized as follows:
Touch(agent, object): A single contact, in which (a)
the duration of the contact is inferior to touch_duration
(1.5 seconds), and (b) the object is not displaced during
the duration of the contact.
Push(agent, object): Similar to touch, with a greater
contact duration, superior or equal to touch_duration
and inferior to take_duration (5 sec), and object
displacement.
Take(agent, object): A single contact in which (a)
the duration of contact is superior or equal to
take_duration, (b) the object is displaced during the
contact, and (c) the agent and object remain in contact.
Take(agent, object, source): Multiple contacts, as
the agent takes the object from the source. Same as
Take(a,o), and for the optional second contact between
agent and source (a) the duration of the contact is
inferior to take_duration, and (b) the agent and source
do not remain in contact. Finally, contact between the
object and source is broken during the event.
Give(agent, object, recipient): Multiple contacts as
agent takes object, then initiates contact between object
and recipient.
These event labeling templates form the basis for a
template matching algorithm that labels events based on
the contact list, similar to the spanning interval and
event logic of Siskind (2001).
Complex “Hierarchical” Events: The events
described above are simple in the sense that there have
no hierarchical structure.
This imposes serious
limitations on the syntactic complexity of the
corresponding sentences (Feldman et al. 1996,
Miikkulainen 1996). The sentence “The block that
pushed the moon was touched by the triangle”
illustrates a complex event that exemplifies this issue.

The corresponding compound event will be recognized
and represented as a pair of temporally successive
simple event descriptions, in this case: push(block,
moon), and touch(triangle, block). The “block” serves
as the link that connects these two simple events in
order to form a complex hierarchical event.

Word Meaning

Structure mapping for language learning
Our approach is based on the cross-linguistic
observation that open class words (e.g. nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs) are assigned to their thematic
roles based on word order and/or grammatical function
words or morphemes (Bates et al. 1982). The mapping
of sentence form onto meaning (Goldberg 1995) takes
place at two distinct levels: Words are associated with
individual components of event descriptions, and
grammatical structure is associated with functional
roles within scene events (Fig 1). The first level has
been addressed by Siskind (1996), Roy & Pentland
(2000) and Steels (2001) and we treat it here in a
relatively simple but effective manner. Our principle
interest lies more in the second level of mapping
between scene and sentence structure.

FormToMeaning

Construction Inventory

Action
Agent
Object
Recipient
Scene Event Array
(SEA)
Visual Scene
Analysis

(1)

Indices: k(1:6) - words; m(1:6) – scene elements;
i(1:25), j(1:25) – elements in word and scene item
vectors, respectively.

Construction
Index

Open Class
Array (OCA)

In the initial learning phases there is no influence of
syntactic knowledge and the word-referent associations
are stored in the WordToReferent matrix (Eqn 1) by
associating every word with every referent in the
current scene (α =1), exploiting the cross-situational
regularity (Siskind 1996) that a given word will have a
higher coincidence with referent to which it refers than
with other referents. This initial word learning
contributes to learning the mapping between sentence
and scene structure (Eqn. 4, 5 & 6 below). Then,
knowledge of the syntactic structure, encoded in
FormToMeaning can be used to identify the appropriate
referent (in the SEA) for a given word (in the OCA),
corresponding to a zero value of α in Eqn. 1. In this
“syntactic bootstrapping” for the new word “gugle,” for
example, syntactic knowledge of Agent-Event-Object
structure of the sentence “John pushed the gugle” can
be used to assign “gugle” to the object of push.
WordToReferent(i,j) = WordToReferent(i,j) +
OCA(k,i) * SEA(m,j) *
Max(α, FormToMeaning(m,k))

WordToReferent
Predicted
Referents
Array (PRA)

Referents Array (PRA). PRA elements are mapped onto
their roles in the Scene Event Array (SEA) by the
FormToMeaning mapping, specific to each sentence
type. This mapping is retrieved from Construction
Inventory, via the ConstructionIndex that encodes the
closed class words that characterize each sentence type.

Open vs Closed Class Word Categories

Closed
class
words

Speech Input
Processing

Figure 1. Structure-Mapping Architecture.
Model Overview: Words in sentences, and elements
in the scene are coded as single ON bits in respective
25-element vectors. On input, Open class words
populate the Open Class Array (OCA), and closed class
words populate the Construction index. Visual Scene
Analysis populates the Scene Event Array (SEA) with
the extracted meaning as scene elements. Words in
OCA are translated to Predicted Referents via the
WordToReferent mapping to populate the Predicted

356

Newborn infants are sensitive to the perceptual
properties that distinguish these two categories (Shi et
al. 1999), and in adults, these categories are processed
by dissociable neurophysiological systems (Brown et al.
1999). Similarly, artificial neural networks can also
learn to make this function/content distinction (Morgan
et al. 1996, Blanc et al. 2003). Thus, for the speech
input that is provided to the learning model open and
closed class words are directed to separate processing
streams that preserve their order and identity, as
indicated in Figure 1.

Mapping Sentence to Meaning
In terms of the architecture in Figure 1, this mapping
can be characterized in the following successive steps.
First, words in the Open Class Array are decoded into
their corresponding scene referents (via the

WordToReferent mapping) to yield the Predicted
Referents Array that contains the translated words while
preserving their original order from the OCA (Eqn 2).
n

PRA(m,j) =

∑ OCA(m,i) * WordToReferent(i,j)

(2)

i =1

Next, each sentence type will correspond to a specific
form to meaning mapping between the PRA and the
SEA. encoded in the FormToMeaning array. The
problem will be to retrieve for each sentence type, the
appropriate corresponding FormToMeaning mapping.
To solve this problem, we recall that each sentence type
will have a unique constellation of closed class words
and/or bound morphemes (Bates et al. 1982) that can be
coded in a ConstructionIndex (Eqn.3) that forms a
unique identifier for each sentence type, shifting the
current contents by the index of the ON bit in
FunctionWord, then ANDing the FunctionWord vector.
The appropriate FormToMeaning mapping for each
sentence type can be indexed in ConstructionInventory
by its corresponding ConstructionIndex.
ConstructionIndex = fcircularShift(ConstructionIndex,
FunctionWord)

(3)

The link between the ConstructionIndex and the
corresponding FormToMeaning mapping is established
as follows. As each new sentence is processed, we first
reconstruct the specific FormToMeaning mapping for
that sentence (Eqn 4), by mapping words to referents
(in PRA) and referents to scene elements (in SEA). The
resulting, FormToMeaningCurrent encodes the
correspondence between word order (that is preserved
in the PRA Eqn 2) and thematic roles in the SEA. Note
that the quality of FormToMeaningCurrent will depend
on the quality of acquired word meanings in
WordToReferent. Thus, syntactic learning requires a
minimum baseline of semantic knowledge. Given the
FormToMeaningCurrent mapping for the current
sentence, we can now associate it in the
ConstructionInventory with the corresponding function
word configuration or ConstructionIndex for that
sentence, expressed in (Eqn 5).
In Eqns 5, 6
FormToMeaning is linearized for simplification.
FormToMeaningCurrent(m,k) =
n

∑ PRA(k,i)*SEA(m,i)

Finally, once this learning has occurred, for new
sentences we can now extract the FormToMeaning
mapping from the learned ConstructionInventory by
using the ConstructionIndex as an index into this
associative memory, illustrated in Eqn. 6.

(4)

i=1

ConstructionInventory(i,j) = ConstructionInventory(i,j)
+ ConstructionIndex(i)
* FormToMeaningCurrent(j)
(5)

357

FormToMeaning(i) =
n

∑ ConstructionInventory(i,j) * ConstructinIndex(j)
i=1

(6)
To accommodate the dual scenes for complex events
Eqns. 4-7 are instantiated twice each, to represent the
two components of the dual scene. In the case of
simple scenes, the second component of the dual scene
representation is null.
We evaluate performance by using the
WordToReferent and FormToMeaning knowledge to
construct for a given input sentence the “predicted
scene”. That is, the model will construct an internal
representation of the scene that should correspond to
the input sentence. This is achieved by first converting
the Open-Class-Array into its corresponding scene
items in the Predicted-Referents-Array as specified in
Eqn. 2. The referents are then re-ordered into the
proper scene representation via application of the
FormToMeaning transformation as described in Eqn. 7.
PSA(m,i) = PRA(k,i) * FormToMeaning(m,k)

(7)

When learning has proceeded correctly, the predicted
scene array (PSA) contents should match those of the
scene event array (SEA) that is directly derived from
input to the model. We then quantify performance
error in terms of the number of mismatches between
PSA and SEA.

Experimental results
Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff (1996) indicate that
children use knowledge of word meaning to acquire a
fixed SVO template around 18 months, then expand this
to non-canonical sentence forms around 24+ months.
Tomasello (1999) indicates that fixed grammatical
constructions will be used initially, and that these will
then provide the basis for the development of more
generalized constructions (Goldberg 1995).
The
following experiments attempt to follow this type of
developmental progression. Training results in changes
in the associative WordToReferent mappings encoding
the lexicon, and changes in the ConstructionInventory
encoding the form to meaning mappings, indexed by
the ConstructionIndex.

A. Learning of Active Forms for Simple Events
1.
2.

Active: The block pushed the triangle.
Dative: The block gave the triangle to the moon.

For this experiment, 17 scene/sentence pairs were
generated that employed the 5 different events, and
narrations in the active voice, corresponding to the
grammatical forms 1 and 2. The model was trained for
32 passes through the 17 scene/sentence pairs for a total
of 544 scene/sentence pairs. During the first 200
scene/sentence pair trials, α in Eqn. 1 was 1 (i.e. no
syntactic bootstrapping before syntax is acquired), and
thereafter it was 0. This was necessary in order to avoid
the random effect of syntactic knowledge on semantic
learning in the initial learning stages. The trained
system displayed error free performance for all 17
sentences, and generalization to new sentences that had
not previously been tested.

B. Passive forms
This experiment examined learning active and
passive grammatical forms, employing grammatical
forms 1-4. Word meanings were used from Experiment
A, so only the structural FormToMeaning mappings
were learned.
3.
4.

Passive: The triangle was pushed by the block.
Dative Passive: The moon was given to the
triangle by the block.

Seventeen new scene/sentence pairs were generated
with active and passive grammatical forms for the
narration. Within 3 training passes through the 17
sentences (51 scene/sentence pairs), error free
performance was achieved, with confirmation of error
free generalization to new untrained sentences of these
types. The rapid learning indicates the importance of
lexicon in establishing the form to meaning mapping
for the grammatical constructions.

C. Relative forms for Complex Events
Here we consider complex scenes narrated by relative
clause sentences. Eleven complex scene/sentence pairs
were generated with narration corresponding to the
grammatical forms indicated in 5 – 10:
5.
6.
7.

The block that pushed the triangle touched the
moon.
The block pushed the triangle that touched the
moon.
The block that pushed the triangle was touched by
the moon.

358

8.

The block pushed the triangle that was touched the
moon.
9. The block that was pushed by the triangle touched
the moon.
10. The block was pushed by the triangle that touched
the moon.
After presentation of 88 scene/sentence pairs, the
model performed without error for these 6 grammatical
forms, and displayed error-free generalization to new
sentences that had not been used during the training for
all six grammatical forms.

D. Combined Test with and Without Lexicon
A total of 27 scene/sentence pairs, used in
Experiments B and C, were employed that exercised the
ensemble of grammatical forms 1 – 10 using the learned
WordToReferent mappings. After exposure to 162
scene/sentence pairs the model performed and
generalized without error. When this combined test was
performed without the pre-learned lexical mappings in
WordToReferent, the system failed to converge,
illustrating the advantage of following the
developmental progression from lexicon to simple to
complex grammatical structure.

E. Some Scaling Issues
A small lexicon (n<25) and construction inventory
(n=10) are used, as the objective was to demonstrate the
integrated system and grammatical structure learning
capability. Based on the independent word and
construction representations, and their synergistic
interaction, the architecture scales well. The model is
being tested with a larger lexicon, and has learned over
40 grammatical constructions. Importantly, the system
should extend to all languages in which sentence to
meaning mapping is encoded by word order and/or
grammatical marking (Bates et al. 1982). In the current
study, deliberate human event production yielded
essentially perfect recognition, though the learning
model is relatively robust to elevated scene error rates
as documented in Dominey (2000).

Conclusion
The current study demonstrates (1) that the
perceptual primitive of contact (available to infants at 5
months), can be used to perform event description in a
manner that is similar to but significantly simpler than
Siskind (2001), (2) that a novel implementation of
principles from construction grammar can be used to
map sentence form to these meanings together in an
integrated system, (3) that relative clauses can be
processed in a manner that is similar to, but requires

less specific machinery (e.g. no stack) than that in
Miikkulainen (1996), and finally (4) that the resulting
system displays robust acquisition behavior that
reproduces certain observations from developmental
studies with very modest “innate” language specificity.
The goal was to identify minimal event recognition
and form-to-meaning mapping capabilities that could be
integrated into a coherent system that performs at the
level of a human infant in the first years of
development when the construction inventory is being
built up. This forms the basis for the infant’s
subsequent ability to de- and re-compose these
constructions in a truly compositional manner, a topic
of future research.

Acknowledgments
Supported by the OHLL, EuroCores OMLL, French
ACI Integrative and Computational Neuroscience, and
HFSP MCILA Projects.

References
Bates E, McNew S, MacWhinney B, Devescovi A,
Smith S (1982) Functional constraints on sentence
processing: A cross linguistic study, Cognition (11)
245-299.
Blanc JM, Dodane C, Dominey PF (2003) Temporal
processing for syntax acquisition: A Simulation
Study, In Press, Proceedings of the 25th Ann Conf.
Cog. Sci. Soc., MIT, Cambridge MA
Brown CM, Hagoort P, ter Keurs M (1999)
Electrophysiological signatures of visual lexical
processing : Open- and closed-class words. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience. 11 :3, 261-281
Chomsky N. (1995) The Minimalist Program. MIT
Chang NC, Maia TV (2001) Grounded learning of
grammatical constructions, AAAI Spring Symp. On
Learning Grounded Representations, Stanford CA.
Cottrel GW, Bartell B, Haupt C. (1990) Grounding
Meaning in Perception. In Proc. GWAI90, 14th
German Workshop on Artificial Intelligence, pages
307--321, Berlin, New York,. Springer Verlag.
Dominey PF, Ramus F (2000) Neural network
processing of natural lanugage: I. Sensitivity to serial,
temporal and abstract structure of language in the
infant. Lang. and Cognitive Processes, 15(1) 87-127
Dominey PF (2000) Conceptual Grounding in
Simulation Studies of Language Acquisition,
Evolution of Communication, 4(1), 57-85.
Dominey PF, Hoen M, Lelekov T, Blanc JM (2003)
Neurological basis of language in sequential
cognition: Evidence from simulation, aphasia and
ERP studies, (in press) Brain and Language
Elman J (1990) Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14:179-211.

359

Feldman JA, Lakoff G, Stolcke A, Weber SH (1990)
Miniature language acquisition: A touchstone for
cognitive science. In Proceedings of the 12th Ann
Conf. Cog. Sci. Soc. 686-693, MIT, Cambridge MA
Feldman J., G. Lakoff, D. Bailey, S. Narayanan, T.
Regier, A. Stolcke (1996). L0: The First Five Years.
Artificial Intelligence Review, v10 103-129.
Goldberg A (1995) Constructions. U Chicago Press,
Chicago and London.
Hirsh-Pasek K, Golinkof RM (1996) The origins of
grammar:
evidence
from
early
language
comprehension. MIT Press, Boston.
Kotovsky L, Baillargeon R, The development of
calibration-based reasoning about collision events in
young infants. 1998, Cognition, 67, 311-351
Langacker, R. (1991). Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar. Practical Applications, Volume 2. Stanford
University Press, Stanford.
Mandler J (1999) Preverbal representations and
language, in P. Bloom, MA Peterson, L Nadel and
MF Garrett (Eds) Language and Space, MIT Press,
365-384
Miikkulainen R (1996) Subsymbolic case-role analysis
of sentences with embedded clauses. Cognitive
Science, 20:47-73.
Morgan JL, Shi R, Allopenna P (1996) Perceptual bases
of rudimentary grammatical categories, pp 263-286,
in Morgan JL, Demuth K (Eds) Signal to syntax,
Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah NJ, USA.
Roy D, Pentland A (2002). Learning Words from Sights
and Sounds: A Computational Model. Cognitive
Science, 26(1), 113-146.
Shi R., Werker J.F., Morgan J.L. (1999) Newborn
infants' sensitivity to perceptual cues to lexical and
grammatical words, Cognition, Volume 72, Issue 2,
B11-B21.
Siskind JM (1996) A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings, Cognition (61) 39-91.
Siskind JM (2001) Grounding the lexical semantics of
verbs in visual perception using force dynamics and
event logic. Journal of AI Research (15) 31-90
Steels, L. (2001) Language Games for Autonomous
Robots. IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 16, nr. 5, pp.
16-22, New York: IEEE Press.
Stolcke A, Omohundro SM (1994) Inducing
probablistic grammars by Bayseian model merging/
In Grammatical Inference and Applications: Proc. 2nd
Intl. Colloq. On Grammatical Inference, Springer
Verlag.
Talmy L (1988) Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 10(2) 117-149.
Tomasello M (1999) The item-based nature of
children's early syntactic development, Trends in
Cognitive Science, 4(4):156-163

