UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic Cues Influence Acquisition of Number Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46x65877

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Steingold, Eugenia
Spelke, Elizabeth
Kittredge, Audrey

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic Cues Influence Acquisition of Number Words
Eugenia Steingold (Genya@wjh.harvard.edu)
Elizabeth Spelke (Spelke@wjh.harvard.edu)
Laboratory for Developmental Studies
Harvard University
33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge MA 02138
and
Audrey Kittredge (Audrey_Kittredge@brown.edu)
Brown University

words is gradual and effortful. One reason for
this apparent paradox is that analog-magnitude
representation is approximate, while correct
application of number words requires exact
representation of numbers. How do children
accomplish this mapping of approximate
representational system onto exact number line?
One possibility is that children use linguistic
cues to arrive at the correct exact meanings of
number words (Bloom and Wynn, 1997). For
example, English marks nouns that refer to sets
of objects with cardinality larger than 1
(singular-plural distinction). Children might use
this cue to make an inference about the meaning
of number word one, and how it is different from
the rest of number words. One implication of
this hypothesis is that speakers of languages with
different plural markings use different strategies
to acquire and initially represent number words.
We investigated this hypothesis by comparing
the performance of English monolinguals and
Russian-English bilinguals on number
discrimination task.
Russian language is different from
English in that it has two plural markers.
Russian marks sets with only one object (by
putting the noun in nominative case, singular
form); sets with 2, 3, or 4 objects (by putting the
noun in genitive case singular form); and finally
sets with more than 5 objects, by putting the
noun in genitive case plural form (see Table 1).
Table1: Examples in English and Russian.
English
One
2-4
5
book
bookS
bookS
Russian
Odna
2-4
5
(Feminine)
knigA
ningI
knig

Abstract
A cross-linguistic study investigated how
syntactic cues influence young children s
number representations. We compared how
English monolinguals and Russian-English
bilinguals perform on number discrimination
task. Subjects performances strongly suggest
that linguistic cues, such as plural markings,
guide children s initial acquisition and
representation of number.
Introduction
Many researchers agree that there is a special
cognitive structure that is devoted to
representation of number (Gallistel & Gelman,
1992; Whalen, Gallister, & Gelman, 1999;
Wynn, 1990a.b). For example, a n a l o g
magnitudes represent a number of items as a
single magnitude proportional to the target
number (Meck and Church, 1983). Because the
magnitudes exhibit scalar variability, the
discriminability of two given quantities accords
with Webers law, in that it increases with the
ratio. Accordingly, even 6-month infants can
discriminate between both visual and auditory
arrays of stimuli based on number, when the
ratio in the array is 1:2 (Liption and Spelke,
2002; Xu and Spelke, 2000). Non-human
primates have also been shown to succeed on
number discrimination tasks (Hauser, McNeilage
and Ware, 1996).
Despite infants success on number
discrimination tasks, children need as long as 6-9
months to learn new number word (Wynn, 1992;
Skwarchuk and Anglin, 2002). Thus, mapping
analog-magnitude representation onto number-

1112

sessions: in English and in Russian. There was a
one-week break between the sessions, and the
sessions were conducted by two different
experimenters. The pairing of experimenters
with the sessions and the order of the sessions
were counterbalanced across the participants.

Experiment
Experiment 1 compared how children who
Russian and English languages discriminate
between two pictures with different numbers of
objects.
For example, we showed the
participants two cards, with one and two balls
each, and asked them to point to the card with
only one or only two balls (adapted from Wynn,
1999). Wynn (1999) showed that English
speaking kids easily learn the contrast between
one and other numbers. She suggested that
English plural marking puts these numbers into
different categories. Because Russian language
breaks the number line into three categories (one,
small numbers, large numbers), we predicted
that Russian speaking children will perform very
well discriminating between small and large
numbers (e.g., 3 vs. 6). Therefore, we predicted
that in both languages, children will perform
better making cross-categorical comparison, than
making within categorical comparison, where
category is a group of numbers organized
together by the plural markers of children s
native language.

Materials We constructed two sets of pictures of
four different familiar objects (e.g., bunny, dog,
star, and tree). The two sets of pictures were
counterbalanced across the two sessions for the
bilingual subjects, and across the monolingual
subjects. Within each set, we constructed four
blocks, with different objects each, such that
each block of objects had all four types of
discriminations.
Procedure The experiment started with two
pretests. The experimenter showed children 5 toy
frogs or chickens (counterbalanced across
sessions for the bilingual subjects) and asked:
How many frogs/ chickens are here? If a child
counted correctly, the experimenter added one
more toy. If a child made a mistake, the
experimenter removed one toy and asked to
count again. Each child was encouraged to count
out loud, and to point at the objects while
counting. The task was conducted to determine
the range of participants counting routine. The
second pretest was Give-a-Number task
developed by Wynn (1990). During this task the
participants were asked to put only a specific
number of toys in the box. The experimenter
always started requesting 3 toys, then the
experimenter increased or decreased the number
of toys by one, depending on subject s
performance. Then, the participants moved on to
the main experimental task, discriminating
between different number of objects in two
pictures.

Method
Participants The participants were 12 RussianEnglish bilingual children and 11 English
monolingual children (age range from 39 to 56
months).
Design Both groups of children completed
number discrimination task, during which they
were presented with two cards, and each card
showed a different number of identical objects.
The participants were asked to point to a card
with X objects. There were four within subject
comparisons: 1 vs. another number; small
number vs. small number (2 vs. 3, vs. 4); small
number vs. large number (4 vs. 6 and 3 vs. 6),
and large number vs. large number (5 vs.10 and
6 vs. 9). The pairs of numbers in each
comparison were constructed such that they had
1 to 2 and 2 to 3 ratios. Overall, there were 8
discriminations between 1 and another number,
and 4 discrimination within each additional type
(small vs. small, small vs. large, and large vs.
large). All children were expected to succeed at
discriminating between 1 and any other number.
All children were expected to perform at chance,
while discriminating between large numbers.
However, we expected the language-specific
differences in children s discriminations between
small vs. small and small vs. large numbers.
Russian-English bilinguals completed two

Results
Counting The mean highest number that English
monolingual produced correctly was 7.2
(std=4.08). The mean highest numbers for the
bilinguals were 6.8 (std=3.32) in Russian and 7.9
(std=4.12) in English. The were no significant
difference between the two groups of children, in
either language.
Give a Number On average, the monolingual
children correctly put 3.4 (std=1.34) objects in
the box, while the bilinguals put 3.0 (std=1.79)

1113

F(3, 20)=56.290, p<000, a significant effect of
Group, F(1,20)=742.330, p<.000; and a
significant interaction between Group and Type
of Discrimination, F=3.57, p<.025.

objects in Russian, and 3.8 (std=1.83) in English.
Again, there were no significant differences
between the two groups of children. The results
of the pretests suggest that the two groups of
children were at a comparable acquisition stage
.
Discriminations The results of number
discriminations are summarized in Figures 1 and
2. As expected, both groups of children
performed equally well discriminating between 1
and another number (Monolinguals: 98% correct
discriminations; Bilinguals Russian: 98% correct
and English: 95%). Monolinguals successfully
discriminated between small numbers (91%
correct), while bilingual children s performance
dropped to 59% correct in Russian and 72%
correct in English. Monolinguals made 76% of
correct discriminations between small and large
numbers, while bilinguals made 77% of correct
discriminations in Russian and 84% in English.
Finally, monolingual children made 51% of
correct discriminations between large numbers,
while bilinguals made 45% of correct

General Discussion
Bloom and Wynn (1998) proposed that
linguistic cues guide acquisition of number
words. For example, acquiring number word
one in English is facilitated by the plural
marking that makes the contrast between one and
many salient Wynn (1992b). Consistent with
this proposal, we found that for Russian speaking
children discriminate between 3 vs. 6 (crosscategorical contrast) more accurately than
between 2 vs. 4 (within-categorical contrast). In
contrast, English monolinguals performance
gradually declined, as the numbers became
larger. Interestingly, the bilingual children
exhibited this language-specific pattern, even
when tested in English, suggesting the salient
contrast between small and large numbers is
conceptualized, and children s performance is
not directly triggered by the linguistic input at
the time of testing.
Although, bilinguals performed better on the
cross-categorical questions, overall, they
performed worse than monolingual children did.
There are two possible answers for their
relatively inferior performance. First, learning
number words in two languages is more difficult
than in one language (especially when the
languages send competing cues). However,
when the bilinguals made cross the categorical
discrimination, their performance recovers up to
the level of English monolinguals, probably
because Russian plural marking made this
contrast particularly salient. Alternatively,
bilingual children might be confused by the
specific plural marker that puts nouns combined
with number words t w o , three and four, in
genitive case, singular form. Putting the nouns
in the singular form might obscure the fact that
the number words themselves refer to the sets
with multiple members. Thus, rather than
acquiring each number word independently,
Russian speaking children appear to group them
into three discreet categories: one, some and
many. While constructing this representation
probably slows down initial acquisition of
number words, it might provide children with the
structure that eventually enables them to realize
the principles of the number line and the
counting routine.
Either one of these
possibilities is consistent with the initial proposal

100
80
60
40
20
0

1
Small
Small/Large
Large
Bilinguals

Monolinguals

Figure 1

discriminations in Russian and 54% in English
(see Figures 1 and 2). We conducted ANOVA to
compare the performances of bilingual children
on different types of number discrimination in
English and Russian. The ANOVA revealed a
significant effect of Type of Discrimination, F(3,
9) =28.998, p<.000; no significant effect of
Language, and no interaction between the
Language and Type of Discrimination. Because
there was no effect of Language for bilinguals,
we collapsed across languages, and compared
bilinguals and monolinguals. ANOVA revealed
a significant effect of Type of Discrimination,

100
80
60
40
20
0
BiRussian
Figure 2

1
Small
Small/Large
Large
BiEnglish

1114

that number word acquisition is in part depends
on the cues provided by child s language.
Further cross-linguistic research is necessary to
shed light on how linguistic and numerical
representations interact in children s early
conception of number words.

primates. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, 53, 1514-1517,
Liption, J. and Spelke, E.S. (2002).
Meck, W.H., & Church, R.M (1983). A mode
control model of counting and timing
processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes.
9(3), 320-334.
Skwarchuk, S.L. & Anglin, J. M. (2002)
Children’s acquisition of the English
cardinal number words: A special case of
vocabulary development. Journal of
Educational Psychology 94(1), 107-125
Whalen J., Gallistel, C. R. & Gelman R. (1999).
Nonverbal counting in humans: The
psychophysics of number representation.
Psychological Science, 10(2), 130-137.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children s understanding of
counting. Cognition, 36(2), 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992a). Addition and subtraction by
human infants. Nature, 358(6389), 749-750.
Wynn, K. (1992b). Children acquisition of the
number words and the counting system.
Cognitive Psychology, 24(2), 220-241.
Xu, F. & and Spelke,E.S. (2000). Large Number
discrimination in 6-month-old infants.
Cognition, 74, b1-b11.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NIH Individual
Postdoctoral Fellowship (grant # HD40719) to E.
G-S and by a research grant from NIH
(HD23103) to E.S.S. We are grateful to the
parents and children for their participation in the
studies, and to Susan Carey, Kristin Shutts and
Anna Shusterman for their comments and
suggestions.
References
Bloom, P. & Wynn, K. (1997). Linguistic cues
in the acquisition of number words. Journal
of Child Language, 24(3), 511-533.
Gallistel, C.R. & Gelman, R. (1992). Preverbal
and verbal counting and computations.
Cognition, 44, 43-74.
Hauser, M.D., McNeilage, P., & Ware, M.
(1996). Numerical representations in

1115

