UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Literal meaning and context categories in the attribution of communicative intentions: A
developmental study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mw1j51v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Bosco, Francesca M.
Bucciarelli, Monica
Bara, Bruno G.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Literal meaning and context categories in the attribution of communicative
intentions: A developmental study
Francesca M. Bosco (bosco@psych.unito.it)
Centro di Scienza Cognitiva, Università di Torino, Via Po, 14, 10123 Torino – Italy

Monica Bucciarelli (monica@psych.unito.it)
Centro di Scienza Cognitiva, Università di Torino, Via Po, 14, 10123 Torino – Italy

Bruno G. Bara (bara@psych.unito.it)
Centro di Scienza Cognitiva, Università di Torino, Via Po, 14, 10123 Torino – Italy

Abstract
Studies in developmental literature claim that for
young children context plays a more important role
than literal meaning in comprehending a speaker's
communicative intention. The present study
evaluates this claim for different categories of
context in children aged 3 to 7 years. In particular,
we analyze contexts pertaining to the categories we
define as follows: Access, Space, Time, Discourse,
Extra-linguistic-behavior and Status. The results of
the study show that, for all children, the contexts
investigated within the categories Space, Time and
Status play a more important role than literal
meaning and that, on the contrary, the literal
meaning bears a more weight than the context within
the category Discourse. We discuss the results in
terms of different roles played in different contexts
in the reconstruction of a speaker’s communicative
intention in children of different ages.

Introduction
How do individuals attribute communicative
intentions to other individuals? Philosophy of
language provides systematic accounts of how it is
possible to attribute a meaning to a linguistic
utterance (Kaplan, 1989; Montague, 1974; Tarski,
1956). Within the totally different frameworks
provided by pragmatics, many studies focus on the
role of the context of enunciation of an utterance in
comprehending a speaker’s communicative intention,
hereby the speaker’s meaning. For instance, Grice
(1967) points out that, in the use of language, some
contents are not directly transmitted by words; they
are implied from what the speaker utters. In some
occasions, he argues, particular contextual features
help the hearer to reconstruct the speaker's meaning.
Thus, in case of doubt, the context clarifies the
meaning an utterance was intended to convey. Clark
and Carlson (1981) claim that a listener who is trying

162

to understand a speaker's meaning limits himself to
considering the intrinsic context, i.e. the amount of
information that may be needed to understand. The
choice of a context for the inferential processes
involved in comprehension, in Sperber and Wilson's
(1986) view, might be partially determined by the
contents of the memory (both encyclopedic-general
and short-term memory store) of a deductive device
and the information that can be picked up from the
physical environment. These factors determine not a
single context, but a range of possible contexts. In
Clark's (1992) formulation the notion of context
depends on the notion of common ground. The
common ground between two agents consists of the
mutual knowledge, beliefs, and suppositions that they
may share. Examples are the social norms shared by
the members of a particular community (Clark and
Marshall, 1992). Gibbs (1986) points out that some
particular social contexts like, for instance, the
presence of potential obstacles for the addressee in
complying with a request, can make a request a
conventional indirect. Bosco, Bucciarelli and Bara
(2003) propose a taxonomy of different categories of
context, which help to reconstruct the speaker’s
meaning. They claim that the literal meaning of an
utterance – which is the result of its syntactical and
semantic analysis - is necessary, but not sufficient to
reconstruct the speaker’s meaning (see also Airenti,
Bara & Colombetti, 1993; Gibbs, 1994; Recanati,
1995). The same identical utterance proffered in
different contexts can acquire different communicative
meanings. For example, as Searle (1975) points out,
the status of the speaker can affect the communicative
effect of the utterance. He argues that if a general asks
a soldier to tidy the room, the request is considered an
order or a command. But, if the soldier asks the
general to tidy the room, we may consider the request
either a suggestion or a proposal. In Bosco et al,
context is a dynamic interpersonal construct, in
continuous progression, possibly oscillating according

to the varying relevance of its dimensions. A series of
dimensions enter into the definition of context with
different possible levels of importance, according to
the specific situation. Each of them may be in turn the
fundamental component of the context, as the
participants in the dialogue mentally represent it.
Studies in the literature sustain the claim that the
same utterance can be assigned a different meaning
depending on the context of enunciation. In the study
by Bosco, et al.’s view, for example, the authors
investigate some context categories pertaining to the
physical world (Access, Space and Time) and some
context categories pertaining to the social world
(Discourse, Extra-linguistic-behavior and Status).
They find that, given a specific context category,
children assign different communicative intentions to
the same speaker’s utterance depending on different
contexts of enunciation. In particular, this result holds
for the categories Access, Space, Discourse and Extralinguistic-behavior. For example, for the category
Space, the utterance by the experimenter: 'Look, what
wonderful building blocks, let’s play with the
building blocks!’ is interpreted as a request, (i.e. bring
the construction to the experimenter), in a context
where the object is near the child and far from the
experimenter, and as a proposal (i.e. to start playing
together) in a context where the mentioned object is
near the experimenter and far from the child.
Furthermore, Bosco and colleagues find that the way
in which different contexts affect children’s
reconstruction of a speaker’s meaning varies according
to the age of the children. In the light of the taxonomy
of contexts proposed by Bosco et al., previous studies
in the literature investigated contexts pertaining to the
categories Access, Space and Discourse in adults and
children (Ackerman, 1978), Discourse in children
(Shatz, 1978), and Space in children (Reeder, 1980).
Other studies in the literature stress the relevance of
the context with respect to the relevance of the literal
meaning in the reconstruction of the speaker’s
meaning. They reveal that in young children context
has more weight than the literal meaning of the
utterance in determining the speaker's meaning. ErvinTripp (1977), for example, shows that in early stages
of development the context provides an important cue
for the reconstruction of the speaker's meaning (see
also the study by Ebeling & Gelman, 1994 on 2 year
olds). Reeder and Wakefield (1987) studied 3 and 4
year olds' comprehension of requests, questions and
offers, under linguistic deprivation conditions. They
employed three levels of linguistic information. A full
utterance, a truncated utterance which presented only a
final object noun phrase, and an acoustically distorted
utterance. They find that the performance of 3 year
olds is relatively unaffected by the reduction of
linguistic information The performance of 4 year olds
decreases in the same experimental condition. Authors
explain these data by arguing that younger children are
not looking for extensive information in the first

163

place. Rather, they find that the information in the
contextual display provided is sufficient. In a later
research Reeder and Shapiro (1993) presented stimuli
items in a pragmatically predisposing (spatial)
context, inducing children (both with higher and lower
literate experience) to judge the stimulus as a polite
request (e.g., ‘I want you to look at the books’). They
presented the items in two different phonological
conditions. In the Intact condition, subjects hear
integer studio-recorded stimulus items, in the
Distorted condition they hear the identical items
acoustically-distorted. The authors find that the group
with higher literate experience demonstrates more
linguistic dependence than contextual dependence.
Globally considered, these data suggest that young
children and children with lower literate experience are
more context dependent, whereas older children and
children with higher literate experience are more
dependent on the linguistic information. A prediction
one could derive from these studies is that when
context and literal meaning diverge in the
interpretation they suggest for a communicative act,
young children tend to rely mostly on contextual
information, whereas older children tend to rely
mostly on linguistic information. Nonetheless, as the
study by Bosco et al. (2003) suggests, different
categories of context might play different roles in
determining the reconstruction of the speaker's
meaning in children of different ages. Thus, when
context and literal meaning diverge in the
interpretation they suggest, children’s reconstruction
of a speaker’s meaning, should be studied taking into
account different context categories.

Experiment
The literature suggests that when the context and the
literal meaning of an utterance differ in the
interpretation they suggest, then young children’s
comprehension will depend on contextual information.
Our aim is to verify whether such a claim is still valid
for contexts pertaining to different context categories.
We devised an experiment whereby the literal meaning
of an utterance contrasts with the context in which the
utterance is proffered. In particular, we investigate the
following context categories (see Bosco et al., 2003).
Access: defined as having access to the physical
object to which the communicative act refers (e.g., an
object on which to carry out an action).
Space: defined as the spatial distance between (or
among) agents and objects of the physical world to
which the communicative act refers (e.g., the distance
between the hearer and the object).
Time: defined as the temporal sequence of the
events to which the communicative act refers (e.g.,
the order in which the actions performed by the
agents evolve).
Discourse: defined as the information conveyed
through discourse before the communicative act was

performed (e.g., what has been previously said by the
speaker).
Extra-linguistic-behavior: defined as the extralinguistic behavior performed by the agents while
proffering a speech act (e.g., the behavior performed
by the actor).
Status: defined as the social status of the agents
(e.g. the status of the speaker is higher than the status
of the hearer).
An example for the context category Access is the
following task:
[1]
Experimenter: 'Please give me the teddy bear
that is on the chair'.
On the chair there is only a doll.
If the context is more relevant than the literal meaning,
we expect the child to give the experimenter the doll,
otherwise, if the literal meaning is more relevant we
expect the child to either say that on the chair there is
a teddy bear, or to look for a doll.

Material and Procedures
The experimental protocol consists of 10 tasks, 2
tasks for each of the context categories investigated
(see the Appendix). The experimental material consists
of some colored crayons, a pencil, an eraser, a box,
some candies and some building blocks. The
experimenters (two) visited the day-care centers and
the primary schools of the children for several days
beforehand, in order to socialize with them. Children
then dealt with the experimental tasks individually
and in a quiet room. All speech acts were proffered in
vivo directly to the child by one of the experimenters.
In each task the experimenter was instructed to use the
same paralinguistic cues (intonation of voice, prosody,
eye direction) in proffering the utterance. Children
were told that they were going to play a game with the
two experimenters. In a warm-up phase Experimenter
1 (E1) says to the child: ‘Now we are going to play a
game. You are this lady's (pointing to Experimenter 2:
E2) helper. She is bad tempered and she gets easily
angry. Don't ask for explanations about what she says,
just do what you think is best. In a warm-up session,
which lasted approximately 10 minutes, the lady
interacted with children either by posing questions or

Context
Literal
meaning

Access

Space

Time

42

63

66

58

37

34

making requests. Then the real experiment started. E1
says to the child: 'The Lady has fallen down and hit
her head and now she is a little bit confused. It is
difficult to understand what she wants. However, don't
worry and behave as you think is best. But always do
something, otherwise she gets angry!'. Now, you can
color these drawings. When the lady wants to call
you, she will ring the bell. When this happens you
must go and see what she wants. Are you ready to
play?'. Between one experimental task and the other
the child was asked to do a drawing. This procedure
was necessary in order to allow the experimenters to
devise the experimental material and setting for each
specific task.

Participants
Seventy-two children participated in the experiment,
24 in each of the following age groups: 3 to 3;6 (mean
age: 3;3), 4;6 to 5 (mean age: 4;10), and 6 to 7 (mean
age: 6;9), balanced by sex. They were randomly
selected from four different schools in Turin.

Results
Table 1 shows the mean percentages of the responses
determined by the context and by the literal meaning.
Figure 1 shows the mean percentages of the responses
determined by the context in the three groups of
children (the balance to 100 is the percentage of
responses determined by the literal meaning). We
analyzed the results by comparing the percentages of
children’s responses determined by the context and
those determined by the literal meaning. The global
results concerning the category Access show no
difference in the role played by context and literal
meaning (Wilcoxon test overall subjects: z = -1.77, p
= .08). The same result holds for 3-3;6 year olds
(Wilcoxon test: z = -1.41, p = .16) and 4;6-5 year
olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -1.6, p = .11). Results differ
for 6-7 year olds, whose responses are more affected
by the literal meaning rather than by the context
(Wilcoxon test: z = -3.21, p <.001).

Extralinguisticbehavior

Status

22

49

62

78

51

38

Discourse

Table 1. Percentages of responses determined by the context and by the literal meaning overall children

164

100
80
60
40
3-3;6 years

20
0

4;6-5 years
Access

Space

Time Discourse Extralinguistic
behavior

Status

6-7 years

Context categories

Figure 1. Histogram of the percentages of responses determined by the context in the three groups of children.
Global results concerning the category Space show
that the responses affected by the context are more than
those affected by the literal meaning (Wilcoxon test
overall subjects: z = -3.53, p < .0004). The same result
holds for 3-3;6 year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -2.12, p =
.03) and 4;6-5 year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -2.14, p =
.03). In the 6-7 year olds’ group, the difference is not
statistically significant (Wilcoxon test: z = -1.89, p =
.06). The global results concerning the category Time
reveal that children’s responses are more affected by the
context than by the literal meaning (Wilcoxon test
overall subjects: z = -4.04, p < .0001). The same result
holds for 3-3;6 year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -3.32, p =
.0009) and 6-7 year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = 2.65, p =
.008). In the 4;6-5 year old group we detected no
significant difference (Wilcoxon test: z = 1.004, p =
.32). The global results concerning the category
Discourse show that responses are more affected by the
literal meaning than by the context (Wilcoxon test
overall subjects: z = -5.81, p < .0001). The same result
holds for 3-3;6 year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -2.83, p <
.005), 4;6-5 olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -3.64, p <.0003),
and 6-7 year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -3.58, p <
.0003). Global results concerning the category Extralinguistic-behavior show no difference in the role
played by the context and the literal meaning
(Wilcoxon test overall subjects: z = -0.19, p = .85).
The same result holds for 3-3;6 year olds (Wilcoxon
test: z = -0.33, p = .74), 4;6-5 year olds (Wilcoxon
test: z = 0.58, p = .56), and 6-7 year olds (Wilcoxon
test: z = -0.71, p = .48). Global results concerning the
category Status show that the responses affected by the
context are more than those affected by the literal
meaning (Wilcoxon test overall subjects: z = -3.16, p
<.002). The same result holds for 6-7 year olds
(Wilcoxon test: z = -3.74, p < .0002), but not for 3-3;6
year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -1, p = .32) and 4;6-5
year olds (Wilcoxon test: z = -1.51, p = .13).
As regards developmental aspects, within the
category Access, the performance of the three groups of

165

participants differ significantly (Kruskall-Wallis test: H
= 10.13; p = .006), and as the age of the participants
increases so does the children’s dependency on the
literal meaning. An increase in age decreases the
dependency on the meaning suggested by the context.
The same result holds within the category Discourse
(Kruskall-Wallis test: H = 5.89; p = .05). Also, within
the category Status, the performance of the participants
differs according to age (Kruskallis Wallis test: H =
15.96; p = .0003). Only this time, the older the child
the more dependent he is on the meaning suggested by
the context and the less dependent he is on the literal
meaning. Within the category Time the performances of
the three groups of children differ significantly
(Kruskall-Wallis test: H = 8,49; p < .01), but no trends
appear in the relationship between the sort of
interpretation and the increase in age. Finally, within
the category Space the performance of the three age
groups does not differ (Kruskall-Wallis test: H = 3,23 p
= 0.2). The same result holds within the category
Extra-linguistic-behavior (Kruskall-Wallis test: H =
.35; p = .84).

Conclusions
In the present study we explored the role of context and
the role of literal meaning in the process of attribution
of intentions in those cases where they suggest a
contrast in meaning. The global results show that,
when the natural interaction between context and the
flow of discourse is deranged, then the contexts
investigated within the categories Space, Time and
Status bear more weight than the literal meaning for all
children. On the contrary, the literal meaning has more
importance than the context if we consider the category
Discourse. The same result holds for the context
category Access, but only for 6-7 year olds. The only
context category in which we found no significant
difference is Extra-linguistic-behavior.

The results analyzed within a developmental
perspective reveal that for the category Access literal
meaning plays a major role for older children than for
younger ones. As regards the category Space, the
context is a very important source of information for
children up to the age of 5, but from 6 years upwards
the literal meaning of the utterance becomes more
relevant. In the category Discourse, the context is more
important for younger children than for older ones.
However we ought to consider that children begin
primary school at the age of six, thus improving in
their mastery of literacy. For this reason they could also
be more sensitive to the linguistic features of a
communicative act than to the contextual ones. The
results for the category Time, reveal that the context
heavily affects the interpretation of the hearer for both
younger and older children: notwithstanding the
percentage for the middle age group of children is 58%
in favor of context; this is not however statistically
significant. The results for the category Status are quite
different in that they reveal that, from 6 years upwards,
the context is more important than the literal meaning:
The only category in which we found no significant
difference among age groups is Extra-linguisticbehavior. A possible explanation is that, in the relative
tasks, the brief interaction between experimenter and
children did not allow them to identify the behavioral
move bid by the experimenter. Thus, among the
context dimensions investigated, we found different
results depending on the specific category of context
analyzed. This result favors of the adoption a taxonomy
of context categories; any claim concerning context/s
ought to be validated through the different categories.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Ministero Italiano
dell'Universita' e della Ricerca (FIRB Project, research
code RBAU01JEYW_001).

References
Ackerman, B. P. (1978). Children's Understanding of
Speech Acts in Unconventional Directive Frames.
Child Development, 49, 311-318.
Airenti, G.,. Bruno G. B. & Colombetti M. (1993).
Conversation and behavior games in the pragmatics
of dialogue. Cognitive Science, 17, 197-256.
Bosco F., Bucciarelli M. & Bara B. (2003). The
Context categories in understanding communicative
intentions: a developmental perspective. Under
submission.
Clark, H. H. (1992). Arenas of Language Use.
Chicago/London: The University of Chicago Press.
Clark, H. H. &. Carlson T. B. (1981). Context for
Comprehension. In: J. Long and A. Baddeley, eds.
Attention and performance, IX, 313-330. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum. (Reprinted in Clark H. H. 1992

166

Arenas of Language Use. 60-77. Chicago/London:
The University of Chicago Press.)
Clark, H. H. & Marshall C. R. (1992). Definite
Reference and Mutual Knowledge. In H. H. Clark,
Arenas of Language Use. 9-39. Chicago/London:
The University of Chicago Press.
Ebeling, K. S. & Gelman S. (1994). Children's use of
Context in Interpreting "Big" and "Little". Child
Development, 65, 1178-1192.
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1977). Wait for me, roller skate. In S.
Ervin-Tripp & Mitchell-Dernan eds. Child
Discourse, 165-188. New York: Academic Press.
Gibbs, R. W. (1986). What Makes Some indirect
Speech Acts Conventional? Journal of Memory and
Language, 25, 181-196.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative
thought language and understanding. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Grice, P. (1967). Logic and conversation. The William
James Lectures at Harvard University.
Kaplan, D. (1989). After thoughts. In: Themes from
Kaplan. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Montague, R. (1974). The Proper Treatment of
Quantification in Natural Discourse. In R.
Thomason ed., Formal Philosophy, selected papers
of Richard Montague. New Haven/London: Yale
University Press.
Recanati, F. (1995). The alleged priority of literal
interpretation. Cognitive Science, 19, 207-232.
Reeder, K. (1980). The emergence of illocutionary
skills. Journal of Child Language, 7, 13-28
Reeder, K. & Shapiro J. (1993). Relationships between
early literate experience and knowledge and
children's linguistic pragmatic strategies. Journal of
Pragmatics, 19, 1-22.
Reeder, K. & Wakefield, J. (1987). The development of
young children's speech act comprehension: How
much
Discourse
is
necessary?
Applied
Psycholinguistics, 8, 1-18.
Searle, J. R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In Syntax and
semantics, vol. 3: Speech acts, eds. P. Cole, J. L.
Morgan. New York: Academic Press.
Shatz, M. (1978). On the Development of
Communicative Understanding: An Early Strategy
for Interpreting and Responding to Messages.
Cognitive Psychology, 10, 271-301.
Sperber, D. & Wilson D. (1986). Relevance. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Tarski, A. (1956). Logic, Semantic, Mathematics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Appendix. The experimental protocol.
Access
1) Experimenter: ‘Hi, how are you? What’s your name?
Well I'm writing it down because I'm a little bit
forgetful and if I write it down I won't forget it. Ah,

I’ve made a mistake, I’ll have to rub it out, please give
me the eraser that is on the table’.
On the table there is only a pencil.
If the context is more relevant...
Child gives the pencil to the experimenter
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child says that on the table there is a pencil, but not
an eraser
Child looks around for an eraser
2) Experimenter: 'Please give me the teddy bear that is
on the chair'.
On the chair there is only a doll.
If the context is more relevant...
Child gives the experimenter the doll
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child says that on the chair there is a teddy bear
Child looks for the teddy bear

Space
3) Experimenter and child are near to each other, near
the experimenter there is a crayon box. Experimenter,
looking at the child says: ‘I can’t reach the crayons’.
If the context is more relevant...
Child looks for other crayons
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child gives the experimenter the crayons
4) Experimenter is sitting near a toy-telephone, child is
far from her. Experimenter says: ‘Please bring the
telephone here’.
If the context is more relevant...
Child looks for another telephone
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child comes near the experimenter and stretches the
telephone out to her.

Time
5) Experimenter n° 1 (the Lady) throws away
experimenter n°2’s crayons . Experimenter n° 2 says:
'Oh, my crayons! You threw all of them away!'. Then,
experimenter n° 1 offers a box of candies to
experimenter n° 2, who says: 'I like candies, thank
you!'. Experimenter 1 leaves the room, and
experimenter 2 says to the child: 'Do you think the
Lady was kind with me before?'
If the context is more relevant...
Child says ‘yes’
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child says ‘no’
6) Experimenter n° 2 to experimenter n° 1 (the Lady) :
'I’d like a candy. Would you give me one?'. The Lady
gives experimenter n° 2 a candy. Experimenter n° 2:
'Thank you!'. The Lady pulls experimenter n° 2's hair.
Experimenter n° 2: ‘That hurt!'. The Lady leaves the
room. Experimenter n° 2 to the child: 'Do you think
the Lady was naughty with me before?'
If the context is more relevant...
Child says ‘no’
If the literal meaning is more relevant...

167

Child says ‘yes’

Discourse
7) In between the child and experimenter there are two
baskets: in the first basket there are red apples, in the
other one, there are yellow apples. Experimenter:
‘Yesterday I met my grandmother and she gave me
some red apples, I like red apples very much, they are
sweet and juicy. Now I’d like to eat one, please give
me a yellow apple’.
If the context is more relevant...
Child gives the experimenter a red apple
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child gives the experimenter a yellow apple
Child asks for explanations
8) Experimenter: "Yesterday a friend of mine gave me
some strawberry candies, which I like very much. I was
lucky, because I only had lemon candies, and I don’t
like them. Now I ‘d like a candy, please give me a
lemon candy." On the table between experimenter and
child there is a basket containing both lemon and
strawberry candies.
If the context is more relevant...
Child gives the experimenter a strawberry candy
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child gives the experimenter a lemon candy

Extra-linguistic-behavior
9) Experimenter asks the child for some help to tidy
some wooden building blocks. The experimenter says,
while starting to play with the building blocks: 'Let's
put everything tidily in this box'.
If the context is more relevant...
Child starts playing with building blocks
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child tidies the building blocks
10) Experimenter says, while sitting on a carpet on
the floor: ‘Now we are going to sit down on these
chairs'.
If the context is more relevant...
Child sits on the carpet
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child sits on a chair

Status
11) There is a box, which is not near the experimenter.
The experimenter says: 'I would like to get the box'
If the context is more relevant...
Child takes the box to the experimenter
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child waits
12) Experimenter is not near the closed door. She
says: "I would like to open the door"
If the context is more relevant...
Child opens the door
If the literal meaning is more relevant...
Child waits

