UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Literary Evidence for the Cultural Development of a Theory of Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53c39179

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Gordon, Andrew S.
Nair, Anish

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Literary Evidence for the Cultural Development of a Theory of Mind
Andrew S. Gordon (gordon@ict.usc.edu) and Anish Nair (anair@usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
13274 Fiji Way, Marina del Rey CA 90292 USA

Abstract
The term Theory of Mind is used within the cognitive
sciences to refer to the abilities that people have to
reason about their own mental states and the mental
states of others. An important question is whether these
abilities are culturally acquired or innate to our species.
This paper outlines the argument that the mental models
that serve as the basis for Theory of Mind abilities are
the product of cultural development. To support this
thesis, we present evidence gathered from the large-scale
automated analysis of text corpora. We show that the
Freudian conception of a subconscious desire is a
relatively modern addition to our culturally shared
Theory of Mind, as evidenced by a shift in the way these
ideas appeared in 19th and 20th century English
language novels.

A Cultural Theory of Mind
One topic that is strikingly pervasive across the
cognitive sciences is that of Theory of Mind, in
reference to the abilities that people have in reasoning
about their own mental states and those of others. It is
the set of Theory of Mind abilities that enable people to
reflect introspectively on their own reasoning, to
empathize with other people by imagining what it
would be like to be in their position, and to generate
reasonable expectations and inferences about mental
states and processes.
Although there are inherent difficulties involved in
investigating behavior that is largely unobservable, a
relatively sophisticated understanding of Theory of
Mind abilities has emerged through the synthesis of
widely disparate sources of evidence. This evidence
suggests that Theory of Mind abilities progressively
develop in children and adults (Wellman & Lagattuata,
2000; Happe et al., 1998), are degraded in people
diagnosed with the illness of autism (Baron-Cohen,
2000), have a relationship to localized brain regions
(Happe et al., 1999; Frith & Frith, 2000), and are a
uniquely human cognitive faculty not available to other
primates, e.g. chimpanzees and orangutans (Call &
Tomasello, 1999). This last contribution to our
understanding of Theory of Mind suggests that these
abilities must have arisen in the human lineage only
after a split from that of chimpanzees some 6-8 million
years ago.
Although in may be reasonable to assume that
Theory of Mind abilities emerged in humans through a
combination of natural evolution and cultural evolution,

468

the relative importance that one ascribes to either of
these two forces can radically change one’s conception
of the mental lives of humans that are contemporary on
a genetic time scale and primitive on a cultural time
scale. If genetic evolution is the prime contributor to
human Theory of Mind abilities, then we could imagine
that human beings tens of thousands of years ago
reflected introspectively on their own reasoning,
empathized with other humans they had contact with,
and were able to generate expectations and inferences
about mental states and processes. If instead cultural is
seen as the prime contributor, then human beings tens
of thousands of years ago would not be capable of any
of these behaviors, among many others.
In attempting to determine whether the emergence of
Theory of Mind abilities is genetic or cultural,
researchers are immediately faced with the problem of
evidence. Drawing comparisons between Theory of
Mind abilities is an extremely difficult task, even
between people that participate in controlled
psychological experiments, let alone across cultures
separated by distance and/or time. Several researchers
have thought that the strongest evidence for a cultural
Theory of Mind would be the discovery of significantly
different Theory of Mind abilities across contemporary
cultures. Lillard’s review of research in cultural
variation in Theory of Mind (1998) suggests that
meaningful variations may exist among the peoples of
the world, but argues that there is little evidence
available to draw firm conclusions, and that the
methodologies employed in the past to study mental
representations in other cultures have been problematic.
A second type of evidence for a cultural Theory of
Mind has looked for significant variation within a
culture across time. One of the more provocative of
these historical analyses was that of Julian Jaynes in
support of his ideas on the emergence of consciousness
(1976). In this work, Jaynes examines references to
psychological concepts as they appear in a variety of
early narratives, including the Iliad and the Odyssey.
By comparing how these texts and others use terms
such as thumos, phrenes, kradie, etor, noos, and psyche,
Jaynes advances his claim that there was a shift in the
way the people of ancient Greece thought about the role
that mental phenomena played in controlling behavior.
Although Jaynes successfully argues that there was a
shift in the way that mental concepts were referenced in
these early texts, one could argue that these changes can

be attributed solely to changes in linguistic convention,
rather than to changes in the underlying semantics of
the language or the cognitive abilities that are based on
these representations. For this criticism, Jaynes makes
the controversial retort, “Let no one think these are just
word changes. Word changes are concept changes and
concept changes are behavioral changes.” (p. 292,
original emphasis) While this comment raises a much
larger philosophical debate concerning mental
representation, we believe that arguments made on
either side would be improved if the evidence were
stronger. Among other points, it is tempting to argue
that the changes exhibited in Jaynes’ sampling of early
texts are not representative of the cultural environment
in which these texts were produced.
In this paper, we explore the role that language
evidence can play a role in answering questions
concerning the cultural development of a Theory of
Mind. Our interest is in identifying evidence of a
specific change in the way that a broad range of people
within a culture refer to mental states or processes over
a period of time. As we describe in this paper, we felt
we could obtain compelling evidence by examining a
large corpus of 19th and 20th century English-language
novels, with particular attention to references to the
Freudian notion of a subconscious desire.
The primary tool that we apply toward exploring
these issues is that of automated corpus analysis, where
computer programs are constructed to gather statistics
about the linguistic elements found in large collections
of text documents. Automated techniques for corpus
analysis enable researchers to study text collections that
are larger than could be reasonably processed by human
analysts, but the tradeoff is that effort must be directed
toward the development of the tool. In the next section,
we describe our efforts to construct a corpus analysis
tool capable of identifying references to Theory of
Mind concepts in English text in a robust manner.
Then, in the he sections that follow, we discuss the
application of this tool to the investigation of the
cultural development of a Theory of Mind.

The Theory of Mind in Language
The relationship between representation and language
has been the subject of one of the most significant and
long-standing philosophical debates of our time, and
concerns some of the most fundamental hypotheses that
we may draw concerning human cognition. In the field
of computational linguistics, however, a pragmatic
approach to this issue has been adopted to allow for the
engineering of useful natural-language processing
systems. It has become commonplace, particularly in
the areas of automated question-answering and
knowledge extraction, to parse natural language
expressions into unambiguous, formal representations.
Generally, the semantics that are employed in these

469

approaches are strictly utilitarian, in that they are
designed to address particular engineering problems.
However, others have adopted many of the same
methods and technologies to construct models of
language understanding that employ representations
that are more cognitively inspired (Baker et al., 1998).
In our work, we also sought to employ some of the
methods and technologies that are used in
computational linguistics to explore issues related to the
Theory of Mind. Our aim was to develop a system that
would be able to recognize all occurrences in English
text of expressions related to the Theory of Mind. That
is, our system takes as input a text document and
produces as output an annotated version, where every
reference to a Theory of Mind concept is tagged and
categorized as a particular sort. For example, the
following passage (from William Makepeace
Thackeray’s 1917 novel, Vanity Fair) illustrates the
format of the output of this system, where references to
Theory of Mind concepts are underlined, and their
semantic type is inserted into the text following the
reference delimited by square brackets:
Perhaps [partially-justified-proposition] she had
mentioned the fact [p r o p o s i t i o n ] already to
Rebecca, but that young lady did not appear to
[partially-justified-proposition] have remembered it
[memory-retrieval]; indeed, vowed and protested
that she expected [add-expectation] to see a number
of Amelia's nephews and nieces. She was quite
disappointed [disappointment-emotion] that Mr.
Sedley was not married; she was sure [justifiedproposition] Amelia had said he was, and she doted
so on [liking-emotion] little children.
The first challenge in developing this system was to
answer the question: What are the representational
elements of the Theory of Mind that we should be
looking for in English text? We believe that the
representational elements for Theory of Mind described
in our previous work (Gordon, 2002) offer the greatest
breadth and depth of concepts compared with previous
representation research. This work, which was based on
the large-scale analysis of analogous planning cases
(Gordon, 2001), identified 30 representational areas and
635 individual concepts that participate in our
commonsense mental models of human reasoning.
These 30 representational areas are largely identified by
cognitive function, and include memory retrieval,
similarity judgments, belief management, explanation,
prediction, planning, scheduling, monitoring, and
execution. For our current purposes, we felt that these
representational areas and specific individual concepts
could serve as the basis for tagging references to
Theory of Mind concepts in English text.
To develop the automated tool for identifying and
tagging references to these concepts in English text, we

followed a methodology that consisted of three main
steps, each requiring the efforts of a team of linguistics
and computational linguistics graduate students of the
University of Southern California. The first step,
expression elicitation, involved collaborative
brainstorming among members of our team to identify
an initial set of English language expressions for each
of the concepts in a particular representational area.
This initial list was then enhanced in the second step,
lexical expansion, where a variety of linguistic
resources (thesauri, thematic dictionaries, phrase
dictionaries) were consulted to identify a more
complete set of synonymous referents to every given
concept. In the third step, rule authoring, our team
created (by hand) a set of generalized linguistic rules
(finite state automata) that could be applied to a text
document to recognize expressions like those in the
expanded set of referents.
To aid in the development of linguistic rules of a high
degree of accuracy, our group utilized the Intex Corpus
Processor software (Silberztein, 1999), which allowed
us to author these rules as finite-state automata using a
graphical user interface. To simplify the specification of
patterns, we employed a large-coverage English
dictionary that allows generalization over linguistic
variations, such as verb inflections for a given lemma.
Hundreds of generalized linguistic patterns were
authored, generalizing over each expression that was
identified in the previous step in the process, and then
combined into a single finite state automaton that could
be applied to any English text document.
At the time of writing of this paper, our group had
executed this methodology for 10 of the original 30
Theory of Mind representational areas that were
identified. These areas are Memory (12 concepts),
Similarity comparisons (13 concepts), Explanations (20
concepts), Managing knowledge (37 concepts), Goals
(20 concepts), and Goal Management (17 concepts),
Envisionment (35 concepts), Plans (21 concepts), Plan
elements (27 concepts), and Planning modalities (17
concepts). An evaluation of the accuracy (precision and
recall) of our rule sets in identifying Theory of Mind
expressions is reported in Gordon et al. (2003). The
results of this evaluation demonstrate that this approach
allows us to recognize and tag 82% of the actual
number of expressions that appear in a document for
any given representational area (recall score), and that
95% of expressions that our system identifies should
actually be counted as positive instances (precision
score).

Expressions of Subconscious Desires
The value of developing a robust lexical-semantic
resource for Theory of Mind concepts is that it allows
us to automatically analyze textual data sources that are

470

larger than could be examined given limited human
effort (e.g. Dyer et al., 2000). With this resource in
hand, we sought evidence for the cultural development
of a Theory of Mind by examining references to these
concepts in large text corpora.
Due to the nature of this tool, we were forced to
adhere to a number of constraints about the sorts of
questions that can be pursued. This tool could only be
applied to English language documents, and only those
that were authored recent enough to share common
lexical and grammatical conventions with
contemporary English. As developing the tool involved
the hand authoring of grammatical rules by speakers of
contemporary English, its performance may be stronger
for contemporary texts than for older texts, particularly
with regard to idioms and slang. Also, when comparing
the frequency of occurrences of Theory of Mind
expressions across different texts, it is important that
the texts are of the same genre (e.g. newspaper articles,
political speeches, poetry, spoken language transcripts),
as the tool performs somewhat differently for each type.
These constraints restricted the application of this
tool to the study of cultural changes that have occurred
within the last few hundred years. Has a significant
change in Theory of Mind occurred among English
speaking peoples during this period of time?
Probably the strongest argument for recent,
widespread cultural change in Theory of Mind involves
the impact of the ideas of Sigmund Freud. In The
Interpretation of Dreams, first published in German in
1900 and translated to English in 1913, Freud outlined
an understanding of human cognition that involved the
influence of subconscious desires in behavior. Although
Freud’s use of symbolism in explaining dreams is often
joked about in everyday conversation, the more central
idea of a subconscious desire has become ingrained in
the way people talk about their behavior. It is
uncontroversial when a person reports, “I must have
wanted to leave my wife all along, but I only recently
became aware of this subconscious desire of mine.”
In the English language, there are, in fact, many ways
of expressing the Freudian notion of a subconscious
desire without using this term – or any special
terminology at all. In our work in developing a lexical
semantic resource for Theory of Mind, we explored
references to this concept within the representational
area of Goals (one of the 30 representational areas that
we aimed to complete). The following list gives some
specific examples of the general linguistic forms that
our hand-authored rules are able to identify and tag as a
subconscious goal:
• Andrew realized he hoped the plan would fail.
• He guessed that what he really wished for was
something different entirely.

• He didn’t figure out what it was that he desired
until it was too late.
• I’m not sure I want to go down that route.
• That man wasn’t aware of what he yearned for.
• It was what I actually wanted all along.
• His subconscious wish now came to the surface.
• We later learned of his unconscious desire.
The ability to automatically identify and collect
references to subconscious desires in English text
allows us to explore whether this Freudian idea is a
modern addition to our understanding of mental states
and processes – the product of a cultural innovation and
dissemination. If so, we hypothesize that we would not
be able to find in English text documents any of the
linguistic patterns listed above before the period in
history when this Freudian idea was disseminated. If
instead we view this concept as one that was already
well established in the pre-Freudian mind, then we
should be able to find some variations of the above
expressions before this time.

The Pre-Freudian Shift
To explore the way that people use language related to
the Freudian notion of a subconscious goal, it was
necessary to construct a very large text corpus of
uniform genre that spanned the relevant years in
history. For this, we quickly settled on the genre of the
novel as the most appropriate data source. First,
electronic texts of novels (necessary for automated
analysis) are readily available in the public domain,
particularly from Project Gutenberg online resource
(http://www.gutenberg.net). Second, the mix of
narration and dialogue that is found in the genre makes
it likely that expression related to desires of all sorts
will occur in abundance, largely because of an
emphasis on character development. Third, the genre of
the novel has remained remarkably constant over the

course of the last several hundred years in format,
aiding in the comparison of novels over time.
The main downside of the novel as a genre of
analysis is that U.S. copyright law has made it difficult
to obtain electronic texts of works published after 1922.
Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams was certainly
well known and discussed among English-language
writers by this date, but we imagine that the cultural
impact of this work would have continued to grow after
this time. Still, we felt that this cut-off date for novel
data was sufficiently late in history to answer the
fundamental question.
We assembled a corpus of 176 English-language
novels with publication dates spanning the years
between 1813 and 1922. This corpus consisted
primarily of American and British novels, all of which
appeared on at least one “great books list” of the 19th
and 20th century and which were available
electronically from Project Gutenberg. With an average
of 118 thousand words per novel, our corpus consisted
of over 20 million words.
To analyze this corpus, we applied our hand-authored
rule set for subconscious desires to each novel,
collecting each sentence from the corpus that matched
any of the linguistic patterns for this concept. In all, 69
occurrences were identified.
Figure 1 displays the distribution of the occurrences
that were identified. To normalize this data across
novels of varying length, each data point on the graph
indicates the number of references to subconscious
goals found in a single novel divided by the word count
of the novel. While this normalization permits us to
compare the frequency of references in a more valid
manner, the relatively constant size of novels in our
corpus yields a normalization that has little affect on the
shape of the graph.

Subconsious goal references per
100,000 words

5

4

3

2

1

0
1810

1820

1830

1840

1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

Year of publication

Figure 1: Subconscious goal references per 100,000 words in
176 English-language novels published between 1813 and 1922

471

1910

1920

1930

The evidence from this corpus supports neither of our
original two hypotheses. There is certainly a shift in the
frequency of references to subconscious goals within
our data set, but this shift is not an immediate one
following the widespread cultural dissemination of
Sigmund Freud’s ideas. Instead, we find a gradual shift
beginning in the middle of the 19th century that
continues to grow into the 20th century through the last
of our data points. We believe this evidence argues for
a “Pre-Freudian Shift” in the mental models that people
had about their capacity to be aware of their own
desires. From this perspective, the work of Freud can be
seen in a context of widespread cultural change, as an
effect rather than an instigating force.
Figure 2 further supports the idea of a Pre-Freudian
Shift by grouping the 69 references into 10
linguistically similar forms, and showing the first
occurrence of each. The first form, “I am sure I hope”,

accounts for most instances in the latter half of the 19th
century and could be viewed as a verbose way of
expressing “I hope”. Henry James’ negation of this
phrase in 1881 begins to connote a sense of doubt about
one’s desires, and gives rise to the 20th century usage
first seen in 1896, “I don’t know that I want”. This
trend becomes fully developed in 1913 when the
certainty of someone else’s desires is questioned, and in
1914 when one’s own desires must be guessed. Most
striking in Figure 2 is the direct references to
unconscious yearning by George Eliot (pseudonym of
Mary Anne Evans) in 1860 and similarly to
unconscious desire by Thomas Hardy in 1874: “There
was no necessity for any continuance of speech, and the
fact that she did add more seemed to proceed from an
unconscious desire to show unconcern by making a
remark, which is noticeable in the ingenuous when they
are acting by stealth.”

1814 Jane Austen, Mansfield Park: "Her year!" cried Mrs. Price; "I am sure I hope I shall be rid of her before
she has staid a year, for that will not be up till November.”
Similar usage is found later in 1847, 1852, 1853, 1857(x2), 1861, 1868, 1872, 1876, 1877, 1886, 1887(x2),
and 1905.
1857 Charles Dickens, Little Dorrit: Mr. Clennam got it him to do, and gives him odd jobs besides in at the
Works next door-- makes 'em for him, in short, when he knows he wants 'em.
Similar usage is found later in 1857, 1877, 1878, 1886, 1898, 1906, 1908(x2), 1910(x2), 1913, 1914,
1915(x2), 1919, 1920(x4), and 1922.
1859 Charles Dickens, Tale of Two Cities: He'd never have no good of it; he'd want all along to be out of the
line, if he, could see his way out, being once in-- even if it wos so.
Similar usage is found later in 1903 and 1914.
1860 George Eliot, Mill on the Floss: Maggie, in her brown frock, with her eyes reddened and her heavy hair
pushed back, looking from the bed where her father lay to the dull walls of this sad chamber which was the
centre of her world, was a creature full of eager, passionate longings for all that was beautiful and glad;
thirsty for all knowledge; with an ear straining after dreamy music that died away and would not come near
to her; with a blind, unconscious yearning for something that would link together the wonderful impressions
of this mysterious life, and give her soul a sense of home in it.
Similar usage is found later in 1874 (Thomas Hardy's Far from the Madding Crowd).
1881 Henry James, Portrait of a Lady: "It's not only that," said Isabel; "but I'm not sure I wish to marry any
one."
1896 Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure: "I don't care to go into them," she replied evasively. "I make a very
good living, and I don't know that I want your company."
Similar usage is found later in 1903, 1905, 1909, 1910, 1912(x3), 1913(x2), 1914, 1915, 1919(x4),
1920(x3), and 1921(x2).
1913 D. H. Lawrence, Sons and Lovers: "You are sure you want me?" he asked, as if a cold shadow had come
over him.
1914 Theodore Dreiser, The Titan: "Oh, I don't know," replied Cowperwood, easily; "I guess I want you as
much as ever.”
Similar usage is found later in 1918 (Willa Cather's My Antonia).
1917 Edith Wharton, Summer: "What's all this about wanting?" he said as she paused. "Do you know what
you really want?"
1920 James Joyce, Ulysses: …ah yes I know I hope the old press doesn’t creak ah I knew it would…
Figure 2: Examples of subconscious goal references in
176 English-language novels published between 1813 and 1922

472

Conclusions

References

The appearance of a Pre-Freudian Shift in the way that
people refer to the idea of a subconscious goal does not,
in itself, prove that Theory of Mind abilities are the
result of cultural development. Nor does this shift
provide direct evidence for a change in the abilities that
19th and 20th century English-speaking people had in
reasoning about their own goals or the goals of other
people. The evidence that is presented is simply that
people have changed the way they refer to goals in
English over this period in history. The argument for
the cultural development of a Theory of Mind,
however, is that this shift is indicative of a significant
cultural change in the mental models of psychology that
people hold – one that now includes the concept of a
subconscious goal. If we believe that our Theory of
Mind abilities are predicated on tacit representational
models of mental states and processes, then we would
expect that some change in our Theory of Mind abilities
might have also occurred. If so, it could be viewed as
just one recent change in a long history of cultural
innovations that would have included the more
fundamental commonsense psychology concepts of
memories, beliefs, emotions, goals, and plans, among
others that would not have participated in the mental
lives of early man.
While the approach of automated corpus analysis
taken in this research was appropriate for investigating
the use of references to subconscious goals, this same
approach may not be appropriate for these other
fundamental concepts. The genre of the novel was
particularly important to the success of this approach, in
that many data points are electronically available that
span a period in history where an interesting Theory of
Mind question can be raised. However, it is clear that
the automated recognition of Theory of Mind concepts
in natural language text can be an important tool for
answering cognitive science questions, and that the
continued development of such a resource will be an
important pursuit.

Baker, C., Fillmore, C., & Lowe, J. (1998) The
Berkeley FrameNet Project. Proceedings of
COLING-ACL 1998, Montreal, Canada.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2000) Theory of mind and autism: a
fifteen year review. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. TagerFlusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other
minds: Perspectives from developmental cognitive
neuroscience, second edition. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (1999) A Nonverbal False
Belief Task: The Performance of Children and Great
Apes. Child Development 70(2):381-395.
Dyer, J., Shatz, M., & Wellman, H. (2000) Young
children’s storybooks as a source of mental state
information. Cognitive Development 15, 17-37.
Frith, C. & Frith, U. (2000) The physiological basis of
theory of mind: functional neuroimaging studies. In
S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen
(Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives
from developmental cognitive neuroscience, second
edition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Gordon, A. (2001) Strategies in Analogous Planning
Cases. In J. Moore & K. Stenning (eds.) Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gordon, A. (2002) The Theory of Mind in Strategy
Representations. In W. Gray & C. Schunn (eds.)
Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Gordon, A., Kazemzadeh, A., Nair, A., & Petrova, M.,
(2003) Recognizing Expressions of Commonsense
Psychology in English Text. Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-03) Sapporo, Japan.
Happé, F., Brownell, H., & Winner, E. (1998) The
getting of wisdom: Theory of mind in old age.
Developmental Psychology, 34 (2), 358-362.
Happé, F., Brownell, H., & Winner, E. (1999) Acquired
'theory of mind' impairments following stroke.
Cognition 70, 211-240.
Jaynes, J. (1976) The Origin of Consciousness in the
Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. 2000 paperback
edition from Mariner Books, Boston.
Lillard, A. (1998) Ethnopsychologies: Cultural
Variations in Theories of Mind. Psychological
Bulletin 123(1):3-32.
Silberztein, M. (1999) Text Indexing with INTEX.
Computers and the Humanities 33(3).
Wellman, H.M., & Lagattuta, K. H. (2000). Developing
understandings of mind. In S. Baron-Cohen, H.
Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding
other minds: Perspectives from developmental
cognitive neuroscience, second edition. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Acknowledgments
Abe Kazemzadeh and Milena Petrova participated in
the language analysis portion of this research. This
paper was developed in part with funds from the U.S.
Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social
Sciences under ARO contract number DAAD 19-99-D0046. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Department of the Army.

473

