UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Metrical Categories in Infancy and Adulthood

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6170j46c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Hannon, Erin E.
Trehub, Sandra E.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Metrical Categories in Infancy and Adulthood
Erin E. Hannon (eeh5@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, 211 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850 USA

Sandra E. Trehub (sandra.trehub@utoronto.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto at Mississauga
Mississauga, ON, CANADA L5L 1C6

Abstract
Adults tend to perceive and produce rhythmic structures with
simple duration ratios and implied isochrony. If these biases
result from long-term exposure to Western metrical structure,
they should be evident in North American adults but not in
infants. Adult similarity judgments were obtained for
alterations of folk melodies that maintained or matched the
original metrical structure, whether simple or complex, and
for alterations that violated or mismatched the original
metrical structure. Adults rated mismatching alterations as
less similar than matching alterations, for simple meter
patterns, but their ratings of matching and mismatching
alterations did not differ for complex meter patterns. Infants,
who were tested with a familiarization preference procedure,
responded differentially to matching and mismatching
alterations for complex as well as simple meter patterns.
These findings imply that adult biases reflect long-term
exposure to culture-specific metrical structure rather than
intrinsic preference for simple meters.

Introduction
Complex auditory patterns such as speech and music
confront listeners with rapidly changing information. Meter,
which is common in music and some types of speech,
provides hierarchical temporal structure that facilitates the
organization of information, creating expectations about
what events will follow and when they will occur. Metrical
structure makes it possible for individuals to dance, sing,
speak, clap, tap, and play instruments in synchrony with
music and with each other.
It is generally assumed that meter is an internal
representation of isochronous periodic structures at multiple
levels, with faster levels being integer multiples of slower
levels (Clarke, 1999; Drake, 1998; Povel & Essens, 1985;
Povel, 1981). Several theorists maintain that incoming
patterns of inter-onset intervals are assimilated to an internal
periodic clock (Povel & Essens, 1985; Povel, 1981) or a
system of oscillators (Large & Kolen, 1994). As a result,
rhythmic patterns that are easily assimilated to such
isochronous, periodic structures have greater coherence
(Boltz & Jones, 1989; Povel & Essens, 1985).
The available evidence from adult production and
perception of temporal patterns is consistent with this
account of meter. When asked to tap spontaneously and
rhythmically, adults produce a distribution of short and long

498

inter-tap intervals that cluster around 1:1 and 2:1 ratios
(Fraisse, 1978). Because adults have difficulty reproducing
rhythms with complex duration ratios, they tend to stretch or
shrink temporal intervals to fit 1:1 or 2:1 ratios (Deutsch,
1986; Povel, 1981). When asked to repeat an English phrase
and align stressed syllables with tones at various temporal
positions, the resulting pattern reflects a division of the
inter-phrase interval into 1:2, 1:1, and 2:1 duration ratios,
even though the target duration ratios vary along a
continuum (Cummins & Port, 1998). These findings add
support to the notion that adults assimilate complex duration
ratios to simple-integer ratios in tapping and speech tasks.
Rhythm categorization studies provide evidence that
durations are assimilated to simple ratios in perception as
well as production. When music students are asked to
categorize two intervals as either 2:1 or 1:1, they shift their
categories according to metrical context, exhibiting a peak
in discrimination at the category boundary (Clarke, 1987).
Similarly, when required to indicate any category change
while listening to a repeating set of two intervals that shift
gradually from 1:1 to 2:1 ratios or vice versa, adults’
judgments show a hysteresis-like effect which is consistent
with perceptual categories for simple duration ratios (Large,
2000).
On the basis of the aforementioned findings as well as the
prevalence of simple duration ratios in Western music,
many scholars contend that basic cognitive biases constrain
the organization of rhythmic patterns; specifically, “good”
metrical structures will have temporal intervals at nested
hierarchical levels that can be multiplied or subdivided by
two or three (Clarke, 1999; Povel & Essens, 1985). These
claims are at odds with the prevalence, in many cultures, of
metrical structures that violate these assumptions about
isochronous levels and simple ratios.
Much music from South Asia, Africa, the Middle East,
and Eastern Europe is characterized by its “asymmetrical”
temporal structure, in which the primary pulse level consists
of alternating groups of short and long temporal intervals
having a 2:3 ratio (Clayton, 2000; London, 1995). Such
meters, which are often designated “complex,” are common
especially in the dance music of Bulgaria and Macedonia.
Despite this temporal complexity, children and adults of all
ages participate in dancing and singing to songs with
complex meters (Singer, 1973). Have children and adults
from these cultures overcome intrinsic perceptual biases to

acquire culture-specific expertise? Alternatively, do the
apparent biases for simple meters reflect long-term
experience with temporal structures that are prevalent in
Western music?
Because infants have limited experience with music, they
provide unique opportunities for examining intrinsic biases
for metrical structure. In principle, differences between
infant and adult performance could reveal the extent to
which the perception of meter is shaped by experience.
At times, young infants outperform adults on speech and
music perception tasks. For example, adults can
discriminate phonetic contrasts in their native language, but
they tend to have difficulty with some nonnative contrasts
(Werker & Tees, 1999). Before 6 months of age, infants
succeed in discriminating most contrasts in native and
nonnative languages. In subsequent months, however, they
display adult-like difficulty with nonnative contrasts (Kuhl,
Williams, Lacerda, Stevens, & Lindblom, 1992; Werker &
Lalonde, 1988).
In the music domain, infants outperform adults on the
detection of mistunings in unfamiliar musical scales (Lynch
& Eilers, 1992; Lynch, Eilers, Oller, & Urbano, 1990;
Trehub, Schellenberg, & Kamenetsky, 1999), and on the
detection of pitch changes that preserve implied harmony
(Trainor & Trehub, 1994). Such findings suggest perceptual
reorganization that results from culture-specific experience.
It is possible that infants begin life with flexible
representations that are subsequently altered by processes of
enculturation (Doupe & Kuhl; 1999; Schellenberg &
Trehub, 1999).
If the perception of rhythmic patterns follows a similar
developmental course, infants may perform equally well on
patterns with simple or complex meter. If, however, intrinsic
biases towards simple integer duration ratios are responsible
for adults’ ease of perceiving and producing patterns with
simple meter, then infants and adults should experience
greater difficulty with complex metrical structures than with
simple metrical structures. In the present study, we
compared infants’ and adults’ detection of changes in folk
melodies with simple and complex meters.

Experiment 1: Adults
Adults’ detection of changes in the metrical structure of
unfamiliar folk melodies was assessed by means of a
judgment task. After familiarization with multi-instrument
performances of dance music, adults were tested with
simpler versions of the same tune played on piano with
drum accompaniment. The simplified versions contained
alterations that maintained or violated the original metrical
structure. We assessed the magnitude of perceived changes
as a function of how consistent or inconsistent altered
versions were with the meter of the original performance.

499

Method
Participants. There were 50 college students (35 female, 15
male, ages 18-25) who received course credit for their
participation. Their musical experience ranged from 0-15
years (mean of 5.7 years formal training). Participants had
lived exclusively in North America, except for three
students who had lived in England, Russia, and the
Dominican Republic for 6-10 years.
Familiarization stimuli. Four 8-measure excerpts were
taken from traditional folk-dance melodies of Serbia,
Macedonia, and Bulgaria (Geisler, 1989). Each excerpt was
arranged as a MIDI performance with four Quicktime MIDI
Instruments. The instrumentation consisted of a primary
melodic instrument (“Acoustic Fretless Bass” or “Tango
Accordian”), a secondary melodic instrument (“Flute”), an
accompanying chordal instrument (“Acoustic Fretless Bass”
or “Bright Acoustic Piano”), and a percussion instrument
(“Melodic Tom” ,“Timpani”, or “Kalimba”). Two of the
excerpts were taken from dances in 4/4 meter (2 + 2 + 2 +
2), and two were in 7/8 meter (2 + 2 + 3 or 3 + 2 + 2). Both
primary melodic instruments were used in each meter.
Most notes were of 250-ms duration (eighth notes), but
several longer-duration notes occurred in the excerpts. The
shortest note duration was 250 ms, and the longest was 1000
ms, both occurring in 4/4 and 7/8 meters. Dynamic accents
were present in the primary and secondary melodic
instruments as increases in MIDI velocity. The downbeat of
the measure had a velocity of 127, the downbeats within the
measure had a velocity of 120, and upbeats had a velocity of
90. Thus, ample cues to meter were provided in the
familiarization stimuli. Cues were present in the drum
accompaniment (at the beat level), the chordal
accompaniment (whose bass notes articulated the beat
level), dynamic accents, and structural features of the music,
such as temporal and melodic accent.
Test stimuli. Test stimuli consisted of simplified and
altered versions of the familiarization melodies. The timbres
were simplified by the use of one melodic instrument
(“Acoustic Grand Piano”) and one drum accompaniment
(“Woodblock”). For all stimuli, the drum accompaniment
consisted of alternating patterns of long and short durations.
For 4/4 and 7/8 stimuli, this accompaniment consisted of
either a Long-Short-Short pattern or a Short-Short-Long
pattern.
The test melodies were identical to the primary melody of
the familiarization stimulus except for a matching or a
mismatching alteration. For both matching and mismatching
alterations, one note was added to each measure. For
matching alterations, one inter-beat interval was subdivided
into two, which decreased the duration of an existing quarter
note to an eighth note and added an additional eighth note.
Thus, the overall metrical structure was not disrupted by this

alteration. For excerpts in 4/4 meter, the drum
accompaniment consisted of a long duration of 1000 ms and
short durations of 500 ms. For 7/8 excerpts, the drum
accompaniment consisted of a long duration of 750 ms and
short durations of 500 ms.
Examples of matching and mismatching changes are
presented in musical notation in Figure 1 (simple meter) and
in Figure 2 (complex meter). For mismatching alterations,
an eighth-note was added without decreasing the duration of
an adjacent quarter note. For drum accompaniments this
resulted in long and short durations of 1125 ms and 500 ms
in 4/4, and 1000 ms and 500 ms in 7/8. Thus, the
mismatching change altered the metrical structure of the
familiarization tune. For both matching and mismatching
changes, the same note was added in the same location. The
only difference was the effect of the alteration on the overall
length of the measure.

in blocks of one familiarization stimulus followed by
corresponding test stimuli. Participants listened to the 2minute familiarization performance, after which they judged
how well each test stimulus matched the rhythmic structure
of the familiarization stimulus (on a scale of 1 = very well to
6 = very poor). Each block was repeated three times,
resulting in three sets of judgments for each stimulus. Order
of blocks and test stimuli were counterbalanced across
participants.

Results and Discussion
A three-way, repeated-measures, mixed-design ANOVA,
with familiarization meter (simple vs. complex
familiarization stimulus, within subjects), alteration type
(matching vs. mismatching, within subjects) and years of
musical training (between subjects), revealed a significant
main effect of meter, F (1,38) = 374.6, p < .001, a
significant main effect of alteration type F (1,38) = 396.9, p
< .001, and a significant interaction between meter and
alteration type, F (1,38) = 373.5, p < .001. There were no
other significant interactions. Post-hoc Bonferroni paired ttests revealed that the mismatching alteration was rated
significantly higher (i.e., more dissimilar) than the matching
alteration for the simple meter excerpts, t(49) = 29.54, p <
.001, but not for the complex meter excerpts, t(49) = .056, p
= .96 (see Figure 3).

Figure 1: Sample alteration to simple meter pattern.

Figure 3: Mean dissimilarity ratings and standard errors for
test stimuli in Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Sample alterations to complex meter pattern.
Procedure. Participants, who were tested in groups of 1-5,
listened to the stimuli over headphones at individual
computer stations. All musical excerpts and instructions
were controlled by means of PsyScope software (Cohen,
MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Trials were presented

500

Adults exhibited an asymmetry in their perception of
rhythmic patterns. They readily detected alterations that
disrupted simple-duration ratios and underlying isochronous
structure, but they did not differentiate similar structureviolating from structure-preserving alterations in the context
of complex metrical structures. Alterations of complex
meter excerpts resulted in simpler ratios, which parallels
observed biases in the production of rhythmic patterns
(Deutsch, 1986; Povel, 1981; Cummins & Port, 1998). For

this reason, perhaps, mismatching alterations were
indistinguishable from matching alterations of complex
meter stimuli.

Each infant was randomly assigned to one of the two
familiarization excerpts in simple meter. Order of the first
monitor in familiarization phase, first monitor in test phase,
and test stimuli were counterbalanced.

Experiment 2a: Infants and Simple Meter
Results and Discussion
We investigated infants’ perception of the simple meter
stimuli of Experiment 1 by means of a familiarization
preference procedure.
Participants. Participants were 32 healthy, full-term infants
6.5 to 7.6 months (M = 7.0 months, SD = 0.27) whose
families volunteered in response to letters distributed in the
community surrounding the University of Toronto at
Mississauga campus. An additional 14 infants were
excluded from the final sample because of fussing (n = 11),
sleeping (n = 1), or technical failure (n = 2).
Familiarization and Test stimuli. We used the two sets of
simple meter familiarization and test stimuli as in
Experiment 1. Stimuli were prepared as Quicktime movies,
accompanied by a dynamic but non-rhythmic visual excerpt,
taken from Attenborough (1991).
Apparatus. A 350-MHz MacIntosh G4 computer, two 17in color monitors, and a loudspeaker were used to present
visual and auditory stimuli and collect infant fixation times
toward each monitor. The two monitors were positioned
side by side, approximately 3 ft apart. The experimenter
viewed the infant through a small hole in a partition
separating the infant from the experimenter and the control
equipment. Infant fixation was also visible from the monitor
of a video camera that recorded infant looking behavior for
subsequent verification of looking times. The computer
controlled trial duration, recorded looking-time judgments,
and presented all stimuli as Quicktime movies. The
experimenter and mother wore headsets playing music to
mask the auditory stimuli presented to infants.
Procedure. We tested infants by means of a familiarization
preference procedure. Infants sat on their parents’ lap in a
dimly lit testing room. The two monitors were
approximately 4.5 ft in front and to the right and left of the
seated infants. The observer monitored infant looking times
by pressing one of two buttons on the computer, each
corresponding to one monitor. Infants were first presented
with 2 min of the familiarization stimulus, consisting of four
repetitions of the stimulus presented on alternate monitors.
Trials were preceded by a flashing red stimulus to orient the
infant’s attention. When the infant looked at the appropriate
monitor, familiarization trials began and continued for 30 s.
After four familiarization trials, test stimuli were presented
six times each, with the matching and mismatching test
stimuli alternating between monitors. Test trials were
terminated when the infant looked away for more than 2 s or
when 60 s had elapsed.

501

Looking times were analyzed for differential attention to
matching and mismatching alterations. A paired t-test
revealed a significant difference between looking times to
matching and mismatching alterations, t(31) = 2.63, p =
.013 (see Figure 4). Greater looking time to the mismatching
alterations can be interpreted as a novelty preference, which
implies that infants perceived mismatching alterations as
less similar to the familiarization stimulus than matching
alterations. In other words, infants exhibit adult-like
response patterns for simple meter stimuli. They notice
structure-violating alterations to the metrical pattern more
readily than structure-preserving alterations.

Experiment 2b: Infants and Complex Meter
A separate group of infants was tested with the complex
meter patterns from Experiment 1 and the procedure from
Experiment 2a.
Participants. Participants were 18 healthy, full-term infants
6.5 to 7.6 months (M = 7.1 months, SD = 0.34), who were
recruited as in Experiment 2a. An additional 4 infants were
excluded from the final sample because of fussiness.
Stimuli and Procedure. The complex meter familiarization
and test stimuli from Experiment 1 were used. The
apparatus and procedure were identical to those of
Experiment 2a.

Results and Discussion
Looking times on test trials were analyzed for differential
responsiveness to alteration type. A paired t-test on average
looking times revealed a significant difference between
looking times to matching and mismatching alterations,
t(17) = 2.59, p < .05 (see Figure 4).

Figure 4: Mean looking times for infants in Experiments 2a
and 2b.
The pattern of looking behavior in the present
experiment was similar to that in Experiment 2a. Infants
looked significantly longer during mismatching trials than
during matching trials, which implies that they perceived the
mismatching stimuli as novel. In contrast to adults, who
differentiated mismatching from matching changes only in
the context of simple meter excerpts, infants differentiated
the two types of changes in the context of complex as well
as simple meters.

General Discussion
Infants outperformed adults in detecting temporal alterations
of musical stimuli. These findings suggest that adult biases
in perceiving and producing temporal patterns arise from
extended exposure to simple metrical structures in music.
Another interpretation of the present findings is that
temporal processing is fundamentally different in infancy
and adulthood. For example, infants may process temporal
patterns in a serial manner, without the hierarchical and
anticipatory aspects of metrical representation in adults
(Drake, Jones, & Baruch, 2000). It is possible, however, that
metrical representations are fundamental to the organization
of auditory-temporal input. Moreover, greater flexibility in
that organization may be possible early in life, before
listeners become attuned to typical input in their
environment.
Several lines of evidence are consistent with the
possibility of rich metrical representations in infancy.
Infants have a number of prerequisite skills for perceiving
meter, including the detection of subtle changes in duration
(Morrongiello & Trehub, 1987) and tempo (Baruch &
Drake, 1997), the detection of miniscule gaps in tones
(Trehub, Schneider, & Henderson, 1995), the discrimination
of isochronous from nonisochronous tone patterns
(Demany, McKenzie, & Vurpillot, 1977), and the
generalization of melodies on the basis of rhythmic structure

502

(Trehub & Thorpe, 1989). Infants can also discriminate
musical excerpts on the basis of rhythm changes (Chang &
Trehub, 1977) and on the basis of the subtle performance
cues that result from metrical structure, such as intensity and
inter-onset interval changes (Palmer, Jungers, & Jusczyk,
2001). These cues are also correlated with metrical position
in infant-directed singing (Trainor, Clark, Huntley, &
Adams, 1997). Infants’ ability to detect small timing
changes depends on the strength of implied metrical
structure (Bergeson, 2000). Finally, 7-month-old infants can
categorize unique rhythms on the basis of implied metrical
structure (Hannon & Johnson, 2002). It is likely, then, that
infants’ performance in the present experiment resulted
from the kind of metrical processing that underlies adult
performance.
Our findings imply that adult biases in temporal pattern
processing result from category learning processes that
occur in the course of musical enculturation, and not
necessarily just from intrinsic preference for patterns with
simple temporal structure. Implicit knowledge of musically
relevant categories is critical for the appreciation of music.
For example, listeners must discern the metrical structure of
a piece in the face of temporal fluctuations that reflect the
performer’s expressive intentions (Large & Palmer, 2002).
Such category learning is also relevant to speech processing.
For example, listeners must recognize words and
meaningful prosodic changes in the context of enormous
variability across utterance and speakers (Doupe & Kuhl,
1999).
Infant perceptual abilities may undergo subsequent
reorganization as young listeners discover which
distinctions are meaningful and which are not. Our findings
provide the first example of such reorganization in the
perception of temporal patterns.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.

References
Attenborough, D. (Producer). (1991). The trials of life:
Courting [Motion picture]. England: BBC Television.
Baruch, C., & Drake, C. (1997). Tempo discrimination in
infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 20, 573-577.
Bergeson, T.R. (2002). Perspectives on music and music
listening in infancy. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Toronto.
Chang, H.W., & Trehub, S.E. (1977). Infants’ perception of
temporal grouping in auditory patterns. Child
Development, 48, 1666-1670.
Clark, E.F. (1999). Rhythm and timing in music. In D.
Deutsch (Ed.), The psychology of music (2nd Edition).
New York: Academic Press.
Clayton, M. (2000). Time in Indian music. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Cohen, J.D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment

for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257271.
Cummins, F., & Port, R. (1998). Rhythmic constraints on
stress timing in English. Journal of Phonetics, 26, 145171.
Demany, L., McKenzie, B., & Vurpillot, E. (1977). Rhythm
perception in early infancy. Nature, 266, 718-719.
Deutsch, D. (1986). Recognition of durations embedded in
temporal patterns. Perception & Psychophysics, 39, 179186.
Doupe, A.J., & Kuhl, P.K. (1999). Birdsong and human
speech: Common themes and mechanisms. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 22, 567-631.
Drake, C., Jones, M.R., & Baruch, C. (2000). The
development of rhythmic attending in auditory sequences:
Attunement, referent period, focal attending. Cognition,
77, 251-288.
Drake, C. (1998). Psychological processes involved in the
temporal organization of complex auditory sequences:
Universal and acquired processes. Music Perception, 16,
11-26.
Fraisse, P. (1978). Time and rhythm perception. In E.C.
Carterette & M.P. Friedman (Eds.), Handbook of
perception, Vol. 8. New York: Academic Press.
Geisler, R. (1989). The Bulgarian and Yogoslav collections.
Grass Valley, CA: The Village and Early Music Society.
Hannon, E. E., & Johnson, S. P. (2002). Infants’
categorization of rhythms on the basis of metrical
structure. In Stevens, C., Burnham, D., McPherson, G.,
Schubert, E., Renwick, J. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Music Perception and
Cognition. Adelaide: Causal Productions.
Kuhl, P.K., Williams, K.A., Lacerda, F., Stevens, K.N., &
Lindblom, B. (1992). Linguistic experience alters
phonetic perception in infants by 6 months of age.
Science, 255, 606-608.
Large, E.W. (2000). Rhythm categorization in context. In C.
Woods, G.B. Luck, R. Brochard, S.A. O’Neill, & J.A.
Sloboda (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Music Perception and Cognition. Keele,
Staffordshire, UK: Department of Psychology. CD-ROM.
Large, E.W., & Kolen, J.F. (1994). Resonance and the
perception of musical meter. Connection Science, 6, 177208.
Large, E.W., & Palmer, C. (2002). Perceiving temporal
regularity in music. Cognitive Science, 26, 1-37.
London, J. (1995). Some examples of complex meters and
their implications for models of metric perception. Music
Perception, 13, 59-77.
Lynch, M.P., & Eilers, R.E. (1992). A study of perceptual
development for musical tuning. Perception &
Psychophysics, 52, 599-608.
Lynch, M.P., Eilers, R.E., Oller, D.K., & Urbano, R.C.
(1990). Innateness, experience, and music percetion.
Psychological Science, 1, 272-276.
Morrongiello, B.A., & Trehub, S.E. (1987). Age-related
changes in auditory temporal perception. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 44, 413-426.

503

Palmer, C., Jungers, M.K., & Jusczyk, P.W. (2001).
Episodic memory for musical prosody. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 526-545.
Povel, D. (1981). Internal representation of simple temporal
patterns. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 7, 3-18.
Povel, D., & Essens, P. (1985). Perception of temporal
patterns. Music Perception, 2, 411-440.
Schellenberg, E.G., & Trehub, S.E. (1999). Culture-general
and culture-specific factors in the discrimination of
melodies. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 74,
107-127.
Singer, A. (1973). The metrical structure of Macedonian
dance. Ethnomusicology, 18, 379-404.
Trainor, L.J., Clark, E.D., Huntley, A., & Adams, B.A.
(1997). The acoustic basis of preferences for infantdirected singing. Infant Behavior and Development, 20,
383-396.
Trehub, S.E., Schneider, B.A., & Henderson, J.L. (1995).
Gap detection in infants, children, and adults. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 98, 2532-2541.
Trehub, S.E., & Thorpe, L.A. (1989). Infants’ perception of
rhythm: Categorization of auditory sequences by temporal
structure. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 43, 217-229.
Werker, J.F., & Lalonde, C.E. (1988). Cross-language
speech perception: Initial capabilities and developmental
change. Developmental Psychology, 24, 672-683.
Werker, J.F., & Tees, R.C. (1999). Influences on infant
speech processing: Toward a new synthesis. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50, 509-535.

