UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mundane Comparisons Can Facilitate Relational Understanding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5214q3g2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Jameson, Jason
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mundane Comparisons Can Facilitate Relational Understanding
Jason Jameson (j-jameson@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Abstract
This paper addresses the role of comparison in highlighting
relational structure. Specifically, we investigated whether
even literal similarity comparisons (where both objects and
relations match) can lead to a focus on common relations over
equally suitable object matches. Whereas previous studies
have demonstrated the highlighting of relations during
analogical comparisons (where only relations match), the
study presented in this paper suggests that even literal
similarity comparisons can promote relational focus. In
addition, we explore the role of types of comparison tasks
(listing commonalities or listing differences). This extension
follows naturally from structure-mapping theory, which
predicts that in certain cases, listing differences between two
things can actually lead to a heightened focus on the structure
common to both.

Introduction
Newton is said to have comprehended the far-reaching
influence of gravity when it occurred to him that an apple
falling from a tree was in some sense like the motion of the
planets. Einstein is said to have conceived his alternative
view of gravity when it occurred to him that a man falling
from the roof of a house was in some sense like an object
freefloating in space. Both examples illustrate the power of
comparison. To be sure, the thought processes leading to
these ideas must have been complex and diverse, but what is
common to both is that something similar was drawn from
something that was prima facie very different. As such, the
examples hint at the far-reaching scope of comparison and
the perception of likeness.
Examples like these have led some researchers to propose
that comparison acts to create a focus on common relational
structure (Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Medina, 1998;
Markman & Gentner, 1993b). Comparison has been shown
to facilitate schema abstraction and to promote knowledge
transfer. In Gick & Holyoak’s (1983) classic studies that
investigated analogical transfer using the Duncker tumor
problem, people who compared two prior analogous stories
were far more likely to transfer the solution to the tumor
problem than those who read only one of the stories.
Additional empirical data suggest this as well. Comparison
facilitates transfer even to ‘hot’ interactive situations. MBA
students who compared analogous cases depicting
negotiation strategies were more successful in extending the
learned principles to new situations than those students who

611

did not compare cases, but were instead given them
separately (Loewenstein, Thompson, & Gentner, 1999).
Comparison has also been shown to facilitate
comprehension of spatial relations in young children.
Adapting the methods from the classic studies of
DeLoache and her colleagues (e.g., DeLoache, 1987),
Loewenstein and Gentner (2001) found that children
who directly compared similar rooms were more
likely to find an object in a similar new room than
children who had not compared rooms. These findings
lead to the conjecture that comparison processes may
be an important route to learning deep relational
knowledge (Gentner & Medina, 1998; Gentner, 2003).
In the above studies, the analogous pairs given to
subjects were designed so that only the relational
structure matched—e.g., X-rays and an army. This
paper asks whether the highlighting of relational
structure can also occur in mundane overall
comparisons in which object commonalities are also
present. In order to be clear about what we are
claiming, consider the sentences below.
a.
b.
c.

The plumber inspected the new faucet.
The plumber tested the pipes.
The accountant checked the totals.

The process of comparison operates over both relations
and object descriptions (Gentner, 1989; Holyoak &
Thagard, 1989). Thus, the resultant common system
can include both relations and objects in a literal
similarity comparison, such as between a and b; or it
can contain only common relations in an analogical
comparison, such as between a and c.
The claim that comparison promotes relational focus
has two forms, one obvious and one not so obvious.
The obvious form is illustrated by the a and c match. In
this case the resulting commonalties contain just the
relational match. In this case, relational highlighting is
not surprising. The less obvious claim is that even in
the case of a and b, in which the commonalities include
object descriptions as well as relational structure, the
effect of the comparison process is to heighten the
focus on common relations. This claim may at first
seem implausible: Why should common relations be
more salient than the equally preserved common
objects?

The starting point for this research comes from a theory of
similarity that emphasizes structural alignment and mapping
of mental representations. We first briefly describe this
theory and its application to similarity comparisons. Then
we lay out the predictions and how these tests go beyond
prior demonstrations of relational focus.

Similarity is like Analogy
According to structure-mapping theory, the core process in
comparison (whether literal similarity or analogy) is
aligning the representational structure of mental
representations (Gentner, 1983). There is considerable
empirical support for the claim that similarity involves
alignment processes akin to those involved in analogical
mapping (Markman & Gentner, 1993b; Gentner &
Markman, 1997). This emphasis on the relations between
representational elements contrasts with other approaches,
such as the spatial and featural models (Shepard, 1962;
Tversky, 1977).
The structure-mapping process model is instantiated in a
computer simulation (SME—the Structure-Mapping
Engine), which has successfully modeled a number of
phenomena (Falkenheiner, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989). In
SME, analogical mapping occurs via a local-to-global
matching process that begins by finding all possible local
matches among both objects and relations. It then invokes
two structural consistency constraints—one-to-one mapping
and parallel connectivity—to arrive eventually at the
maximal alignment of common structure. This maximal
alignment is determined in part by a bias for systematicity
(that is, for interconnected relations over isolated ones, and
for deeper systems of relations over shallower ones) (e.g.,
Gentner & Markman, 1997). A number of studies provide
evidence supporting these constraints (Gentner & Clement,
1991; Gentner & Toupin, 1986).
A.

In structure-mapping, because predicates that belong
to connected systems are weighted more heavily than
isolated predicates, the theory predicts that relational
matches will in general outweigh object matches. Prior
evidence for this claim has utilized cross-mapping
studies, in which objects and relations are pitted against
one another (Gentner & Toupin, 1986). For example,
Markman & Gentner (1993b) showed people pairs of
cross-mapped scenes like those in Figure 1. In A, a man
from a community food bank is shown giving food to a
woman; and in B, the same woman is shown giving
food to a squirrel. For each pair, subjects were asked to
match an object in one scene—always the crossmapped object (the woman in scene A)—to its
corresponding part in the other scene
The pairs were designed to show a strong object
match, and indeed subjects who simply performed a
one-shot mapping task (that is, without rating the
similarity of the scenes beforehand) tended to choose
the womanÆwoman match. However, as predicted by
structure-mapping, when subjects first rated the
similarity of the two scenes, they mostly chose the
relational match for the woman in A—namely, the
squirrel in B. This is evidence that the comparison
process favors finding common relational structure
rather than common object descriptions when the two
are in competition.

Testing relational focus – beyond crossmapping competition
To understand how the present study goes beyond the
Markman & Gentner study, consider the following
sentences.
d. The plumber pounded the jammed nozzle.
e. The gushing fire hose bludgeoned the plumber.
f. The plumber hammered on the faulty stopper.
Like the picture pairs used in Markman and Gentner’s
study, the sentences d and e constitute a cross-mapping.
There is an obvious object mapping of “plumber” to
“plumber” and “nozzle” to “fire hose”. Alternatively,
one could align the central events described in the two
sentences (pounded and bludgeoned), so that “plumber”
in d would map to “fire hose” in e, and “nozzle” in d
would map to “plumber” in e. Thus, this pair requires
that one choose between object matches and relational
matches. For adults, when relational matches are pitted
against object matches, the relational match is likely to
win out. Thus, cross-mapped comparisons result in
relational highlighting.
But what about the pair d and f, in which both the
objects and relations match? This research investigates
the possibility that even in this case, common relations
will become more salient than common objects.
One key line of support for the claim that even
mundane overall comparisons can lead to a focus on
common relations comes from a set of studies by
Gentner & Namy (1999) that used a word-learning task

B.

Figure 1. Sample stimuli used in a cross-mapping task
(from Markman & Gentner, 1993b, study 1).

612

with children. In one study, 4-year-olds were presented with
triads composed of either one standard or two standards,
along with two response options. For example, in one triad
the single standard was either a bicycle or a tricycle (in the
single standard condition) or both (in the comparison
condition). One of the response options (a pair of
eyeglasses), was perceptually similar to the standard(s) but
was from a different taxonomic category. The other option
(a skateboard) was perceptually dissimilar to the standards,
but was from the same taxonomic category. Children in the
one-standard condition were told that the standard was a
‘blicket’ in dinosaur language and asked which option
would also be a blicket. Most of the children in this
condition chose the perceptual response, consistent with
much prior research (Baldwin, 1989; Imai, Gentner &
Uchida, 1994; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1992).
What is more interesting, however, is that when children
in the two-standard condition (the comparison condition)
were given the parallel task, they behaved quite differently.
When told that both standards were blickets, and asked to
choose the other blicket, they chose the taxonomic response.
This is a counterintuitive result: when either single standard
was presented alone, the perceptually similar response was
preferred. Further, the two standards shared the same
perceptual features with each other as each did with the
perceptual option. Thus, on a feature-based account,
presenting the two together should have reinforced those
featural commonalities, thereby leading to even more
perceptual responding. However, this was not the case.
When children compared the two standards, they chose the
taxonomically similar alternative. Gentner and Namy
concluded that the comparison task highlighted the common
relational structure between the standards, and that this in
turn led to the greater perceived similarity to the taxonomic
response option.
However, the conclusion that this pattern of results
implies highlighting of relational structure could be
challenged. The claim rests on the assumption that the
similarity of the taxonomic members was relational. Though
there is evidence that people may form categories on the
basis of common relational structure (Ahn, 1999; Gentner &
Medina, 1998; Kurtz & Gentner, 2001), it is still a
speculative claim. Direct evidence that comparison leads to
noticing of common relational structure is needed, without
the intermediate assumption that the category members
share relational structure.
The present study uses stimuli that clearly separate
relational similarity from object similarity. To accomplish
this, sentences were used as stimuli. There are several
reasons for using sentences, but the most important reason is
that they allow us to establish clear relational commonalities
and clear surface commonalities. As in the Gentner and
Namy study, we used triads in which there were two
response options: an object match and a relational match.

Experiment
In designing this experiment, one goal was to ensure that
participants engaged in an active comparison process. Prior
evidence suggests that participants are more likely to arrive
at a common relational abstraction for a pair of items when

613

they engage in more intensive comparison processes
(such as stating commonalities) than when they merely
give similarity ratings (Kurtz, Miao, & Gentner, 2000).
Accordingly, participants in one comparison condition
were asked to write out the commonalities for each
sentence pair.
In addition to the commonality-listing task, we also
included a difference-listing task. This group of
participants was asked to write out the differences
between sentence pairs. The task was included for two
reasons. First, it addresses a potential alternative
explanation for the finding, should it occur, that listing
commonalities increases relational responding: namely,
a kind of carryover from the first task. Suppose, as is
likely on our account, that participants list relational
commonalities for the pairs. Then a simple carryover or
priming effect might increase their subsequent
likelihood of choosing the consistent response—that is,
the relationally similar response. However, if subjects
who list differences also show a shift towards relational
choices, then we can rule out this carryover
explanation. Second, and more importantly, the
difference-listing task provides an opportunity to test
further predictions concerning the process of similarity
comparison.
According to structure-mapping, finding differences
is normally accomplished by aligning relational
structure and then reading off aligned differences
(Markman & Gentner, 1993). For example, Gentner
and Markman (1994) found that people listed
differences for similar objects more easily than for
dissimilar objects, and listed more differences for
similar objects than for dissimilar objects. This
surprising result is complemented by a recent study in
which listing the differences between similar objects
actually increased judged similarity (Boroditsky, in
press). Also, listing the commonalities among word
pairs has been shown to facilitate later listing of
differences for the same word pairs (Gentner & Gunn,
2001).
This suggests that even a comparison task that
highlights differences should also lead to alignment of
common structure. Thus there should be a shift towards
the relational choice following a difference-listing task
as well as a commonality- listing task, though the effect
of the difference-listing task may not be as strong.
By using these sentence stimuli, we can test the claim
that comparison processes heighten attention to
common relational structure, even when there are also
common aligned objects. Such a result would extend
Markman and Gentner’s finding that comparison
highlights common relations when object and relational
matches conflict. The main prediction, then, is that
listing commonalities and listing differences should
both lead to higher rates of relational responding than
processing the sentences separately. An open question
is whether, as seems plausible, listing commonalities
will lead to more relational responding than listing
differences.

Method

comparison tasks of listing commonalities or listing
differences should affect the rate of relational
responding accordingly. The tasks were self-paced, and
took about 15-20 minutes to complete.

Participants Seventy-nine Northwestern students
participated for partial course credit.
Design The three levels of task, listing commonalities
(N=26), listing differences (N=31), and rating
comprehensibility (N=22), were run between subjects. The
purpose of the comprehensibility ratings task (the control
group) was to equate the three groups in their prior
experience with the standards.
Materials and procedure Participants were randomly
assigned to the three conditions. In the first part of the
commonality-listing (or difference-listing) condition, 18
sentence pairs were presented (12 test items and 6 filler
items), and space for written responses was provided below
each pair. Participants were instructed to compare the
sentences and then to write out as many of their
commonalities (or differences) as possible. In the
comprehensibility condition, participants rated the
comprehensibility of individual sentences on a scale from 1
(not at all comprehensible) to 9 (completely
comprehensible). In all, 45 sentences were presented: 36
from the 18 pairs of test items and fillers, plus 9 low
comprehensibility fillers specific to the first part of this
condition that were designed to anchor the ratings scale.
The second phase was identical for all three groups. All
participants received 18 triads (12 test item triads and 6
filler triads) in random order. Each triad consisted of a pair
of sentences serving as standards (those presented in the
first part of the commonalities and differences conditions,
with both the order between and within pairs rerandomized); and the two response options, one an attribute
match with the standards, and the other a relational match
with the standards. The subject, object, and verb for the
standards were chosen so that the action described in the
sentences would be familiar to participants. The
superficially similar option had the same subject as the
standards, but was otherwise semantically unrelated. The
relationally similar option conveyed an event that was
similar to those in the standards, but had no object match. It
was constructed with the intent of establishing a matching
predicate argument structure with the standards. A sample
triad is presented in Figure 2.
The plumber tested the new faucet.
The plumber inspected the pipes.
The plumber mailed the
customer the bill.

The accountant
checked the totals.

Figure 2. Sample test stimulus used in the experiment.
The filler triads were designed so that the correct response
option shared both object and relational matches with the
standard(s). The fillers were included in order to circumvent
formulaic responding. The order of items and left-right
placement of response options was randomized.
Even though the second task is a comparison task for all
conditions, our prediction is that the more intensive prior

614

Results

As predicted, participants who listed commonalities
responded relationally more often (M = .84, SD = .14)
than those who rated the comprehensibility of
individual sentences (M = .65, SD = .15), tI(11) = 7.32,
p < .001, by a paired-samples t-test over items. Further,
those who listed differences also responded relationally
more often than those who rated single-sentence
comprehensibility, tI(11) = 1.74, p = .05. An ANOVA
confirmed an overall between-subjects effect, F(2, 76)
= 3.08, p = .05. A marginally significant trend
suggested that people who listed commonalities
responded relationally more often than those who listed
differences (M = .76, SD = .15), tI(11) = 1.30, p = .10.
Thus, the chief prediction was borne out: listing
commonalities led to a gain in relational focus. In
addition, the difference-listing group also showed a
gain in relational focus, allowing us to discount the
explanation that listed relational commonalities were
simply carried over from the first part of the task.

General Discussion
We tested the prediction that comparison would lead to
the highlighting of common relational structure even
for literally similar pairs. Two different comparison
tasks were used: a commonality-listing task and a
difference-listing task. In both cases, the prediction that
structural alignment would lead to a focus on common
relational structure was supported.
The finding that difference listing as well as
commonality listing led to heightened relational
responding supports Markman and Gentner’s (1996)
claim that finding differences typically invites
structural alignment just as does finding commonalities.
Not surprisingly, the relational highlighting effect
appears weaker for difference listing than for
commonality listing.
The results of the study buttress the claim that
comparison leads to the noticing of common relational
structure. However, there are still issues to explore.
Structure-mapping predicts that the differences
advantage should happen primarily in the case of
alignable differences (which is the result of a shared
property between objects, but with each object
possessing different values for that property). However,
the way in which the stimuli in the experiment were
structured doesn’t provide evidence that alignable
differences were responsible for the heightened
relational focus. For example, for one item in the
difference-listing task, a participant wrote, “Both
coaches, but one is for the Bears and the other is for the
Raiders”, whereas another participant wrote,
“Bears/Raiders”. Now, it appears that these are both
alignable differences, but it is not entirely clear that the

participants thought of them as such. It may have been the
case that the second participant engaged in a rather shallow
level of processing, perhaps only noting that words in the
same relative location within each sentence happened to be
different. It seems, then, that the written responses do not
provide very many clues as to the types of differences
involved in the task. However, sentence stimuli that are not
matched completely may get around this limitation.

Conclusions
The current results add to the set of findings suggesting that
similarity is most tractable when viewed, not as an end
product or as a static mental rating, but rather as a process
operating over mental representations (Medin, Goldstone,
& Gentner, 1993). Furthermore, these findings suggest that
similarity comparison processes may have important
psychological consequences – notably, leading to a focus on
relational commonalities (Gentner & Medina, 1998; Gentner
& Namy, 1999). Spontaneous comparison processes may be
one route by which children can use experiential learning to
bootstrap their way to abstract rule-like knowledge. Clearly,
this ability to sharpen our grasp of relational similarity is
crucial: it is what enables the Newton or the Einstein to note
the spectacular in the mundane.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ONR award N00014-02-10078. Thanks to Sam Day and the rest of the Similarity
and Analogy group.

References
Ahn, W. (1999). Effect of Causal Structure on Category
Construction. Memory & Cognition, 27, 1008-1023.
Boroditsky, L. (in press). Comparison and the development
of knowledge. Cognition.
DeLoache, J. S. (1987). Rapid changes in the symbolic
functioning of very young children. Science, 238, 1556557.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and cognition (pp. 195-236).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29(4), 565-577.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural
alignment in comparison: No difference without
similarity. Psychological Science, 5(3), 152-158.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.

615

Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development,
14, 487-513.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema
induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical
mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive
Science, 13, 295-355.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children's
theories of word meaning: The role of shape
similarity
in
early
acquisition.
Cognitive
Development, 9, 45-75.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Kinds of kinds:
Sources of category coherence. Proceedings of the
Twenty-third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 522-527. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Kurtz, K. J., Miao, C., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning
by analogical bootstrapping. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 10(4), 417-446.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping
in preschoolers: Close comparisons facilitate far
mappings. Journal of Cognition and Development,
2(2), 189-219.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(4),
586-597.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993a). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of
similarity. Journal of Memory and Language, 32,
517-535.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993b). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities
and differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
Cognition, 24(2), 235-249.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review,
100(2), 254-278.
Shepard, R. N. (1962). The analysis of proximities:
Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
function. Part 1. Psychometrika, 27, 125-140.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1992). Count
nouns, adjectives, and perceptual properties in
children's novel word interpretations. Developmental
Psychology, 28, 273-286.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity.
Psychological Review, 84, 327-352.

