UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perception of e-mail personality at zero-acquaintance: Extraversion takes care of itself;
Neuroticism is a worry

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/35r866df

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Gill, Alastair J.
Oberlander, Jon

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perception of e-mail personality at zero-acquaintance:
Extraversion takes care of itself; Neuroticism is a worry
Alastair J. Gill (agill@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW UK

Jon Oberlander (J.Oberlander@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW UK

as follows. We first describe the notions of Extraversion and Neuroticism with which we are working.
We then briefly survey previous findings on perception of personality, before noting particular findings
concerning the effects of technological mediation on
personality perception. We note the objective features of text in our e-mail corpus that vary with Extraversion and Neuroticism, and then describe the
methods and results of our perception study. The
discussion section focuses on why Extraversion may
be easier to detect in e-mail than other personality
characteristics, like Neuroticism.

Abstract
We investigate the impact of computer-mediated interaction on person perception. In particular, we
study how traits important for socialisation and
collaboration—Extraversion and Neuroticism—can
be detected from the text of an e-mail communication. We have previously shown how Extraversion influences people’s language production in electronic communication, in broadly intuitive ways.
Here, we briefly outline the ways in which Neuroticism is expressed more through the high-level properties of a text. By their nature, these properties
are less accessible to intuition. In subjective ratings
of the texts for personality, we demonstrate that
author Extraversion can be accurately perceived,
given the limited cues, and that judges also exhibit
relatively high agreement with each other for this
trait. Neuroticism, however, appears more difficult.
This result is consistent with previous findings, but
suggests that e-mail exacerbates this discrepancy.

Background
Two personality traits

Introduction
One view of human cognition is that it has been
shaped by natural selection to enable individuals to
interact effectively with members of relatively large
groups of peers: to estimate the trustworthiness of
strangers, to recognise individuals, and to recall our
judgement of familiars.
Until relatively recently, interaction has been
conducted entirely face-to-face, or at least synchronously. It is therefore unsurprising that in such
contexts, we are highly effective at judging people’s
characteristics, such as familiarity, gender, emotion
or temperament (eg. Cheng, O’Toole, and Abdi,
2001). But technology now mediates much communication. Phone, e-mail or video-conference: in
each case, people must make do with impoverished
cues to help them estimate other people’s emotional
states, dispositions and personalities. E-mail is especially popular: it is designed to allow asynchronous
communication; and it is often the means by which
people make first contact with one another (Baron,
1998). Given this, it seems reasonable to ask: How
easily can the personality of an author be perceived
from their e-mail message?
To address this question, we here focus on the
personality dimensions of Extraversion and Neuroticism. The rest of the paper is therefore structured

456

Extraversion and Neuroticism are traits which are
considered central to theories of personality. They
are common to the two major theories: Eysenck’s
three factor model (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991);
and the five factor model developed by Costa and
McCrae (Costa and McCrae, 1992) and others. Beyond these two traits there is greater dispute, with
personality described either in terms of the single
trait Psychoticism, or divided into Conscientiousness, Agreeableness and Openness.
Extraversion is a trait strongly related to interpersonal interaction and sociability. High Extraverts
are said to: be sociable, take chances, be easy-going
and optimistic. Low Extraverts (or Introverts) are
said to: be quiet, reserved, plan ahead, and dislike
excitement (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991). Unsurprisingly, then, there is popular awareness of this
trait, and its manifestations in behaviour.
Neuroticism is generally related to internal emotional states. High Neurotics are said to be: anxious,
worrying, over-emotional, and frequently depressed.
Low Neurotics are said to be: calm, even-tempered,
and unworried (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991). Although internal states are less directly perceived
than interpersonal behaviour, there is also considerable popular awareness of this trait, and it makes
a real difference to productivity, collaboration, and
performance in jobs requiring interpersonal interaction (Mount, Barrick, and Stewart, 1998).

Perception of personality
How much about ourselves do we give away in interaction? How good are other people at picking it up?
From a cognitive science point of view, we need to
know what aspects of interactive behaviour can be
informative, before we design models of the relevant
information processing. In fact, we must turn to social and personality psychology for the appropriate
empirical methods.
Personality judgement data can be gathered in
several ways. On the one hand, subjects’ self-reports
of personality, together with ratings of subjects by
peers (such as spouses or colleagues), have been compared with each other for agreement. On the other
hand, strangers have been called upon to make personality judgements, after being exposed to various
different kinds of information about the target individuals. Funder’s (1995) Realistic Accuracy Model
views accuracy of judgement as a function of the
availability, detection, and utilisation of relevant behavioural cues. The first two categories he describes
as ‘good judge’, and ‘good target’: some people are
better able to judge—or rate—personality; and some
individuals are more easily judged than others. Generally, these kinds of variation do not appear to occur
systematically across groups. However, other variation, labelled ‘good trait’ and ‘good information’, is
more systematic.
Good Traits Distinguishing between the different personality dimensions has shown that, even in
judgements by close acquaintances, much greater
agreement is found for ratings of Extraversion than
for Neuroticism (or Psychoticism) for the EPQ
(Gomà-i-Freixanet, 1997), and this pattern has been
mirrored in the five factor model (McCrae and
Costa, 1987). Additionally, self-ratings were shown
to be more informative in predicting behaviour for
Extraversion—but not Neuroticism. Funder (1995)
proposes that this is due, in part, to the ‘visibility’
of Extraversion. It is realised in ‘frequent positive
social interaction’, whereas Neuroticism is realised
via internal states. Furthermore, Neuroticism is regarded as more ‘evaluative’, ie. affectively charged.
It may thus lead to: the concealment of undesirable behaviour from observers; or a distortion of selfperception, leading to lower target-judge agreement;
or a greater reluctance to pass judgement on such behaviours, leading to reduced inter-judge agreement.
When less evaluative measures of Neuroticism are
used, agreement increases (John and Robbins, 1993).
Good Information The amount and relevance
of target information available to the judges influences their agreement. Close acquaintances agree
better with each other and with the target, than do
relative strangers, although both predict target behaviour equally well, when they know the target in a
relevant context (Colvin and Funder, 1991). Judge-

457

ments by close acquaintances (especially when taken
as a composite measure) generally also better predict target behaviour (Kolar, Funder, and Colvin,
1996). At the other extreme, studies have investigated personality perception of strangers on the basis of minimal cues, at so-called zero-acquaintance.
Here there appears to be interaction between the
available information and the visibility of the trait
being judged. Albright, Kenny, and Malloy (1988)
found that, on the basis of physical appearance, Extraversion and Conscientiousness could be reliably
rated, although the former appeared to be mediated
by judgements of physical attractiveness. On the basis of transcribed interactions, self-other agreement
has been found for ratings of Extraversion (and also
its opposite Introversion) (Gifford and Hine, 1994).

Technology mediated communication
Whether or not subject and judge have prior knowledge of each other, technology has an impact on
what information is available in a communicative
situation. Zero-acquaintance judgements are perhaps particularly vulnerable to technological artifacts. For example, interviews conducted over
the telephone were found to result in reduced selfinterviewer and peer-interviewer agreement than
face-to-face interviews (Blackman, 2002).
In a computer-mediated environment (CMC), the
cues are reduced even further, and following one-onone interactions in an internet chat room, consensus
was found between judges for a target’s Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Openness, whilst targetjudge agreement was only found for Extraversion
and Openness (Markey and Wells, 2002).
Impressions of personality formed following taskoriented synchronous computer-mediated communication found that they were less detailed but more
intense compared with those from face-to-face communication. Specifically, in the CMC environment,
judges seemed less able to rate their partners for Extraversion, Neuroticism, and Agreeableness. Across
both environments, Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, and Extraversion were the most rateable (Hancock and Dunham, 2001).

Linguistic features of personality
By analysing our personality e-mail corpus, we have
previously shown that Extraverts and Introverts produce characteristic language features (Gill and Oberlander, 2002). For a summary, see Figure 1.
These results are broadly consistent with—and in
some cases more detailed than—the prior literature
(eg. Nass, Moon, Fogg, and Reeves, 1995; Furnham,
1990; Berry, Pennebaker, Mueller, and Hiller, 1997).
In particular, study of texts written about thoughts
and feelings by Extraverts has found that they used
fewer negations, tentative words, negative emotion
words, causation words, inclusive words, and exclu-

Surface Realisation Extraverts are more informal, use hi,
and use looser punctuation (!! or ...). Introverts use hello.
Quantification Introverts show greater use of quantifiers
(for exaggeration? ); Extraverts are looser and less specific.
Social Devices Stylistic expressions such as catch up and
take care indicate the Extravert’s relaxed social style.
Self/Other Reference Introverts use more first-person
singular (i), whereas Extraverts are more likely to use plural we.
Valence Introverts prominently use negations; Extraverts
use words suggestive of positive affect.
Ability Extraverts are more confident and assertive (eg.,
want-, able-, need-(to)); Introverts are more tentative and
timid (trying-, going- (to)).
Modality Extraverts are more strongly predictive than Introverts (eg., modal auxiliaries will- vs. should- (be)).
Message Planning/Expression Introverts prefer coordinating conjunctions (and, but), whereas only Extraverts use the subordinative which (usually for evaluation? ).

Figure 1: Extravert and Introvert Language

Table 1: Summary of LIWC, MRC, and TTR multiple regression analyses.
β

R2

p

Inclusive Words
Total First Person

.28
.21

.11

.0030

Mean Concreteness
Mean Brown
Verbal Frequency

.33

Analysis

Independent Var.

LIWC
MRC
TTR

10 Word Measures

We would expect a text characteristic of high Neuroticism to exhibit the following: In terms of LIWC
features, we would expect words such as with, and,
include (indicating inclusion) to be used, which are
possibly indicative of the high Neurotic’s desire for
attachment or reassurance; first person pronouns,
such as I, me, we again indicate a preoccupation
with self, and may be related to our previous findings for low Extraverts (Introverts).
This relationship between Neurotics and Introverts again appears in an increased use of concrete
words (for entities which can be sensed); for example, table, spoon, girl, rather than abstract words,
like thoughts, flavours, pains. Given the relationship
between Neuroticism and Brown Verbal Frequency,
we suggest that high Neurotics show a preference for
forms occurring frequently in speech, for example, I,
and, that, rather than less common words such as abject, suspicion, tether. This preference for common
words contributes towards the very low lexical density found in highly Neurotic texts, demonstrated by
the high repetition over ten-word sections of text.
So, e-mail from Extraverts and Neurotics has
characteristic linguistic features. Do judges with
zero-acquaintance pick up on these features? We
turn now to our rating experiment.

Method

.27

.14

.0004

Participants

−.27

.07

.0057

The 30 judges were current students at the University of Edinburgh, or recent graduates (15 males, 15
females; mean age= 21.6 years, s.d.= 1.24). All were
highly experienced e-mail users (rating themselves
between 7 and 10 on a scale of 1–10; mean= 9.23,
s.d.= 0.77), and naive raters of personality (none
had previously taken part in personality rating experiments, although 3 had studied Psychology as
part of their course). Participants received a nominal ‘experimental expenses’ payment for taking part.

Note: In each case, EPQ-R Neuroticism Score is the Dependent Variable. LIWC = Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count; MRC = Medical Research Council Psycholinguistic Database; TTR = Type-Token Ratio.

sive words, while using more social and positive emotion words (Pennebaker and King, 1999).
Extraversion is generally considered most relevant
to communication, but Neuroticism also has implications for interaction (Mount et al., 1998). Furthermore, Pennebaker and King (1999), using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) text analysis program, showed that broad psychological language categories are related to Neuroticism. For example, they found that when writing about thoughts
and feelings, high Neurotics use more negative emotion words and fewer positive emotion words, along
with other features in their factor ‘Immediacy’.
Using multiple regression analysis, we have uncovered characteristic language usage patterns for
Neuroticism in our e-mail corpus. Table 1 shows the
results of these analyses, using LIWC data (Pennebaker and King, 1999), psycholinguistic properties from derived from the Medical Research Council
(MRC) Psycholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1987),
and a measure of lexical diversity, type-token ratio
(TTR) (Bradac, 1990). (See also Gill and Oberlander, prep, for more details.)

458

Materials
Selection of Target Texts The target e-mail
texts were selected from data previously collected
(see Gill and Oberlander, 2002, for further details).
These texts were composed ‘to a good friend’ to ensure they elicited a naturalistic expression of personality. Only the 105 ‘past’ texts, detailing recent
activities, were considered since these were generally slightly longer (each approximating 10 minutes
of written communication; cf. Blackman, 2002). Six
texts were chosen to represent a range of scores from
the Extraversion, Neuroticism, and Psychoticism dimensions. Extreme high and low personality scores
were deemed to be those greater than 1 standard deviation of the mean (Dewaele and Pavlenko, 2002),
and two texts represented each of these. Additionally, two further texts were selected—one above and
below the mean—to represent less extreme realisa-

tions of the trait (each between .5 and 1 s.d. of the
mean). In each case, the scores for the other personality dimensions were controlled for, being < ±1 s.d.
of the mean (in most cases < ±.5 s.d.). This resulted
in 6 texts for each dimension. Each e-mail text was
anonymised by name substitution before use in the
experiment.
Subjective Rating Methods Descriptions of the
personality dimensions were presented to the participants before rating of the e-mail texts. These
were taken from Eysenck and Eysenck (1991) (with
minor re-wording to enhance general intelligibility),
and participants were informed that they could refer back to them at any point during the experiment. Although it is more usual to rate personality
using a standard set of personality questions, Sneed,
McCrae, and Funder (1998) have found that ‘most
laypersons can easily grasp the nature of the factors
and their behavioural manifestations and can spontaneously recognise their grouping when presented
with clear exemplars’.
Each text was followed by a set of questions, with
answers rated on a scale of 1–10, as follows. (i)
How Extravert (or Emotionally Stable, or Toughminded1 ) is the author of the e-mail? (ii) How easy
was it to judge the author’s personality? (iii) How
informative were Topic, Vocabulary, and Style in
judging personality? (iv) How similar is the author’s
personality to your own? Finally, subjects supplied
5 words describing the author’s personality.

Procedure
Upon commencing the experiment, subjects were
given a rating booklet prefixed with written instructions explaining that the experiment was investigating how author personality can be perceived through
e-mail texts. It was emphasised that they should
answer honestly and accurately, not spend too long
thinking about each question, and instead concentrate on giving their initial response.
The target e-mail texts (described above) were
then presented in random order within their representative dimension. Each set of dimension texts
(P, E, or N) were presented using a Latin square
technique to avoid ordering effects.
Following the rating of the texts, participants were
asked to confirm that they are Native English Speakers, detail their experience of personality psychology, and rate their previous experience using e-mail.
Participants were then asked to complete EPQ-R
and NEO-PI personality questionnaires (both short
forms), before being debriefed about the experiment.
1

The terms ‘Emotional Stability’ and ‘Toughmindedness’ have been used in preference to Neuroticism and Psychoticism when discussing these traits with
participants (cf. Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991).

459

Table 2: Summary of inter-judge agreement.
Trait

Target-rater
Aggr. rs

Extraversion
Neuroticism

Inter-rater
Mean rs s.d.

.89*
−.29

.48
.31

.17
.16

Note: Target-rater = correlation of target self-reports
and rater judgement; Inter-rater = correlation of rater
judgements with each other. Aggregate correlation is
calculated from 30 raters. Mean rs is the mean correlation across all raters. *p < .05, two-tailed.

Table 3: Summary of similarity ratings.
Rater
group

High trait texts
n
U
p

High E
vs Low E

42
47

High N
vs Low N

33
56

647
813

Low trait texts
n
U
p

.005

42
47

941

.702

.341

32
57

732.5

.121

Note: Observations (n) vary due to missing cases.

Results
For clarity here we discuss only the results for
texts contrasted on the Extraversion and Neuroticism scales, and we focus on the subjective ratings
and similarity ratings for these texts. Spearman correlation of target personality scores and subjective
ratings aggregated across the 30 judges is shown in
the second column of Table 2. Inter-rater agreement,
and standard deviation, are shown in the following
columns; these are calculated from the mean of each
rater’s mean Spearman correlation with each of the
other raters. Since this is a mean correlation, no
significance value is shown. For a description and
discussion of further results, see Gill and Oberlander (2003).
Table 3 shows the Mann-Whitney U-tests (twotailed) calculated from the similarity ratings for the
judges grouped by High and Low Neuroticism and
Extraversion for the texts grouped by these categories. Examination of the means for the High and
Low Extraverts rating High Extravert texts, shows
that the High Extraverts do indeed rate themselves
as significantly more similar (5.71; s.d.= 1.92 vs
4.65; s.d.= 1.89).
Although not significant, the next strongest difference is found between the High and Low Neurotic
similarity ratings of Low Neurotic texts. Comparison of the means shows that it is the High—rather
than Low—Neurotic raters who see themselves as
most similar to the Low Neurotic e-mail authors
(5.00; s.d. = 2.17 and 4.34; s.d. = 2.09, respectively).

Discussion
Before discussing the subjective ratings in detail, it
should be noted that there is a much greater level of
target-rater agreement, than inter-rater agreement,
for judgements of Extraversion.

Part of this increased agreement for target-rater
judgements can be explained by the use of aggregated scores across raters. This is because they may
‘reflect more accurately the consensus of how an individual is viewed’. The high number of raters (30)
for each target apparently contributes towards the
good agreement (cf. McCrae and Costa, 1987). In
fact, even without aggregation of judgements before
correlation (ie. calculating the mean across each
rater’s correlation with the target), the same pattern is still preserved (mean rs E= .64; N= −.02).

Subjective Ratings
In the case of inter-rater judgements, both Extraversion and Neuroticism show a level of agreement
greater than .3, which is regarded as the lower level
of acceptability within personality research (McCrae
and Costa, 1987). In Neuroticism’s case, this level is
only just reached; by contrast, Extraversion shows
much greater agreement between judges.
In the case of target-rater judgements, however,
there is a greater discrepancy between the traits.
Extraversion shows a strong, significant, positive
correlation, while Neuroticism shows a relatively
weak, non-significant, negative relationship.

Similarity Judgements
The similarity ratings show that only the High and
Low Extraverts rate their similarity to the High Extravert texts significantly differently. This confirms
the observability of Extravert behaviour—even in an
asynchronous CMC environment. Furthermore, this
also lends some support to Funder’s (1995) claim
that Extraverts may make more accurate judges of
personality—at least for Extraversion.
The tendency of High Neurotic judges to rate
themselves similar to Low Neurotic authors contributes further towards the confused picture that
exists for ratings of Neuroticism. Indeed, it may
well be the High Neurotic raters who are clouding
the picture for ratings of Neuroticism as a whole.

Interpretation
Taking these results together, the picture for Extraversion seems relatively clear. There is a high
level of agreement between judges, and the judges
tend to agree with the targets themselves. It seems
safe to conclude that writers of e-mail messages do
betray their level of Extraversion through their linguistic choices; and readers of e-mail messages can
reliably infer the author’s level of Extraversion from
the text alone. This supports previous findings from
the literature for well-acquainted raters (Gomà-iFreixanet, 1997; McCrae and Costa, 1987), zeroacquaintance raters (Gifford and Hine, 1994; Albright et al., 1988), and in computer-mediated communication (eg. Markey and Wells, 2002).
In the rating of Neuroticism, there was a low but
evident level of agreement between judges, but not

460

between judges and targets. This follows a trend
of lower agreement for Neuroticism than for Extraversion found more generally (Colvin and Funder, 1991; Kolar et al., 1996). However, this lack
of perception ability appears particularly acute for
zero-acquaintance (Gifford and Hine, 1994; Albright
et al., 1988) or CMC (Markey and Wells, 2002;
Hancock and Dunham, 2001). Indeed, the fact
that raters agreed amongst themselves for the ratings of Neuroticism appears to mirror Markey and
Wells’s (2002) findings for Agreeableness, since despite inter-rater agreement, they were unable to find
target-rater agreement. Since raters were in a cueimpoverished environment, this may have resulted
in their relying upon cues—apparently stereotypical
of the trait—but inappropriate (Scherer, 1972).
The similarity ratings confirm the observability
of particularly high Extravert authored texts, and
also point to the expertise of Extraverted raters.
Both subjective and similarity results for Neuroticism point to confusion on the whole, and possible
distortion of this trait on the part of high Neurotic
raters (Funder, 1995). Given the findings of John
and Robbins (1993) regarding the role of evaluativeness in the assessment of this trait, caution may be
advisable in the subjective personality rating of Neuroticism (note, however this effect was not present
for another highly evaluative trait, Psychoticism; cf.
Sneed et al., 1998).
To summarise the position on Neuroticism, we return to Funder’s Realistic Accuracy Model. There
is no reason to consider that we had bad targets
on this dimension; deception would have been revealed in the EPQ-R Lie Scale. In general, we do
not have bad judges; they agreed with targets and
each other when rating Extraversion. It is however,
possible that highly Neurotic authors linguistically
conceal the full extent of their Neuroticism and this
would tend to lower its visibility. This may have led
to the confusion of highly Neurotic judges in ratings of similarity. So, in fact the main difficulty
seems to be that Neuroticism is a bad trait. It is
held to be high in evaluativeness, and low in visibility. Our study has provided evidence that the
trait affects the form of the e-mail texts. But the
evidence is in terms of the concreteness of language,
or in repetitiveness. While these may cause unconscious reactions in judges, the latter appear unable—
or unwilling—to recruit them in their judgements.

Conclusion
We have shown that at zero-acquaintance, people
are able to take asynchronous communication, and
are still able to subjectively rate the degree of Extraversion of the author. There is also a relatively
high level of agreement between judges in rating the
target. In the case of Neuroticism, raters show a
reasonable level of agreement with each other, but
their perceptions of Neuroticism do not appear to

match up with the targets’ self reports. So the asynchronous nature of e-mail seems to exacerbate the
differences in the perception of personality traits.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Elizabeth Austin and our anonymous reviewers for comments. This work was supported by
the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
and the Economic and Social Research Council, UK.

References
Albright, L., Kenny, D., and Malloy, T. (1988). Consensus in personality judgements at zero acquaintance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55(3), 387–395.
Baron, N. (1998). Letters by phone or speech by
other means: the linguistics of email. Language
and Communication, 18, 133–170.
Berry, D., Pennebaker, J., Mueller, J., and Hiller,
W. (1997). Linguistic bases of social perception.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23,
526–537.
Blackman, M. (2002). The employment interview
via the telephone: Are we sacrificing accurate personality judgements for cost efficiency. Journal of
Research in Personality, 36, 208–223.
Bradac, J. (1990). Language attitudes and impression formation. In H. Giles and W. Robinson, editors, Handbook of Language and Social Psychology, pages 387–412. Wiley, Chichester.
Cheng, Y., O’Toole, A., and Abdi, H. (2001). Classifying adults’ and children’s faces by sex: Computational investigations of subcategorial feature
encoding. Cognitive Science, 25, 819–838.
Colvin, C. and Funder, D. (1991). Predicting personality and behaviour: A boundary on the acquaintance effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 884–894.
Costa, P. and McCrae, R. R. (1992). NEO PI-R
Professional Manual . Psychological Assessment
Resources, Odessa, Florida.
Dewaele, J.-M. and Pavlenko, A. (2002). Emotion
vocabulary in interlanguage. Language Learning,
52, 265–324.
Eysenck, H. and Eysenck, S. (1991). The Eysenck
Personality Questionnaire-Revised . Hodder and
Stoughton, Sevenoaks.
Funder, D. C. (1995). On the accuracy of personality
judgement: A realistic approach. Psychological
Review , 102, 652–670.
Furnham, A. (1990). Language and personality. In
H. Giles and W. Robinson, editors, Handbook of
Language and Social Psychology, pages 73–95. Wiley, Chichester.
Gifford, R. and Hine, D. W. (1994). The role of
verbal behaviour in the encoding and decoding of

461

interpersonal dispositions. Journal of Research in
Personality, 28, 115–132.
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (2002). Taking care of
the linguistic features of extraversion. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 363–368.
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (2003). Rating e-mail extraversion at zero acquaintance. In Proceedings of
the 11th Biennial Meeting of the International Society for the Study of Individual Differences, Graz,
Austria July 13-17, 2003 .
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (in prep.). Dictionary
approaches to personality language. in prep.
Gomà-i-Freixanet, M. (1997). Consensus validity of
the EPQ: Self-reports and spouse-reports. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 13(3),
179–185.
Hancock, J. and Dunham, P. (2001). Impression
formation in computer-mediated communication.
Communication Research, 28, 325–347.
John, O. and Robbins, R. (1993). Determinants
of interjudge agreement: The Big Five domains,
observability, evaluativeness, and the unique perspective of the self. J. Personality, 61, 521–551.
Kolar, D., Funder, D., and Colvin, C. (1996). Comparing the accuracy of personality judgements by
the self and knowledgeable others. J. Personality,
64, 311–337.
Markey, P. and Wells, S. (2002). Interpersonal perception in internet chat rooms. Journal of Research in Personality, 36, 134–146.
McCrae, R. and Costa, P. (1987). Validation of the
five-factor model of personality across instruments
and observers. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52, 81–90.
Mount, M., Barrick, M., and Stewart, G. (1998).
Five-factor model of personality and performance
in jobs involving interpersonal interactions. Human Performance, 11, 145–165.
Nass, C., Moon, Y., Fogg, B., and Reeves, B. (1995).
Can computer personalities be human personalities? Int J Human-Computer Studies, 43, 223–
239.
Pennebaker, J. W. and King, L. (1999). Linguistic
styles: Language use as an individual difference.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
1296–1312.
Scherer, K. (1972). Judging personality from voice:
A cross-cultural approach to an old issue in interpersonal perception. J. Personality, 40, 191–210.
Sneed, C., McCrae, R., and Funder, D. (1998). Lay
conceptions of the Five-Factor Model and its indicators. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 115–126.
Wilson, M. (1987). MRC psycholinguistic database:
Machine usable dictionary. Technical report, Oxford Text Archive, Oxford.

