UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Polynesian Tapu in the ‘Deontic Square’: A Cognitive Concept, its Linguistic Expression
and Cultural Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5920r2t8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Bender, Andrea
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Polynesian Tapu in the ‘Deontic Square’:
A Cognitive Concept, its Linguistic Expression and Cultural Context
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
The Polynesian concept of tapu, introduced into European languages as ‘taboo’, is the most salient example of
a deontic concept in Tonga. In order to examine whether
tapu and its related concepts reflect cross-cultural equivalences, we pursue a comparative approach that is conceptually grounded in the ‘deontic square’. By analyzing
preferences for linguistic expressions, implications of
grammar, and the traditional cultural context, we found
remarkable similarities on a structural level. The most
significant difference lies in the concept of agency, which
is more prevalent in ‘Western’ than in Tongan culture.

Introduction
In several Indo-European languages, we use ‘taboo’ if
we want to indicate that something is absolutely forbidden in a sense that it is not to be touched, not even with
words. Despite its current familiarity, ‘taboo’ is a loanword from a Polynesian language, introduced in the second half of the 18th century by Captain James Cook
(Lehmann, 1930). Particularly in Tonga, an island Kingdom in the Southwestern Pacific, tapu was traditionally
so salient a concept that it managed to attract the attention of most early visitors (e.g., Martin, 1991). Our contemporary frequent use of this term may suggest that we
have captured its meaning and that it was conceptually
compatible with our own notion of prohibition, while
also adding a certain quality (i.e., intensity) to it.
However, the term ‘tapu’1 contained a much broader
spectrum of meanings than was realized even by Cook
himself (Lehmann, 1930). Being a very attentive
observer, he conceded not to fully understand the variety
of situations it referred to. Why, for instance, should it
be absolutely forbidden for a boy to touch his father’s
head? This leaves us with the central question of how
the Polynesian tapu fits into our concept of prohibition
or, more generally, into a deontic system of social rules.
1

Terms and their translations will be given in ‘single quotation marks’. Tongan terms are translated according to
Churchward (1959), but are restricted as often as possible
to an -ing form conveying the central idea. A straight quotation mark ' signifies a glottal stop, a dash on top of a vowel
indicates length (as in ‘faka'ata’). Tongan concepts will be
put in italics; sentences with numbers will remain
unmarked, irrespective of language.

133

Social rules are at the core of living together in social
groups. Their objective is to restrict the freedom of individuals to do as they please in favor of group interests.
Often, although not always, they try to facilitate cooperation and smooth relationships by indicating what is
permitted and what is forbidden in interaction. The
whole set of social rules in a society constitutes an
essential part of what defines a particular culture and
distinguishes it from others. With regard to content, we
assume nearly infinite variety. However, the basic concepts, such as obligation and ban, should be comparable
across cultures, at least to a certain degree.
In general, social rules are specified by the parties
involved, by the constraints they set or remove, and by
their semantic content. At least two parties should be
identifiable: an authority who establishes, modifies, or
lifts a rule, and those who are subject to the rule, that is,
whose behavior is accordingly restricted – in linguistic
terms: agent and patient.
In English (and German) verbal constructions these
two roles can be expressed in different ways. In transitive constructions such as
(1) David forbids Mary to tell the story
the agent of the ban (David) is grammatically reflected
as subject, while the patient (Mary) is the grammatical
object. Although these roles can be converted if the verb
is reversed into its passive form, agent and patient are
still clearly identifiable:
(1a) Mary was forbidden by David to tell the story.
In modal constructions using deontic operators such as
‘must’ or ‘may’, however, these roles themselves are
affected. Here, the patient of the rule turns not only into
a grammatical subject, but also into the apparent agent
of the phrase, whereas the agent of the rule disappears:
(2) Mary must not tell the story.
The Polynesian language spoken in Tonga differs
from English with regard to the fact that modal verbs do
not exist and that there is not even a clear boundary
between word categories such as verbs or nouns (Broschart, 1997). In addition, Tongan has an ergative alignment (Dixon, 1994; Tchekhoff, 1979): transitive phrases
are not primarily based on a subject-object distinction
but rather topicalize the event or the patient of an action.

This raises the following questions: How are deontic
concepts such as ban and obligation lexicalised in Tongan? What characteristics emerge from differences in
grammar and syntactical structure? How do these differences reflect the relationship between the deontic concepts and between agent and patient? Our paper
primarily aims to analyze the deontic system in Tongan
language and culture and its equivalence with that in
other languages. We start by specifying ban, obligation,
permission, and release and by showing that these concepts and their relations have psychological reality as
mental models. We will then look at their linguistic
expression, comparing it with two Indo-European languages (English and German). In order to understand
some of the peculiarities of their use in a traditional
Polynesian society, we will finally take into consideration the cultural origins and consequences of tapu in
Tonga.

The Cognitive Concepts
In order to compare deontic concepts cross-culturally, a
set of structural features is required to define these concepts and to check equivalences (cf. Wierzbicka, 1992).
Among these could be the number of and the relation
between deontic concepts as well as the implications
they have. With regard to social norms, four deontic
concepts are typically distinguished: ban, obligation,
permission and release (from obligation). They can be
arranged in a so-called “deontic square of opposition”
(see Figure 1), going back to the Greek philosopher
Aristotle. The square defines relations between all pairs
(cf. Anderson, 1956), which must hold in a consistent
system of norms.
First, ban and obligation form a pair of contraries: at
most only one of them may be in effect at any time since
it is not possible for an action to be forbidden and obligatory simultaneously. This corresponds with our intuition that social rules must allow either an action to be
taken or to be omitted. Further, ban and obligation are
interchangeable concepts. To be obligated to take an
action, for example, implies that the omission of the
action is forbidden. Second, ban and permission on the
left side of the square, and obligation and release on the
right are pairs of contradictories. Exactly one of each

pair is true in a particular situation: an action is either
forbidden or allowed, and either obligatory or not.
Third, from the contrary relation we know that a banned
action cannot be obligatory. Instead its omission must be
possible, that is, the action need not be done. Conversely, if an action is obligatory, then it cannot be
banned but must be permitted. Along the diagonals of
the square the top thus implies the bottom. These pairs
are called subalterns. Finally, the concepts at the bottom
of the square form a pair of subcontraries: at least one
of them holds in each situation – an action may be taken
if there is no ban, or it needs not to be taken if it is not
obligatory – or both if no social rule at all is imposed.
Assuming that human behavior is socially unregulated
in its ‘natural state’, ban and obligation appear to be the
basic rules. Formulated as social norms, their main
objective is to impose behavioral constraints that hold
under certain conditions for certain people. Setting a
norm thus requires two roles and a certain content,
reflected linguistically in a three-place predicate:
(3)

CAUSE-OBLIGE

(x,y,p) [ag(x) ∧ pat(y[+anim]) ∧ p]

This predicate includes an agent (ag), a patient (pat),
and the proposition (p) that is the topic of the rule (cf.
Abraham, 2001). Note that while the patient is supposed
to be animate, the agent need not be. In addition to their
role as patients of a rule, people may also appear as
agents with regard to the action constrained. In this role
they need to know which behavioral constraints are
implied by norms, that is, they need to infer what they
‘must’ or ‘may’ do in a particular situation.
Psychological experiments on deontic reasoning show
that people, irrespective of language or culture, have a
clear understanding of the social norms resulting, for
instance, from promises or threats (Beller, Bender &
Kuhnmünch, in prep.). People are also very accurate in
detecting rule violations (e.g., Beller, 2001; Cosmides,
1989; Holyoak & Cheng, 1995) and in inferring what
must or may be done according to a given norm (Beller,
2003). These latter empirical findings suggest that people build mental models of social norms and use their
implications flexibly and in accordance with the deontic
square. It thus seems justified to use this square as a conceptual basis for analyzing how deontic concepts are
reflected in different linguistic systems.

Linguistic Expressions

subalterns

Permission
subcontraries

In most Indo-European languages (such as English and
German), social rules can be expressed as referring to
the deontic concept itself (e.g., ‘ban’/‘Verbot’) or to the
act of posing them (‘to forbid’/‘verbieten’). In addition,
modals can be used to express their implications and
focus on the person to whom a rule applies (‘somebody
must not do something’/‘jemand darf etwas nicht tun’).
Not all of these expressions, however, can be formulated
in other languages, particularly with modal verbs. Even
when comparing them in related languages such as
English and German, differences become obvious.

Obligation
contradictories

contradictories

Ban

contraries

Release

Figure 1: The deontic square of opposition.

134

Modal Verbs in German and English

Table 2: Prohibiting in German, English, and Tongan.

Although modals in English and German derive from a
common source, their present day usage differs with
regard to at least two aspects (Abraham, 2001): contrary
to English, German modals have retained their categorial polyfunctionality (as epistemics and deontics) and
in particular their full deontic root load. In English, only
‘must’ and partly ‘may’ are still used deontically, but
even these are increasingly substituted by ‘have to’ and
‘be permitted to’. When negated, modals switch differently (see Table 1): in English, the stronger rules obligation and ban are expressed with the same word, namely
‘must’ (negated in the second case), while the weaker
rules permission and release take different terms: ‘may’
and ‘need not’. In German, mutually exclusive rules are
expressed with one term each: obligation and release
with ‘müssen’, permission and ban with ‘dürfen’ (both
negated in the second case).
The crossing of terms for concepts focuses on different aspects of the square: the choice of one term for contrary concepts in English indicates a focus on the
necessity implied by the rule, while in German same
terms are used for contradicting pairs as the preferred
relation. The crossing may also be due to a difference in
scope. In German, the modal is under the scope of the
negation – the deontic rule itself is then negated:
(4) Er muß gehen [It is necessary that he goes]. —
Er muß nicht gehen [It is not necessary that he goes].
In English, it rather seems as if the negation were under
the scope of the modal verb, for instance:
(5) He must go [It is necessary that he goes]. —
He must not go [It is necessary that he does not go].
Differences in the expression of deontic concepts may
be even more salient when crossing the boundary of language families and looking at equivalents in Tongan.

German
verbieten
verboten
Verbot

English

{
{

to forbid
to prohibit
forbidden
prohibited
ban

Tongan

}

tapui

}

tapu
('ikai ngofua)

The concept of ban is expressed with the adjective/intransitive verb/noun ‘tapu’. The original meaning
of ‘tapu’ included, among other things, ‘prohibiting, forbidden, unlawful, sacred, holy’:
(6) 'Oku tapu ['a] e 'alu ta'e kofu ['i] he hala 'i Tonga.
(lit. ‘It is forbidden the going without clothing on a
road in Tonga.’)
Although formulations with tapu are perfectly acceptable, many Tongans seem to prefer indirect formulations
with the negated contradictory ‘'ikai ngofua’:
(6a) He 'ikai ngofua ['a] e 'alu ta'e kofu ['i] he hala 'i
Tonga.
(lit. ‘It is not allowed the going without clothing on
a road in Tonga.’)
This may be due to the fact that in certain contexts
‘tapu’ is regarded as too strong. Deontically, however,
both formulations are equivalent. The act of posing a
ban can be expressed, for instance, by adding the suffix i
for transitive verbs, thus obtaining ‘tapui’ (‘to forbid’).
Despite the grammatical differences between both
languages, the rule and its posing can be translated without major divergence (see Table 2). What cannot be
made analogously in Tongan is the construction with a
modal verb. The English modal phrase

Deontic Concepts in Tongan

(7) The boy must not touch his father’s head

With regard to the concepts themselves and the act of
posing them, Tongan offers apparently similar options
for phrasing, with the exception that nouns and verbs
overlap to a certain degree (Broschart, 1997). Modal
verbs, however, do not exist, and in order to express the
implication for the person to whom a rule applies, one
needs to use indirect constructions.

will again be translated with reference to the concept:

Table 1: Deontic modals in English and German (the
diverging distribution of ‘must’/‘müssen’ regarding
strong vs. weak formulation is highlighted).
English
formulation positive

German

negative

positive

negative

strong

must

must not

müssen

nicht dürfen

weak

may

need not

dürfen

nicht müssen

(7a) He 'ikai ngofua ke ala ['a] e tamasi'i ki he 'ulu 'o
'ene tamaí.
(lit. ‘It is not allowed that is being touched by the
boy [to] the head of his father.’)
(7) and (7a) differ not only according to the use or lack
of modals, but also with regard to word order, relationship between agent and patient, and its ergative construction. Before we highlight these differences in the
next section, let us briefly look at the other deontic concepts: permission, obligation, and release (see Table 3).
The term that fits best as the opposite or, more precise,
as the contradictory of ‘tapu’ is ‘ngofua’:
(8) 'E ngofua pe ke ke va'inga, kaikehe, 'e 'ikai ngofua
ke ke ngaue ['i] he 'aho Sapaté.
(lit. ‘It is allowed that you play, however, it is not
allowed that you work on a Sunday.’)

135

Table 3: Tongan Deontic Terms.

English

Tongan

Act of
Posing Rule

Implication

ban

tapu

tapui

tapu / 'ikai ngofua

permission

ngofua

fakangofua

ngofua

obligation

fatongia

fakamo'ua /
fakafatongia

kuo pau ke

ries are used as equivalents, as when terms used for bans
(‘'ikai ngofua’) explicitly refer to the permission concept; in other cases semantic connections do exist. And
the term for release (‘faka'ata’), with its connotation
‘free from any rule’, expands into the sphere of permission. It is remarkable that even without polyfunctional
modals, most equivalent expressions in Tonga carry the
semantic polyfunctionality of deontic and epistemic
reading as well, particularly ‘ngofua’ and ‘pau’.

release

faka'ata

tuku'ange

'ikai fiema'u

Agent and Patient

Deontic Concept/Rule

The transitive verb in the sense of ‘allowing’ is derived
by affixing faka- as in the following example:
(9) 'Oku fakangofua 'e Tevita 'a Mele ke ne fakahoko
['a] e talanoá.
(‘David allows Mary to tell the story.’)
While in general, ngofua is the opposite of tapu in a
contradictory pair, a second type of permission is lexicalised. Distinguished from a state in which something is
usually allowed (ngofua) is the state where something
was forbidden before but from which the ban has been
removed. In this second case, the proper term depends
on the particular tapu removed – ‘fu'ia’, for instance, is
used for removing tapu five days after a funeral, ‘fu'ipa’
for the same act after ten days, and ‘fakamalele’ refers
to lifting all restrictions imposed after a death.
Permission can also be indicated by the term
‘faka'ata’, which denotes ‘removing restrictions, permitting, allowing’. It also means ‘removing any rules at all’
and thus has a close connection to the release concept.
Two words exist for ‘obligation’, depending on the
context or connotation. The first, ‘mo'ua’, refers to
‘being encumbered, busy, or indebted’, while the second, ‘fatongia’, is an obligation in the sense of duty.
Although ‘fatongia’ would be the preferred term,
‘mo'ua’ contributes to derived forms of obligation as
well, such as ‘fakamo'ua’ (‘to obligate’). An interesting
connotation of ‘mo'ua’ is ‘suffering as the result of
breaking a prohibition’. In order to express implications
from the rule (corresponding to a modal phrase), a
change in terms is required from ‘fatongia’ to ‘pau’:
(10) Kuo pau ke u 'alu.
(‘I must go’, lit. ‘It has been decided that I go.’)
Basically carrying the epistemic meaning ‘certain,
decided, necessary, inevitable’, pau is also used to help
convey the deontic sense of ‘must’. In addition, sentences with pau can be phrased in correspondence to a
negation of the English type (resulting in a ban), as in:
(11) Kuo pau ke 'oua te tau fai ha me'a pehe.
(‘We must not do any such thing’,
i.e., ‘We must refrain from doing any such thing.’)
To sum up, the Tongan deontic terms are indeed
related to each other in accordance with the relationship
defined within the deontic square: negated contradicto-

136

While the phrasing of deontic concepts and rules and the
act of posing these rules can be carried out correspondingly in Tongan (yet with semantically conditioned
exceptions), one particular transformation cannot be
made analogously, and that refers to modals. If we
return to (7) and (7a), we can elucidate significant differences between English modal phrases and their Tongan equivalents.
Assuming, as does the Tongan scholar Futa Helu, that
“the earlier the position of an idea in the normal syntax
of sentences the more important it is” (1999, p. 189), we
can conclude that English (and German) put considerable emphasis on the actor, while in Tongan the action
itself is more significant. As indicated by the word order
in (7a), the focus here would thus be on the concept
itself (i.e., on the ban) and on the action that is forbidden
rather than on the person – either agent or patient. In
English (7), the focus is at least as much on the patient
(the one to whom the rule applies) as it is on the rule
itself.
This focus is further reflected in the predominantly
ergative alignment of Tongan. An ergative construction
gives prominence to topic or event rather than subject
(cf. Duranti, 1994; Tchekhoff, 1979). The focus of Tongan phrases thus remains on the rule, whereas in English
– with the choice of a rule formulation, as in (1), or its
modal implication (2) – one of either parties of the rule
(agent or patient) will be focused upon. The construction with a modal verb transforms the patient of a rule,
for instance the boy in (7), into the subject (and agent)
of the implication phrase. In Tongan (7a), on the other
hand, the boy is not the subject, but the agent of an
action that is the topic of the rule. Consequently, while
Indo-European languages (at least English and German)
tend to focus on single persons as agents or patients,
Tongan formulations, with the prominence they give to
topic, rather reflect certain aspects of a situation.
However, more than the linguistic expression, it is the
rule itself that topicalizes relation. We therefore need to
turn to the cultural context in order to gain a full comprehension.

Cultural Context
If we wish to understand tapu as the defining rule of the
Tongan deontic system, we need to look more thoroughly at its religious origins and social consequences.

Origins and Consequences of Tapu
The term ‘tapu’ means ‘forbidden or prohibited’ and is
still widely used in this sense today. Traditionally, however, its semantics included also, and essentially,
‘sacredness’ – a meaning that at first glance seems
incompatible with our notion of prohibition (cf. Shore,
1989). The ‘Tohi Tapu’ (the Bible) is the ‘holy book’
rather than the ‘forbidden book’; yet the latter would
have to be translated in just the same way, as ‘tohi tapu’.
Something being tapu in the sense of ‘forbidden’ was
rather a consequence of its being sacred, that is, loaded
with the supernatural power mana. Mana, a core concept of Polynesian worldview, contained a broad spectrum of meanings: it implied or induced prestige,
influence, supernatural power, or luck. It could be
loaded like energy and was attributed to people, animals, things, or actions. With people, it was particularly
the higher ranking who were endowed with mana (Lehmann, 1930). The contact between people of different
rank was regarded as dangerous for both sides and therefore strictly regulated by avoidance rules, the tapu
(Shore, 1989).
This connection between mana and tapu explains why
two types of permission needed to be distinguished: one
generally permissible (ngofua) and one permissible after
the removal of restrictions. The first category concerned
the sphere of little mana, thus not dangerous for anybody, while the second category was marked by great
mana and therefore first needed to be de-sacralized.
Several tapu applied, for instance, during times of death
and funeral (particularly prone to mana), others during
pregnancy and lactation. Most tapu, however, were concerned with social contact (Gifford, 1929; Lehmann,
1930; Shore, 1989).
According to the Tongan fahu principle, sisters are
higher in rank ('eiki) than their brothers, older people are
higher than younger people, and nobles are higher than
commoners. Among the relationships restricted by tapu
were therefore those between brothers and sisters,
between women and their sisters-in-law, and in particular between fathers and their children. The restraint that
marks their relationship involves physical separation:
children were not allowed to sit in their father’s lap, use
his belongings, eat his leftover food or, as stated in the
introductory example, touch his head (Gifford, 1929;
Morton, 1996). The latter example is prototypical for
the protecting objective of many tapu by preventing the
most dangerous act: to touch the head where mana is
concentrated.

Agent and Patient in Tongan Tapu
Not only was mana the legitimation of a tapu, it was
also its source and, in a sense, even its agent. Although
in certain cases a tapu could be imposed by religious
specialists, the causative force lay in the tapu itself. A
tapu thus did not need to be looked after by any kind of
authority, but was regarded as being capable of protecting itself (Lehmann, 1930; Martin, 1991). Conse-

137

quently, the Tongan language provides a number of
terms for consequences of breaking a tapu: ‘fula’, for
instance, denotes the swelling up as the result of eating
food left over by a chief; ‘hangatamaki’ refers to an
abscess or carbuncle caused by breaking a tapu on a
tree; and scented oil was considered to be spoilt (‘talai’)
if the woman preparing it had broken a tapu.
With regard to the structure for social rules (3), a Tongan phrase always retains the predicate pattern: the commonly known source of tapu used to be the obliging part
or agent, the proposition is the restricted action, and the
patient are those to whom this restriction applies (usually lower ranking people). Therefore, in a sentence
such as
(12) 'Oku tapu ke ala ['a] e tamasi'i ki he 'ulu 'o 'ene
tamaí.
(lit. ‘It is tapu that is being touched by the boy [to]
the head of his father.’)
the agent of the tapu is mana, possessed by the father
and concentrated in his head, whereas the topic of the
tapu is the restricted action, and the person who would
be the agent of this action, namely the boy, is the (only
implicit) patient. In the English modal equivalent (7) the
party imposing the rule completely disappears. Agreeing with Abraham (2001, p.19f.) that root modals are
causatives involving at least a covert agent, we would
thus argue that this agent is responsible for the obligation. Instead, the subject (the boy) is suggested to be
responsible as agent. Even when retranslating the Tongan phrase into:
(13) It is not allowed that the boy touches his father’s head.
it still seems plausible that the ban has more to do with
the boy than anything regarding the father or his head.
Summing up the relationship between Tongan deontic
concepts, both ban and permission had to do with mana:
having mana made sacred and thus required avoidance
(both aspects of tapu); equal or low mana did not and
resulted in ngofua. As with tapu, the obligation fatongia
resulted from a difference in rank: traditionally, fatongia
denoted the enforced labor of commoners for chiefs, but
its meaning has extended to the duties and correct
behavior in social relations, including attitudes and
emotions such as obedience, love ('ofa), or respect
(Morton, 1996). Accordingly, agent of the fatongia were
the high ranking.2
2

Taking into consideration the relational information hidden
in Tongan possessive classes supports this interpretation.
All words to which a possessive can be applied belong to
either the 'e- or ho-class. As Bennardo (2000) showed, this
distinction reflects the direction of the relationship: originating from the possessor ('e-class) vs. towards the possessor (ho-class). Accordingly, ‘hoku fatongia’ (‘my duty’)
is conceived of as the duty imposed on me while ‘'eku tapu’
(‘my ban’) rather refers to an intrinsic feature or internalized duty. The agent of the rule would thus need no further
expression.

Discussion
When the term ‘taboo’ entered the vocabulary of European languages, it was used in the sense of ‘strictly forbidden’, and lacked the notion of ‘sacred’ that was an
essential part of the Polynesian concept of tapu. With
the increasing influence and success of Christian missionaries during the 19th century, this religiously motivated use of the term even diminished in Tonga itself.
And although some of the old tapu are still in practice,
most are not. The head tapu, for instance – preventing
the dangerous contact of lower-ranking children with
the mana concentrated in their father’s head – is adhered
to by less and less families (Morton, 1996). Although
tapu no longer implies sacredness in its practical use, its
semantic load still conveys this reading, and people hesitate to call a prohibition a tapu if they consider the term
too strong or not appropriate in a profane context. In
various cases (cf. 6a and 8) a paraphrase is preferred,
nowadays even for the head tapu (7a).
Despite this additional reading, the deontic concepts
expressed in English and Tongan are comparable and fit
equally well into the deontic square. They differ, however, with regard to the ranking of action over actor and
of patient over agent. If grammar is seen as an index of
culture that “represents standardized judgments or conventions on the environment” and that “reveals a charter
of morality […], i.e. a set of rules or beliefs for behavior
of the people who speak a language” (Helu, 1999,
p. 188; see also Duranti, 1994), then these linguistic
characteristics of Tongan should reveal at least a certain
concept of agency. If this is the case, it should also have
consequences on more complex cognitive processes, for
instance on attribution patterns, on emotion-eliciting
appraisals, or on conflict management.
The question of psychological reality still remains
open. Whether these differences do mould deontic mental models or the perception of agency and how they
relate to actual behavior has to be accounted for empirically. Some findings from previous research on a different topic indicate that people in Tonga tend not to hold
agents as responsible for action outcomes as those in
Western cultures do. Instead, they seem to make stronger attributions to situational factors than personal ones
and also appear to react with anger less often than Europeans (Beller, Bender & Kuhnmünch, in prep.). Eventually conflicts are reduced (Bender, 2001) – and that may
very well be due to the fact that people are less often
topicalized as agents in daily talk.
Acknowledgments We are grateful to Sione Faka'osi for
being a patient and never-failing source of information and
to Giovanni Bennardo and Stefan Wahl for discussion and
valuable comments. We dedicate this paper to Hans Spada
who provided the space for this convergence of ideas.

References
Abraham, W. (2001). Modals: toward explaining the
‘epistemic non-finiteness gap’. In R. Müller, & M.

138

Reis (Eds.), Modalität und Modalverben im Deutschen. Hamburg: Buske.
Anderson, A. R. (1956). The formal analysis of normative systems. In N. Rescher (Ed.), The logic of decision
and action. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Beller, S. (2001). A model theory of deontic reasoning
about social norms. In J. D. Moore, & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Beller, S. (2003). The flexible use of deontic mental
models. To appear in the Proceedings of the TwentyFifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Beller, S., Bender, A., & Kuhnmünch, G. (in prep.).
Understanding conditional promises and threats.
Freiburg: Manuscript.
Bender, A. (2001). “God will send us the fish” – Perception and evaluation of an environmental risk in
Ha'apai, Tonga. Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, 9, 165-190.
Bennardo, G. (2000). Possessive markers in Tongan: A
conceptual approach. Language Typology and Universals, 53, 269-280.
Broschart, J. (1997). Why Tongan does it differently:
Categorial distinctions in a language without nouns
and verbs. Linguistic Typology, 1, 123-165.
Churchward, C. M. (1959). Tongan dictionary.
Nuku'alofa, Tonga: Government Printing Press.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Dixon, R. M. W. (1994). Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Duranti, A. (1994). From grammar to politics: Linguistic Anthropology in a Western Samoan village. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Gifford, E. W. (1929). Tongan society. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.
Helu, F. (1999). Critical essays. Canberra: JPH.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (1995). Pragmatic reasoning about human voluntary action. In S. Newstead,
& J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking
and reasoning. Hove: Erlbaum.
Lehmann, F. R. (1930). Die polynesischen Tabusitten.
Leipzig: Voigtländers.
Martin, J. (Ed.) (1991). Tonga Islands: William Mariner’s account. Nuku'alofa, Tonga: Vava'u Press.
Morton, H. (1996). Becoming Tongan: An ethnography
of childhood. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
Shore, B. (1989). Mana and tapu. In A. Howard & R.
Borofsky (Eds.), Developments in Polynesian ethnology. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Tchekhoff, C. (1979). From ergative to accusative in
Tongan: An example of synchronic dynamics. In F.
Plank (Ed.), Ergativity: Towards a theory of grammatical relations. London: Academic Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1992). Semantics, culture, and cognition. New York: Oxford University Press.

