UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Progression of one Student Group’s Work

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8gp8f518

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Wiebe, Muffie

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Progression of one Student Group’s Work
Muffie Wiebe (wiebe@stanford.edu)
School of Education, Cognition and Learning Lab, CERAS 105
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract
This paper discusses a case study of a student group working
on a research project in a 5th grade science classroom. Over a
12-week unit of study, the group learned the content
necessary to produce a research report on endangered species,
and they learned to manage their own research activities. The
study addresses how the teacher and student group organized
the student work such that this happened. A 4-step
progression in the organization of the student group’s work is
identified. A key part of the findings is that the group cycled
three times through this progression of increasing student
autonomy and expertise.

Introduction
When students are working in classrooms they are learning
far more than the content material being taught – they are
also learning who gets to do what with that content.
Through ongoing classroom interaction the students and
classroom teacher negotiate what work is to be done, what
kinds of questions and information are relevant to doing it,
and who gets to say how it goes. Traditionally, classrooms
have been organized so that teachers define what is to be
learned and then impart that knowledge to individual
students, who either get it, or don't. In recent years
educational reform has attempted to change how classrooms
are organized, such that students become active and critical
in their own learning, and teachers guide students toward
productive engagement with the content using their own
inquiry activities. This paper examines how a group of 5th
grade students learned to do a research report in just such a
reform-minded classroom.
This paper discusses a case study of a student group
working on a research project in a 5th grade science
classroom. Over a 12-week unit of study, the group learned
the content necessary to produce a research report on
endangered species, and they learned to manage their own
research activities. The study addresses how the teacher and
group organized the student work such that this happened.
A key part of the findings is that the group cycled three
times through a pattern of increasing autonomy and
expertise over the 12 weeks, repeating the pattern each time
they began a new activity in the research project.
It has long been held in the cognitive sciences that how
information is presented impacts the representations people
build. That is, we understand that there is a connection
between the structure of information and the mental actions
that learners take on it. Taking this idea beyond the actions
of individual learners, situative research is concerned with
informational structures as they develop and are used in

1230

interaction. For example, research has shown that how
classrooms are organized has bearing on what kids learn to
do with the content material (e.g., Boaler, 1997; Brown,
1992; Greeno & MMAP, 1998). One question emerging
from this work is how the organization of the classroom gets
negotiated by teachers and students.
In didactic classrooms, the lines of communication are
more constrained, and the patterns of negotiation are both
more constant and more readily detected (c.f., Mehan's
(1979) seminal study on the didactic instruction pattern
IRE). In classrooms organized around project work and
group learning the interaction gets more complex very
quickly, with the analysis becoming concomitantly
complex.
Examining how classroom practices emerge and
develop over time requires analysis in a very detailed
manner, with attention given to how the work is organized
and by whom, over extended periods of time (e.g., Cobb,
Stephan, McClain, & Gravemeijer, 2001; Engle & Conant,
2002; Newman, Griffin, & Cole, 1987). This paper
contributes to this line of work, by presenting a four-step
progression of change in the organization of a student
group’s work. The steps are foregrounded here, and treated
more fully in a later section:
1) initially the students were able to do very little content
work and proceeded with whatever they could, while
the teacher gave detailed instructions to the whole class;
2) shortly afterward the students began to follow the
teacher’s exact language, borrowing her words to order
and organize their work;
3) next the student group began to work on ideas that were
supported within the group itself, while the teacher
shifted away from whole-class instruction;
4) later the group was elaborating its own ideas and
working together, while the teacher checked in with the
group and individual students.

Empirical Setting
The study examined the development of classroom practice
in a 5th grade classroom during a 12-week research project
on Endangered Species. The classroom was located in a
San Francisco Bay Area school taking part in the Fostering
a Community of Learners program. The FCL program was
designed to promote literacy through science inquiry, and
emphasized distributed expertise in the classroom, and
developing students’ abilities in sustained complex thinking
(Brown & Campione, 1994). The classroom teacher
involved in this study was an experienced teacher, teaching

this unit for the second time. The students had diverse SES
and ethnic backgrounds, and the groups were of mixed sex
and heterogeneous ability. The group discussed in this
study was comprised of three boys and two girls. The data
were collected as part of a larger study on the process of
conceptual change in conversation (Greeno, Benke, Engle,
Lachapelle, & Wiebe, 1998). The sample used here consists
of videotapes and audiotapes of naturally occurring
interaction over 40 class periods, ranging from 45 minutes
to almost two hours.
The videotapes of the group were viewed, and detailed
narrative annotations (cf., Rogoff, Mistry, Goncu, &
Mosier, 1993, ch. 3) written for each day’s videotape, in
intervals of one to two minutes. These annotations focused
on actions (e.g., pointing to picture and writing), verbal
contributions (e.g., comments and questions), and attention
of group members and the teacher to one another or the
materials (e.g., looking, pointing, leaning in, and avoiding).
Content-relevant conversations were closely transcribed.
From these narrative annotations, analytic summaries were
constructed for each class day. Patterns in the organization
of student work began to emerge in the summaries, and
were cross checked against both the annotations and the
video record.

degree to which their work was misaligned with the
teacher's instructions.

4-Step Progression of the Group’s Learning

Step 3 - Middle, beginning to work on group ideas,
while teacher guides the group

Observing the classroom studied here it was clear that the
participation of the students and teacher changed
significantly over the course of the unit. While this
progression was continuous, is it analytically useful to
segment it into a few discrete steps to better understand both
what was changing, and how. To this end I identify four
main steps to the organization of the student group’s work,
which reflect shifts in how the teacher and students together
were organizing the student work to get done.

Step 1 - Initially, doing what they can with teacher
introductions
On the first day of the unit, the group’s work is best
characterized as diligent but not exactly on target with what
the teacher had instructed them to do. Throughout the day's
activities, the students were enthusiastic and well behaved,
already evidencing an inclination to take an active part in
their own learning. This kind of active participation is a key
goal articulated in education reform, but taken alone it does
not constitute or ensure fruitful learning; rather it is seen in
this progression as an important and necessary precursor to
the kinds of expertise and autonomy the group came to
develop. At this initial step, closer inspection of what the
student group were working on reveals that their diligence
didn’t guarantee they were doing what was requested.
Instead, we find that the group’s work was closely related to
the teacher's instructions, but missed the target on some
rather key points. Hence, this first step is characterized by a
genuine intent to work, with the group doing whatever they
could with what the teacher told them. Importantly, the
students seemed unaware of, or at least unconcerned by, the

1231

Step 2 - Early work, using the teacher's words,
mostly from teacher introductions
The first shift in the group’s work came as the students
started to attend more precisely to what the teacher was
telling them. As the teacher continued to give lengthy and
detailed introductions to the whole class at the start of the
lesson, the students began to shape both their actions and
their word choices using her exact words. The content of
the unit was emerging and becoming better defined during
this time, but the students' contact with it can be
characterized as handling the terms as if they were
placeholders or captions more than complex domains.
While the group continued to be enthusiastic and appeared
very intent on getting down to work, the ideas they pursued
were taken directly from the teacher’s language. They
began to talk about what they are "supposed" to be doing,
and the group began paying some attention to whether that
was happening. That is, at this early step the students
indeed were actively participating in their own learning, but
the teacher remained the guiding force for the organization
of their work.

The next shift in the group’s work is marked when they
began to voice ideas of their own and began to pursue those
ideas which got support from others in the group. The
group began to develop a sense of their research topics as
domains, rather than captions, and began to treat the
information entailed by the topics. The group’s talk about
what they were supposed to do disappeared, replaced by
assertions of what to do which nonetheless looked for
support from within the group. The teacher's guidance also
shifted in this step, to shorter whole-class introductions and
more checking in with the group. Furthermore, her
interventions became highly dependent on the group itself,
and we can see in her interventions choices she was making
to help the group see itself as responsible for its work.

Step 4 - Later work, elaborating ideas and working
together, while teacher checks in
The final shift in the group’s work is marked by the students
acting with more authority on their own ideas, more fully
elaborating those ideas, and looking even less than before to
the teacher for input. In this final step of the progression the
teacher had shifted away fully from giving instructions
through whole class introductions, to checking in with the
group and individual students in order to monitor their
work. The idea of being done began to emerge in the
group’s talk, and the group began to pay some attention to
the criteria for deciding whether they were finished with
their work.

Steps 1-4 again (and again) – cycles of progression
What is perhaps most significant about this progression is
that it occurred not once, but three times over the course of
the unit. The research project was structured by the teacher
into three principal activities, Gathering Information,
Outlining, and Writing. Each activity led to the next. As the
teacher determined that the groups were ready to move on,
she had the class finish that activity and start the next one.
My analysis was conducted by viewing the videotapes
of each class day in chronological order. As such, the
student group’s work in the first of the research project
activities (Gathering Information) was analyzed first. A
general trend emerged in the group’s work: the students
could be seen moving from doing what little they could with
the content to taking on more responsibility for their work
and connecting that work more closely to the content.
Surprisingly (to me), when the class started work on the
second activity of the research project (Outlining), the
organization of the group’s work shifted dramatically,
looking much like they had when the unit had begun.
Analysis of the second and then third research project
activities found that each time the group shifted to a new
activity, they restarted the progression, following again the
whole path taken toward more expert and autonomous work.

Analysis
This paper presents a 4-step progression from direct
guidance to student autonomy and expertise. In this section
I present two episodes from the corpus of videotape data.
The analysis of these episodes uses a three-level analytic
framework to examine how the teacher and students were
organizing what the students were working on (Wiebe, in
press). The three levels are Global (the pedagogy and
learning trajectory), Task (the classroom work), and Local
(the moment-to-moment interaction). While these are not
the only possible levels for viewing classroom interaction, I
believe they are particularly useful ones. These three levels
were chosen because a) the different views they offer have
ecological validity for the classroom activity setting –
teachers must plan what they want students to learn,
students must get work done, and negotiation about that
work must happen; and b) they offer usefully different
scopes and time scales over the interaction. Combining the
information made available by viewing the interaction from
each of these levels gives us a better understanding of how
the interaction developed, and the ability to construct a more
complete model of the learning.
The episodes are drawn from the middle of the group’s
first cycle through the 4-step progression, when the group
was engaged in Gathering Information. The episodes
illustrate the organization of the group’s work at Step 2 and
Step 3 of the progression.

Episode 1– “Sorting questions”
This example illustrates the group’s activity at Step 2 of the
4-step progression. In this episode of interaction the group

1232

was sorting questions about animals into piles that
addressed what animals need to survive. The interaction
typifies activity at Step 2 – the student group was organizing
its work using the teacher’s exact words, taken mostly from
the whole-class introductions the teacher used to orient the
students.
Context for the Episode – Early in the unit (Day 2) the
teacher had students sort questions they had generated, as a
step toward developing a set of survival adaptations that
would fit all animals. This set would then become the
specialty topics students researched for the unit. In her
introduction to the class, the teacher brought in the main
idea (of what animals need to survive), gave a very explicit
set of instructions about carrying out the task (they will get
envelopes, all the questions, scissors, and will make piles),
and then reemphasized the point of the categories (piles that
help you think about how animals survive). The students
organized their work attending first to her set of
instructions, taking them very literally. Upon receiving
their pages of questions, the group proceeded to cut them,
and chat about cutting, without addressing any of the
content of the questions themselves. Only when they had
finished the cutting part, did they broach the text of the
questions and the task of sorting. Once their attention was
turned to that, the categories they chose were lifted heavily
from the teacher’s introduction, including terms she had
explicitly ruled out.
Looking at this set of events at three different levels
reveals different aspects of the nature and the structure of
the interaction. Below I examine the interaction from the
Global (pedagogy and learning trajectory), Task (classroom
work), and Local (moment-to-moment) levels, using each to
illustrate how the teacher and students together were
organizing the student work.
Global – The teacher’s interest in the lesson was for the
students to begin to develop ideas about what animals need.
The categories the student groups generated were to be used
in a whole-class discussion, in which common categories
could be highlighted and pertinent terms could be
introduced using the students’ ideas and language as a
starting point. Having the students generate the questions
and categories meant that going in to the whole-class
discussion the students had already had some time to be
working with the content of the unit. In this way, the
teacher was creating places for the students to explore and
become invested in the content, even as she set the agenda
and guided the discussion toward a desired set of terms (the
set of survival adaptations). The students enthusiastically
brought themselves into contact with the content, but with
little understanding of the material, their main point of entry
was the teacher’s own language. Hence they made use of
what was available to them, and in doing so advanced their
own position relative to both the content and their ability to
carry out their research.

Task – The teacher’s introduction to the task initially
focused on the point of the task and the conceptual space the
students would be working in. Her interest was in having
the kids generate categories, and cutting the questions was
just a step to get them there. It behooved her to be specific
about the less important precursor steps, helping all the kids
to power through that in an agreed upon way, but note that
she did not give the same kind of explicit instructions for
the students for developing their categories. This is the way
in which the structure of the task created spaces for the
students to be developing their expertise and autonomy.
The category ideas were theirs to create, with the teacher
guiding and shaping them. How they did it was also theirs
to negotiate, with some reference points provided by her,
but with the work itself up to them. What is interesting is to
look at how the students organized themselves within this
space afforded them. They latched on to her specific
instructions and used those as their starting point, with no
contact with the conceptual point of the task. Only once
they had completed the highly specified work did they turn
to the, presumably, harder work of devising categories. At
this point, too, we see that their work was organized by the
teacher’s language. The ideas they had for their piles came
from her introduction. When she came to check in, new
words that she used immediately got worked into the
group’s discussion. When it was their turn to contribute to
the whole-class discussion, the categories they offered were
ones that the teacher had expressly commented on.
Local – As they turned to the work of sorting, the group
began by calling out categories: Swiss Army bird, all about
birds, volcanoes, communication, and Oh Oh birds.
Interestingly, three of the categories were about birds (two
about specific kinds of birds), despite the fact that in the
teacher’s introduction she said: “if you took the same
approach we did with Borneo you might have a pile for the
Oh-oh birds, and a pile for the carnivorous caterpillar. We're
NOT going to do that.” That is, one of the earliest
categories the group chose had been ruled out explicitly by
the teacher in her introduction. The students also called for
a category on carnivorous caterpillars, invoking the other
category the teacher ruled out in her introduction. Later in
the lesson when the teacher came over to check on their
progress she tried to make clear that their categories should
not be about single animals explaining, “Okay, instead of
having questions about a bird category, and a-” but she was
interrupted. One group member (Ron) seemed to have an
idea of what the teacher was suggesting, but he had
difficulty persuading the group. When the teacher
addressed them again, she specified, “Okay guys, listen. (2s)
We don't want all flamingo questions= (Ron: =Exactly
what I'm saying!=) We don't want all bird questions.” They
discussed it more, and the group did begin to work with
some of the terms she had endorsed, but their misaligned
ideas also persisted, including carnivorous caterpillars,
Swiss Army birds, and Oh Oh birds. Gradually, most of the
bird questions were moved into other piles, but other ill-

1233

fitting terms which the teacher had not explicitly addressed
remained in use (e.g., Hawaii, volcanoes). That is, we see
that the ideas which got put forward and were taken up
derived largely from the teacher. New ideas developed
within the group didn’t appear until later in the unit, and
then slowly.
Using the three-level analytic framework we can see
(with Global level view) that the students were enthusiastic
but relatively unconnected to the content; (with Task level
view) that the tasks were highly structured and yet the
students navigated them within that structure; and (with
Local level view) that the students shaped their work
according to the teacher’s words. At each of these levels we
find that the activity is best characterized as Step 2.

Episode 2 – “Choosing a research specialty”
This example illustrates the group’s activity at Step 3 of the
4-step progression. In this episode the group members were
choosing their survival adaptation topic to research for the
unit. The interaction typifies activity at Step 3 – the student
group was organizing its work by beginning to work on
ideas developed within the group, rather than simply using
the teacher’s words, and there was less emphasis from the
teacher on giving instructions and more on being available
for guidance.
Context for the Episode – Within the research groups each
group member specialized in one or two survival needs of
animals (e.g., Food Getting, Reproduction) and was
responsible for writing that chapter of the groups’ research
report. In a series of whole-class discussions, a class list of
topics (the survival adaptations) was generated. In this
episode (Day 10), the teacher said in her introduction to the
class that the groups needed to be working on who was
doing which topic. The group moved to make their choices
without explicit discussion of how to divide the topics, and
approached the choice in different ways. By the end of the
lesson the choices had been made. In this 14-minute
episode, the group members started calling out their choices,
and one student found there was nothing left that she liked.
Her attempts to open up the selection process resulted in
some productive group conversation about the topics and
the beginning of talk about what they entail.
Below I examine the interaction from the Global
(pedagogy and learning trajectory), Task (classroom work),
and Local (moment-to-moment) views, using each to
illustrate how the teacher and students together were
organizing the student work.
Global – In her introduction to the class at the start of the
lesson, the teacher indicated to the students that they needed
to be working on who was doing what topics, but did not
give directions as to how to accomplish that. Given how
central the idea of each child doing a research specialty was
to the content of the unit, it is conceivable that the teacher
would have wanted to guide their choices somewhat. At the
same time, however, it was also central to the learning

trajectory of the unit that students develop a sense of being
responsible for conducting their research. In this instance
the teacher made clear what the task was, but in contrast to
the previous example, she did not structure how it should
get done. Instead, she left the door open for the students to
figure out how they would divide the topics, and by creating
this opportunity for them to act on their own initiative, the
teacher helped the students develop the sense of ownership
that was central to her learning goals. This pedagogical
choice was productive in two ways: the students took up
the opportunity and proceeded in their own way, taking
some ownership over their work. In doing so they also
stepped into fruitful conceptual terrain.
Task – At the beginning of the episode, the group was
returning to the classroom and getting settled in to work.
They were not yet clearly working toward any specific goal,
and were having only light contact with the content (looking
at their books; talking about eagles’ wingspan) when one of
the researchers asked if they knew who was doing which
survival adaptation. This spurred them into a process of
choosing, which resulted in various kinds of work on the
content of the unit. They clarified the terms being used
(survival adaptations refers to the categories on a class list);
reminded themselves of the specifics of those topics (some
of the group’s earlier categories didn’t make the class list);
and became clear about where terms referred to the same
topic (two people wanted the same content: prey, food
getting, and hunting). Members of the group approached
choosing their topics differently and there was no explicit
consideration within the group as to how the choice should
be made: it was accepted that as people called out the topic
they wanted, they could lay claim to it. Despite the absence
of a conversation about how to choose the topics, the
process of choosing took them into a productive discussion
of the topics themselves. Even so, there were limits to how
much they could negotiate on their own, and as their
conversation required additional support one of the students
called in the teacher - not to adjudicate the process of
selecting the topics, but rather to clarify the deeper content
issues that choosing had invoked.
Local – We can see a shift in how the group was working
when one student (Sunny) wanted a topic another student
(Monay) had picked. Monay staked her claim over the topic
and made it clear that food getting was already hers. She
then directed her attention to the other group members,
excluding Sunny. Despite being turned away from, Sunny
persisted and asked Monay about another topic,
communication, and Monay took up helping Sunny find a
new topic. In the course of trying to help/persuade Sunny,
Monay and the other members of the group ended up talking
about what some of the topics actually entailed. Their
interaction shifted from simply calling out the topics as if
they were titles or headlines, to starting to consider what the
topics meant and what it would take to research them.

1234

Helping Sunny choose her topic the group members touched
on
- communication and whether bald eagles do it:
Sunny: “I don't think the eagles do communication.”
Andy: “Yes they do. I think they do. They make
lots of noises. And we don't really know why.”
- migration as where eagles travel.
Monay (to Sunny): “You could do where they travel.”
She looks at the board, and points. “Migration.”
then points to a whole page on it.
- and reproduction as taking care of babies
Monay: “Here. You can do baby eagles” and holds
a book up for Sunny to see. Jay looks over too.
Teacher comes over to observe the group without
speaking.
Monay flipping through the book, again says
“Reproduction.”
Sunny : “Hmmm.”
Through their conversation the group members both opened
up the conceptual ground they were working with, and
began to validate and work with some of their own ideas.
Even so, after awhile Sunny turned to the teacher for
assistance, drawing her into their conversation by asking her
a question about what the group had just been working on:
Sunny (to the teacher): “What's reproduction again?”
Monay responds: “Reproduction is like when they
have babies, and things.”
Teacher: “Reproduction can be a couple of things”
as she walks around sits in Andy’s empty seat.
“I mean reproduction can be a giant, giant
topic” looking at Sunny and Monay.
Invited by the group to shift from quiet observer to
conversational partner, the teacher follows up with some
clarification of reproduction as well as some record keeping
as to who is taking which research specialty. In this way the
group had some time to be working on ideas they
developed, followed by some guidance from the teacher,
positioning them to act further on their own, now more
elaborated, ideas.
Using the three-level analytic framework we can see
(with Global level view) that the students continued to
pursue their work with enthusiasm and initiative, but that in
comparison to the previous step, here their work was more
closely connected to the content and it was beginning to be
developed within the group. We can also see (with Task
level view) that the tasks on which the students were
working were less structured by the teacher and afforded
more opportunity for the students to develop their ideas
while carrying out the work. Finally (with Local level
view), we see that the group’s negotiations of the content
and the task reflected and also deepened their growing
understanding of the material and their ability to navigate
their own path through it. At each of these levels we find
that the students’ activity is best characterized as Step 3.

Discussion

References

This paper introduced a four-step progression in the
organization of a student group’s work as they conducted a
research project on endangered species. Using a three-part
analytic framework, I illustrated how the teacher and
students together brought about the change in the group’s
participation in the classroom, such that the group became
more autonomous and more expert in their work. The
progression was seen not once, but three times across the
unit of study, reappearing in full each time the group started
a new activity within the research project.
At a pragmatic level, the description of the progression
of the group’s learning may have utility for thinking about
classroom design and teaching, especially in light of the
persistence of the progression across research project
activities. Clearly learning to work together well with the
content once was not enough. Rather, each time a new
activity began, the group retraced its steps — yet each
retracing proceeded faster than the previous one, suggesting
that the group was learning more robustly across time.
At another level, the study offers a case for thinking
about the Vygotskian notion of a Zone of Proximal
Development (Vygotsky, 1978, 1986) as pertaining to more
than one learner at a time. Vygotskian theory has been seen
as pushing the study of cognition out of the heads of
individuals to a more contextualized take on cognition as it
occurs in social context (e.g., Greeno & MMAP, 1998; Lave
& Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1990). This study contributes to
that trend by suggesting that cognition and learning can
fruitfully be investigated as pertaining to a group of
individuals working together.
At a third level this paper tackles a more theoretical
problem. In demonstrating that close analysis of interaction
can reveal the development over time of particular
classroom practices (in this case, the development of a
research practice by a student group) I join other situative
theorists in an effort to shift the conversation about learning.
At its core, this paper puts forward the argument that the
construction of a classroom practice is the learning which
takes place in that classroom, and that it is jointly
accomplished by the teacher and students through the
ongoing organization of student work.
While these ideas are not new to the field of cognitive
science, neither have they been the mainstay. It is hoped that
the paper offers a discussion point for those interested in the
contextual elements of cognition on how we can focus our
looking at interaction, as well as an example of what we will
see when we look there.

Boaler, J. (1997). Experiencing school mathematics:
Teaching styles, sex, and setting. Buckingham, England:
Open University Press.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and
methodological challenges in creating complex
interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 2:141-178.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery
in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and
classroom practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cobb, P., Stephan, M., McClain, K., & Gravemeijer, K.
(2001). Participating in classroom mathematical practices.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 113-163.
Engle, R. A. & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for
fostering productive disciplinary engagement: Explaining
an emergent argument in a community of learners
classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 20(4), 399-483.
Greeno, J.G., Benke, G., Engle, R.A., Lachapelle, C., &
Wiebe, M. (1998). Considering conceptual growth as
change in discourse practices. In M.A. Gernsbacher &
S.J. Derry (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 442-447).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greeno, J. G. & MMAP. (1998). The situativity of knowing,
learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 526.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:
Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization in
the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). T h e
construction zone: Working for cognitive change in
schools. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive
development in social context. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rogoff, B., Mistry, J., Goncu, A., & Mosier, C. (1993).
Guided participation in cultural activity by toddlers and
caregivers. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 58 (8, Serial No. 236).
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development
of higher psychological processes. M. Cole, V. JohnSteiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. (A. Kozulin,
Ed. & Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiebe, M. (in press). Teaching and learning as a system of
interaction. In P. Bell and R. Stevens (Eds.), Proceedings
of the Sixth International Conference on the Learning
Sciences.

Acknowledgements
An earlier version of this work was presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
Montreal, Canada, April 1998.
This research was supported in part by a grant from the
Spencer Foundation.

1235

