UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reconsidering the Notion of Dynamical Systems Theory Resources as a Conceptual
Framework

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60s8c775

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Liu, Daniel His-wen

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reconsidering the Notion of Dynamical Systems Theory Resources as a
Conceptual Framework
Daniel Hsi-wen Liu (hwliu@pu.edu.tw)
Division of Humanities, Providence University
200 Chung-Chi Rd, Shalu, Taichung County 433, Taiwan

Abstract
Taking DST (dynamical systems theory) resources as a
conceptual framework for thinking about dynamical
systems transforms numerical complexities into
conceptual deliberations, and consequently greatly
facilitates embodied cognitive science (Clark 1997, 1999,
2001). In fact, some dynamicists, such as Thelen &
Smith (1994), Thelen (1995) and van Gelder (1998),
worked at this conceptual level.
However, the
management of those conceptual resources may risk
floating away from the anchor of the DST-based
equation-governed modeling. This may, at least, incur
three mis-implications, as this paper aims to uncover.
Firstly, conceiving of cognitive systems on the grounds
of DST resources, surprisingly, does not warrant a DSTbased underlying mechanism.
Secondly, inference
across the DST resources may be a mistake. Lastly, the
entitlement of a ‘
dynamical system’on grounds of DST
resources may direct our attention to various troubling
ambiguities of that term. Therefore, before all those
risks are avoided, DST resources would not be safely
useful as tools.

Introduction
Dynamical systems theory (DST) is seen by Clark
(1997, 1999, 2001) as a useful tool for understanding
embodied mind; more strongly, it is taken by van
Gelder (1998) as a dominant tool for describing the
behavior of dynamical systems 1 and in turn for
understanding cognition, even at its highest level.
Clark takes this useful tool to support a dynamic
approach in action for understanding adaptive behavior
in the environment; more thoroughly, based on this
dominant tool does van Gelder entrench a dynamical
hypothesis: To wit, cognition is a dynamical system and
cognitive science can and should take dynamical form.
The requirement of taking dynamical form is not simply
a technological concern as to dynamical modeling.
Rather, it fundamentally raises a normative dimension
of understanding: Understanding of cognition should be
grounded on resources of DST, such as ‘
geometric
landscape’and ‘
coupling relationship’etc. Although
this normative dimension is not seen as an exclusive
1

The two terms ‘
dynamic systems’and ‘
dynamical systems’
used by Clark and van Gelder respectively seem to mean the
same.

722

way to understand cognition,2 van Gelder takes it as a
must for understanding dynamical modeling.3 This is
plausible, but what he later announces, concerning the
status of DST resources, tends to be groundless.
Van Gelder (1998) treats the DST resources as still
useful for understanding cognition even when the
equation-governed modeling is in complete absence.
When there is no dynamical modeling available, we can
still think cognition in terms of such DST resources.
He overtly proposes as follows.
These resources can be brought to bear even in the
absence of an actual equation-governed model. If
done rigorously, this can buy a qualitative or
preliminary understanding of the phenomenon, which
may be the best available and forms a solid
foundation for further exploration. This approach is
useful in situations where, for whatever reason,
providing a model is not currently feasible (e.g.
Thelen 1995) (van Gelder (1998), p. 621).
This passage recognizes the DST resources as an
independent conceptual framework for understanding
cognition, independent of its relating mathematical
characterization (viz., equation-governed modeling).
As is worth noting, such an attitude would perhaps not
also be admitted by some dynamicalists who attempt to
transpose the DST into cognitive science. Before they
apply the DST resources to an envisaged target domain,
they may see equation-governed modeling as a precondition.
In addition, Clark (1997, 1999, 2001) sees DST as ‘
a
useful tool’
, and has not made overt distinction between
dynamical modeling and DST resources. Still, readers
2

Van Gelder (1998) states that modern dynamics ‘
is a highly
general framework that must be adapted, supplemented, finetuned, and so forth, to apply to any particular cognitive
phenomenon’and that ‘
[t]his typically involves merging
dynamics with other constructs (e.g. the schema, …) or
theoretical frameworks (e.g. ecological psychology, …)’(p.
621). In addition, Clark (1999, 2001) argues effortfully for a
combination of dynamical systems and representations. Such
attitudes clearly see the role of dynamical systems in the
understanding of cognition as non-exclusive.
3
Van Gelder (1998) asserts that ‘
[t]he distinctive
complexities of cognition yield to scientific understanding
only when dynamical modeling is enriched by the perspective
and resources of DST (p. 621)’
.

should bear this distinction in mind, when they see
dynamicalist characterization of cognition unsupported
with mathematical modeling, e.g. Oyama (1985),
Thelen & Smith (1994), and Thelen (1995).
The warning, as this paper contends, is that the fullscale application of the DST resources to cognition,
even simply limited to embodied cognition, remains
lacking in evidence but it really needs evidence (of
equation-governed modeling). Without the approval of
DST's equation-governed modeling, the conception of
cognitive nature on grounds of DST resources is likely
to be fragile in its empirical validity. The dynamicalist
attempt of an overall understanding of cognition in
terms of the DST resources, as a consequence, would be
premature. A dynamicalist account on the grounds of
DST resources should be supplemented with the
equation-governed modeling as its price for being
convincing (e.g. Thelen et. al. 2001); otherwise, it will
remain in a position of a not-yet-confirmed hypothesis.
Worse, considering a non-DST based phenomenon in
terms of the DST resources may risk misleading us with
regard to what its nature is.
Basically, the DST is a mathematical theory that
characterizes its target domain on the grounds of a set
of differential equations. When such mathematical
characterization is fortunately available, seeing a target
system as a dynamical system is qualified; under such a
circumstance, the DST resources would serve to
understand that domain.
However, when that
characterization is not available, conceptions with the
DST resources would not warrant a dynamical system.
This paper plans to argue these three points. Firstly,
understanding of a cognitive system on grounds of DST
resources, if not further supported with equationgoverned modeling, may still indicate very different
kinds of systems; hence is so incomplete that it has no
indication of its underlying mechanism. Secondly, a
judgment of a system’
s being a dynamical system
grounded on some DST resources, would likely be
misleading when it readily implicates other theoretical
properties among the DST resources. For example, an
inference from a coupling system to the fact that it is
driven by in interdependence of certain lowdimensional factors, would be wrong. Thirdly, the DST
resources altogether, which entitle a target system to be
a ‘
dynamical system’
, do not seem useful as tools in
practice, because separate features (such as (b) the
notion of coupling relationship) would be less
confusing (in understanding a system’
s being a
coupling system).
These three considerations would convince us that
conceiving of cognitive systems purely on the grounds
of DST resources/metaphors, as Thelen & Smith (1994)
and Thelen (1995) did and van Gelder (1998) suggested,
would be misleading, unless it is further supported with
equation-governed modeling.
723

2. The DST resources
Perhaps, the equation-governed modeling manifested in
DST is generally inessential for the dynamical
hypothesis,4 and in particular nor is it intrinsic for the
dynamical approach in action. What matters for
understanding the embodied mind is the DST resources
as a conceptual framework. Such an understanding, yet,
is not plausible, as this section will argue.

2.1 Explicating DST resources
The DST, as Clark (2001) describes, includes the
following key features:
1. the discovery of powerful but low-dimensional
descriptions of systemic unfolding,
2. the provision of intuitive, geometric images of the
state space of the system,
3. the (closely related) practice of isolating control
parameters and defining collective variables (…), and
4. the use of the technical notion of coupling (…) to
model and track processes involving continuous
circular causal influence among multiple sub-systems
(p. 121) .
When they are transposed into the cognitive science
domain, these features can be taken at a technical level
and/or at a conceptual level. The former is manifested
in the equation-governed modeling such as Beer (1995)
in robotic navigation and Grossberg (1995) in the
psychology of motion perception, to mention only two.
Dynamical systems, therein, are understood in a literal
sense—the sense included in the term ‘
dynamical
systems theory (DST)’
. The latter (conceptual level) is
generally manifested in the attempt to understand
dynamical systems without recourse to mathematical
modeling, but instead by relying directly on DST
resources. The dynamical systems so understood are
construed in a looser sense (including a metaphorical
sense):5 systems whose behaviors are like the dynamical
systems’(in literal sense) behaviors, no matter whether
they are observable or purely existent in a mathematical
space.
The likeliness, according to the general
understanding of DST together with Clark’
s
characterization (aforementioned 1-4 points), is
characterised in the following four key theoretical
notions, which would constitute the aforementioned
DST resources:
(a) an unfolding system controlled by a limited
number of interdependent factors, whose values are
depicted in control parameters and collective
variables of a set of numerically-characterised
equations (as manifested in DST);
4

This seems to be the perspective of van Gelder (1998). See
the cited passage in the above text.
5
The term ‘
metaphor’is used by Thelen (1995) to describe
ideas drawn from the DST, which are the DST resources
discussed here.

(b) understanding the change of cognitive states with
the metaphor of geometric landscape, which
according to DST may be further specified in the
metaphors
of
attractors
and
bifurcation.
Furthermore, time unfolds along with trajectory of the
landscape;
(c) multiple sub-systems: A system unfolds in
accordance with a number of interdependent factors; a
system is but one of a few sub-systems, among which
are continuous circular causal influence, and these subsystems constitute a higher-level system that in turn
can be seen as a sub-system of a further higher-level
system. Thus, within a system there is a continuous
circular causal influence (i.e. the coupling
relationship) taking place among its sub-systems,
and the role of a ‘ system’turn up multiply with
different levels;
(d) self-organization: A novel pattern of cognitive
order and stable cognitive states may emerge although
it previously has never been existent. This notion
answers the question how cognitive mechanisms and
processes arise and are sustained; this requires (a) and
(c) as pre-conditions.6
Dynamicalists have general understanding of all four
points (e.g., as manifested in Thelen & Smith (1994)),
but Clark and van Gelder hold different emphasises.
Clark emphasizes (c)—the coupling relationship
between agent and its environment—and van Gelder
(and Thelen (1995)) focuses on (b)—the geometric
images of such systems’state space. Common to all of
them is an attitude that they can entitle a system ‘
a
dynamical system’ without requiring an equationgoverned modeling. Surrounding to this attitude can we
find certain topics as follows.

(DST) focuses attention on the reciprocal relationship
between its part-systems ((c)). 7 The former can
vertically manifest phenomena at different levels and
horizontally show how one system affects the control
parameters of another; yet, the latter does not present
such distinctions. Here, like a mechanical perspective,
the notion of coupling serves as a philosophical
(metaphysical, specifically) resource of analysis.
Following this line of consideration, we can find more
resources inherent in the DST or its relating conceptual
framework.
Apart from the abovementioned conception of
coupling, DST resources are manifested in various
conceptions as previously marked in boldface. These
conceptions form solid resources of metaphysical
analysis. Such an analysis has a two-fold significance.
On the one hand, a number of metaphysic conceptions
serve to describe how equations of DST unfold; on the
other hand, those conceptions also have the explanatory
power for metaphysic understanding as to the way a
‘
literal’dynamical system unfolds.
Thus, we can deliberate about why ultimately such
DST resources subserve our scientific understanding as
a tool. The DST, basically, is a mathematical theory,
with its scientific details beyond human comprehension.
So is the equation-governed modeling on the basis of
DST. The behavior of dynamical systems may be hard
to understand unless we seek support from a conceptual
tool—those conceptions seen as DST resources.
Above is a positive part of the understanding with
recourse to DST resources. Below are negative
considerations.

2.2 Positive consideration: Resources and tool

Is the equation-governed modeling really inessential?
Yes and no. Yes, because it is the DST resources—the
above four points—that constitute theoretical
understanding of the dynamical systems themselves and
the dynamicalism. Mathematical modeling itself does
not speak at all. The mathematical characterization, in
fact, usually goes beyond human comprehension. No,
because a system whose behavior being conceived of as
manifesting (a)(b)(c) and (d) may risk having
completely no equation-governed modeling on its
ground, or even worse, may be simply stored in the
theorist’
s inner sense but indeed never been cashed out.
In short, the risk is that a system looks like, or
conceived of as, a dynamical system (in literal sense)
may turn out not to be that.
The problem is that what looks like a dynamical
system (in literal sense of DST) does not warrant its
being grounded on a DST-based mathematical

The above discussion explicates DST resources point
by point; still, the term ‘
resources’needs clarification as
to its role in van Gelder’
s notion of ‘
DST resources as a
conceptual framework’
. This role may relate to Clark’
s
(1997, 1999, 2001) notion of seeing DST as a useful
tool, specifically regarding the questions of what tool it
is, and what tool it is for.
To begin with, the concept of ‘
DST resources’refers
to what DST specifically can illuminate, as opposed to
other scientific theories or philosophical theses. A
mechanical perspective, as Bechel (1998) points out,
can offer analysis into parts and wholes, while DST’
s
main way of relating systems is by means of coupling.
The former (mechanical perspective) can decompose
the system into various constitutes, while the latter
6

The (a) (b) (c) entries are summarized from the
aforementioned four key features of dynamical systems that
Clark proposed. The (d) entry is advocated by van Gelder as
a reason (among others) to support the dynamical hypothesis.

724

2.3 Negative consideration: Is the equationgoverned modeling inessential?

7

In the parenthesis is the entry this notion corresponds in the
aforementioned four DST resources.

modeling. The role of DST resources, in consequence,
risks having a principal move from the conceptual
foundation of the DST to a metaphorical use of the term
‘
dynamical systems’
. The theoretical thrust may
therein become very loose. A metaphorical description
of dynamical systems would have no constraint on what
the underlying mechanism really are.
An overt problem of the above move is a theoretical
understanding heading toward a wrong direction and
consequently losing sight of a target phenomenon. This
is similar to a medical mistake of offering a wrong
prescription, despite the similar clinical symptoms.

3. Underlying Mechanisms
This section discusses the possible mis-implications
arising out of using DST resources without grounding
on DST-based modeling. To begin with, consider the
first main point of this paper:
Conceiving of a system on the basis of the DST
resources does not warrant a DST-based underlying
mechanism.
To understand this, let’
s consider the assumption of
using DST resources: DST-based modeling at the
highest level would always be feasible.

3.1 Presuming the existence of DST-based laws
A dynamicalist may contend that the underlying
mechanism of the target domain may in reality be
equation-governed on the basis of DST, while the
corresponding mathematical characterization is simply
not yet detected. This is tantamount to saying that the
conceptual framework of DST resources implicate the
feasibility of DST-based equation-governed modeling
at the highest level. The differential equations are
really out there as the underlying mechanism although
not yet epistemologically present.
It is in the
metaphysical sense that we understand the underlying
mechanism of a cognitive domain on the grounds of the
DST resources. We can understand that a newly
detected star must be governed by certain physical laws,
although they are not yet detected. Analogously, the
target cognitive phenomenon must be understood in
terms of the DST resources, although they are not yet
detected.
The previous argument on the basis of analogy,
about the existence of a mechanism in accordance with
DST modeling, is not successful. It is grounded on an
assumption that every physical phenomenon is lawgoverned. In the celestial bodies this principle is
largely plausible; however, when it is argued that it is
equally tenable in applying dynamical systems theory to
cognitive phenomena, the argument begs the question.
To wit, whether the DST-based equation-governed
modeling is generally applicable to a target cognitive
domain at its highest level remains an open question.

725

3.2 Mis-implication
A dynamicalist conception of cognitive complexities
grounded on some (but not all) DST resources may lead
to something wrong. When a novel pattern turns up,
people would be inclined to think it in terms of
emergence, hence categorize it as a self-organizing
pattern. If the theoretical deliberation is put in the
context of dynamicalism, then it is easy to quickly
recognize the aforementioned feature (d) and
consequently see the detected pattern as arising out of a
dynamical system in the DST sense.
It is
straightforward, with the DST resources as a conceptual
framework, to take other three features (a)-(c) as its
theoretical properties. If the feature (c) is further
confirmed in observation, a theorist will be further
convinced of its being a dynamical system in DST
sense. Consider the feature (a) as a feature of the
underlying mechanism. The envisaged pattern would
thus be regarded as arising out of interactions between
low-dimensional factors (such as the control parameters
and collective variables in the equation-governed
modeling). However, there is no warrant that a DSTbased equation-governed modeling at the target
system’
s highest level would necessarily be in position.
The question of what the underlying mechanism is
should remain open. It may well be a connectionist
neural network, where the system is controlled by a
large number of units; alternatively, it may be a system
with Brookian subsumption architecture, where no
overt low-dimensionality is required. Worse, the
underlying mechanism may be somehow controlled by
certain action-oriented representations, as evident in
Clark & Grush (1999). There is basically nowhere to
position representation within the framework of DST
resources, especially considering feature (a); yet, (a) is
part-and–
parcel to DST resources. All above rebuttals
can be cleared away when the DST-based equationgoverned modeling is required in the first place for
recognizing a dynamical system.
Crudely speaking, the features (b)-(d) are not features
exclusively pertaining to a DST-based dynamical
approach. If the requirement of low-dimensionality is
loosened, even (a)—the interdependence between some
factors—is not an exclusive character of DST. The
feature (b) can be seen in Waddington’
s landscape
(Waddington 1975). The feature (c) and (d) are both
prominent in various non-DST-based complex adaptive
systems, such as animate vision (Ballard 1991). Hence,
(a)-(d) amounts to the negation of the computational
approach to cognitive science; the coverage of this is
very broad and has gone greatly away from the DST
itself, be it DST modeling or DST resources. The most
distinctive characteristics of DST resources are two:
interdependence between low-dimensional factors and
the geometric landscape controlled by attractors and
bifurcation. They must be specifically supported by

DST modeling, rather than simply the property
remaining in (b)-(d).
The above argument is a criticism on the conception
of cognitive complexities grounded on some (but not all)
DST resources but without DST-based modeling. How
is it if the word ‘
some’is replaced by ‘
all’
: viz., a
conception is grounded on all (a)–(d) features but
remains lack of DST-based modeling?
This replacement would not lead to any change in
conclusion. Given that it is controlled by a limited
number of factors, the underlying mechanism would not
be a neural network. However, other possibilities
remain at stake. Before the conclusion is drawn, the
current argument can still reach the same point that the
envisaged system is a DST-based dynamical system. In
fact, the argument leading to this point is more
straightforward, as all four features are at hand. The
conclusion would remain the same: What the
underlying mechanism is remains an open question.
Seeing an envisaged system as necessarily being a
DST-based dynamical system would still be misleading.

3.3 All dynamical systems can and should have
a DST-based modeling?
Van Gelder (1998) seems to believe that all quantitative
systems will have a dynamical modeling, when he
summarizes his thesis of dynamical hypothesis as
follows:
For every kind of cognitive performance exhibited by
a natural cognitive agent, there is some quantitative
system …; in addition, causal organization can and
should be understood by producing dynamical models
using the theoretical resources of dynamics, and
adopting a broadly dynamical perspective (italics
added, van Gelder 1998, p. 622) .
If it is further granted that understanding the causal
organization can be grounded on DST resources, the
aforementioned mis-implication would be in position.
As previously discussed, van Gelder’
s belief, that
‘
[t]hese resources can be brought to bear even in the
absence of an actual equation-governed model’
, would
lead up to this undesirable point. That is, when DST
resources are deemed as universally applicable to any
cognitive system, the easily-made implication of a
DST-based underlying mechanism would be misleading.
However, a mis-implication as to the system’
s
understanding mechanism would easily be in the way.
The above arguments entrenches the aforementioned
first main point of this paper.

3.4. Implication across the features of DST
resources
Consider the second main point:
Implication across the four features of DST resources
is likely to be misleading.

726

The above section gives a warning as to the implication
from some features (out of (a)-(d)) to the underlying
mechanism of the entire system. The point at issue
gives another warning regarding the application of DST
resources: the implication from some features to
another would also be misleading. Giving such a
warning would not be very startling, as this is implicit
in a previous argument. Implication across the four
features of DST resources is most likely when the target
system is regarded as a DST-based dynamical system.
If the notion of DST resources mistakes a feature of
them as a criterion of a DST-based dynamical system,
then another feature pops out as this notion’
s
implication. Thus, for example, we can infer from a
coupling relationship between brain, body and the
environment (feature (c)) to predicting a self-organizing
novel pattern ((feature (d))), or to the fact that the
envisaged system is controlled by a low-dimensionality
of interdependent factors (feature (a)).
Such an
implication is misleading, basically because (as
previously argued) there is no warrant that the
underlying mechanism of that sort of system is DSTbased at the system’
s highest level. Therefore, we
present this second warning.

4. What is meant by a ‘
dynamical system’
?
Consider the third main point:
The DST resources altogether would not be as useful
as any single resource.
The DST resources altogether, allow us to consider a
target system in terms of ‘
dynamical system’
. This
would not necessarily direct our attention to some
treasure, but may lead to confusion. The name
‘
dynamical system’is highly ambiguous, as appears in
the peer review of van Gelder (1998). It may refer, as
van Gelder himself suggests, to a quantitative system;
yet, it may otherwise be considered to be a statedependent system, as Michael Wheeler (1998) suggests;
or, it may simply mean a system with any single feature
among the aforementioned four features of DST
resources—a system with a coupling relationship or a
system whose trajectory is manifested in a geometric
landscape. Of course, it may also strictly refer to a
system with DST-based equation-governed modeling.
All these systems are different; hence the name
‘
dynamical systems’would bring about confusion, as to
what it is. If DST resources are to be taken altogether
as a tool, hence, that tool would likely be very blunt.
Why not, as this paper suggests, reserve it (the name
‘
dynamical systems’
) strictly to those systems with
DST-based equation-governed modeling? Then, those
systems with coupling relationships can be specifically
named to be ‘
coupling systems’
. This, at least, avoids
confusing such systems with the strictly DST-based
dynamical systems.

Consider van Gelder’
s (1998) original concern—
quantitative systems at the highest level. Defining a
‘
dynamical system’in terms of a quantitative system
would likely lead to the undesired contravention, as it
takes place between van Gelder (1998) and Beer (1998),
that a digital computer is a dynamical system. A better
way to managing that term, as this paper suggests,
would be leaving the so-far-confusing title ‘
dynamical
system’specifically exclusively to those systems with
DST-based modeling, and call the target systems in van
Gelder’
s mind with its direct name ‘ quantitative
systems at the (system’
s) highest level’
. This will save
much time for clearing up similar confusions.
The gist of this section is as follows: DST resources
are useful tools when they turn up separately; however,
when they turn up altogether as features of a special
sort of systems—dynamical systems—they bring about
much confusion.

5. Concluding Remarks
Dynamical systems theory (DST) is indeed attractive,
as it presents an alternative to the orthodox
computational approach to cognitive science, indeed a
new approach appropriate for illuminating various
dynamical features of cognition. Yet, it is hard to
conceive because it’
s basically a mathematical theory
with numerical subtleties; consequently, it needs to rise
to an upper level in the light of conceptual explanations.
DST resources, thus, arise for this need, and serve as
useful tool for understanding the embodied mind.
However, the management of that conceptual
illumination may incur certain illusory implications.
Certain as-yet-unnoticed risks are lurking, basically
because those conceptual resources float away from the
anchor of the DST-based equation-governed modeling.
However, managing DST resources in this way have
been approached in some dynamicists’works, such as
Thelen & Smith (1994), Thelen (1995) and van Gelder
(1998), and also appeared in reconsideration of
dynamical systems analysis, such as Clark (1997). This
paper aims to uncover such risks by elucidating the
notions of DST resources in the beginning and then
expounding their nature as a useful tool. On these
grounds, the discussion went on to examine various
possible mis-implications. Firstly, conceiving of a
system on the basis of the DST resources has no
bearing on a specific understanding mechanism.
Secondly, when any one among the four features of
DST resources turns up and is taken as a criterion of
DST-based dynamical system, an inference of that
system’
s also having another feature may be a mistake.
Lastly, discussion criticized the entitlement of a
‘
dynamical system’on the grounds of those DST
resources, because may it direct our attention to

727

ambiguities of that term. The DST resources would not
be safely useful tools unless all those risks are avoided.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by National Science Council,
Taiwan, under grant NSC 91-2411-H-126-002.

References
Ballard, D. H. (1991). Animate Vision. Artificial
Intelligence, 48:57-86.
Beer, R. (1995). A dynamical systems perspective on
agent-environment interaction. Artificial Intelligence,
72, 173-215.
Bechtel, W. (1998). Dynamicists versus
computationalists: Whither mechanists?. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 21, 629.
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence without
representation. Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139-160.
Clark, A. (1997) Dynamical Challenge. Cognitive
Science, 21(4), 461-481.
Clark, A. (1999). An embodied cognitive science?
Trends in Cognitive Science, 3(9), 345-351.
Clark, A. (2001). Mindware: An introduction to the
philosophy of cognitive science. Oxford University
Press.
Clark, A., & Grush, R. (1999) Towards a Cognitive
Robotics. Adaptive Behavior, 7(1) :5-15.
Oyama, S. (1985) The ontogeny of information:
Developmental systems and evolution. Cambridge
University Press.
Thelen, E., and Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems
approach to the development of cognition and action.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Van Gelder, T., and Port, R. F. (1995). It’
s about time:
An overview of the dynamical approach to cognition.
In R. F. Port and T. van Gelder (1995) (Eds.). Mind
as Motion: Explorations in the Dynamics of
Cognition. MIT Press.
Thelen, E. (1995) Time-Scale Dynamics and the
Development of an Embodied Cognition. In van
Gelder & Port (1995).
Thelen, E., S. Schöner, C. Scheier, and Smith, L. (2001)
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of
infant perspective reaching. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 24:1-86.
Van Gelder (1998) The dynamical Hypothesis in
Cognitive Science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
21, 615-665.
Waddington, C. H. (1975) The evolution of an
evolutionist. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Wheeler, M. (1998) An appeal for liberalism, or why
van Gelder’
s notion of a dynamical system is too
narrow for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21, 653-654.

