UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representations at Work

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6n04w96m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Nielsen, Martin M.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representations at Work
Martin M. Nielsen (mmn@imv.au.dk)
Department of Information and Media Studies, Niels Juels Gade 84
8200 Århus N, Denmark

Abstract
This paper argues that distributed cognition provides a unifying
framework for analyzing organizations as socio-technical
systems. The framework is utilized in an analysis of information
processing at a post office. Finally, implications – both for
organizational and cognitive studies – are presented. Research
on performative representations is called for and, consequently,
an abandonment of the cognition as computation framework is
suggested.

Studying Representations at Work
Organizational theories often pay lip service to the claim
that organizations are complex socio-technical systems. In
practice, however, the association is merely stated as a fact
and abandoned for issues concerning social aspects at the
expense of technological issues. This shortcoming rests on a
lack of unifying notions bridging the gap between humans
and things. This paper claims that distributed cognition
provides such a common analytical framework comprising
minds and artifacts.
The general idea of distributed cognition is to expand the
traditional cognitivist model to comprise whole systems of
humans and things. In this light organizations are construed
as input-output devices with intermediary processing
capabilities. The novelty of distributed cognition, however,
is the claim that the processing capabilities are as much
attributed to artifacts as to individual minds and their
organization. To explain the processing capabilities of
minds and artifacts distributed cognition offers a
reinterpretation of representation.

Representation
The single most important contribution of distributed
cognition is the understanding of external representation
(Zhang, 1997). In accordance with orthodox views
distributed cognition holds that cognition is a product of
“propagation
of
representational
state
across
representational media” (Hutchins, 1995). Contrary to these
views the representations may be embedded both in minds
(internal representations) and – more prominently –in
artifacts (external representations). Consequently, according
to distributed cognition it does not make sense to study
cognition in separation from social and technical aspects. In
short, representations constitute the common ground
connecting minds and artifacts, thus making cognition a
fundamental feature of socio-technical systems.
Representations are characterized partly by motivation
and partly by friction and there is an intimate relationship
between the two. By motivation I refer to the reason for
representing in the first place that is determined by the task

863

at hand. Take a chart illustrating pathways between point A
and point B as an example. The chart may look entirely
different if you are going by bike or by car if certain roads
are meant for cars or bikes exclusively. It is modeling
possible ways from A to B with regard to the specific means
of transportation. In sum, the motivation determines the task
relevant structures the representation needs to represent.
This brings us to friction. The degree to which the generated
representation fits the task determines the level of resistance
encountered while utilizing the representation. If the
representation fits poorly the result will be accordingly. A
high level of friction will trigger a reconfiguration of the
representation to make it account for the unexpected
findings. If for example somewhere along the way from A
to B a road does not allow passage the chart may be redone
to illustrate this. Consequently, rather than construing
representations as ideal 1:1 mappings of the world, it is
important to realize the highly task dependent and dynamic
character of representations. In fact, representations may be
defined as models of task relevant structures of a given
domain.
Artifacts like charts are cumulative in nature. Through
time artifacts may come to incorporate knowledge
impossible to represent mentally. Through re-adjustment the
charts have been successively refined and elaborated up
until today when the world has been mapped out entirely.
Once the friction between representation and task relevant
structures wears off the artifact reaches its highest level of
development and its highest value in use. In time, several
task relevant structures may be superimposed on the same
artifact thus embedding numerous representational media in
it. This gives rise to crucial information processing abilities
since the artifact literally facilitates propagation of
representational state across representational media.
This raises another basic point. Cognition is not
something taking place on top of representation. Cognition
is taking place through manipulation of representation.
Once a working representation is established actions are
guided by it, hence it is possible to do things via
manipulation of representations. Standing at point X
between A and B, should I turn left or right at this
intersection? Given that the level of friction between
representation and represented is sufficiently low, the
answer is immediately available from the artifact. The
representation may effectively come to work as a taskspecific surrogate for the represented. Again, rather than
depicting the world as it is, representations are better
understood as facilitating predictions about outcomes of
certain practices.
This approach obtains impetus from theories on mental
models (Johnson-Laird, 1989), model-based reasoning
(Nersessian, 2003), epistemic mediators and manipulative

abduction (Magnani, 2002) etc. The thing to bear in mind is
that cognition is a product of the manipulation of external as
well as internal representations. Distributed cognition does
not hold that no internalization occurs. It holds that neither
the mind nor the artifact alone is the exclusive site of
cognition. Cognition is exactly distributed across the two
and arises from their interaction.

Distributed Cognition as Organizational Analysis
Above, the theoretical underpinnings of distributed
cognition are sketched out. In the following some
preliminary remarks on doing organizational analysis are
stressed before turning to our field study at a post office.
Analyzing organizations as cognitive units amounts to
studying the generation, propagation, and manipulation of
representations that capture the information processing
capabilities of organizations. According to the theory this is
done by spelling out the various representations at work at
the organization and their distribution across artifacts and
minds.
Norman coined the term cognitive artifacts which he
defined as “an artificial device designed to maintain,
display, or operate upon information in order to serve a
representational function” (1991). This term fits this
framework nicely although it would have been even better if
it read: “… operate on representations to serve an
information processing function.” In any case, the inference
that it is possible to study the representational structures
embodied in artifacts should be clear.
Communication – i.e. the propagation of representations –
between workers constitutes another key ingredient in the
analysis. In the case study to be presented here
communication is mainly used to assign tasks to people.
This issue is left out in favor of the interaction between
worker and artifacts that takes place without substantial
collaboration with colleagues.
Contrary to common beliefs in organizational studies it is
insufficient to study the individual and her function at the
work place. It is equally important to analyze the (cognitive)
artifacts encountered. Distributed cognition suggests that
these artifacts will be crucial to the understanding of
workflows in the organizations. Fortunately, the majority of
the representations at work at organizations are readily
observable which constitutes a major advantage to studies of
distributed cognition over traditional studies in cognitive
science.

Carrying Out Distinctions
This case study examines a small post office distributing
letters at the University of Århus in Denmark. As input the
office receives letters to the various departments on campus.
The output is the delivered mail at these departments. In
order to facilitate the process the postal system has devised
a number of artifacts mediating input and output. Here we
will examine just a few of the more salient before studying
the contribution of the officers in the workflow.
The address An address is an example of a global standard
for an artifact. Over history it has been found to remedy an

864

easy procedure for discriminatingly pinpointing a singular
location (or addressee) in the world. As such an address may
be regarded as a representation of the location of an
addressee. Take my own address as an example:
Martin M. Nielsen
Gl. Munkegade 21A
8000 Århus C
Denmark
Reading the address from below brings the letter in
coordination with the addressee via successive binary steps:
If the current location of the post officer/letter matches the
designated country – move on to the subsequent level. If
not, produce the match by moving the letter to the
designated destination. The process is repeated at each level,
virtually walking through state, zip code, city, street, street
number etc. The task is completed when the letter reaches a
mailbox, a door slot, or a person answering the name written
at the top level of the address. In our case the world is
confined to a rather limited area, but the procedure is the
same nonetheless.
The tour For obvious reasons the letters are not processed
one at a time. The huge amount of letters coming through
the post office daily calls for further mediating artifacts. One
of the most prominent of these artifacts is referred to as “the
tour”. It is produced by locating all addressable locations of
a given area and then “connecting the dots”, thereby
reducing the world to addresses put into sequence and
imposing a temporal order on otherwise unordered
juxtaposed locations. In other words the tour is a
representation of the (postal) world.
The pigeonhole While the tour certainly has a “physical”
existence in its guidance of the officer through a postal area,
it is still too “conceptual” to actually do anything. Despite
the severe densification of the world in the reduction to a
sequence of locations, further materialization needs to take
place for the artifact to perform a task. The “sorting device”
provides this materialization. Materially this device consists
of a number of cells ordered in rows and columns. Each cell
is labeled with one address from the tour and designed to
hold all the designated letters. The shape of the device gives
rise to the term “pigeonhole” (meaning the entire structure –
not any individual compartment). The sorting box works as
a device for segmenting letters. Stacked in front of the
boxes, the letters are moved one at the time to their
designated cell, producing distinctions between them
through their assignment to different boxes. The device is
big enough to let 3 officers sort mail at same time. This
enables parallel processing of the letters.
The pigeonhole represents the tour while giving it
material existence. The cell structure is superimposed on
this representation, thus permitting the device to work as a
temporary compartmentalization device. As such, the
pigeonhole comprises the whole postal world “writ small”.
Here the letters find their final destination albeit in surrogate
form.

The Cognitive Artifacts of the Post Office
A number of superimposed representations have been
encountered at the post office so far. In the tour a specific
sequence was superimposed on all the addresses of a certain
area. In the pigeonhole, a material cell structure was
superimposed on the tour. As such, most of what the officer
needs to know when working at the office is incorporated in
the artifacts. Any change in the world represented by the
artifacts (if a department moves somewhere else for
example) will immediately trigger reconfigurations of the
representational structures.
The artifacts totally restructure the task faced by the
officers. Instead of bringing the letters directly into
coordination with the world, the letters need to be brought
into coordination with the pigeonhole at first. Afterwards,
the distinctions provided by the artifact are maintained and
carried out, thus bringing the segmented letters into
coordination with the world.
Through the “precognitions” facilitated by the sorting
device the overall task is sequenced into successive
alignments of letters and addressees. Notice how both of
these tasks are consistent with the tour, which
simultaneously coordinates the procedures for sorting and
delivery. Accordingly, everything the officers need to know
about the postal world is effectively incorporated in the
artifacts.

The Human Component
So far the human component of the system has been largely
ignored. The representational analysis reveals the
requirements faced by the officers at the post office. The
artifacts define the task and now it is up to the people to
carry it out. This supports a claim widespread in
organizational studies that we do not simply use tools in
work processes. On the contrary, tools by and large define
the task and constrain our work process. According to
Hutchins’ analysis, the human component of a system is “to
act as a malleable and adaptable coordinating tissue, the job
of which is to see to it that the proper coordinating activities
are carried out” (Hutchins, 1995). As such, the officers
superimpose themselves on the network of representational
artifacts in order to achieve coordination of tasks.
Besides the incorporation of the representational state of
the tour in artifacts, the field study revealed yet another
representational medium in which it was – at least partially
– instantiated, i.e. the human mind. In the case study more
than 100 cells were arranged in 4 rows and 25-30 columns
in the sorting box which put the mental abilities of the
officers under severe stress. It is far too time consuming to
process the cells perceptually every time a letter needs
sorting. Video recordings expose a large degree of
internalization of the structure of the device, which is
substantiated by the observation that the officers after
reading the address are immediately able to move directly
towards the location of the designated cell without orienting
themselves in advance. This indicates that the locations of
the cells are represented internally with a precision of a few
cells’ margin. In this case, however, the representation is not
totally available to conscious manipulation. An officer

865

comments on the recall of the location of cells: “It comes
with routine… It lies in the back of the head.”
The internal representation is only approximate, however.
The exact location of a cell is always reconfirmed
perceptually before placing the letter. The same findings are
confirmed by a questionnaire in which the officers where
asked to list all the addresses of a particular tour. Despite
the self-assuredness of the officers they did not recall the list
accurately. The errors were no more than 2 addresses in
average (3 subjects, a tour of 29 addresses). Still, there was
no pattern in the errors and no apparent explanation.
At first sight, this inaccuracy seems damaging to the
proper delivery of mail. Once again, however, closer
inspection unveils subtle trade-offs between man and
artifact that in effect enable them to outperform individuals
on their own. Remember, that distributed cognition does not
argue that no internalization occurs. It just holds that
cognition is a product of the interaction between
representations – internal and external. In fact, this partial
internalization is to be expected given the distributed
character of cognition.
Prior to delivery the letters are arranged in their newly
imposed order on a “tray”. This artifact largely echoes the
pigeonhole except that it only accommodates a single tour
and is smaller in order to be mobile. Consequently, during
delivery simple inspection of the next undelivered stack of
letters informs the officer about the subsequent destination.
As a result, the lack of ability to retrieve the tour from
memory is inconsequential to actually performing the task.

Summary
The input of the post office is a large number of disordered
letters constituting the raw material. Through propagation of
addresses (representational states) across the tour and
pigeonhole (representational media) the letters successively
reach their destinations. The output is bundles of letters
delivered at their designated departments (where new input
is picked up). As such, the representations at work at the
office mediate between input and output.
As argued, the tour is the governing artifact at the post
office. Its structure is incorporated in several artifacts and,
thus, controls the behavior of the system at large. Virtually
walking through these artifacts carries the letters to their
destinations. The organization of the workflow between the
officers and the artifacts represents the system taken as a
whole. As such, the organizational architecture is itself part
of the cognitive make-up of the system.
There remains, however, a subtle (and unaccounted for)
difference in the contributions of artifacts and humans.
Whereas the propagation across representational media is
taking place “inside” artifacts (across, for example, the
sequential order of the tour, and the physical grid of cells)
the human task is to propagate “between” artifacts (address
and sorting device, for example).
Even if the product of the post office is a physical entity
(i.e. delivered mail) the field study serves to show the
indisputable cognitive nature of even the most mundane
operations of any system. A layer of informational
structures serves the physical entities of the postal system.
This layer is what makes a distributed cognition analysis of

the workflow rewarding. An analysis of representational
structures renders a powerful description of the informationprocessing capabilities of the post office. As argued the
components of the system participate in complex
propagations of representational state across internal and
external representational media.

Implications for Organizational Studies and
Cognitive Science
Through the analysis of the representations at work at the
post office the information processing occurring at the office
was explicated. This validates the claim that the post office
may actually be regarded as a distributed cognitive system.
This is by no means an intuitive conclusion and well worth
examining in closer detail.
The claim runs counter not least to the current practice in
organizational studies. There is of course the work done on
the cybernetics of management by Beer (1972) and the
classical article by Galbraith (1974) to mention a few
prominent exceptions, but these tend to focus on the
information processing in decision-making. Through the
representational analysis it is possible, however, to get a
hold of the workflow of the actual production process in
hereto unprecedented detail. In the remainder of the paper
further implications for organizational studies and for
cognitive science are attended to.

office are performative. Through the incorporation of
representations in artifacts it is possible to do things with
things. This rethinking can be seen as an attempt to
accommodate the growing body of research on situated
cognition (Lave, 1988) suggesting a fundamental reconceptualization of cognition. The study of performative
representations reveals that cognition is more a question of
practice than of mental depiction. Likewise, it suggests an
abandonment of the “cognition as computation” framework
since many practices do not lend themselves easily to
computational terms. Even though Hutchins is explicit in
handling the work processes of the navigation team (1995)
as fundamentally computational, he is aware of possible
shortcomings of this approach:
“Many human activities are difficult to characterize as
computational in nature. This raises the question of the
extent to which the approach I present here can be applied to
other domains. I would like to believe that the problems will
be mostly methodological, but I am prepared to discover
new theoretical insights as we explore the range of
applicability of this approach” (1996).
Even if there is a lot of information processing taking
place through the practices of the post office there is –
strictly speaking – not much computation. The case study
suggests that computation proper is a borderline case of a
wider information processing as practice framework.

The Orchestration of Representations

The Informational Structures of Work
Recently Vicente (1999) criticized the inability of
distributed cognition to go beyond a mere descriptive stance
and hence the inability of the theory to present formative
directions for the development of informational systems. In
contrast, he argued for developing an analytical framework
directed towards uncovering the “intrinsic constraints” of
work domains. However, I will argue that the study of
representations at work gives the framework a potential
beyond descriptivity. Through the analysis distributed
cognition excavates essential information flows at
organizations. Even if the analysis of the post office was
highly descriptive, studies may be composed to reveal the
minimal and necessary informational structures of
organizations which is exactly what Vicente calls for.
Obviously this is highly valued in organizational studies, not
least with regard to the development of information
technology and cognitive artifacts in general.
It is also important to notice the intertwining of the
informational and the material in cognitive artifacts. Clearly
the input and output of the post office are physical entities,
i.e. letters. In order to do any work with the letters, though,
an informational layer is imposed on the physical entities.
Not that the informational layer takes on a separate
existence; it is exactly the intertwining of the physical and
the informational that bestows the pigeonhole with its
cognitive attributes. The worker manipulates the material of
her work through the informational layer. In this sense
information processing and practice are two sides the same
thing.
This brings us naturally to some implications for
cognitive science. The representations at work at the post

866

The classical view of human rationality – and the one
adopted by traditional cognitive science – highlights the
“cogito” as the site of rationality. From a distributed
cognition perspective, however, rational behavior is a
product of the interaction with artifacts in social settings.
The human mind on its own is not likely to come up with
novel insights. Processes utilizing the massive stock of
creativity accumulated in artifacts and social collaboration
are much more apt scenes of rationality. Accordingly,
rationality is a socio-cultural property of a system – not an
inherent attribute of the mind. As a result, the structures
facilitating rationality are to be examined empirically.
Evidently it is possible to design systems to behave
unintelligently, so instead of assuming rationality a priori it
is important to examine the mechanisms that do orchestrate
systems to behave competently.
Through the discussion of organizational rationality we
derive at a critical issue concerning human vs. material
agency. As should be evident from the study of
representations at work at the post office, there are – so far
unattended to – differences in the cognitive contributions of
man and artifact. Whereas artifacts propagate
representational states inside themselves humans propagate
across artifacts. Working as a “coordinating tissue” actually
sets the human contribution aside from that of artifacts.
Arguably, the humans have access to a higher-level
representation of the system itself in which the distinct
functions of the artifacts need orchestration. Surely, the
artifacts define the task, but it is up to the humans to put
them to work.
The leveling of man and artifact in distributed cognition is
often criticized on ethical grounds (Nardi, 1996). If both

things and minds are construed in representational terms no
dues are paid to the moral value of human beings. This may
lead to inhuman work settings in which workers are treated
on a par with machines. Despite the possibility of
demarcating actions of man from artifacts even under the
label of propagation of representations, the analytical
framework pushed forward here is much better attuned to
the functional/instrumental practices of workflows than to
social issues proper. Every theory has its limitations and this
is probably one to keep in mind while applying distributed
cognition to organizational studies.
Considering the implications for cognitive science, the
line of reasoning presented above suggests an awareness of
the interplay between cognition and the orchestration of
representations. The artifacts may be constantly
reconfigured in light of novel situations. Not only the way
the artifacts are organized in relation to each other, but also
with regard to the internal makeup of each artifact. As
noticed the human function is to act as a malleable tissue
putting representations together to ensure proper
coordination. As such, the orchestration of representations is
an indispensable part of the cognitive function.

Conclusion
Over the last decades much work has been done on the role
of knowledge in organizations. Despite the low-tech
standard of the representations at work at the post office the
cognitive analysis of the information processing occurring
seems sensible. At the post office the informational
structures presented themselves only as the top layer of the
mail delivery system.
Information is certainly always in need of a vehicle but in
modern knowledge based organizations the informational
layer has made itself ever more independent of physical
production processes. In pure form these organizations
actually produce information. This development which
seems to pick up pace through the rise of “the postindustrial
society” and the related explosion in information
technologies, strengthens the need for theories capturing
these information processing abilities. Distributed cognition
seems to be well suited for just that.
On the other hand, cognitive science may benefit equally
from adding organizational studies to its already long list of
disciplines. Organizations are rich sites of the propagation
of representations crucial to cognition. Contrary to
traditional cognitive studies the processing between input
and output in organizations is not opaque. Through the
analytical lens of distributed cognition these propagations
are readily available for inspection which makes
organizations even more promising sites of study. Further,
through the case study a reinterpretation of representations
is carried forth calling for studies of their performative
nature. As a consequence, an abandonment or a widening of
the cognition as computation framework was proposed.
Finally, the mixture of distributed cognition and
organizational studies provides cognitive science with a new
practical discipline of putting representations to work. This
practice holds the promise of delivering directions for
devising cognitive artifacts, the development of

867

informational systems, and for orchestration of entire
organizations.

Acknowledgements
This paper is a result of a study trip to Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, where I studied at the cognitive
science program in the fall of 2002. No one has been more
instrumental to this stay than Dr. Nancy Nersessian.
Although she did criticize earlier versions of this paper
thoroughly I am responsible for all its inadequacy. I would
also like to thank the officers at the Internal Post Office at
the University of Århus for their willing participation in the
case study.
A number of reviewers made significant contributions to
this final version. These include Finn Olesen, Susanne
Bødker, Karen Astvad, Mads Astvad, Kirstine Sinclair,
Mads Søgaard, and Claus Bossen. I am grateful for all their
aid and support.

References
Beer, S. (1972). Brain of the Firm. London: Allen Lane The
Penguin Press.
Galbraith, J. R. (1974). Organization design: An
Information Processing View. Interfaces, 4, (3), 28-36.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1996). Response to Reviewers. Mind, Culture,
and Activity, 3, (1), 64-68.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Mental Models. In M. I.
Posner (Ed.). Foundations of Cognitive Science.
Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in Practice: Mind, Mathematics
and Culture in everyday Life. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Magnani, L. (2002). Epistemic Mediators and Model-Based
Discovery in Science. In L. Magnani & N. J. Nersessian
(Eds.). Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology,
Values. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Nardi, B. (1996). Studying Context: A Comparison of
Activity Theory, Situated Action Models, and Distributed
Cognition. In B. Nardi. Context and Consciousness –
Activity Theory and Human-Computer Interaction. MIT
Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2003). Kuhn, Conceptual Change, and
Cognitive Science. In T. Nickles (Ed.). Thomas Kuhn.
Cambridge University Press.
Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive Artifacts. In J. M. Carroll
(Ed.). Designing Interaction: Psychology at the HumanComputer Interface. Cambridge University Press.
Vicente, K. J. (1999). Cognitive Work Analysis: Toward
Safe, Productive, and Healthy Computer-based Work.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zhang, J. (1997). The Nature of external Representations in
Problem Solving. Cognitive Science, 21 (2), 179-217.

