UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Schema-driven Memory and Structural Alignment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/524863qm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Stilwell, C. Hunt
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Schema-driven Memory and Structural Alignment
C. Hunt Stilwell (stilwell@psy.utexas.edu)
Univeristy of Texas at Austin, Department of Psychology
1 University Station A 8000
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Univeristy of Texas at Austin, Department of Psychology
1 University Station A 8000
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Abstract
In the 1960s and 70s, researchers paid a great deal of
attention to schematic memory, or memory for thematic
information. In the 1980s and 90s, this research ground
to a halt, in large part because researchers lacked a
strong theoretical framework for the study of schematic
memory. We suggest that structure-mapping theory, a
theory of analogy and similarity comparisons, may
provide such a framework. We conduct two experiments
designed to replicate classic findings from the schematic
memory literature - that memory for schema-relevant
information is better than that for schema-irrelevant
information, and that information in a schema can
intrude on memory for instances - using a paradigm from
work in analogical reasoning. Because we can replicate
schema-driven findings in an analogy paradigm, we
should be able to use what we know about analogy to
understand schematic memory.

Introduction
Humans are experts at remembering information that is
related by a common theme. This expertise underlies
our ability to comprehend stories and sentences, as well
as reason about everyday events. A great deal of
attention was once paid to issues related to this type of
memory, called schematic memory, but this research
virtually disappeared two decades ago. While schematic
memory research produced many interesting findings,
its abrupt end left many questions unanswered. In this
paper we argue that schematic memory can be
understood using theories from research in analogy. To
support this argument, we describe two experiments
replicate important findings from the schematic
memory research using an analogical reasoning
paradigm, and discuss the implications of using this
theoretical perspective.

Past Research on Schematic Memory
By the end of the 1970s, there was a wealth of
empirical findings in the schematic memory literature.
For example, people are more likely to remember
information that is relevant to the gist or theme than

1122

information that is not relevant to it (Bransford &
Johnson, 1972). Information related to the theme
facilitates recall (Schustack & Anderston, 1979), and
can also intrude on recall for related information (Sulin
& Dooling, 1974).
All of these findings led to a common set of
conclusions, which also served as the most prominent
theoretical explanation of schematic memory
phenomena. Following Bartlett (1995), memory for
thematic information was thought to be abstracted from
surface information, and stored in schemas. During
recall, this information was reconstructed on-line from
information contained in the schemas. This theoretical
explanation was, however, too abstract, and left many
questions unanswered. For instance, how and when
does the abstraction process take place, and how is the
information in schemas reconstructed in the retrieval
situation? Without a more concrete theoretical
explanation, it was difficult to derive new predictions to
drive empirical research. This research suffered from a
second problem, as well. In general, these experiments
relied on schemas already present in participants'
background knowledge, thus allowing for little control
of the information that went into the schemas being
studied. Eventually, these two problems led researchers
to study other areas of memory, primarily using listlearning methodologies that allowed for more
experimental control.
Our goal in this paper, therefore, is twofold. First, we
develop an experimental method that uses an analogical
reasoning paradigm to create a schema and then expose
participants to an instance that reminds them of it. This
gives us greater control over what goes into the
schemas that participants' use in the experiments.
Second, by using this methodology to replicate two
important findings from the schematic memory
literature, we hope to demonstrate that schematic
memory can be treated as an analogical phenomenon,
and therefore that we can use our knowledge of analogy
to explain these past findings, as well as to answer

previously unanswered questions and to produce new
predictions.

What We Know About Analogy
It is known that analogical comparisons, as well as
other types of comparisons (e.g., similarity and
metaphor), use the process of structural alignment
(Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995; Markman
& Gentner, 1993). During the structural alignment
process, objects and relations from one domain are
aligned with objects and relations from another, and
information from the better-known of the two domains
(called the base) can then be used to make inferences
about the lesser-known domain (called the target).
Three principles govern this alignment process. The
first, called one-to-one mapping, insures that each
object or relation from one domain is mapped onto one
and only one object or relation in the other. The second,
systematicity, states that all else being equal, higherorder mappings will be preferred to lower-order
mappings. The third, parallel connectivity, states that
when to relations are aligned, the objects of those
relations are also aligned.
The relationship between analogy and memory has
been studied before (Markman & Gentner, 1997;
Schustack & Anderson, 1979). However, this research
stopped well short of claiming that memory for
thematic information is an analogical phenomenon.
Thus, as we mentioned above, the experiments in this
paper seek to go further by replicating specific findings
from the previous schematic memory literature using an
analogical reasoning paradigm, in order to demonstrate
that they can in fact be understood within the
framework of structural alignment.

General Experimental Method
The following two experiments use the same general
method. This method involves two tasks, separated by a
delay. In the first task, participants are given series of
story pairs and ask to rate the similarity of the two
stories in each pair (see Figure 1). In each story pair, the
second story, called the target, was given a title, and
contained two short stories, or sub-stories, which
involved the same main characters, but in different
relations. For each target, two base stories were created,
each of which was analogous (i.e., contains different
characters in similar relations) to one of the two target
sub-stories. The first story in each pair was one of the
two base stories for the target. These base stories
served, then, as schemas. The target sub-story that was
analogous to the base a participant received was thus
analogous to the schema, while the other target substory was not.
After a delay, participants were given a retrieval task in
which they had to remember information about the

1123

target stories from the comparison task. This method
allowed us to put the schemas (base stories) into
participants heads, provide them with information
Comparison Task
Base
1

OR
Base
2

Target Delay Delay
(Sub-story
1)
&
(Sub-story
2)

Retrieval Task
(Cued-recall
or
Recognition)

Figure 1: An outline of the tasks in Experiments 1 and
2, and their order.
that should activate those schemas (analogous target
sub-stories) and information that should not activate
them (non-analogous target sub-stories), and then test
participants' memory for both types of information.

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to replicate the finding
that memory is better for schema-relevant than schemairrelevant information (Bransford & Johnson, 1972). In
their experiment, Bransford and Johnson (1972)
presented participants with a paragraph containing a
sentence that did not seem to fit with the rest of the
story. For instance, a paragraph that was ostensibly
about a peace march contained a sentence about an
alien spacecraft landing. During recall, participants
were much less likely to remember this sentence than
those that were relevant to the peace march schema.
However, if the paragraph was given a title that made
the strange sentence (e.g., the alien landing) make sense
in the story, then people were able to recall it.
To replicate this finding, Experiment 1 used the
general method described above. A 20-30 minute filler
task served as the delay, and the retrieval task was a
cued-recall task in which the titles of the targets served
as retrieval cues. The prediction was that participants
would recall information relevant to the analogical
match between the base story and one of the target substories, or schema-relevant information, more readily
than information from the other, non-analogous substory, or schema-irrelevant information.

Method
Participants: Participants were 59 undergraduates at
the University of Texas, Austin, who participated for
course credit. Data from 5 participants had to be
eliminated because they failed to complete one of the
two tasks.

Results and Discussion: A 2(Base Story) X 2(Target
Sub-Story) ANOVA was conducted on the mean recall
data shown in Figure 2. There was a main effect of the
target sub-story, such that participants recalled more
from the sub-story they read first in each target (m =
5.62) than from the second sub-story (m = 4.03),
regardless of which base story they had been given,
F(1,52) = 52.83, p < .051. This may be a result of a
primacy effect, or simply because these stories were
generally longer, and therefore contained more
information to recall. The primary prediction for
Experiment 1 was that participants would remember
analogous, or schema-relevant information better than
they would schema-irrelevant information. Thus, they
would remember information from the target sub-story
that corresponded to the base they received for that
target. Consistent with this prediction, there was a
significant base story by target-sub story interaction,
F(1,52) = 37.96, p < .05. Participants recalled more
from the first sub-story in each target when they had
been given the corresponding base (m = 6.33) than

1
Unless otherwise indicated, analysis conducted across items
and across subjects were significant, and for brevity's sake,
only the subject analyses are reported.

1124

when they had been given the base corresponding to the
7

Base
1

6

Base
2

5
Mean Recall

Materials and Procedure: Eighteen sets of three
stories (2 base stories and one target) were composed,
drawing heavily on the materials used in Gentner,
Ratterman, & Forbus (1993). Booklets of six story pairs
(one of the two bases and the corresponding target)
were created. The pages with base stories simply
contained the story. The target story pages had a title at
the top, and at the bottom, asked participants to rate the
similarity of the base-target pair by circling a number,
and provided a 9-point scale with the words "Highly
Dissimilar" under the 1 and "Highly Similar" under the
9. These booklets comprised the comparison task. The
cued-recall task booklets contained six pages with lines
for writing. Each page had the title of one of the targets
participants had seen in the comparison task.
Participants were given a comparison task booklet
with 6 pairs of stories, and the instructions to read the
stories carefully and rate the similarity of the two
stories in each pair, using the scale provided. Each
participant saw only one base with each target, and
across participants, each of the two bases was seen with
the corresponding target. After completing the
comparison task, participants were given a filler task
that took on average 20-30 minutes to complete.
Finally, participants received the cued-recall packet
with instructions to write down as much as they could
remember about the story they had seen earlier with the
title at the top of the page.

4
3
2
1
0
Target 1

Target 2

second sub-story (m = 4.91), t(52) = 2.78, p < .052.
Figure 2: Mean amount of information participants
recalled from Target Stories (1 or 2) as a function of the
Base Story (1 or 2) they received. Error bars in this and
all future graphs represent standard error.
Participants also recalled more from the second substory in each target when they had been given its
corresponding base (m = 4.67) than when they had
been given the base corresponding to the first target
sub-story (m = 3.38), t(52) = 3.40, p < .05.
Thus, Experiment 1 provided a replication of the
Bransford and Johnson (1972) finding that schemarelevant information is recalled more readily than
schema-irrelevant information using an analogical
reasoning paradigm. In our experiment, information in
the target sub-story that stood in analogical
correspondence to the base story served as schemarelevant information, and information from the target
sub-story that was not analogous to the base served as
schema-irrelevant information. Participants recalled
more of the analogous information than the nonanalogous information.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to replicate the results of
Experiment 1 using a recognition task with a longer
delay, as well as to replicate the finding that when a
story activates a schema, information from that schema
that was not contained in the story can be mistakenly
remembered during recall of the story. For example,
Sulin & Dooling (1974) provided participants with
biographical passages in which the main character was
given either the name of a famous person (e.g., Helen
Keller) or a novel person (e.g., Carol Harris). After a
2

The alpha levels for all pair-wise comparisons were
corrected using the Bonferroni correction.

Method
Participants: Participants were 62 undergraduates
taking a Cognitive Psychology course at the University
of Texas, Austin, who participated for extra credit.
Materials and Procedure: As in Experiment 1, each
participant received a comparison task booklet. These
booklets consisted of 10 base-target story pairs. The

1125

bases and targets were selected from the 18 used in
Experiment 1, and altered as described above. The
instructions were identical to those for Experiment 1.
After a 2-day delay, participants were given a
recognition task booklet. This booklet contained ten
pages of sentences, with a title from one of the targets
at the top of each page. For each target, there were
fourteen recognition sentences. Seven of these were old
sentences (four from one target sub-story and three
from the other) and seven were new sentences (three
foils, two intrusion sentences from one base, and two
from the other). After each sentence were the letters Y
and N, and participants were instructed to circle Y for
those sentences that had appeared in the target story,
and N for those that had not.
0.9
Mean Proportion of Yes Responses

week delay, participants were given a recognition task
containing sentences from the story and new sentences
which were either true sentences about the famous
person that were not contained in the passage or simply
new sentences. When the biographical passage had
contained the name of the famous person, participants
mistakenly recalled having seen the new sentences that
were true of that person. Thus, Sulin & Dooling (1974)
concluded that information from the activated schemas
was intruding on memory for the biographical passages.
In Experiment 2, participants again completed a
comparison task with base and target story pairs. The
target and base stories from Experiment 1 were altered
so that each base contained information relevant to the
story, but not contained in the corresponding sub-story
in the target. After a two-day delay, participants
completed a recognition task in which they were given
the title and a series of sentences for each target they
had seen. They were asked to indicate which sentences
were from those targets and which were not. Included
for each target were OLD sentences from both of the
sub-stories and three types of NEW, or unseen
sentences. The first type, foils, were sentences that were
completely new for all participants. The other two types
of unseen sentences, called intrusion sentences, were
altered versions of sentences from each of the two bases
that were relevant to the story but not contained in the
targets. The alterations to these sentences were
designed to change their surface information as well as
to make them fit with the characters in the target story,
but to retain the relational information of the sentences.
As in Experiment 1, the base stories served as
schemas, the target stories as instances that should
activate the schemas, and the information in the bases
that was not in the target served as information from the
schema that could potentially intrude on participants’
memory for the target. We predict that, consistent with
Experiment 1, participants will correctly recognize
OLD sentences from the target sub-story that
corresponds to the base they saw more often than OLD
sentences from other target sub-story. We also predict
that, consistent with Sulin & Dooling (1974),
participants will be more likely to mistakenly remember
intrusion sentences that were from the base they saw
than either those that were from the base they did not
see or foil sentences.

Base 1

0.8

Base 2

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Target 1

Target 2

Figure 3: Mean proportion of yes responses for OLD
sentences as a function of the Target Sub-story (1 or 2)
from which they were taken, and the Base (1 or 2) that
participants saw.
Results and Discussion: Because there were different
numbers of sentences for each category of recognition
sentences, we analyzed the mean proportions of
sentences for which participants circled Y, indicating
that it had been in the target story, for each sentence
category3. The first prediction for Experiment 2 was
that participants would recognize sentences from the
target sub-story corresponding to the base they saw than
from the other target sub-story, thus replicating
Experiment 1 with a recognition task. To test this
prediction, we conducted a 2(Base Story) X 2(Target
Sub-story) ANOVA on the mean proportions of yes
responses for the old sentences. These mean
proportions for old sentences are presented in Figure 3.
There was a main effect of target sub-story, with
participants indicating that they had seen sentences
from the first target sub-story in each more often than
they indicated having seen the second, F(1,61) = 49.36,
3

The pattern of data for both mean number and proportion of
yes responses was the same.

p < .05. Consistent with our prediction, there was a
significant base X target sub-story interaction, F(1,61)
= 45.92, p < .05. Participants correctly recognized
sentences from the first target sub-story when they had
seen the analogous base (m = 0.75) at a higher rate than
when they seen the non-analogous base (m = .62), t(61)
= 4.93, p < .05. The pattern for sentences from the
second target sub-story was the same, with participants
correctly recognizing it when they had seen the
analogous base (m = 0.63) than when they had seen the
non-analogous one (m = 0.49), t(61) = 3.98, p < .05.
0.7

Intrusion
1
Intrusion
2
Foils

Mean Proportion of Yes Resonses

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Base 1

Base 2

Figure 4: Mean proportion of yes responses for NEW
sentences (Intrusion from Base 1, Intrusion from Base
2, and Foil) as a function of the Base (1 or 2)
participants saw.
The second prediction for Experiment 2 was that, in
replication of Sulin & Dooling (1972), participants
would incorrectly indicate having seen intrusion
sentences from the base they saw more often than
intrusion sentences from the base they had not seen,
thus indicating that information from the base was
intruding on memory for the target. To test this
prediction, we conducted a 2(Base Sentence) X
2(Intrusion Sentence) ANOVA on the mean proportion
of yes responses for the intrusion sentences. This data is
presented in Figure 4, along with the data from foil
sentences. Consistent with the prediction, there was a
significant base sentence X intrusion sentence
interaction, F(1,61) = 92.26, p < .05. When participants
received the base corresponding to the first target substory, they incorrectly recalled seeing the intrusion
sentences from that base (m = 0.50) at a higher rate
than intrusion sentences from the base they had not
seen (m =0.22), t(61) = 7.65, as well as than the foil
sentences (m = 0.17), t(61) = 11.10, p < .05. The
difference between intrusion sentences from the base
they had not seen and foil sentences was not significant,
t(61) = 1.97, p > .10. When participants received the
base corresponding to the second target sub-story, they

1126

incorrectly indicated having seen intrusion sentences
from that base (m = 0.55) more frequently than
intrusion sentences from the unseen base (m = 0.21),
t(61) = 8.77, p < .05, as well as than the foil sentences
(m = 0.16), t(61) = 11.68, p < .05. The difference
between intrusion sentences from the unseen base and
foil sentences was not significant, t(61) = 2.09, p > .10.
These results are consistent with both predictions.
Participants correctly indicated having seen old
sentences from the target sub-story corresponding to the
base they saw more often than old sentences from the
target sub-story that did not correspond to the base,
replicating the results of Experiment 1. Participants also
incorrectly indicated having seen new intrusion
sentences taken from the base story they had seen more
often than those taken from the base they did not see or
foil sentences, thus replicating the finding of Sulin &
Dooling (1974) that information in schemas that is not
contained in the story to be remembered can intrude on
the memory for that story and be mistakenly
remembered. Sulin & Dooling (1974) also found that
intrusion effects increased over time, with virtually no
intrusion at short delays (5 minutes). Pilot studies
indicate that this is the case in the analogical reasoning
paradigm as well, with short delays (20-30 minutes)
prdoducing little to no intrusion.

General Discussion
The experiments presented in this paper are the first in a
series of experiments designed to replicate findings
from the literature on schematic memory using an
analogical reasoning paradigm. In Experiment 1, we
presented participants with base-target story pairs, and
after a delay, asked them to recall as much as they
could about the targets. We found that participants
remembered more about the sub-story within a target
that was analogous to the base they saw. We argued
that this was a replication of the Bransford & Johnson
(1972) finding that people remember more schemarelevant than schema-irrelevant information. In
Experiment 2, we again gave participants base-target
story pairs, with bases that contained information not
present in the targets. In a recognition task, participants
saw old sentences and new sentences that included
version of the information in the bases not present in
the targets. We found that, consistent with Experiment
1, participants correctly recognized old sentences from
the target sub-story that corresponded to the base they
saw than from the sub-story that did not. In addition,
participants were more likely to incorrectly recognize
new intrusion sentences from the base they saw than
sentences they had not seen before, thus replicating the
finding of Sulin & Dooling (1974) that information
contained in schemas can intrude on memory for
instances of the schema.

Because we can replicate these findings using an
analogical reasoning paradigm, we can carry over what
we know about analogy to explain schematic memory
phenomena. We know that analogy involves the
structural alignment process, and thus we suggest that
schematic memory does as well. This means that
schematic memory uses the same principles that
analogy does. This approach may help us to answer
some of the outstanding questions about schematic
memory. For instance, schema-intrusion may involve
processes similar to those that produce inferences from
one domain to another in analogy (Clement & Gentner,
1991; Holyoak, Novick, & Meltz, 1994). Furthermore,
the primacy of schema-relevant information may be
related to the focus of attention on information relevant
to the relational match, goal-related information, and
functionally-relevant information in analogy (Markman
& Gentner, 1997; Spellman & Holyoak, 1996; Keane,
1985).
In addition to the benefits of this theoretical
approach, by using the analogical reasoning method to
study schematic memory, we are able to control what
goes into schemas, allowing us to better test the
predictions we derive with from the structure mapping
theory of analogy. This method raises questions of its
own. For instance, in these experiments, one exposure
to a story was enough to lead to memory effects that
resemble those which previous work attributed to
abstract schemas. Thus, abstractions are not necessary
to explain the observed pattern of memory phenomena.
However, a key limitation of the present studies is that
participants were directed to compare the stories.
Presumably for schemas to be useful, people must be
reminded of them during comprehension. Abstraction
may be useful in that it allows for the retrieval of a
schema in a wider variety of situations (Gick &
Holyoak, 1983). Further research must address this
issue.
Future experiments will replicate other classic
findings, and address the issues that the structural
alignment paradigm raises for research on schematic
memory. The benefits of this research may go in both
directions, as our knowledge of schematic memory may
be able to guide future research in analogy as well.
Thus, this research holds the promise that it will allow
an important but long-neglected type of memory to be
studied again within a concrete theoretical framework,
using a well-controlled method, with the promise of
answering old and providing new questions.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dedre Gentner, Lisa Grimm,
Kyungil Kim, and Lauretta Reeves for helpful
discussion about and/or aid in conducting experiments.

1127

This research was supported by NSF Grant SBC-9905013.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1995/1932). Remembering: A study in
experimental and social psychology. Cambridge
University Press.
Bransford, J. D. & Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual
prerequisites for understanding: Some investigations
of comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal
Learning & Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 717-726.
Clement, C. A. & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as
a selection constraint in analogical mapping.
Cognitive Science, 15(1), 89-132.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2),
155-170.
Gentner, D.; Ratterman, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25(4), 524-575.
Holyoak, K. J.; Novick, L. R., & Melz, E. R. (1994).
Component processes in analogical transfer:
Mapping, pattern completion, and adaptation. In
Holyoak, K. J. & Barnden, J. A. (Eds.). ). Analogical
connections. Advances in connectionist and neural
computation theory, Vol 2. 113-180. Norwood, N.J.:
Ablex Publishing Corp.
Holyoak, K. F. & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Keane, M. (1985). On drawing analogies when solving
problems: A theory and test of solution generation an
analogical problem-solving task. British Journal of
Psychology, 76(4), 449-458.
Markman, A. B. & Gentner, D. (1997). The effects of
alignability on memory. Psychological Scienc, 8(5),
363-367.
Markman, A. B. & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25(4), 431-467.
Schustack, M.W. & Anderson, J. R. (1979). Effects of
analogy to prior knowledge on memory for new
information. . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal
Behavior, 18(5), 65-583.
Spellman, B. A. & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). Pragmatics
in analogical mapping. Cognitive Psychology, 31(3),
307-346.
Sulin, R. A. & Dooling, D. J. (1974). Intrusion of a
thematic idea in retention of prose. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 103(2), 255-262.

