UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sequence Effects in Solving Knowledge-Rich Problems: The Ambiguous Role of Surface
Similarities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zq6d5cm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Scheiter, Katharina
Gerjets, Peter

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sequence Effects in Solving Knowledge-Rich Problems:
The Ambiguous Role of Surface Similarities
Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
Abstract
Sequence effects are said to occur whenever the problemsolving performance varies as a function of the order in which
problems are solved. We present a framework that explain
sequence effects as a result of (a) learning during solving a
problem and of (b) transferring the learned content on
succeeding problems. In two experiments we studied the
ambiguous influence of surface similarities among structurally
dissimilar knowledge-rich problems on sequence effects.
These experiments demonstrate that surface similarities may
either foster performance by enabling learning during problem
solving or lead to negative transfer depending on whether
problem solvers are already aware of the structural features of
the problems prior to solving them or not.

Sequence Effects in Problem Solving
In this paper we investigate the ambiguous role of surface
similarities for the occurrence of sequence effects when
solving so-called knowledge-rich problems (VanLehn,
1996). Sequence effects occur whenever performance varies
as a function of the order in which problems are solved.
These effects can be analyzed as the result of (a) learning
during problem solving and (b) transfer (Scheiter & Gerjets,
2002). Learning refers to a change in the cognitive system
of the problem solver (i.e., newly generated or modified
knowledge structures) that occurs due to solving a problem.
Transfer refers to the transmission of these newly generated
or modified knowledge structures to a subsequent target
problem. Whenever problem orders are compared to each
other that differ with regard to how they support these two
processes, sequence effects may arise.
Sequence effects for knowledge-lean problems Sequence
effects can be well demonstrated for rather context-free
tasks whose accomplishment does not presuppose
substantial domain-specific prior knowledge (i.e.,
knowledge-lean problems, cf. VanLehn, 1989). For instance,
sequence effects can be found for simple stimulus-response
tasks in the taskshift paradigm (Rogers & Monsell, 1995) or
for rule induction tasks (Sweller, 1980). In these tasks
learning mostly consists in the activation of knowledge
structures necessary for the accomplishment of the task and
transfer is seen as a more or less automatic process in which
higher activated knowledge structures are more readily
available when working on a succeeding task.

1035

Sequence effects for knowledge-rich problems These
problems differ from knowledge-lean problems in several
respects. First, working on knowledge-rich problems
requires domain-specific prior knowledge. Second, whereas
knowledge-lean problems consist only of a small number of
task stimuli that are relevant to their solution (i.e., structural
features), knowledge-rich problems are often embedded in a
semantically rich context (e.g., algebra word problems).
That is, they may contain many surface features that are
irrelevant to their solution. As will be stressed in the
remainder of this paper, these surface features and their
combination with structural features play a central, but
ambiguous role for the formation of sequence effects when
solving knowledge-rich problems. In particular, surface
similarities among succeeding structurally dissimilar
problems may either hinder performance by means of
negative transfer or improve it by fostering structural
awareness and learning during problem solving.
The differences between knowledge-lean and knowledgerich problems may also influence the two processes that are
made responsible for the occurrence of sequence effects. For
knowledge-rich problems learning during problem solving
may not consist only in the activation of already existing
knowledge structures and transfer may not only be an
automatic process:
- Learning during problem solving: Solving a knowledgerich problem presupposes a substantial amount of
problem comprehension, which is expressed in the
problem solver’s ability to construct a situation model of
that problem (Nathan, Kintsch, & Young, 1992). A
situation model is a qualitative representation of a
problem in terms of concrete objects, events, and
relations mentioned in the problem. The situation model
can be transformed into a more abstract and quantitative
problem model by further interpreting the situation
model on the basis of problem schemas, which are
“templates for organizing problem-relevant information”
(Nathan et al., 1992, p. 332). These problem schemas are
therefore considered to be the relevant prior knowledge
helpful to solve knowledge-rich problems. The problem
model that results from this knowledge-based
interpretation process mainly comprises structural
features that determine how a problem has to be solved.
To sum up, learning during solving a knowledge-rich
and context-rich problem - as the first factor in the
explanation of sequence effects - results in a declarative
representation of a problem and its solution that may be

1036

by fostering structural awareness and learning during
problem solving (near miss). This ambiguity is expressed in
two contrasting hypotheses on sequence effects when
solving knowledge-rich problems. These hypotheses can be
best explained in the context of the experimental materials
that will be introduced next.

Problem Sequences for
Algebra Word Problems
The test problems that were used for experimentation
consisted in nine algebra word problems. There were three
problems that stemmed from each of three problem
categories, namely work problems, motion problems, and
interest problems (Mayer, 1981). Within each problem
category the three problems could be solved by applying the
same solution procedure. Different problem categories
required different solution procedures. For the purpose of
experimentally testing the impact of superficial and
structural similarities on sequence effects we made use of a
method introduced by Blessing and Ross (1996), i.e., we
cross-varied the surface and structural features of the word
problems (see Table 1).
Table 1: Algebra word problems used for experimentation

Problem
category

more or less abstract depending on what prior
knowledge a problem solver has at his or her disposal.
However, there is evidence that even problem schemata
themselves are not only abstract, but may include
information that is tied to the concrete context of
problems (Hinsley, Hayes, & Simon, 1977). In fact,
many problem categories (defined by the structural
features of the problems) are associated with a specific
cover story so that superficial problem features may act
as useful cues for retrieving a problem schema from
memory. This is, however, helpful only for problems
where a cover story activates a problem schema that
corresponds to the structural features of the problem.
Otherwise, the apparent resemblance with regard to
superficial but not structural features may lead to
performance impairments.
- Transfer to subsequent problems: Sequence effects are
not only based on learning during problem solving but
also rely on the fact that the learned content is applied to
a new problem. In contrast to knowledge-lean problems,
transfer among knowledge-rich problems is said to be a
non-automatic process requiring effort and
metacognitive awareness (Weisberg, DiCamillo, &
Phillips, 1978; Salomon & Perkins, 1989). This kind of
transfer is often referred to as transfer by analogy and
consists in a number of different processes (Gentner,
1983; Gick & Holyoak, 1980). In order to solve a target,
first a suitable source problem has to be retrieved from
memory. Next, elements of the source problem and its
solution are mapped onto the target. Finally, based on
these mappings a solution for the target problem can be
generated. Whether a target problem is successfully
solved by means of analogical transfer depends on first
whether a problem solver recognizes similarities
between the target and an earlier problem-solving
episode stored in memory. Second, this similarity
judgment must be based on structural similarity, i.e., it
must rely on features that are relevant to the solution of
the problems. Unfortunately, a wide range of evidence
shows that problem solvers often fail to notice
spontaneously that they have encountered similar
problems before (Gick & Holyoak, 1980). Furthermore,
similarity judgments are most often based on superficial
features of the problems, which sets the stage for
negative transfer (Holyoak & Koh, 1987). Transfer in
solving knowledge-rich problems – as the second factor
in the formation of sequence effects – therefore crucially
depends upon a problem solver’s ability to distinguish
among a problem’s surface features and its deep
structure.
Funnily enough, it may be a strong resemblance between
problems with regard to superficial features that fosters this
structural awareness. That is, comparing two problems that
share many surface features but differ with regard to
structural features may highlight the structural differences
between these problems. This effect has been referred to as
the “near-miss” effect (Winston, 1975).
To conclude, surface features of knowledge-rich problems
and the way they are combined with structural features may
either hinder performance (negative transfer) or improve it

Work
Motion
Interest

Work
Correspond.

Cover story
Motion

Interest

Correspond.
Correspond.

Note: Grey-shadowed cells indicate non-corresponding test
problems.
For each of the three problem categories there was always
one problem that was embedded in the cover story that is
typical for problems of that category (i.e., a so-called
corresponding problem). Additionally, there were two
problems of each problem category that were each couched
into cover stories that are typical for another problem
category (i.e., non-corresponding problems). For instance,
the non-corresponding problem shown in Table 2 belongs to
the problem category of work problems, however, its cover
story is very similar to that typical of motion problems.
Table 2: Corresponding and non-corresponding test
problems for the work-problem category
Corresponding problem: An electrician needs 3 hours in
order to repair a lamp, while his apprentice needs 6 hours
to perform the same job. How long would it take them to
repair the lamp, if they worked together?
Non-corresponding problem: Jane needs 6 hours to drive to
Tom by car, whereas Tom needs 4 hours for driving the
reversed way. How long would they need to drive until
they meet on the way, if they started at the same time?
Common solution procedure: 1 = (Rate1 + Rate2) * h

In order to investigate the ambiguous role of surface
features two different problem sequences were constructed
for the nine corresponding and non-corresponding test
problems. In the structure-blocked sequence the test
problems were presented according to their category
membership resulting in three blocks of problems (work-,
motion-, interest-category), so that within each block there
were three problems that could all be solved by applying the
same solution procedure. On the contrary, in the surfaceblocked sequence test problems were presented according to
their cover stories resulting in three blocks of superficially
similar problems (work-, motion-, interest-story). However,
within each block each of the three problems had to be
solved by a different solution procedure. In both sequences
each block of problems began with a corresponding problem
(i.e., a problem couched into its typical cover story),
followed by two non-corresponding ones (i.e., problems
couched into atypical cover stories).
In the remainder of the paper these problems for which we
varied the problem-solving sequence will be referred to as
isomorphic problems, because they are structurally identical
(isomorphic) to examples participants had to study before
working on the test problems. In addition to these
isomorphic problems participants had to solve three transfer
problems that each required an adaptation of one of the
known solution procedures. For the transfer problems order
was kept constant for all participants.
We investigated two contrasting hypotheses concerning
performance differences between the two problem
sequences that are illustrated in the next section.

Transfer versus Near Miss?
The transfer hypothesis states that performance for
isomorphic problems in the structure-blocked sequence
should be superior to performance in the surface-blocked
sequence, whereas the near-miss hypothesis assumes the
opposite.
Transfer hypothesis The first hypothesis is based on an
activation-summation model that is commonly used to
describe the retrieval of source problems in analogical
transfer (Holyoak & Koh, 1987). According to this model
the retrieval of stored problem knowledge to solve a target
problem is guided by structural as well as superficial
similarities between target and source. That is, any feature
of a target problem can act as a source of activation for
mental representations that also contain this feature.
“Activation from multiple shared features will summate,
and if the activation level of a stored representation exceeds
some threshold, that representation will become available
for further processing” (Holyoak & Koh, 1987, p. 333f.).
The most activated representation is used for solving the
current problem. Using this model in order to predict
performance for the aforementioned problem sequences
leads to the assumption that negative transfer among
succeeding problems should occur in the case of a surfaceblocked problem sequence as is illustrated in Figure 1.
The surface-blocked sequence starts with a corresponding
problem (indicated by identical indices for problem category
PC and cover story CV) that may activate the correct

1037

problem schema. The second problem PC2CV1 is a noncorresponding problem from a different problem category
than the first problem, but embedded in a cover story typical
for problems of problem category 1. Its structural features
may activate the correct problem schema 2; however, its
surface features activate problem schema 1, which is already
highly activated as it has been applied to solve the first
problem. Therefore, problem schema 1 may be spuriously
used to solve the second test problem – resulting in negative
transfer. A correct problem schema is applied again when
the next corresponding problem (PC2CV2) is encountered at
the beginning of the second block.

Figure 1: Negative and positive transfer based
on activation summation
On the contrary, in the structure-blocked sequence the
structural features of the second problem PC1CV2 cue the
already highly activated problem schema 1 that has been
used to solve the first (corresponding) problem and that is
also suited to solve the second test problem. Additionally,
there may be activation of the wrong problem schema 2 due
to shared surface features, however, this should not be
sufficient to dominate the selection process. In this problem
sequence non-corresponding problems within each block
benefit from the previous activation of a problem schema by
means of positive transfer, whereas performance for noncorresponding problems is impaired in the case of a surfaceblocked sequence (i.e., negative transfer). According to the
transfer hypothesis sequence effects in favor of a structureblocked sequence should in particular be observable for
non-corresponding compared to corresponding problems.
These sequence effects can be explained by differences
among the sequences with regard to enabling positive
transfer among succeeding problems.
Near-miss hypothesis According to the second hypothesis a
surface-blocked sequence should result in better
performance compared to a structure-blocked sequence.
This should be the case because a surface-blocked sequence
highlights structural differences among succeeding

problems as these problems share the same cover story and
differ only with regard to a few, but crucial features, i.e.
structural features (Winston, 1975). On the contrary, in the
structure-blocked sequence in which superficially dissimilar
problems of one category are presented in succession
attention may be directed toward differences with regard to
the surface features between these problems and may
thereby even impede problem-solving performance. Again,
sequence effects should be in particular observable for noncorresponding problems. These sequence effects can be
explained by differences among the sequences with regard
to enabling learning during problem solving (i.e., acquiring
knowledge on structural features).
Therefore, the near-miss hypothesis also predicts better
performance for transfer problems, if they are solved
subsequently to a surface-blocked sequence of isomorphic
test problems. Transfer problems require an adaptation of
known solution procedures and thus presuppose knowledge
on structural features and on their relation to solution steps.
The transfer hypothesis, on the other hand, does not allow
for any predictions concerning transfer performance.
The two contradicting hypotheses were tested in two
experiments described in the following sections.

Results and Discussion
In all analyses of variances reported here we used math
grades and gender as covariates because they were both
strongly associated with problem-solving performance. In a
first step we analyzed subjects’ performance on the
isomorphic test problems by an ANCOVA (Figure 2).
As postulated in the near-miss hypothesis subjects who
were presented with the surface-blocked sequence
outperformed subjects who worked in the structure-blocked
condition (F(1,35) = 4.51; MSE = 305.01; p < .05). Further
distinguishing between corresponding and noncorresponding isomorphic problems revealed that this
sequence effect in favor of the surface-blocked sequence
could only be observed for non-corresponding problems
(F(1,35) = 5.27; MSE = 446.94; p < .05), whereas there were
no performance differences for corresponding problems as
predicted (F < 1).
80

Errors (%)

Experiment 1

subjects’ error rates for the isomorphic and transfer
problems were registered.

Method
Participants Subjects were 40 students (33 female, 7 male)
of the Saarland University, Germany, who participated for
course credit or payment. Average age was 23.03 years.
Materials and procedure Participants first received a
booklet that contained an example problem together with a
step-by-step solution for each of the three problem
categories used for experimentation. The worked-out
examples were couched into their typical cover stories.
Participants were given twelve minutes to study the
examples carefully. Subsequently, the example booklet was
taken away from them and they received another booklet
with the nine test problems that were isomorphic to the
previously studied examples. Each test problem was
presented on a single page and the pages were arranged
according to either the surface-blocked or structure-blocked
sequence. Participants were instructed to solve the problems
in the given order. There were no time limits during testing.
When participants had finished working on the nine
isomorphs they had to solve the three transfer problems.
Design and dependent measures The problem sequence
for the nine isomorphic test problems was varied as a
between-subjects variable. The problems were either
blocked according to the problem category they belonged to
(structure-blocked sequence) or according to their cover
stories (surface-blocked sequence). The sequence of the
three blocks (either containing structurally or superficially
similar problems) was counterbalanced within the two
experimental conditions. As performance measures

1038

(a) Isomorphic problems

(b) Transfer

60
40
20
0
Total

Corres.

Structure-blocked

Noncorres.
Surface-blocked

Figure 2: Problem-solving errors for (a) isomorphic
problems (total, corresponding and non-corresponding) and
(b) transfer problems as a function of problem sequence
Arranging isomorphic problems according to their cover
story compared to arranging them according to their
structural features not only improved performance on these
problems, but also positively influenced subsequent transfer
performance (F(1,34) = 5.17; MSE = 572.02; p < .05). There
were no trade-offs between the time needed for problem
solving and any of the error measures.
To conclude, performance on the isomorphic as well as on
the transfer problems clearly supported the near-miss
hypothesis. That is, presenting superficially similar
problems successively emphasizes differences between
these problems with regard to structural features and thereby
fosters problem-solving performance. Additionally, working
on problems from different problem categories alternately
seems to result in more knowledge on structural features
that can be brought into play in order to solve problems that
require an adaptation of known solution procedures.
It is important to note that the surface-blocked sequence is
superior because it supports a process that seems to be the
most crucial prerequisite for transfer, namely recognizing

structural features among problems. This explanation has an
interesting consequence as it implies that the observed
superiority of the surface-blocked sequence should vanish
under certain conditions. In particular, there should be no
sequence effect due to near miss when problem solvers are
already sufficiently aware of the structural properties of the
to-be-solved problems.
In order to address this issue we conducted a second
experiment where subjects’ attention was directed towards
structural features of the to-be-solved problems by means of
a categorization task before they attempted to solve them
either in the structure-blocked or surface-blocked condition.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to test the assumption that
fostering structural awareness by means of a prior
categorization task should reduce the superiority of the
surface-blocked sequence. More precisely stated, we
expected that participants who were able to categorize the
problems according to their structural features would no
longer benefit from a surface-blocked sequence in which
structural differences are highlighted. On the contrary, it
might even well be that due to the fact that good
categorizers already know about the problems’ structural
similarities they might benefit from activation mechanisms
in the structure-blocked sequence in which succeeding
problems can be solved by the same solution procedure,
thereby enabling positive transfer among these problems.
However, for subjects who experience difficulties in
detecting the structural similarities among problems in the
categorization task, the surface-blocked sequence might be
another chance to recognize the structural properties of the
problems. This superiority of the surface-blocked sequence
may however be less accentuated compared to Experiment 1
as it might at least be partially overridden by minor effects
of prior problem categorization. In sum, poor categorizers
were expected to show a – maybe less accentuated –
superiority of the surface-blocked sequence, whereas no
sequence effect (or even a superiority of the structureblocked sequence) was postulated for good categorizers.

solved in a different way etc. It was stressed that there could
be as many categories as they liked and that the number of
problems assigned to each category did not need to be
identical for all categories. After having accomplished the
categorization task participants were told to solve the
problems they had categorized before. The list with the
problems to be solved and the category assignments
produced by the participant were visible during the whole
test phase. Contrary to Experiment 1, the test problems were
not presented each on a single page, rather participants
received only the list and blank paper to write down their
solutions. After having solved the isomorphic problems,
participants received the three transfer problems.
Design and dependent measures Problem sequence for the
nine isomorphic test problems was varied as a betweensubjects variable. The problems on the list for the
categorization task were either presented in the structureblocked sequence or in the surface-blocked sequence. The
sequence of the three blocks (either containing structurally
or superficially similar problems) was counterbalanced
within the two experimental conditions. Additionally, we
distinguished between good and poor categorizers within
each of the experimental conditions (see below).
As performance measures participants’ error rates for the
isomorphic and transfer problems were registered.
Additionally, we determined the performance in the
categorization task by computing a structure score according
to Quilici and Mayer (1996) that indicates participants’
ability to categorize problems according to their structural
similarities. This structure score was used for a median split
within both problem sequence conditions in order to
distinguish between good and poor categorizers.

Results and Discussion
In a first step we analyzed subjects’ performance on the
isomorphic test problems (Figure 3) by means of an
ANCOVA (problem sequence x quality of categorization;
math grades and gender as covariates).

80

Participants Subjects were 40 students (29 female, 11
male) of the Saarland University, Germany who participated
for course credit or payment. Average age was 25.03 years.
Materials and procedure The same materials were used
for experimentation as in Experiment 1. Participants first
studied the booklet containing three worked-out examples
for a maximum of twelve minutes. In contrast to Experiment
1 they did not start working on the isomorphic test problems
immediately after this learning phase. Rather, participants
received a sheet of paper that listed all nine isomorphic test
problems, whereby the order of presentation depended on
experimental condition. They were instructed to categorize
problems according to their mathematical features by
assigning the letter ‘A’ to all problems that could be solved
in a similar way, the letter ‘B’ to all problems that could be

1039

Errors (%)

Method

(a) Isomorphic problems

(b) Transfer

60
40
20
0
Good
Categ.

Poor
Categ.

Structure-blocked

Good
Categ.

Poor
Categ.

Surface-blocked

Figure 3: Problem-solving errors for (a) isomorphic and
for (b) transfer problems as a function of problem
sequence and quality of categorization

Neither problem sequence nor quality of categorization had
an impact on problem-solving performance (problem
sequence: F < 1; quality of categorization: F(1,31) = 1.11;
MSE = 430.51; p = .30). This lack of significant main effects
could be traced back to a cross-interaction between the two
factors (F(1,31) = 5.15; MSE = 430.51; p < .05). Participants
who performed poorly in detecting structural similarities in
the categorization task did not show any sequence effect
(t(18) = 0.83; p > .40; two-tailed), whereas good
categorizers performed better in the structure-blocked
sequence compared to the surface-blocked sequence.
However, the latter difference was not significant due to a
lack of statistical power (t(18) = -1.51; p < .15; two-tailed).
Further analyses revealed that as expected this pattern of
results held only for non-corresponding problems.
For the transfer problems there was no main effect for
problem sequence (F < 1). However, good categorizers
committed fewer errors in the transfer task than did poor
categorizers (F(1,31) = 5.48; M SE = 581.31; p < .05).
Finally, there was the same, but less accentuated crossinteraction as for isomorphic problems (F(1,31) = 3.66; MSE
= 581.31; p < .10). However, the respective paired
comparisons were not significant (both ps > .20).
To conclude, the quality of problem categorization
moderated effects of problem sequence as expected. Not
only did the sequence effect in favor of the surface-blocked
sequence vanish for good categorizers, but participants who
had been able to detect the problems’ structural similarities
in the categorization task even slightly benefited from a
structure-blocked sequence. This can be interpreted as
evidence that the structural awareness induced by the
categorization task supported positive, activation-based
transfer among succeeding structurally similar problems in
this sequence. On the other hand, for poor categorizers no
sequence effect could be observed. It might well be that the
initially expected superiority of the surface-blocked
sequence is overridden by minor effects of the
categorization task that run into the opposite direction –
adding up to a null effect.

Summary
In two experiments we provided evidence for the ambiguous
role of surface similarities in the formation of sequence
effects. On the one hand, presenting superficially similar,
but structurally dissimilar problems successively can foster
learning during problem solving by enabling the recognition
of structural relations among problems. On the other hand,
structure-blocked sequences may foster the transfer process
in the case that structural relations among problems have
already been detected. Accordingly, we obtained support for
the transfer as well as for the near-miss hypothesis
depending on whether problem solvers were aware of
structural features prior to problem solving or not.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a scholarship of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft awarded to the first author of the
paper as a member of the Graduate College for Cognitive
Science at the Saarland University, Germany. We thank

1040

Carina Kraemer, Frauke Lancker, Lisa Olbrich, and Tina
Schorr for conducting the experiments.

References
Blessing, S. B., & Ross, B. H. (1996). Content effects in
problem categorization and problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 792-810.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Hinsley, D. A., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1977). From
words to equations: Meaning and representation in algebra
word problems. In M. A. Just & P. A. Carpenter (Eds.),
Cognitive processes in comprehension. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition, 15,
332-340.
Mayer, R. E. (1981). Frequency norms and structural
analysis of algebra story problems into families,
categories, and templates. Instructional Science, 10, 133175.
Nathan, M. J., Kintsch, W., & Young, E. (1992). A theory
of algebra-word-problem comprehension and its
implications for the design of learning environments.
Cognition and Instruction, 9, 329-389.
Quilici, J. L., & Mayer, R. E. (1996). Role of examples in
how students learn to categorize statistics word problems.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 144-161.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictable
switch between simple cognitive tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 207-231.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1989). Rocky roads to
transfer: Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected
phenomenon. Educational Psychologist, 24, 113-142.
Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P. (2002). The impact of problem
order: Sequencing problems as a strategy for improving
one's performance. In W. D. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 798-803). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Sweller, J. (1980). Hypothesis salience, task difficulty, and
sequential effects on problem solving. American Journal
of Psychology, 93, 135-145.
VanLehn, K. (1989). Problem solving and cognitive skill
acquisition. In M. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of cognitive
science. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weisberg, R., DiCamillo, M., & Phillips, D. (1978).
Transferring old associations to new situations: A
nonautomatic process. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 17, 219-228.
Winston, P. H. (1975). Learning structural descriptions from
examples. In P. H. Winston (Ed.), The psychology of
computer vision. New York: McGraw-Hill.

