UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Seven Cognitive Factors that Make Learning Successful in Networked Collaboration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0645r9ms

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Cho, Kwangsu
Schunn, Christian D.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Seven Cognitive Factors that Make Learning Successful in Networked Collaboration
Kwangsu Cho (Kwangsu@Pitt.Edu)

Christian D. Schunn (Schunn@Pitt.Edu)

Learning Research and Development Center, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
This paper examines seven cognitive factors that seem to make
learning successful in networked collaboration. Through our
literature review, it was found that there are at least seven
cognitive factors: deep thinking, more interaction, cognitive
conflict resolution, adaptation over time, constructive use of
technology, task coordination between media, and
asynchrousness management. It is concluded that the
effectiveness of learning and problem solving in networked
collaboration is determined by students’ use of those factors
in networked collaboration.

One of the most famous collaborations in history was
between Herbert Simon, Allen Newell, and J. C. Shaw who
worked together over the phone. Simon was at Carnegie
Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh and Newell and Shaw
were at RAND in California. McCorduck (1979) wrote: “…
Simon and Cliff Shaw seldom saw or spoke to each other.
Newell carried out the middleman’s role, mostly by longdistance telephone between Pittsburgh and Santa Monica”
(p. 139). However, they were one of the most effective
teams in spite of the difficulties working at a distance.
In present day, we work together with our colleagues
using the help of the state-of-art technology called
computer-mediated communication (CMC). Once you sit at
your desk, you can see whether your partners are available,
busy or even happy using an instant messenger. You can
communicate through email or video-mediated conference
with your colleagues who are within 10 steps or in another
continent. However, the state-of-art networked collaboration
technology seems not straightforward to result in better
performance although barriers set by time and space have
been removed. So, what factors make networked
collaboration effective or ineffective for learning and
problem solving? That is the topic that this review intends to
investigate.
Dominant theories in CMC such as social presence
theory (Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976), media richness
theory (Daft & Lengel, 1986), task-media fitness theory
(McGrath & Hollingshead, 1994), etc. argue that the
bandwidth or capacities of transmitting information in each
communication medium determine the effectiveness of
networked collaboration in learning and problem solving.
We call these theories the face-to-face (FTF) superiority
theories since they qualify the effectiveness of networked
collaboration through CMC in terms of the amount of
information each CMC medium transmits. According to the
FTF superiority theories, networked collaboration filters out
various information such as social cues. Hence, networked
collaboration cannot be as effective as FTF with possible

246

exceptions where networked collaboration is task-oriented
(Sproull & Kiesler, 1991) and where a task does not require
more than a given network bandwidth (McGrath &
Hollingshead, 1994). However, empirical studies tend not to
find supportive evidence when the quantity and/or quality of
performance instead of self-report were taken into account,
and when bandwidth as an independent was manipulated
(e.g. Dennis & Kinney, 1998). Also many studies show that
networked collaboration is as effective as FTF (e.g. Vera,
Kvan, West, & Lai, 1998). Thus, it seems that the impact of
bandwidth is not a critical factor, but rather deactivated by
another factor, which we assume the role of active agents in
the processes of networked collaboration.
In contrast to the FTF superiority theories, cognitive
perspectives try to account for learning and problem solving
in networked collaboration in terms of how cognitive agents
adapt and behave because “learning rests on the learning
skills that the students themselves bring to bear as they
learn” (Chi, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989, p. 146). Thus,
learners are expected to be involved in constructive
processes where they construct knowledge, skills, and ways
of working together regardless of whether they are in
adverse or auspicious situations. Hence, in a low-bandwidth
network, they are still expected to overcome given
difficulties by maximizing the effectiveness of knowledge,
strategies or skills. For example, Cho, Schunn, and Lesgold
(2002) compared successful dyads with unsuccessful dyads
in networked collaboration. Participants were asked to work
together to understand texts while interacting with peers
through a text-based generic chat interface. It was shown
that in general the unsuccessful dyads tend to be involved in
less effective learning processes like checking each other’s
answer or rephrasing, while the successful groups tended to
be involved in more effective processes like explanation or
elaboration. In the face of explicit errors or
misunderstandings, the successful groups explored their
understandings in more depth by implementing elaboration.
However, the unsuccessful groups didn’t explore what
caused their comprehension failure and tended to keep their
errors. Therefore, the prime consideration of this paper is to
reveal what processes make networked collaboration
successful for effective learning and problem solving.

Methods
Scope This review deals with networked collaboration for
learning and problem solving between peers in unstructured
situations, which by itself covers many situations. Therefore,
the long history of collaborative learning and problem
solving at a distance using surface mail, fax, phones, TVs,
and satellites are not taken as being included in the main

issue. Non-peer interactions like student-teacher interactions
in teaching, tutoring, or otherwise are not dealt with, either.
Cases To find papers to be analyzed, ERIC (1982 2002/06), ISA (Information Science Abstract; 1966 2002/09), LLBA (Linguistics & Language Behavior
Abstracts; 1973 -2002/09), PsychInfo (1978-2002/09),
Sociological Abstracts (1986-2002/09), ACM (American
Computing Machinery) were searched with keywords. In
total, 676 studies were located with abstracts, but many
studies were excluded if they were beyond the scope of this
review as defined above. Finally, 102 studies were left for
the analysis.

Results
Networked collaboration may produce positive performance
in learning and problem solving depending on some
cognitive and adaptive processes. In this section, the
processes that make networked collaboration effective are
critically addressed.
Think in More Depth
Deep thinking has been considered one of the most
important processes for learning and problem solving.
Researchers have argued that networked collaboration
especially through text-based CMC could be successful if
participants incubate deep thinking activities such as
articulation, reflection, or critical thinking (Hammond,
1999; Lotman, 1988; McNeil, Robin, & Miller, 2000;
Warschauer, 1997).
Collaborators interacting through a synchronous textbased interface such as the chat could benefit from the
speech-like, real-time interactions as well as the time
available for reflection and preparation, although perhaps at
the expense of organized utterances due to the delay time
between utterances (Kroonenberg, 1994/1995). Warschauer
(1997) argued that “the historical divide between speech and
writing has been overcome with the interactional and
reflective aspects of language merged in a single medium:
CMC” (p.472). Therefore, compared to FTF, participants in
networked collaboration could use more deep thinking
strategies like exchanging more ideas, proposals and
perspectives. Conversational analyses showed that students
felt freer to have reflective time and to take issue with
different perspectives (Cho et al, 2002; Dubrovsky, Kiesler,
& Sethna, 1991). Therefore, participants in networked
collaboration tend to become involved in more desirable
conversational processes and patterns like scientific inquiry
and more task-relevant conversations (Barile & Durso,
2002; Jonassen & Kwon, 2001).
Asynchronous channels like emails or electronic bulletin
boards could fortify deep thinking activities because those
channels could also furnish participants with learnercentered time to think and external, permanent long-term
memory aids. Thus, along with the self-regulated time,
CMC allows people to think more about issues or
assignments. Therefore, asynchronous communications
could be very effective for interpretation and reflection

247

(Warschauer,
1997).
Therefore,
participants
in
asynchronous interaction generate more discussions and
more complete reports than FTF, for instance (BenbunanFich, Hiltz, & Turoff, 2002). In addition, Jonassen and
Kwon (2001) analyzed conversations collected from
undergraduate engineering students who solved illstructured and well-structured business tasks through either
FTF or an asynchronized text-based conferencing medium.
The students in the networked collaboration condition had
significantly fewer off-task interactions and raised
significantly more disagreements than FTF students. A more
interesting result was that the students in networked
collaboration showed iterative scientific inquiry patterns of
problem definition, orientation, and solution development
during problem solving, while those in FTF stopped after a
single cycle of the sequence. In other words, once FTF
students developed their problem solutions their interaction
was terminated. Reid, Malinek, Stott, and Evans (1996) also
found that FTF groups were considerably more involved in
process loss such as off-task behaviors than networked
collaboration groups.
As in text-based channels, deep thinking could be
implemented in non-text CMC channels. For example,
Alavi, Wheeler, and Valacich (1995) carried out a
longitudinal field study of comparing the effectiveness of
computer-mediated groups between a local campus,
computer-mediated distributed groups from different
campuses, and FTF groups. It was found that although there
were no significant differences in outcomes between the
comparison conditions, a significant difference was found in
higher-level critical thinking, which appeared only in the
computer-mediated distributed groups.
Also, it seems that students are willing to reflect upon
thinking to compensate for the difficulties posed by
networked collaboration (Galegher & Kraut, 1994).Vera et
al. (1998) found that, compared to video-mediated
collaboration (VMC), the conversational process in textbased CMC involved more abstracted conversation,
sacrificing other features like elaboration.
More Equal and/or More Interaction
Because networked collaboration tends to obscure social
status cues, participants in networked collaboration do have
more equal interaction and more learner-centered
interactions (Hammond, 1999; Warschauer, 1997), which
may create more opportunities for learner-based activities.
In a sense, the lack of social cues may encourage to be
more interactive non-dominant students who are less vocal
or less able to communicate in FTF. Therefore, nondominant students may actively participate in online
discussions more than in FTF (Dubrovsky et al., 1991;
Eveland & Bikson, 1988; Sproull & Kiesler, 1991). A
dramatic example is from research on English as Second
Language (ESL) students. Sullivan and Pratt (1996)
observed that in FTF discussion about the half of the ESL
students participated. In contrast, in online discussion 100 %
of the ESL students participated. Also, Eveland and Bikson

(1988) observed that participants in networked collaboration
tend to like changing leaders, but not in FTF. Yet, there are
still people who are silent in online environments
(Hammond, 1999).
Cognitive Conflict and Management
Cognitive conflict is defined as awareness of differences in
perspectives and opinions on the group’s task and solutions.
Learning could be advanced by cognitive conflict between
peers. Just as students are most productive in FTF when
both strategy and judgment are different, teams performing
complex cognitive tasks in networked collaboration also
benefit from differences of opinion about the work being
done (Jehn, Northcraft, & Neale, 1999). However, merely
detecting these differences does not appear to be enough for
cognitive growth. Once a difference is found, participants
must try to resolve the difference through explaining and
elaborating the conflict (Cho et al., 2002) through
argumentation processes (Ravenscroft & Matheson, 2002)
in order for positive outcomes to result.
Therefore, it could be argued that participants in
networked collaboration could maximally benefit from
resolving conflicts. However, it is still an open question that
they really could reach a consensus through conflict
resolution or negotiation process. Studies showed a mixed
result on conflict management between networked
collaboration and FTF: Some studies showed that
participants in networked collaboration have more
difficulties in managing conflicts than in FTF (Galegher &
Kraut, 1996; Hollingshead, 1993), some studies did not find
this problem (Barile & Durso, 2002, Fjermestad & Hiltz,
1999) and other studies showed that participants in
networked collaboration are more constructive in resolving
conflict (e.g. Chidambaram, 1996; Whitworth, Gallupe, &
McQueen, 2001), while FTF is destructive to the process of
managing conflict.
Although learners may not reach an agreed upon
solution, they could nonetheless benefit from actively
participating in argumentation that occurs more frequently
in networked collaboration. Because of various
characteristics in networked collaboration, participants may
actively explore their tasks with more critical and reflective
perspectives than those in FTF where equivocal advice
rather than critical one is accepted (Edward & Bello, 2001)
and where they are forced to agree with group or authorities
(McGrath & Hollingshead, 1994; Whitworth et al., 2001).
Adaptation over Time
When time is set free instead of being constrained, the
impact of negative factors that run against networked
collaboration tends to be ameliorated.
Participants in networked collaboration tend to master
basic skills and literacy concerning their environment. One
example is computer literacy which plays a barrier to good
collaboration, especially in the beginning stages, and which
affects learning and problem solving, such as when
participants are distracted from their tasks (Feenberg, 1989;

248

Orvis, Wisher, Bonk, & Olson, 2002; Pilkington, Bennett, &
Vaughan, 2000). However, this roadblock seems to diminish
over time (Pilkington et al., 2000). Also, Orvis et al. (2002)
found that shifting patterns of interactions appeared over a
six month period of networked collaboration. At the start,
technological concerns reached a peak. However, the
technological concerns gradually reduced over time.
Therefore, changes of collaboration processes over time
appear to lead to different outcomes. For example,
Hollingshead, McGrath, and O'Connor (1993) used a series
of thirteen tasks over thirteen weeks. Until the time the first
two tasks were performed, FTF groups outperformed
networked collaboration groups. However, after that,
networked collaboration groups’ performances improved
over time and then were not different from FTF groups’.
Thus, groups in networked collaboration can adjust over
time to constraints on their communication as members
interact more, which leads to the performance level of FTF
groups (Walther, 2002). For this, Hollingshead, et al. (1993)
wrote: “Surprisingly, the relationship between technology
and task performance appeared to be more dependent on
experience with the technology and with group membership
than the type of task on which the group was working” (p.
324).
In addition, other collaboration processes could change
over time. Hobman, Bordia, Irmer, & Chang (2002) noticed
that on the first day, people in networked collaboration
showed more emotional conflicts than those in FTF.
However, these emotional conflicts disappeared over time.
Zornoza, Ripoll, & Peiro (2002) observed that constructive
resolution of conflicts in networked collaboration groups
changed over time. Meanwhile, Chidambaram (1996)
showed that although in the beginning, FTF groups showed
more constructive conflict management than CMC groups,
over time this pattern reversed direction, at which point the
networked collaboration groups were more constructive.
Constructive Use of Technology
The ways of working together in networked collaboration
are different from those in FTF. The differences could
provide participants with disadvantages as well as unique
advantages. Sometimes the disadvantages lead to ineffective
learning in networked collaboration. Other times, people try
to overcome given advantages in the process of
appropriating technologies into their tasks (Andreassen,
2000; Arnseth & Ludvigsen, 2001; Scott, Fowler, & Gibson,
1993; Vera, Kvan, West, & Lai, 1998).
Most frequently, people devise strategies for linguistic
compression based on discourse routines when frequent
information exchanges are difficult. For example, Condon
and Cech (1996) found that participants in networked
collaboration decimate unnecessary elaborations and
repetitions in order to increase the efficiency of
communications because of the typing requirements.
Therefore, networked collaboration groups focus more on
orientation and management, while FTF groups rely on
discourse markers and short orienting phrases. Vera et al.

(1998) found a similar pattern. Participants worked on an
architectural design task through either a text-based chat
interface or a high quality VMC. It was found that the two
media did not generate significant differences in
performances and general collaboration patterns. However,
very interestingly the participants in the chat condition had
significantly
higher
levels
of
design
process
communications, while sacrificing other features like
elaboration. Thus, networked collaboration could be taskoriented by decreasing the number of disambiguating subdialogues (McGrath & Hollingshead, 1994) at the expense
of less important activities which might retard the
development of social relations focused on fewer
social/emotional interactions (Scott et al., 1993). Therefore,
the cost of interaction in networked collaboration could
foster argumentation processes in networked collaboration.
Sometimes participants devise strategies to use
technology in ways that were not originally intended by the
technology. For example, people have developed emoticons
in text-based CMC for expressing emotions such as :) as
happy, :-( as sad and :-e as disappointed. In addition,
Arnseth et al. (2001) reported another interesting case that
shows how a technology tool is meshed with collaboration
processes. In their study, participants in networked
collaboration used the chat and Post-Its interfaces that
functioned as their names imply. The participants had very
general difficulties with the chat interface such as wrong
positioning of utterances, disparity between writings and
feedback, and delays between writing and posting. Then,
some of them found a way around these problems by using
the Post-Its as a chat which was not intended by the
technology. The authors stated: “when they needed to coordinate some activity, recall, and discuss earlier work that
had been done, and plan future activities.… they created a
chatroom by placing Post-Its beside each other and by
putting their names as headings.” People also use CMC
functionally depending on their work. In a collaborative
writing task, the communication tools were most used in the
planning and revision phase, but not in the drafting phase
(Galegher & Kraut, 1992).
Task Coordination between Media
Learning and problem solving could be improved when
available media resources are taken advantage of to the
fullest. There appeared three coordination patterns between
media. First, FTF and networked collaboration may serve
better for different processes since each medium does have
unique advantages. For example, Newman, Johnson, Webb,
and Cochrane (1997) found that students in FTF were better
at creative problem solving while those in networked
collaboration were better at further elaboration and
integration in an information management task. Also it was
found that FTF is better for interdependent tasks such as
negotiation and consensus, while networked collaboration
through emails could be better for independent tasks
(Galegher & Kraut, 1994; Vera et al., 1998), especially in
the early stages of a project (Galegher & Kraut, 1994). In

249

addition, Neuwirth, Kaufer, Chandhok, and Morris (1996)
used a system that helped comments on documents.
Reviewers could comment in either voice mode or written
text mode. Interestingly, they found that voice mode
reviewers tended to produce more comments about purpose
and audience issues, while text mode reviewers tended to
focus on more substantial issues like substance or content
Second, networked collaboration could be used to
support the weakness of FTF. It seems that task arrangement
and brainstorming tasks could be better achieved in
networked collaboration (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987). Therefore,
emails or other such media are used for coordinating FTF
meetings (Finholt, Sproull, & Kiesler, 2002) for collecting
multiple diverse sources. Also, networked collaboration
could be used for preparing FTF. According to Diehl and
Stroebe (1987), FTF meetings are not good at brainstorming
tasks because participants listen to each other and censor
their own ideas, instead of freely brainstorming. Therefore,
before FTF meetings, networked collaboration could be
used to gather various ideas and thoughts. Then these ideas
could be used as resources for FTF meetings. Likewise,
networked collaboration could then extend FTF by having
communications after FTF meetings (Sproull & Kiesler,
1991).
Third, FTF meetings could increase the probability of
success in networked collaboration because FTF can temper
networked collaboration. Therefore, FTF meetings could be
a predictor for the success of a networked collaboration
team (Schunn, Crowley, & Okada, 2002). For example,
Maznevski and Chudoba (2000) observed global virtual
teams that use considerably more technology-supported
communications than FTF teams because team members
work and live in different countries. It was found that the
most successful teams were those that engaged in very
regular transitions between virtual meetings and FTF
meetings with deliberate rhythms based on time. Therefore,
the researchers argued: “conducting regular meetings in
person is essential to global virtual team effectiveness to the
extent that the task requires a high degree of
interdependence and there are geographic, organizational,
and cultural boundaries that must be spanned” (p. 488).
Asynchronousness Management
Asynchronous interaction is accompanied by the costs to
maintain the delay between messages. Compared to FTF,
even synchronous networked collaboration is not likely to
ameliorate this cost, and asynchronous CMC could become
disastrous if the time delay is too problematic. However, the
very nature of asynchronous communication in networked
collaboration seems to provide important benefits like
reflective thinking for learning and problem solving.
Compared to synchronous interactions, asynchronous
interactions are even freer from time and space constraints,
and are more easily integrated into current practice because
synchronous networked collaborations need scheduled times
to meet and places to access and use computers. This
appears to explain why emails are frequently exchanged

between people whose offices are right next to each other.
Many a study reported that asynchronous collaboration is
effective or sometimes better in improving classroom
learning than synchronous or FTF collaborations, as
measured by the qualities of writings and solutions
(Benbunan-Fich & Hiltz, 1999).

Discussion
As specified in the FTF superiority theories, networked
collaboration could have various disadvantages in part
because of the lower bandwidth of collaboration channels
and in part because the participants apply their conventions
learned from FTF collaboration to networked collaboration.
Nevertheless, learning in networked collaboration could be
successful if learners could develop and implement
strategies to overcome given difficulties.
In this review, we take cognitive perspectives which
emphasize the active role of cognitive agents in constructing
their learning. Although in this research area the role of
cognition in networked collaboration was not seriously
taken into account in contrast to the FTF superiority theories,
cognitive perspective seem very relevant to understand what
mechanisms underlie learning and problem solving in
networked collaboration. Based on the findings, it seems
that the effectiveness of learning and problem solving in
networked collaboration depends on what knowledge, skills
or strategies active agents devise and implement in
networked collaboration because learners can think and
make conscious decisions about their learning processes.
Also, it seems that networked collaboration involves its
own unique cognitive processes different from those in FTF.
For example, FTF groups and networked collaboration
groups use different coordination strategies (Benbunan-Fich,
Hiltz, & Turoff, 2002; Vera et al., 1998). Instead of
enforcing
high
fidelity
coordination,
networked
collaboration groups adopted loosely coupled interaction
models with lower level of interdependence compared to
FTF (Benbunan-Fich, Hiltz, & Turoff, 2002). Also, people
in networked collaboration could reduce perceived
ambiguity or uncertainty by using explicit request strategy
and by more interactive questions and answers as well as
more self-disclosure strategies (Tidwell & Walther, 2002).
Therefore, for successful learning and problem solving
students in networked collaboration need be equipped with
skills or strategies that fit well in networked collaboration.
The paucity of studies that directly focus on the role of
cognition in networked collaboration made much of the
findings inferred from existing analyses from the literature.
Although the findings of this review are still informative, it
seems necessary to examine with empirical data how the
seven factors play roles and what strategies students use
with the factors between networked collaboration and FTF.

Acknowledgement
We thank Bo T. Christensen, AnTony Harrison, Mark
McGregor, and Lelyn Saner for their valuable comments on
earlier drafts.

250

References
Alavi, M., Wheeler, B., & Valacich, J. (1995). Using IT to
reengineer business education: An exploratory
investigation to collaboration telelearning. MIS Quarterly,
294-312.
Andreassen, E. F. (2000). Evaluating how students organize
their work in a collaborative telelearning scenario.
Masters dissertation, University of Bergen, Norway.
Arnseth, H. C., Ludvigsen, S., Wasson, B., & Mørch, A.
(2001). Collaboration and Problem Solving in Distributed
Collaborative Learning. Euro CSCL conference 2001.
Barile, A. L., & Durso, F. T. (2002). Computer-mediated
communication in collaborative writing. Computers in
Human Behaviors, 18(2), 173-190.
Benbunan-Fich, R., & Hiltz, S. R. (1999). Effects of
asynchronous learning networks: A field experiment.
Group Decision and Negotiation, 8, 409-426.
Benbunan-Fich, R., Hiltz, S. R., Turoff, M. (2002). A
comparative content analysis of face-to-face vs.
asynchronous group decision making. Decision Support
Systems 34, 457– 469.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassock, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Chidambaram, L. (1996). Relational development in
computer-supported groups. MIS Quarterly, 20, 143-165.
Cho, K., Schunn, C. D., & Lesgold, A. M. (2002).
Comprehension monitoring and regulation in distance
collaboration. Proceedings of Cognitive Science
Conference 2002, George Mason University, Virginia.
Condon, S. L., & Cech, C. G. (1996). Discourse
management strategies in face-to-face and computermediated decision making interaction. Electronic Journal
of Communication, 6(3).
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organizational
information requirements: Media richness and structural
design. Management Science, 32(5), 554-571.
Dennis, A. R., & Kinney, S. T. (1998). Testing media
richness theory in the new media: The effects of cues,
feedback, and task equivocality. Information Systems
Research, 9(3), 256-274.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: Toward a solution of a riddle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,53,497-509.
Dubrovsky, V.J., Kiesler, S., & Sethna, B.N. (1991). The
equalization phenomenon: status effects in computermediated and face-to-face decision making groups.
Human-Computer Interaction, 6, 119-146.
Edward, R., & Bello, R. (2001). Interpretations of messages:
The influence of equivocation, face concerns and egoinvolvement. Human Communication Research, 27(4),
597-631.
Eveland, J. D. & Bikson, T. K. (1988). Work group
structures and computer support: a field experiment,
Proceedings of the conference on Computer-supported
cooperative work, p.324-343, Portland, Oregon.

Feenberg, A. (1989). The written world: On the theory and
practice of computer conferencing. In R. Mason & A.
Kays (Eds.), Mindweave: Communication, Computers,
and Distance Education. NY: Pergamon Press, 22-39.
Finholt, T. A., Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (2002). Outsiders
on the inside: Sharing know-how across space and time.
In P. Hinds & S. Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed Work.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fjermestad, J., & Hiltz, R. (1999). An assessment of group
support systems experimental research: Methodology and
results. Journal of Management Information Systems,
15(3), 7-149.
Galegher, J., & Kraut, R. E. (1994). Computer-mediated
communication for intellectual teamwork: An experiment
in group writing.Information Systems Research,5,110-138.
Hammond, M. (1999). Issues associated with participation
in on line forums - the case of the communicative learner.
Education and Information Technologies, 4(4), 353-367.
Hobman, E. V., Bordia, P., Irmer, B., & Chang, A. (2002).
The expression of conflict in computer-mediated and
face-to-face groups. Small Group Research, 33, 439-465.
Hollingshead A. B., McGrath J. E. & O'Connor, K. M.
(1993). Group task performance and communication
technology: A longitudinal study of computer-mediated
versus face to face work groups. Small Group Research,
24, 307-333.
Hollingshead, A. B. (1993). Information, influence and
technology in group decision making. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. Univ.of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Jehn, K. A., Northcraft, G. B., & Neale, M. A. (1999). Why
differences make a difference: A field study of diversity,
conflict, and performance in workgroups. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 44, 741-763.
Jonassen, D. H., & Kwon, H. (2001). Communication
patterns in computer mediated versus face-to-face group
problem solving. ETR&D, 49(1), 35-51.
Kroonenberg, N. (1994/1995). Developing communicative
and thinking skills via electronic mail. TESOL Journal, 4,
24-27.
Lebie, L., Rhoades, J. A., & McGrath, J. E. (1995).
Interaction process in computer-mediated and face-to-face
groups.Computer Supported Cooperative Work,4,127-152.
Lotman, Y. M. (1988). Text within a text. Soviet Psychology,
26, 32-51.
Maznevski, M. L., & Chudoba, K. M. (2000). Bridging
space over time: Global virtual team dynamics and
effectiveness. Organizational Science, 11(5), 473-492.
McCorduck, P. (1979). Machines who think: A personal
inquiry into the history and prospects of artificial
intelligence. NY: W. H. Freeman and Company.
McGrath, J. E., & Hollingshead, A. B. (1994). Groups
interacting with technology. London: Sage Pub.
McNeil, S. G., Robin, B. R., & Miller, R. M. (2000).
Facilitating interaction, communication and collaboration
in online courses.Computers and Geosciences,26,699-708.
Neuwirth, C. M., Kaufer, D. S., Chandhok, R., & Morris, J.
M. (1996). Computer support for distributed collaborative

251

writing: A coordination science perspective. In G. Olson,
T. W. Malone, & J. B. Smith (eds.), Coordination theory
and collaboration technology. Mahwa, NJ: LEA.
Newman, D. R., Johnson, C., Webb, B. & Cochrane, C.
(1997) Evaluating the quality of learning in computer
supported co-operative learning. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 48 (6), 484-495.
Orvis, K. L. Wisher, R. A., Bonk, C. J., & Olson, T. M.
(2002). Communication patterns during synchronous
web-based military training in problem solving.
Computers in Human Behavior, 18, 783-795.
Pilkington, R. M., Bennett, C. L., & Vaughan, S. (2000). An
evaluation of computer mediated communication to
support group discussion in continuing education.
Educational Technology and Society, 3 (3), 349-359.
Ravenscroft, A., & Matheson, M. P. (2002). Developing and
evaluating dialogue games for collaborative e-learning.
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 18, 93-101.
Reid, F., Malinek, V., Stott, C.J. & Evans, J. (1996). The
messaging
threshold
in
computer-mediated
communication. Ergonomics, 39(8), 1017-1037.
Schunn, C. D., Crowley, K., & Okada, T. (2002). What
makes collaborations across a distance succeed? The case
of the Cognitive Science community. In P. Hinds & S.
Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed Work. MA: MIT Press.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social
psychology of telecommunications. John Wiley and Sons.
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of
working in the networked organization. MA: MIT Press.
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two
ESL writing environments: A computer-assisted
classroom and a traditional oral classroom.System,24,1-14.
Tidwell, L. C., & Walther, J. B. (2002). Computer-mediated
communication effects on disclosure, impressions, and
interpersonal evaluations. Human Communication
Research, 28(3), 317-348.
Vera, A. H., Kvan, T., West, R., & Lai, S. (1998). Expertise,
collaboration, and bandwidth. Proceedings of CHI 98.
Walther, J. B. (2002). Time effects in computer-mediated
groups: Past, present, and future. In P. Hinds & S. Kiesler
(Eds.), Distributed Work. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative
learning: Theory and practice. The Modern Language
Journal, 81(4), 470-481.
Whitworth, B. Gallupe, B. & McQueen, R. (2001).
Generating agreement in computer-mediated groups.
Small Group Research, 32(5), 625-665.
Zornoza, A., Ripoll, P., & Peiro, J. M. (2002). Conflict
management in groups that work in two different
communication contexts: Face-to-face and computermediated communication. Small Group Research, 33(5),
481-508.

