UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
“Slow Mapping” in Children’s Learning of Semantic Relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9r698420

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Deak, Gedeon O.
Wagner, Jennifer Hughes

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

“Slow Mapping” in Children’s Learning of Semantic Relations
Gedeon O. Deák (deak@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Jennifer Hughes Wagner
Department of Psychology and Human Development, Box 512 GPC, Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 372003 USA

Abstract

demands. Conversely, we know little about limitations of 4to 7-year-olds’ word meaning representations, especially for
recently learned words. Perhaps fast mapping yields
minimal knowledge of meaning, for example the referent
category’s relation to other labeled categories.

To investigate how young children learn categorical semantic
relations between words, 4- to 7-year-olds were taught four
labels for novel categories in an “alien” microworld. After
two play sessions, where each label was given, with defining
information, at least 20 times, comprehension and production
were tested. Results of two experiments show that 6-7-yearolds learned more words and correct semantic relations than
4-5-year-olds. The exclusion relation between contrasting
category labels was easy to learn, and some findings
suggested that hierarchical words are more easily learned than
overlapping ones. Both studies showed no advantage to
explicitly telling children semantic relations between words
(e.g., “All fegs are wuddles.”). The results qualify a common
assumption that preschool children have precocious abilities
to infer word meaning; such an ability does not seem to
extend to semantic relations between words.

Learning Semantic Relations

Is Word Learning Specialized Induction?
There is a pervasive assumption that young children have
precocious abilities to infer novel word meanings. The
assumption fits evidence that children can learn a closedclass word, or at least its approximate meaning, from only
one or a few exposures. First shown by Carey and Bartlett
(1978), this fast mapping is replicable (Dollaghan, 1987;
Heibeck & Markman, 1987), and it might explain how
children learn an average of 5-6 words per day over the few
years preceding kindergarten (Anglin, 1993).

Beyond Fast Mapping
Although fast mapping implies a system of constraints
specialized for acquisition of word meanings, it is unclear
how large a role it plays in children’s lexical development.
Perhaps, for instance, young children work out the meanings
of many words in parallel, over long periods. It is also
possible that fast mapping operates only in very controlled,
simplified situations, or with a narrow range of word types.
More generally, perhaps fast mapping induces only
unstable, partial, and fragmentary representations of new
words. Vocabulary growth statistics do not address this
because standardized tests assess only shallow word
knowledge (Deák, 2000).
In sum, we do not know how quickly children learn
(accurate and complete) meanings of words in their
lexicons. We also do not know what sort of input this

318

Knowledge of semantic relations between words is a critical
aspect of word meaning. Knowing, for instance, that a collie
is a kind of dog supports certain inferences (i.e., collies must
inherit all properties of dogs); knowing that some dogs are
pets (and vice versa) supports different inferences (i.e.,
possibility of shared properties). Finally, knowing no dogs
are cats supports other inferences. These relations—
inclusion, overlap, and exclusion, respectively—are basic
logical/categorical semantic relations.
Inhelder and Piaget (1964) claimed that children younger
than 7-8 years do not grasp the logical implications of
different category relations. This should prevent learning of
correct semantic relations. Though some of these claims are
discredited (e.g., Trabasso et al., 1978), few studies have
examined children’s abilities to infer logical relations
among referents of words as part of inferred word
meanings. One study (Smith, 1979) found 4- and 5-yearolds are above chance in making inferences about semantic
relations involving novel words, given information about
another familiar category. For example, when told “A Pug is
a kind of dog. Is a Pug an animal?” children were more
likely to answer “yes” than when told “A Pug is an animal”
and asked “Is a Pug a dog?” Thus, 4- and 5-year-olds have
at least minimal ability to reason about inclusion relations.
Yet study has tested whether children differentiate between
three types of set relations (inclusion, overlap, exclusion), or
what input facilitates this. Although some fast mapping
studies used markers of exclusion relations to teach a new
word (e.g., “…the chromium tray, not the red one”; Carey &
Bartlett, 1978), the situation was highly constrained (e.g.,
the teacher pointed towards two trays, one red and the other
an ambiguous non-focal color), and the tests did not require
inferring the new word’s relation to multiple familiar words.
Other studies have focused on parental input that might
specify semantic relations. Callanan (1985, 1989) found
parents produce markers to differentiate superordinate
category labels during book reading, and preschool children
differentiate word meanings based on these markers.

However, the learning effects were small. Finally, no study
has assessed children’s ability to differentiate inclusion from
overlap relations.

infer the overlap of biological and occupational categories,
in distinction from the hierarchical inclusion relation
between some biological categories.

Questions addressed:

Method

1. Can children “fast map” semantic relations between
new words? Children were taught novel words for
categories of novel creatures in a microworld. Some words
referred to biological categories (akin to species or genus, or
perhaps gender, types); others referred to occupational or
vocational categories. Deák and Maratsos (1998) showed
that 3- and 4-year-old children almost perfectly accurately
answer questions about a referent of familiar biological and
vocational categories that are inclusive or overlapping: for
example, they can affirm that a character described in a 1minute vignette is, for instance, simultaneously a “woman,”
“person,” “mother,” and “doctor.” Such categories not only
represent critical set relations (inclusion vs. overlap), but
socially and biologically important categories. How do
children learn these semantic relations? Is it in the process
of forming initial mappings of novel word meanings?
2. Are some semantic relations easier to learn than
others? By 4 or 5 years, children are sensitive to property
inheritance in inclusion relations, at least in some tasks.
However, they might not distinguish inclusion from overlap
relations (e.g., “dog” and “pet”). Because young children
have trouble discriminating possibility from necessity
(Piéraut-Bonniec, 1980), they might misconceive overlap
relations, which are based on possible co-extension.
Conversely, studies of children’s mutual exclusivity bias
(Merriman & Bowman, 1989) suggest exclusion relations
are easier to learn because children’s “default” assumption
is that words’ extensions do not overlap.
3. Does explicit input matter? Studies show that parents
provide contextual cues to help children learn novel word
meanings (Gelman et al., 1998). We tested whether explicit
markers of inclusion (“All Xs are Ys”) and exclusion (“Xs
are n o t Ys”) help children learn appropriate semantic
relations, more than information about semantic relations
that must be inferred from ostension and definitions.
4. Developmental changes: In order to assess whether
preschool children are especially skilled at inductive
inferences about word meanings, we compared younger (4and 5-year-old) and older (6- and 7-year-old) children.

Participants. 48 children aged 48-86 months participated:
38 4-5-year-olds (mean = 59 months, range 48-71) and 10
6-7-year-olds (mean = 82 months, range 77-86). Children
were recruited from schools in Nashville, TN, and were
primarily white and middle-class.
Materials. Children were tested in a 3 ft2 U-shaped diorama
(plywood covered with Astroturf) equipped with oddshaped buildings, a “construction area” stocked with
building materials (e.g., brick-like blocks) and an “animal
pen” with alien clay quadrupeds (i.e., livestock).
Referents were four categories of molded “alien”
creatures, constructed as two basic-level categories from
each of two orders or classes (i.e., bipeds and lizard-like
kinds). Each biological category was defined by four
features that differentiated its members from the contrasting
basic-level kind (e.g., skin color, eye placement, tail, and
arm thickness). Similarly, the superordinate classes were
differentiated by four defining features (i.e., orientation,
number of eyes, leg type, color spectrum region). At least 10
distinct exemplars of each category were constructed.
Creatures could be outfitted and placed in structures
indicate their membership in an occupational “basic-level”
category within one of two “industries”: construction and
animal husbandry. The basic-level occupational kinds were
defined by uniform color, “patient” (e.g., large vs. small
herd animals), location (pen 1 or 2), and activity (e.g.,
washing vs. feeding animals). The higher-order industry
categories also were defined by four features.
Children learned four category labels. Basic-level
biological kinds were assigned monosyllabic nonsense
words (e.g., “feg”), superordinate categories were bisyllabic (“wuddle”), and occupation categories terminated in
the agentive –er (“cragger”). The words therefore provided
some phonological and morphological cues to meaning.
Otherwise, words were randomly assigned to categories.
Design. Each child was assigned to one of four conditions.
One was defined by category relations: half of children
learned words that were inclusive, including one basic-level
and one superordinate biological category label, and one
basic-level and one superordinate occupation label. Between
any biological and any occupation category label was an
overlap relation. The other group learned words that were
exclusive or overlapping, including two basic-level
biological kind labels, and two basic-level occupational kind
labels. Thus, both groups could infer overlap relations
between biological and occupational labels, but only the
former group could (correctly) infer inclusion relations
within a domain.
Within each group, half of the children heard explicit
input about the inclusion or exclusion relation (e.g., “All
fegs are wuddles” or “A feg can’t be a blib”).

Experiment 1
We introduced children to an appealing microworld of
“alien” creatures (i.e., cute, painted clay model animates) in
a landscape with unusual buildings and structures (described
below). During two training sessions, the experimenter
named each category repeatedly, and gave information
about defining features (Mervis, Johnson, & Mervis, 1994).
Care was taken during training not to label any particular
exemplars with two words, so we could later test the
children’s ability to infer the co-extension of two or more
related (non-exclusive) category labels to the same
exemplars. A specific question was whether children can

319

Procedure. All children participated in two sessions (1-2
days apart). During the first (training) session, children were
taught each word on two prototypical exemplars. The
exemplars were unique for each word. The experimenter
said the word, six times per exemplar, while unambiguously
indicating the exemplar. The experimenter ensured that the
child was attentive to the object before saying the word.1
While presenting each word, the experimenter described
two defining features (chosen from the four), for instance,
“It is a blib because it has a tail, and it is green.” After all
four words were presented, the experimenter reviewed all
four words, and encouraged the child to repeat each word so
that failure to produce the word at testing could not be
attributed to articulation difficulty.
In the second (reminder) session, children were shown
two new exemplars of each category, reminded of the words
and definitions, and encouraged to produce each word (with
feedback). During the reminder session children heard each
word in an ostensive context, paired with defining
information, nine times. Thus, before testing began, children
heard at least 21 tokens of each word, paired with
descriptions of defining features.
Children in the explicit input condition heard inclusion or
exclusion statements about word pairs during training.
Production Test: Immediately after the reminder session,
children were shown 5 new exemplars, with features of 1, 2,
or 4 named categories (in the exclusion/overlap condition an
exemplar could belong to a maximum of two categories,
whereas in the inclusion/overlap condition it could belong to
all four). Children were asked to teach the words to a
puppet, to encourage them to produce the labels. After the
child produced a correct word, the experimenter gave
positive feedback, to maintain task motivation. The
experimenter also used semantic contrast, if possible, to
elicit multiple labels (see Deák & Maratsos, 1998).
Comprehension Test: After the production test, children
saw novel exemplars of each category, including both
typical and atypical exemplars of named and unnamed
categories. This tested children’s discriminative knowledge
of each word’s referential meaning, and how broadly they
would generalize it. Children were asked to show the puppet
“…all the fegs, but only the fegs.” The experimenter also
pointed to each exemplar and asked whether it was an
member of the labeled class (e.g., “Is this a feg, or not?”).
To adequately test production and comprehension of
occupation category words, exemplars were outfitted with
uniforms and accoutrements, and placed in the appropriate
place in the diorama.

Results
Production. Number of words correctly produced in the test
(range = 0-4) were submitted to an ANOVA with age
(younger vs. older children) and condition (inclusion/
1

Videotapes of a randomly chosen subset (n = 8) were examined
to verify that children attended to the exemplar while the
experimenter labeled it; this was true in M = 95% of coded trials.

320

overlap vs. exclusion/overlap) between subjects. The age
effect was significant, F(1, 44) = 13.5, p < .002: 6-7-yearolds correctly produced M = 3.0 (SD = 0.7) words, whereas
4-5-year-olds produced only M = 1.5 (SD = 1.2). Neither
condition, F(1, 44) < 1, nor its interaction with age, F(1, 44)
= 1.2, was significant.
A separate t-test showed no effect of explicit statements
of category relations, t(46) < 1, with means of 2.1 (SD =
1.4) and 1.7 (1.2) in the explicit and implicit conditions,
respectively. Closer inspection revealed no benefit of
explicit statements even in older children.
A central question is whether, and how often, children
who produced at least two non-exclusive words extended
them to referents with defining features of both categories
(i.e., co-extension). Children in the inclusion/overlap
condition could co-extend hierarchically related biological
terms (analogous to “dog” and “canine”) or occupation
terms (analogous to “doctor” and “health care provider”) as
well as overlapping words from both domains (akin to
“fish” and “pet”). However, 14 of 24 children in this group
co-extended words for only 0 or 1 exemplar. The remaining
children co-extended words for 3 to 9 exemplars. Though
older children tended to co-extend more words pairs than
younger children did (means = 1.9 vs. 3.4, SDs = 2.9 and
3.6), the difference was not statistically reliable. There was
(predictably) less co-extension in the exclusion/overlap
group, but of the 6 children who produced at least three
words (thus ensuring some opportunities for correct coextension), 5 co-extended words for only 1-2 exemplars.
For a more contextualized analysis, we compared the
number of observed instances of co-extension with the
number of expected instances, for each child, based on the
words the child produced for any object. For instance, if a
child might have co-extended two words (because she
produced the words correctly at other times), but did not do
so when appropriate, this would increase the negative
observed-expected difference. Thus, negative scores
indicate failure to appropriately co-extend available words.
For children in the inclusion/overlap condition, separate
observed-expected difference scores were calculated for
inclusive word pairs and for overlapping word pairs. T-tests
showed that the difference for inclusion pairs (M = .01, SD
= .04) was not different than zero, t(23) = 1.3, ns. However,
the difference for overlapping words (M = -.05, SD = .06)
was significant, t(49) = 5.6, p < .001, indicating that
children failed to co-extend overlapping words even when
they had produced both words.
Comprehension. The numbers of words on which children
showed receptive knowledge were compared by ANOVA,
with age (younger vs. older) and condition (inclusion/
overlap vs. exclusion/overlap) between-subjects. Again,
older children understood more words (M = 2.4, SD = 1.3)
than younger children (M = 1.2, SD = 1.1), F(1, 44) = 9.7, p
< .005. In contrast to production data, there was a
significant advantage of the exclusion/overlap condition (M
= 1.9, SD = 1/2) over the inclusion/overlap condition (M =
1.0, SD = 1.1), F(1, 44) = 7.4, p < .01.

Again, however, there was no effect of explicit statements
about category relations, t(46) < 1, ns.
The critical question is whether children understood
relation between words, and whether this depended on age
or type of relation. To assess this, we classified children by
whether or not they showed evidence in the comprehension
test of having learned the relation between word pairs (e.g.,
for a hierarchically related pair, selecting a subset of the
referents chosen for the superordinate term, when invited to
find all examples of the basic-level term). For biological
words (inclusive or exclusive), 22 of the 48 children showed
understanding of the correct semantic relation; for
occupational terms only 6 children did, and only 9 children
seemed to represent the overlap between biological and
occupational word pairs. Thus, biological kind words
seemed privileged, but the effect is mediated by age. For
each type of semantic relation, 40-60% of 6-7-year-olds
showed comprehension of at least one representative word
pair. Among 4-5-year-olds, however, 42% showed
comprehension of the biological word pair, but only 5%
and 11% showed comprehension of the other pair types
(occuptational-occupational and biological-occupational).

can co-extend them with familiar biological or kinship kinds
(Deák & Maratsos, 1998; Watson & Fischer, 1980).
The data do not provide a simple answer to whether
children more readily induce inclusive than overlapping
semantic relations. Specifically, children’s production
showed no difference between the inclusion and the
exclusion/overlap condition (but a slight trend in favor of
the former), whereas comprehension significantly favored
the group that learned exclusive basic-level terms but no
hierarchically related word pairs. One interpretation is that
referential meanings of mutually exclusive novel words are
learned somewhat faster than meanings of words with more
complex semantic relations. This is consistent with other
recent findings (Deák, 2001). Another interpretation,
however, is that the overlap/exclusion condition benefited
from a basic-level advantage in all words.
A final question is whether explicit input about semantic
relations helps children learn correct semantic relations.
Surprisingly, no such evidence was seen in either production
or comprehension. Perhaps, however, the form of explicit
input was not easy for children to process. For this reason,
this factor was tested again in Experiment 2.

Discussion

Experiment 2

The first experiment suggests specific limitations of
children’s fast mapping ability. We presented novel words
(discrete, pronounceable mono- or bi-syllabic English nonwords) more than 20 times over two sessions, while
unambiguously indicating the referent object. Children were
oriented to the task and stimuli. Nonetheless, immediately
after training, 4- and 5-year-olds showed productive
competence over only 1 or 2 words. The problem was not
ambiguity of the referent set, because children were trained
on at least four discriminable but prototypical exemplars of
each category, and two defining features of each category
were described during training. Also, articulation or motor
production problems were not indicated, because children
had practiced production of each word. Older children
performed somewhat better, showing productive
competence over 2-4 words. More importantly, older
children co-extended words more frequently than younger
children. This trend called for replication with a larger
sample (Experiment 2). Overall, the production data do not
indicate that children readily co-extended words: only six of
the 17 younger children who produced two or more words
co-extended any two words to more than one referent. By
comparison, half of older children co-extended two or more
words to several referents.
Children’s comprehension showed a similar trend. Older
children showed receptive knowledge of twice as many
words (2 or 3) as younger children (0 to 2). Also, more older
children understood the relation between the two occupation
category words, and between some biological-occupational
word pairs. Perhaps younger children simply do not
understand occupational categories or labels. There is
evidence, however, that by 6 years or younger, most
children understand some occupational category terms and

321

The paradigm in Experiment 1 was extended and modified
to further address the questions outlined in the introduction.
First, we recruited a sufficiently large sample of 6-7-yearolds to satisfactorily answer questions about age differences.
Second, the training and reminder sessions were made more
play-like by encouraging children to engage in pretense
scenarios with the stimuli, and by presenting the words
during more natural conversation. These changes addressed
concerns about both children’s motivation and ecological
validity. Third, to eliminate some possible artifacts (e.g.,
motivation; pronunciation problems) from production test
data, children were reinforced for producing words in
training. Fourth, a possible ambiguity in Experiment 1 is
that occupational kinds were taught on sets of aliens that
were dissimilar from the biological kinds. This was done to
assess whether children could infer, without direct input,
potential for overlap between occupational and biological
categories. Unfortunately, this might have encouraged
children to infer that the occupational roles were restricted
to different, unnamed biological kinds, and exclusive from
the named biological kinds. In the revised procedure, we
taught occupation categories on a wider range of biological
kinds. Finally, minor improvements were made in stimuli
and test procedures.

Method
Participants. 48 4- to 7-year-old children participated: 24
4-5-year-olds (mean age = 60 months, range 50-71) and 24
6-7-year-olds (mean = 83 months, range 76-95). Children
were recruited and tested at private schools in Nashville,
TN, and were primarily white and middle-class.
Materials. The materials from Experiment 1, with slight
modifications, were used.

Design. Each child was randomly assigned to one of four
conditions, as in Experiment 1: children learned either
inclusive and overlapping words, or exclusive and
overlapping (i.e., basic-level) words. Half of each of these
conditions were given explicit statements about category
relations; they other half had to infer these relations from
implicit evidence.
Procedure. All children completed a training session and,
2-3 days later, a reminder and testing session. Children were
taught the words on unique prototypical exemplars.
However, after initial presentation of exemplars and words,
the experimenter suggested pretense scenarios to children,
and more generally encouraged pretend play with the
stimuli. During play, the experimenter asked question and
made statements to elicit labels from the child. An assistant
monitored the number of times the experimenter presented
each word and definition, and prompted additional
repetitions if necessary. During the first session children
heard each word used by ostension for training exemplars,
and heard defining features mentioned, 20 times. They
heard the words 8 more times during the reminder session.
Thus, children heard 28 uses per word, in clear contexts and
with simple definitions, before the tests.
Explicit semantic relation input was altered slightly.
Inclusion relations were explained with “kind of”
constructions (e.g., “A feg is a kind of wuddle”), which
parents use during picture book reading (Callanan, 1985;
Gelman et al., 1998).
The experimenter encouraged children to produce the
words, but used more natural play discourse contexts (e.g.,
asking the child “Which one do you want? Who should
come to the buildings?”). To increase motivation and elicit
pre-test production from all children, a colorful sticker was
awarded for each production during training.
Production and comprehension tests were similar to
Experiment 1.

Results
Production. Number of correct words was submitted to an
ANOVA, with age and condition (inclusion/overlap vs.
exclusion/overlap) between subjects. The age effect was
significant, F (1, 44) = 13.9, p < .001: 6-7-year-olds
produced M = 3.2 (SD = 1.0) words, and 4-5-year-olds
produced M = 1.8 (SD = 1.4). Neither the condition effect,
F(1, 44) < 1, nor the age-by-condition interaction, F(1, 44)
= 0, was significant.
Given the apparent different in acquisition of biological
and occupation words in Experiment 1, we compared the
number of words produced in each domain. Children
produced M = 1.4 biological kind words (SD = 0.8) and M =
1.1 (0.8) occupation words, a significant difference, t(47) =
3.0, p < .01. The age difference was significant (at p < .01 in
post-hoc tests) for both biological and occupation words.
There was no effect of explicit statements of category
relations on production of biological, occupational, or total
words, each t(46) < 1.

322

A critical question is whether children produced correct
co-extensions in production. In the inclusion overlap group,
13 of 24 children (54%) labeled at least one test exemplar
with two hierarchically related words. There was no
difference in proportions between age groups, c2 (1, N = 24)
< 1. However, the incidence of overlap co-extension (i.e.,
naming an exemplar with both a biological and occupational
word) did increase with age, c 2 (1, N = 48) = 8.4, p < .005.
Only 8 of 24 younger children co-extended overlapping
words (33%), compared to 18 of 24 (75%) older children.
Comprehension. Initial analyses concern whether or not
children inferred the correct relation (inclusion or exclusion)
between the two biological words or between two
occupation words. In the inclusion condition, each child had
two opportunities to infer an inclusion relation. Summed
across ages, then, there were a total of 48 possible
opportunities to infer this relation. Of these, children
inferred only 8 inclusion relation, in addition to 16 inferred
exclusion relations, 9 overlap relations, 8 synonymy
relations, and 7 indeterminate relations. Surprisingly, there
were no apparent age differences in accuracy. Thus,
children seldom showed, by selecting a superset of basiclevel referents for the superordinate term, correct induction
of an inclusion relation. Rather, they seemed to infer a wide
range of relations between hierarchical words.
The other group, which should have inferred exclusion
relations between same-domain word pairs, showed much
greater accuracy and less variability. Out of a total of 48
cases, these children inferred 2 cases (each) indeterminate
and synonymous relations, 1 (each) inclusion and overlap
relations, and 42 exclusion relations. This is consistent with
the claim that children initially assume that referents of
novel words are mutually exclusive (Markman, 1994).

Discussion
The results largely confirm conclusions from the first
Experiment, despite a number of procedural changes and
increased size of the older sample. Despite clear and
extensive input about novel words and their definitions,
children infrequently showed evidence of learning
hierarchically related word pairs. In production, they rarely
co-extended overlapping (biological-occupational) word
pairs. In contrast, most children showed comprehension of
exclusive within-domain word pairs, indicating that they
readily learn contrasting basic-level kind labels.
Production improved significantly with age, for both
biological and occupational words, and in co-extension of
overlapping word pairs. The analyses so far do not show
age-related improvement in receptive competence.
As in Experiment 1, there was no positive effect on
learning of providing explicit input about semantic relations
between words, even when the form of this input was based
on parents’ input.

General Discussion
These data provide partial answers to the initial questions.
First, fast mapping does not provide accurate inferences

about word meanings, even in 6-7-year-old children.
Representations of semantic relations (i.e., referent class
relations) were often inaccurate or disorganized. An
exception is a robust ability, even in preschool children, to
infer that labels of clearly contrasting categories (e.g., basiclevel kinds within a domain) are mutually exclusivity. Of
course, we do not know whether children inferred
exclusivity by the 2nd presentations of labels, or by the
20th.) This addresses our second question: exclusive
relations seem easier to learn than others semantic relations.
Of course, there might well be different circumstances that
facilitate, for example, fast inferences about synonymy or
inclusion. But overall children’s ability to differentiate
inclusive and overlapping semantic relations seems fragile
or sluggish, even when abundant, explicit input about
relations is provided. Some production test evidence
suggested that accurate co-extension is more robust for
inclusive than for overlapping word pairs (e.g., younger
children in Experiment 2). Perhaps, especially for animate
kinds, hierarchical relations are more easily inferred by
analogical transfer from familiar inclusion relations among
labels for biological kinds (e.g., “dog” and “animal”; see
Gelman et al., 1998).
One unresolved issue concerns possible divergence of
comprehension data between the two experiments. The
advantage of biological kind word pairs in Experiment 1
might indicate that the exclusion/overlap group readily
inferring exclusion relations between basic-level biological
kinds, or that children in the inclusion group were able to
transfer knowledge of familiar hierarchical relations among
biological kinds. In Experiment 2, however, no such trend
was found. Further analyses and follow-up studies might
resolve this discrepancy.
Finally, there was no advantage from hearing statements
about inclusion or exclusion relations between words within
a domain. This raises an important question, because many
researchers assume parents’ use of inclusion statements
facilitates children’s category learning. Our data suggest
they do not, at least not when first learning words or
concepts. Interestingly, such statements were not effective
even for 6- to 7-year-olds.
In sum, these data provide balance to the popular
assumption that preschool children are precocious word
learners. When word learning is measured at a surface level,
children show a grasp of new words, but this grasp is weak.
It is unlikely to include knowledge of meaning relations, or
incorporation into a differentiated semantic network, even
after many unambiguous exposures to the new words.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a fellowship from the National
Academy of Education/Spencer Foundation. Thanks to
Michelle Gendreau and Mary Love for assistance.

323

References
Anglin, J.M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A
morphological analysis. Monographs of the SRCD, 58(10)
[serial no. 238].
Callanan, M.A. (1985). How parents label objects for young
children: The role of input in the acquisition of category
hierarchies. Child Development, 56, 508-523.
Callanan, M. A. (1989). Development of object categories
and inclusion relations: Preschoolers’ hypotheses about
word meaning. Developmental Psychology, 25, 207-216.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Papers and Reports on Child Language
Development, 15, 17-29.
Deák, G. O. (2000). Chasing the fox of word learning: Why
“constraints” fail to capture it. Developmental Review, 20,
29-80.
Deák, G. O. (2001, April). Do children have specialized
word learning mechanisms? Presented to the Society for
Research in Child Development, Minneapolis, MN.
Deák, G.O., & Maratsos, M. (1998). On having complex
representations of things: Preschoolers use multiple words
for objects and people. Developmental Psychology, 34,
224-240.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1987). Child meets word: “Fast mapping”
in preschool children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
research, 28, 449-454.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J., Rosengren, K, Hartman, E., &
Pappas, A. (1998). Beyond labeling: The role of maternal
input in the acquisition of richly structured categories.
Monographs of the SRCD, 63 [1, no. 242].
Heibeck, T.H. & Markman, E.M. (1987). Word learning in
children: An examination of fast mapping. C h i l d
Development, 58, 1021-1034.
Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1964). The early growth of logic in
the child. NY: Harper & Row.
Markman, E.M. (1994). Constraints on word meaning in
early language acquisition. Lingua, 92, 199-227.
Merriman, W.E. & Bowman, L. (1989).The mutual
exclusivity bias in children's word learning. Monographs
of the SRCD, 54 (3-4, no. 220).
Mervis, C.B., Johnson, J. E., & Mervis, C. (1994).
Acquisition of subordinate categories by 3-year-olds: The
roles of attribute salience, linguistic input, and child
characteristics. Cognitive Development, 9, 211-234.
Piéraut-Le Bonniec, G. (1980). The development of modal
reasoning. New York: Academic Press.
Smith, C. L. (1979). Children's understanding of natural
language hierarchies. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 27, 437-458.
Trabasso, T., Isen, A., Dolecki, P., McLanahan, A., Riley,
C. & Tucker, T. (1978). How do children solve classinclusion problems? In Siegler, R. S. (Ed.), Children's
thinking: What develops? Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Watson, M., & Fischer, K. (1980). Development of social
roles in elicited and spontaneous behavior during the
preschool years. Developmental Psychology, 16, 483-494.

