UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Something Old, Something New: Addressee Knowledge and the Given-New Contract

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bf702h8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Branigan, Holly P.
McLean, Janet F.
Reeve, Hannah

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Something Old, Something New:
Addressee Knowledge and the Given-New Contract
Holly P. Branigan (Holly.Branigan@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Janet F. McLean (Janet.McLean@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Hannah Reeve
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

speaker’s desire to be cooperative versus the need to
meet interactive norms.

Abstract
Although speakers in a dialogue are known to design
utterances cooperatively with respect to meaning, less is
known about audience design with respect to syntax. We
report two picture verification experiments that
investigated the production of Given-New ordering when
speakers' and addressees' knowledge differed. In both
experiments, speakers produced word orders that
reflected their own but not their addressees' knowledge
states. We suggest that speakers do not engage in
audience design for aspects of their utterances which
they do not consider to be necessary for adequate
communication.

Fitting utterances to audiences

Introduction
Cooperation or fluency?
When speakers produce utterances in a dialogue, they
operate under two main constraints. First, they must
produce utterances that fulfill their communicative
need: They must ensure that addressees can extract the
meaning that the speaker intends to convey. In other
words, they must think about what the addressee knows
or doesn't know, wants or needs to know, and so on.
This requires them to act cooperatively. However,
speakers must also satisfy a more general constraint
relating to the overall norms of interactions, by
producing utterances in a timely manner, without undue
hesitations and disfluencies. These two constraints can
conflict: Low-level processing demands reduce the
resources that can be allocated to higher-level planning.
In some cases, speakers may have to decide between
being cooperative but disfluent, or fluent but
uncooperative. There is good evidence that speakers
usually try to be cooperative with respect to the content
of their utterances, but less is known about cooperation
with respect to utterance form. In this paper, we
investigate the production of Given-New structure, and
the extent to which Given-New ordering reflects the

180

Cooperation and content. There is substantial
evidence that speakers design their utterances with their
audience in mind. Such audience design has been found
to occur at different levels of linguistic structure. For
example, speakers adapt their accent according to their
audience (e.g., Bell, 1984). However, most
experimental evidence for audience design has focused
on meaning-related aspects of language. In particular,
research has shown that speakers adapt their lexical and
conceptual choices to reflect what they believe about
their addressees' knowledge. Many studies have
demonstrated that speakers use longer and more
contentful referential expressions when they believe
their addressees will have difficulty in identifying a
referent than when they believe that their addressees
will be able to identify a referent straightforwardly
(e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Krauss &
Weinheimer, 1966). In these experiments, researchers
manipulated the assumed or jointly developed common
ground, or mutual knowledge, on which a particular
speaker-addressee dyad could call. In each case, the
question was whether by adapting their own linguistic
behavior, speakers can enhance addressees’ ability to
correctly extract the meaning that the speaker wishes to
convey.
Audience design at meaning-related levels of
structure makes good sense. The primary goal of
communication is to ensure that speaker and addressee
comprehend each other correctly, so modifying one’s
behavior to maximize the chances of correct mutual
interpretation is sensible. Even so, there is some debate
about the extent to which speakers take their common
ground with the addressee into consideration during the
earliest stages of utterance planning. Some models
propose that speakers’ beliefs about addressee

knowledge can constrain the semantic and lexical
content of the utterances that speakers initially generate
(Lockridge & Brennan, 2002). That is, utterance
planning necessarily involves consultation of a model
of the addressee's knowledge state. Such models
assume that speakers are fundamentally cooperative.
We can think of this as speakers trying to fulfill the
cooperativeness requirement, even if it is at the expense
of fluency.
However, other researchers suggest that speakers are
fundamentally egocentric (Brown & Dell, 1987; Horton
& Keysar, 1996). For example, Horton and Keysar
(1996) found evidence that speakers consistently failed
to take their addressee’s knowledge into account and
produced inadequately specific descriptions when
placed under time pressure. They proposed a model in
which speakers first generate utterances without
recourse to information about the addressee’s
knowledge state, and only then monitor the prearticulatory utterance for appropriateness. If necessary,
and if processing demands allow, the utterance is then
revised to accommodate the addressee’s knowledge
state. Under this approach, the fluency constraint has a
higher priority for speakers than the cooperativeness
constraint. Nevertheless, even in their model, speakers
are assumed to consult their model of common ground
when processing resources allow.
Cooperation and Form. Clearly, speakers do tend to
behave cooperatively towards their addressees with
respect to what they say.
But do they behave
cooperatively with respect to how they say it? We focus
here on syntactic structure (see Bard et al, 2000, for a
related discussion with respect to phonology). There
has been little investigation of audience design at the
level of syntax. In general terms, we might expect to
find less evidence for audience design with respect to
syntactic structure than with respect to lexical/semantic
structure, because variations in syntax do not
necessarily have communicative implications. Speakers
can successfully communicate the same intended
meaning using different syntactic structures (e.g., The
pennyloafer struck the shopkeeper or The shopkeeper
was struck by the pennyloafer), whereas using different
words (e.g., pennyloafer versus docksider; see Brennan
& Clark, 1996) may lead to different interpretations (an
addressee may have two different concepts for the
labels pennyloafer and docksider).
One exception, where syntactic structure may impact
on communicative success, is syntactic ambiguities.
These can cause (possibly temporary) processing
difficulties for the addressee. However, Ferreira and
Dell (2000) found no evidence that speakers avoid
producing utterances that are temporarily syntactically
ambiguous, even when they were told that their
utterances would be rated for clarity. In this respect,
therefore, we see little evidence for audience design at
the level of syntactic structure.

181

The Given-New Contract. One place where we might
expect to find audience design with respect to syntax is
in the ordering of Given and New entities. Many
linguists have noted a strong preference for Given
entities to precede New entities (e.g., Prince, 1981).
Indeed, the preference for Given-New ordering has
been hypothesized to be a language universal (Clark &
Clark, 1978).
This theoretical observation is backed up by
empirical research in a variety of languages (Bock &
Irwin, 1980; Osgood, 1971; Sridhar, 1988).
Importantly, a Given-New preference has been reported
for both language production (e.g., Bock & Irwin, 1980;
Sridhar, 1988) and language comprehension (Clark &
Haviland, 1977).
One interpretation of the tendency to produce GivenNew ordering is that it is a manifestation of audience
design: Speakers know that addressees prefer it, and
hence produce it as a cooperative activity. This stance
has been made explicit in some theoretical accounts of
information packaging. For example, Vallduvi (1992)
suggested that information packaging, including GivenNew ordering, is designed to "optimize the entry of data
into the hearer's knowledge store". Under this approach,
speakers mention Given entities first so that addressees
know which part of their knowledge store to address,
and then update that entry with the New information
contained in the later part of the sentence.
If this approach is correct, then speakers should
produce word orders that reflect their addressee's
knowledge state: An entity that is Given to the
addressee should appear preceding an entity that is New
to the addressee, irrespective of what the speaker
knows. If both entities are New (or indeed Given), then
the speaker should produce default word order.
An alternative interpretation of Given-New ordering
is that it reflects ease of processing for the speaker.
Given entities are both semantically and lexically
activated, and are correspondingly easier to access
during the processes of language production (Bock,
1982). Under an assumption of incremental processing
(Kempen & Hoenkamp, 1987), Given entities therefore
claim earlier positions in the developing word order. If
this approach is correct, then Given-New ordering is
essentially egocentric: a means of promoting fluency.
This approach predicts that speakers will by default
produce word orders that reflect their own knowledge
state: An entity that is Given to the speaker will appear
preceding an entity that is New to the speaker,
irrespective of what the addressee knows. If both
entities are of the same status, then the speaker will
produce whatever the default ordering is. Speakers may
subsequently revise their utterance to accommodate
their addressees' knowledge if this differs from their
own; but this would be a later process.

In previous experiments on Given-New ordering, the
speaker and the addressee always had the same
knowledge state, making it impossible to distinguish the
two positions. We carried out two experiments that
manipulated the knowledge states of the speaker and
the addressee independently. The question we
investigated was: Do speakers produce syntactic
structures that are designed to be cooperative with
respect to their addressee? Specifically, do speakers
normally produce word orders that reflect their own
knowledge state, or do they design them to reflect the
knowledge of their addressees?
We used a picture verification task, in which a
Describer described pictures to a Matcher, who had to
decide whether that description matched their own
picture. We manipulated Describer and Matcher
knowledge by showing both the Describer and the
Matcher, just the Describer, or neither, an initial
'scenario' picture which introduced one of the entities
depicted in the target picture. We examined whether the
Describer's description for the target picture displayed
Given-New ordering. More importantly, did this
ordering reflect the Matcher's knowledge or only the
Describer's knowledge? In Experiment 1, Describers
and Matchers were restricted in what they could say; in
Experiment 2, they were allowed to interact freely.

Experiment 1

scenario: book on a shelf (Figure 2); or a patient
scenario: a chef in a kitchen. For the filler cards, half
the scenario cards had an agent scenario and half had a
patient scenario. The MATCHER’s set was similar to
the DESCRIBER’s set except that half of the target
cards which they would be matching were altered to
induce a No match response. For the experimental cards
the response to the match cards was No on half the
cards because the agent was different and on half the
cards because the patient was different.

Figure 1: Example target picture

Figure 2: Example agent scenario
Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to be
either the DESCRIBER or the MATCHER for the
whole experiment. Participants sat on either side of a
table and were separated by a divider (see Figure 3).

Method
Participants. Twenty-four pairs of participants were
paid to participate.
Items. For each experiment, we prepared two sets of
items. The DESCRIBER’s set consisted of 24 pairs of
experimental cards and 48 pairs of filler cards. The
pairs of cards included a scenario card which
introduced one entity (and hence making it GIVEN),
and a target card showing that entity and another entity
taking part in an action. For the 24 experimental card
pairs the target card depicted a transitive action with an
inanimate agent and an animate patient. In the “target”
cards for the filler pairs, 12 pairs depicted an
intransitive action with an inanimate agent, 12 depicted
an intransitive action with an animate agent, 12
depicted a transitive action with an animate agent and
patient, and 12 depicted a transitive action with an
animate agent and an inanimate patient. The scenario
card was manipulated in the experimental card pairs so
that each target card could be preceded by either an
Agent scenario - the scenario card depicted the agent, or
a Patient scenario - the scenario card depicted the
patient.
For example, a target picture showing a book hitting a
chef (Figure 1) could be preceded by either an agent

182

Figure 3: Overhead of the experimental set-up
For each part of the experiment, the DESCRIBER was
informed about how much the MATCHER would
know. In the No Knowledge condition, the
DESCRIBER was instructed to describe each card. In
the Same and Privileged Knowledge condition, the
DESCRIBER was told to describe only the second card.
In all conditions, the DESCRIBER described the target
card and the MATCHER said Yes or No and placed
their card in the appropriate box. The order of the
knowledge conditions was that the No Knowledge
condition was always completed first. The order of the

Same Knowledge and Privileged Knowledge conditions
was counter-balanced.

Results
Scoring. DESCRIBERS’ descriptions were scored as
ACTIVES if: both entities were mentioned; the agent
appeared as the subject of the sentence; and the patient
appeared as the direct object. They were scored as
PASSIVES if: both entities were mentioned; the patient
appeared as the subject of the sentence; and the agent
appeared as an oblique object.
The proportion of PASSIVE and ACTIVE sentences
produced by the DESCRIBER were calculated. Only
the PASSIVE sentences were included in the analyses
as the proportions are complementary.
1.00
0.90
0.80

if the addressee does not respond (Krauss &
Weinheimer, 1966). It is therefore possible that the
results of Experiment 1 are not indicative of the extent
to which speakers take their audience's knowledge into
account in normal dialogue. To investigate this
possibility, we carried out a second experiment, which
was identical in all respects to Experiment 1 except that
MATCHERS were allowed to interact freely. For
example, if the DESCRIBER said the mummy skipping,
the MATCHER could reply No, I have the fairy
skipping, or Do you mean the guy with the bandages?
Participants. Twelve pairs of participants took part.

Results
The proportion of PASSIVE and ACTIVE sentences
produced by the DESCRIBER were calculated. Again
only the PASSIVE sentences were included in the
analyses as the proportions are complementary.

0.70
0.60
0.50

1.00

0.40

0.90

0.30

0.80

0.20

0.70

0.10

0.60

0.00

0.50
No Knowledge

Same Knowledge
Agent Scenario

Same Knowledge
Patient Scenario

Privileged Knowledge Privileged Knowledge
Agent Scenario
Patient Scenario

0.40
0.30

Figure 4: Proportion of Passive sentences produced by
the DESCRIBER in Experiment 1

0.20
0.10
0.00
No Knowledge

We conducted a 2 (Knowledge – Same, Privileged) x 2
(Scenario – Agent, Patient) analysis of variance. The
No Knowledge condition was not included as there was
no scenario manipulation. This revealed a main effect
of Scenario, F1(1, 23) = 22.3, p<.01, no main effect of
Knowledge, p>0.1, and no Interaction, p>0.1. A second
analysis was conducted as a one-way ANOVA across
all knowledge conditions on the proportion of
PASSIVE sentences. This revealed a main effect of
Knowledge, F1(2, 46) = 3.46, p<.05. Post-hoc NewmanKeuls revealed a significant difference between No and
Privileged Knowledge, p<.05; marginal between No
and Same Knowledge, p =.08.

Same Knowledge
Agent Scenario

Same Knowledge
Patient Scenario

Privileged Knowledge Privileged Knowledge
Agent Scenario
Patient Scenario

Figure 5: Proportion of Passive sentences produced by
the DESCRIBER in Experiment 2
A 2 (Knowledge – Same, Privileged) x 2 (Scenario –
Agent, Patient) analysis of variance revealed a main
effect of Scenario, F1(1, 11) = 19.8, p<.01, no main
effect of Knowledge, p>0.1, and no Interaction, p>0.1.
A second analysis was conducted as a one-way
ANOVA across all knowledge conditions on the
proportion of PASSIVE sentences. This revealed no
effect of Knowledge, p>0.1.

Experiment 2

Discussion

In Experiment 1, participants were very restricted in the
type of contributions that they could make to the
dialogue: Matchers were only allowed to give Yes/No
feedback, and to ask the Describer to repeat a
description. But previous research has shown that
speakers' tendency to design their utterances for their
addressee is influenced by the feedback that they
receive from the addressee. For example, speakers do
not shorten referring expressions with repeated mention

In two experiments, we investigated how speakers
describe transitive pictures as a function of their own or
their addressees' knowledge. In one condition, the
speakers simply described the target picture to their
addressee. In another condition, both the speaker and
their addressee saw an initial picture which showed the
agent or the patient of the target action. In a third
condition, the speaker saw an initial picture which

183

showed the agent or the patient of the target action, but
their addressee did not. In each case, the speaker was
aware of their addressee's knowledge state.
As in previous experiments, we found strong evidence
of a preference for Given-New ordering: Speakers
produced orderings that reflected their own knowledge.
Thus, entities that they had previously encountered
tended to appear in early word order positions,
manifested as a tendency for Given agents to appear as
the subject of active sentences, and Given patients to
appear as the subject of passive sentences. Note that the
active and passive sentences were denotationally
identical, hence conveyed the same meanings. The
effect of the scenario card was to alter which entity was
mentioned first, not the meaning that was expressed.
However, we found no evidence that speakers take
into account the knowledge of their addressees when
formulating word order. Speakers produced passive
sentences if the patient was speaker-Given, even when
it was addressee-New to the addressee; speakers also
produced more active sentences if the agent was
speaker-Given than if it was speaker-New to the
speaker, irrespective of whether it was Given or New to
the addressee.
These results are in keeping with approaches that
explain Given-New ordering in terms of information
availability and incremental processing. Placing Given,
hence accessible, entities in early word order positions
helps speakers to meet the constraint of fluent
production. The results sit less well with approaches
that explain Given-New ordering in terms of audience
design. Speakers did not produce word orders that were
designed for their audience: Their utterances did not
cooperatively
accommodate
their
addressees'
knowledge. Clearly, speakers do not produce GivenNew order primarily to facilitate their addressees’ entry
of information into memory.
Previous research has demonstrated that speakers take
into account their audience when designing their
utterances at levels relating to meaning. Even results
like those of Horton and Keysar (1996) show that
speakers usually try to act cooperatively, and only tend
to fail to cooperate when they are placed under a high
processing load. In contrast, our results suggest that
speakers do not primarily aim to act cooperatively with
respect to syntactic structure. Even when they were not
placed under any pressure, Describers produced
syntactic structures that reflected their own ease of
processing, and not that of their addressees. We suggest
that this reflects both the inability of speakers to assess
syntactic structures for difficulty (including ambiguity,
as Ferreira and Dell's (2000) results suggest), and also a
willingness to ignore audience design at levels of
structure that are likely to be less relevant to successful
communication in favor of devoting more resources to
aspects of utterances that are likely to impact upon
communicative success, such as lexical and semantic
content.

184

In our experiments, the Matchers’ task was
straightforward, and Describers may have felt that
producing a word order that reflected the Matchers’
knowledge
would
not
appreciably
affect
comprehension.
In
fact,
post-experimental
questionnaires revealed that both Describers and
Matchers focused on aspects of the task directly related
to meaning. Both groups reported that the most difficult
part of the task, to which they devoted most effort, was
correctly identifying the relevant entities. It is possible
that with a more difficult task, where syntactic
variations might have a more profound impact on
Matchers’ comprehension and hence ability to perform
the task, speakers would be more concerned to
formulate syntactic structures that were maximally easy
to understand.
If correct, this would mean that speakers choose to
allocate their limited resources depending on the
probably communicative consequences of their
decision. When successful communication is not likely
to be endangered, they are willing to focus more on
meeting the fluency constraint. However, when
successful communication is at stake, speakers expend
relatively more resources on behaving cooperatively.
Insofar as syntactic variations are less likely to impact
upon successful communication, speakers are less likely
to display evidence of audience design with respect to
syntactic structure.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Nuffield Foundation
Research Grant SGS/00570/G and a British Academy
Postdoctoral Fellowship.

References
Bard, E.G., Anderson, A.H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M.,
Doherty-Sneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000).
Controlling the intelligibility of referring expressions
in dialogue. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 122.
Bell, A. (1984). Language style as audience design.
Language in Society, 13, 145-204.
Bock, J.K., & Irwin, D.E. (1980). Syntactic effects of
information availability in sentence production.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Learning Behavior,
19, 467-484.
Brennan, S.E., & Clark, H.H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 1482-1493.
Brown, P.M., & Dell, G.S. (1987). Adapting production
to comprehension: The explicit mention of
instruments. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 441-472.
Clark, E.V., & Clark, H.H. (1978). Universals,
relativity and language processing. In J. Greenberg
(Ed.), Universals of Human Language Processing,

Volume 1: Method and Theory. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Clark,
E.V.,
&
Haviland,
S.E.
(1977).
Comprehension and the Given-New contract. In R.O.
Freedle
(Ed.),
Discourse
Production
and
Comprehension. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Ferreira, V.S., & Dell, G.S. (2000). Effect of ambiguity
and lexical availability on syntactic and lexical
production. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296-340.
Horton, W.S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers
take into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91117.
Kempen, G., & Hoenkamp, E. (1987). An incremental
procedural grammar for sentence formulation.
Cognitive Science, 11, 201-258.
Krauss, R.M., & Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent
feedback, confirmation, and the encoding of referents
in verbal communication. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 4, 343-346.
Lockridge, C.B., & Brennan, S.E. (2002). Addressees’
needs influence speakers’ early syntactic choices.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 550-557.
Osgood, C.E. (1971). Where do sentences come from?
In D.D. Steinberg & L.A.Jakobovits (Eds.),
Semantics: An interdisciplinary reader in philosophy,
linguistics and psychology. London: CUP.
Prince, E.F. (1981). Towards a taxonomy of given-new
information. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical pragmatics.
New York: Academic Press.
Sridhar, S.N. (1988). Cognition and sentence
production: A cross-linguistic study. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Vallduvi, E. (1992). The informational component.
New York: Garland.

185

