UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Some New Evidence for Concept Stability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0qt7j874

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Scott, Sam

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Some New Evidence for Concept Stability
Sam Scott (sscott@carleton.ca)
Department of Cognitive Science
Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6

Abstract
It is generally assumed that concepts are stored as relatively
invariant chunks in long term memory. This is the default
assumption in most linguistic, psychological, and
philosophical work on concepts. But contrary to this
assumption is the recent suggestion that both the structure and
content of concepts is highly flexible and unstable. I critically
review the evidence behind this assertion, then present some
new experimental evidence that supports the traditional view.

Introduction
Concepts are the building blocks of human thought. They
are the invariant sub-propositional mental representations of
the physical and social world which we use in perception,
categorization, learning, and inference. The enormous
flexibility, productivity, and context-sensitivity of human
thought is a result of computations performed on these
otherwise invariant concepts. That’s the traditional view,
anyhow, and it forms the basis of most published
psychological, philosophical, and linguistic work on
concepts. Barsalou (1987; 1999) and Prinz (2002) are the
architects of a new view of concepts – one which claims to
be empiricist rather than rationalist, and one in which the
flexibility of thought is explained by the flexibility and
instability of concepts. In this paper, I re-examine the
evidence for concept instability, and find it lacking. Then I
present the results of a new experiment which demonstrates
that concepts are rather more stable and inflexible than
Barsalou and Prinz claim.

conclusion, participants were given lists of category
exemplars and asked to rate each one for “goodness of
example”, or “typicality” using a 7-point scale. The
participants tended to show a high level of agreement in
their ratings, and the mean typicality scores correlated well
with independent measures of within-category similarity.
This pattern of results has been replicated many times using
different methodologies (e.g. Barsalou, 1985; Hampton,
1979; Malt & Smith, 1984; Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
There are a number of competing interpretations of these
results, but a near consensus has emerged that they are to be
explained by appeal to the structure of the concepts stored in
long term memory. Debates continue around the exact
nature of that structure (e.g. whether concepts are best
described as prototypes or mini theories), but the idea that
concepts might be highly flexible and unstable structures
has not often been entertained. That is what makes
Barsalou’s (1987) original challenge and Prinz’s (2002)
recent reformulation so important.
According to Barsalou (1987), typicality judgments are
unreliable both within and between participants, and
unstable across contexts. He concludes that stable concepts
in long term memory are an “analytic fiction”. According to
Barsalou, concepts are constructed as needed out of a partly
context-dependent subset of our full knowledge. They are
not invariant structures retrieved intact from long term
memory. The following sections are an attempt to outline
and respond to Barsalou’s main arguments for this radical
conclusion – arguments from variable participant behavior,
context effects, and multiple determinants of typicality.

Variable Participant Behavior

Arguments for Instability
The current era of empirical research on concepts was
ushered in by some striking and original results from Rosch
and her colleagues (Rosch, 1975; Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
In a series of now classic experiments, Rosch demonstrated
that concepts are graded structures bound together by
overall similarity or “family resemblances”. For example,
DOG is considered by most experimental participants to be a
better exemplar than PLATYPUS of the concept ANIMAL. This
is so because the concept DOG shares more features in
common with other ANIMAL exemplars than PLATYPUS does,
or to put it another way, because DOG is more similar to
other ANIMAL exemplars than PLATYPUS is.1 In the
experiments that were most influential in establishing this
1

Words in small caps refer to concepts. An exemplar of a concept
is a sub-concept (e.g. DOG is an exemplar of ANIMAL).

1059

Barsalou’s first claim is that the typicality ratings on which
Rosch based much of her work are unstable both within and
between participants. Barsalou (1987) reports that
participants seem to agree with each other less than Rosch
originally reported, and even disagree with themselves on
different occasions. Reviewing his own unpublished work,
Barsalou reports that mean between-participant correlations
for 20 different groups ranged from 0.30 to 0.60. Rosch’s
(1975) original finding of high inter-participant agreement
reflected a different, possibly misleading statistic in which
the stability of the mean is measured by split-group
correlation. The problem with this type of statistic is that
increasing group size tends to increase the stability of the
mean, potentially producing an arbitrarily high appearance
of inter-participant agreement. In contrast, Barsalou’s
statistics resulted from calculating between-participant

correlations for every possible pair of participants and then
computing the mean, to predict the expected level of
correlation between any two participants’ typicality ratings.
Even more potentially damaging is Barsalou’s report (again
summarizing his own unpublished work) that typicality
judgments can differ on different occasions. He had
participants rate typicality on the same set of items twice,
with varying delays of 1 hour to 1 month. With the
exception of the 1 hour delay, the participants correlated
with themselves to a mean level of 0.80. Barsalou concluded
that typicality judgments are too unstable to be useful in
determining the underlying structure of a concept.
Related studies by Bellezza (1984a; 1984b; 1984c) also
lend general support to Barsalou’s results. Bellezza showed
that participants tend to be highly variable in their
performance on two types of production tasks related to
categorization: exemplar listing for categories (Bellezza
1984a), and property listing for nouns and proper names
(Bellezza, 1984b; 1984c). In this series of experiments,
participants performed an identical task on two separate
occasions, one week apart. The degree of overlap between
the two sessions on the exemplar-listing task, as measured
by mean common-element correlation, was 0.69 within
participants and 0.44 between participants. For the propertylisting tasks, the numbers were approximately 0.50 within
participants and 0.20 between-participants.
What should we conclude from all this? First of all, the
fact that participants disagree with each others’ typicality
ratings is not particularly surprising, and does not
necessarily invalidate the mean ratings over a large group of
participants, particularly when these mean ratings prove to
be predictive of other psychological effects. Experimental
psychology is a statistical science designed to measure
tendencies across large groups. Between-participant
variance of the kind Barsalou reports is neither unusual nor
troubling. Nor should it be particularly troublesome that
participants show a high variability in production tasks,
which are probably affected by all sorts of subtle priming
effects as well as the participants’ moods and
preoccupations on the day tested. It is only the finding of
within-participant disagreement on the typicality ratings in
particular that might really pose a problem. If participants
can’t even agree with themselves across time, then maybe
typicality ratings do not result from the structure of
relatively invariant concepts after all.
But there are two reasons to doubt the significance of the
problem. First of all, within-participant reliability for
typicality, as measured by Barsalou, seems significantly
higher than within-participant reliability on Bellezza’s
production tasks. This shows that participants are more
variable in free recall than they are in rating given stimuli,
which is exactly the sort of trend to be expected if the act of
rating exemplars causes the participants to access some kind
of invariant underlying structure. Secondly, Barsalou
(1987) reports that high- and low-typicality items showed
little variance within participants. Rather, the majority of the
1060

within-participant disagreement was on the intermediatetypicality examples. This may simply reflect the way the
participants were using the rating scale. If they tend to rate
high on the scale for typical exemplars and low for atypical
exemplars, then that leaves them with a lot of room to
maneuver in the middle of the 7- or 9-point scales that are
usually used. If so, participants can be expected to produce
different values in this range on different occasions. Later
work by Barsalou (1989) supports this interpretation: when
participants rank exemplars in order of typicality, they show
less variance, both within- and between-participants, than
when they use a rating scale. So the reliability of typicality
ratings may not be a major cause for alarm after all.

Context Effects
Barsalou’s (1987) second claim is that sentential and
situational context will affect typicality judgments. As
evidence, he cites Roth and Shoben (1983), who found that
when a concept word appears in a sentence, the sentential
context affects participants’ typicality ratings. For example,
participants were shown the sentence, “During the
midmorning break the two secretaries gossiped as they
drank the beverage”, and were then asked to use a 9-point
scale to rate how well given exemplars fit their “idea or
image of what the category term [beverage] refers to in the
sentence” (Roth & Shoben, 1983, pp. 358-359). Normally
atypical exemplar names for BEVERAGE, such as “coffee” or
“tea” were rated much more typical in context than when no
context was provided. In other experiments, Roth and
Shoben also found differences in reaction times that were
consistent with a shift in typicality across contexts.
Similarly, Barsalou (1987), again reviewing his own
unpublished work, reports that participants changed their
typicality judgments when instructed to take another
person’s point of view. For example, American students
judged robins and sparrows to be highly typical birds from
an American point of view, while swans and peacocks were
highly typical from a Chinese point of view.
The problem with these types of studies is that it is not at
all clear that the concept itself is the same across contexts. It
seems quite likely that participants are inferring what
Barsalou would call “ad hoc" concepts such as BEVERAGE
THAT SECRETARIES DRINK IN THE MORNING or BIRD FROM A
CHINESE POINT OF VIEW and rating typicality against those
concepts rather than the target concepts BEVERAGE and
BIRD. If so, then these studies do not in any way prove that
conceptual content is dependent on context. This is not to
say that context doesn’t play any role in the behavior of the
participants, but no evidence to date conclusively shows that
the concepts themselves can actually change in context.

Multiple Determinants of Typicality
The evidence in support of Barsalou’s (1987) third claim
comes from previous work in which he found typicality
effects in ad hoc and goal-directed concepts, such as THINGS

TO DO ON THE WEEKEND (Barsalou, 1983; 1985). Rosch had
shown that typicality effects in object concepts correlated
consistently with family resemblance, rather than any
simple measure of frequency or familiarity. But this does
not seem to be a possibility for ad hoc and goal-directed
concepts, whose exemplars tend to bear little resemblance to
one another. For example, what do money, children,
jewelry, photo albums and pets have in common? On the
face of it, they seem to have very little in common at all, but
they are all intuitively good exemplars of the concept
THINGS TO SAVE FROM A BURNING HOUSE. On the other hand
chairs, televisions and pots do not seem like such good
exemplars, though they could all conceivably be rescued as
easily as the good exemplars. What could the sources of
typicality effects be in these domains?
To answer this question, Barsalou (1985) looked at four
possible predictors of graded typicality judgments for a
given concept exemplar: 1) Central tendency, a measure of
within-category
similarity,
like
Rosch’s
“family
resemblance”; 2) Closeness to an ideal, such as “zero
calories” for the concept THINGS TO EAT ON A DIET; 3)
Frequency of instantiation, measured by participants’ own
estimates of how often an exemplar occurs as a member of a
given category; and 4) Familiarity, measured by
participants’ own estimates of how familiar they were with
the exemplar. In accord with many earlier studies, Barsalou
found that central tendency was most predictive of typicality
for object concepts2, but both frequency of instantiation and
closeness to an ideal were much more predictive for the
goal-directed concepts. Of course, this result is easily
explainable given that there is no reason to believe that ad
hoc concepts are in any way psychologically basic. Whereas
the object concepts he studied are in common use and tend
to be lexicalized, ad hoc concepts are uncommon and
generally have to be expressed using long phrases. It is quite
possible that the ad hoc concepts function just as Barsalou
suggests. That is, they have little invariant structure, but
rather are constructed on the fly when participants’ attention
is called to their existence. But the predictive value of
family resemblance and central tendency seems to argue
against the same conclusion for lexicalized object concepts.
However, Barsalou (1987) went on to try and prove that
the determinants of graded structure can change. Having
established that ideals can determine graded structure for
certain concepts, he constructed an experiment involving
two groups of imaginary individuals defined so that they
could be sorted equally well by overall family resemblance
or using a single attribute. Each individual was represented
by a list of 5 attributes, encoding how often they engaged in
activities such as dancing, renovating houses, writing
poetry, watching movies, and so on. The defining attributes
for the two categories were how often the individual read
the newspaper and how often they jogged. In the “ideals”
2
Barsalou called them “common taxonomic categories”, but of the
9 categories, 8 were object categories.

1061

condition, participants were told the categories were
CURRENT EVENTS TEACHER and PHYSICAL EDUCATION
TEACHER. In the “central tendency” condition, they were
told the categories were Z PROGRAMMER and Q
PROGRAMMER. After studying the descriptions of

individuals in the two categories, they were asked to rate
them for typicality. Not surprisingly, in the ideals condition,
participants’ ratings correlated with the values of the
relevant defining dimension (that is, how often they jogged
or read the newspaper). In the central tendency condition,
their ratings correlated with overall family resemblance.
Barsalou concluded that this was further evidence for the
flexibility of concept structure.
The main problem with this study was that the
participants in the ideals condition were not learning
arbitrary concepts from scratch, whereas they were in the
central tendency condition. Suppose, as is quite likely, that
the participants already had pre-existing concepts for
PHYSICAL EDUCATION TEACHER and CURRENT EVENTS
TEACHER that were organized around family resemblance
principles. The participants were then placed before
descriptions of individuals that show values for a mere five
dimensions. It is likely that very few of these dimensions
would seem relevant to categorization decisions based on
these pre-existing concepts. (Does a physical education
teacher watch more or fewer movies than a current events
teacher?) Under these conditions, it’s plausible that only the
target features of the individuals seemed salient given the
concepts’ pre-existing central tendencies. If so, the fact that
the participants appeared to sort using that feature says
nothing about the general organization of their concepts. By
contrast, participants in the central tendency condition were
learning two new concepts, and thus approached the
problem as a new learning situation, basing their typicality
judgments on all available attributes at once.

Default Concepts
In the end, none of Barsalou’s three conclusions are
warranted, hence neither is his suggestion that invariant
concepts stored in long-term memory are an “analytic
fiction”. Nevertheless, Barsalou and (more recently) Prinz
have continued to argue that much of the structure of
concepts in working memory is assembled on the fly rather
than included in an invariant structure retrieved from long
term memory. Both Barsalou’s (1999) “simulator” and
Prinz’s (2002) “proxytype” concepts are skeletal structures
consisting of just a small amount of context-invariant
information. They are default concepts that are retrieved and
integrated with other context-dependent information to form
a newly modified concept in working memory. On these
accounts, concepts are highly flexible structures, and no two
retrievals of the same default concept from long term
memory are likely to result in exactly the same concept in
working memory. Though weakened a little from Barsalou’s
original position, these theories still predict much more
flexibility and variability in concepts than most other

theories. In the next section, I present new empirical
evidence that I hope better addresses the debate than the
work reviewed above.

Some New Evidence
Almost all typicality rating tasks, from Rosch onwards, have
used the same methodology: participants are tested in
groups, filling out booklets in which each page shows a
category name at the top, followed by a list of items to rate
for typicality in that category. Thus the context of each
individual typicality rating is determined by the list of items
in which it appears. Participants do not just rate the items
against the category, but also against the other items that the
experimenters have chosen to include in the list. If the
participant is not sure what the experimenters meant by, for
instance, “animal”, she can scan the list of stimuli to figure
out an intended meaning, then rate each item based on that.
Although Barsalou’s arguments failed to establish his
claim of massive concept flexibility, the usual method of
collecting typicality ratings for family resemblance studies
does not rule it out either. It is possible that participants
form new concepts for each category name by scanning the
list of stimuli and forming a prototype based on what the
exemplars and instances in that list have in common. Then
they rate for typicality based on that contextuallydetermined prototype. But if this is what they are doing,
then the correlation with family resemblance, a direct
measure of how much the exemplars and instances have in
common, becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The goal of the experiment described in this section was
to check whether manipulating the context of the typicality
rating task would have a significant effect on the behavior
of the participants. Typicality ratings were collected using a
task designed to minimize the effect of context. Instead of
seeing a list of items on a page, participants saw the items
one at a time, displayed on a computer screen in random
order. In this condition, items were presented randomly
from 10 different concepts to ensure that, on average,
participants would have to process 9 items from different
concepts between each pair from the same category. The
immediate context of each individual typicality judgment
under these conditions is quite different between
participants. If, contrary to Barsalou and Prinz, typicality
ratings do cause participants to access invariable default
concepts, then between-group agreement should be high,
and within-group agreement should be comparable to
previous studies.
A note on the design of the experiment: The original idea
was to do a between-groups comparison against the data
reported in Rosch (1975). However, typicality data for four
categories collected using Rosch’s method was also
available locally. The inclusion of this third source of data
(Group A below) allowed for more detailed within-group
comparisons, since Rosch only reported the mean typicality.

1062

Methods
Participants
The Group A participants were 32 student volunteers, 12
male and 20 female, with a mean age of 25.3 years. They
performed the task either for extra academic credit or for
pay. The Group B participants were 31 student volunteers,
13 male and 18 female, with a mean age of 20.5 years. They
performed the task for extra academic credit.
Stimuli
The Group A participants rated 20 items in each of four
categories, named “animal”, “monster”, “fish”, and
“superhero”. The 20 stimuli for these categories were
selected from an associative frequency study in which
participants generated exemplars for each of the categories.
The Group B participants saw the same stimuli as Group A
plus stimuli from another 6 categories originally studied by
Rosch (1975). 20 items were selected at random from
Rosch’s lists for the categories named “furniture”,
“weapon”, “vegetable”, “sport”, “toy”, and “clothing”.
Group A Procedure
For both groups, the instructions were very similar to those
used by Rosch (1975) – see the Appendix for an example.
Group A participants provided their ratings on paper in a
booklet. Each page had a category name printed at the top
and items in that category listed on the left hand side. Each
item had a 7-point scale for rating goodness of example, as
well as an “X” for participants to circle if they felt the item
did not belong in the category at all, and a “?” for
participants to circle if they did not know what the item was.
Participants received the items within the categories in one
of two random orders, and received the categories in a
random order. No more than 2 participants saw the same
random ordering of categories.
Group B Procedure
Group B participants provided ratings on a computer
keyboard. Stimuli were displayed in black on a white
background. On each trial, participants first saw a category
name (all lowercase) displayed using a 24-point bold-faced
Arial font, centered horizontally, and 50 pixels above
vertical center on a 15 inch screen. This was followed, after
500 ms, by the name of the item to rate (all lowercase),
centered both horizontally and vertically and displayed
using a 30-point bold-faced Arial font with no indefinite
article. The category name remained on the screen during
the entire trial, and participants had an unlimited time to
respond, using a standard computer keyboard with keys
relabeled to present a 7-point response scale numbered in
increasing order from left to right as well as the “X” and “?”
options. The participants were given 10 practice trials
involving category names and items not included in the
main study. The main block of trials involved all 200

category/item pairs presented in a different random order for
each participant.

Results
To assess agreement between groups, Pearson correlations
of mean typicality between groups were computed for each
of the four categories rated by both Groups A and B. These
correlations were substantial and significant, ranging from r
= 0.91, p < .01 to r = 0.95, p < .01. Table 1 displays these
correlations along with the correlations of mean typicality
between the Group B participants and Rosch’s (1975) 209
participants. Again all correlations are significant and
substantial, ranging from r = -0.81, p < .01, to r = -0.97, p <
.01, (these correlations are negative because Rosch used an
inverted 7-point scale).

Table 3 shows the available mean between-participant
correlations, computed using the method of Guildford and
Fruchter (1973) as suggested by Barsalou (1987). They
range from 0.22 to 0.70, but most fall within the range of
0.30 to 0.60 reported by Barsalou. The mean of these mean
correlations for the four categories rated by both Groups A
and B is 0.46 for Group A and 0.39 for Group B (the overall
mean for Group B was 0.51).
Table 3: Mean Pair-wise Typicality Correlations
Category
Animal
Clothing
Fish
Furniture
Monster
Sport
Superhero
Toy
Vegetable
Weapon

Table 1: Mean Typicality Correlations Between Groups
Category
Animal
Clothing
Fish
Furniture
Monster
Sport
Superhero
Toy
Vegetable
Weapon

A vs. B
0.95

B vs. Rosch
-0.94

0.90
-0.93
-0.89
0.92
-0.81
-0.84
-0.97

Table 2: Random Split-half Typicality Correlations
Rosch

Group A
0.94

>0.90
0.78
>0.90
0.81
>0.90
0.83
>0.90
>0.90
>0.90

0.52
0.24
0.45

Grp. B
0.52
0.70
0.39
0.64
0.22
0.58
0.42
0.43
0.61
0.56

Discussion

0.91

As for within-group agreement, Table 2 shows the
available data for split-half correlations over all 10
categories. No exact values are available for Rosch’s six
categories, except for her report that all split-half
correlations were above r = 0.90. The values from Groups A
and B reflect split-half correlations based on random splits.
The mean split-half correlation for the four categories rated
by both Groups A and B is 0.84 for Group A and 0.87 for
Group B (the overall mean for Group B was 0.90).

Category
Animal
Clothing
Fish
Furniture
Monster
Sport
Superhero
Toy
Vegetable
Weapon

Grp. A
0.64

Group B
0.94
0.97
0.84
0.87
0.78
0.98
0.93
0.94
0.83
0.96

1063

For all categories, the between-group mean typicality
correlations shown in Table 1 are substantial and significant
(most striking are the correlations between Group B and
Rosch’s participants, separated by 30 years and 3000 miles).
For both Groups A and B, within-group agreement, whether
measured by split-half correlations (Table 2) or mean
correlations between participants (Table 3), is comparable to
that reported in previous studies. One potentially anomalous
result is that the mean between-participant agreement
measured using Barsalou’s method appeared to be a little
lower in Group B than in Group A on the four categories
that could be compared. But over all of the 10 categories
rated by the Group B participants, most mean betweenparticipant correlations were well within the range reported
by Barsalou for this statistic and several exceeded it. So the
appearance of lower within-subject agreement is probably
an artifact of the choice of categories given to Group A. In
particular, the words “fish” and “animal” are ambiguous in a
way that the other category words are not. In common
usage, “fish” can mean a kind of organism or a kind of
meat, and “animal” can include humans or not, and
sometimes refers only to mammals. These different
meanings correspond to quite different concepts. So the
lower agreement in Group B likely stems from confusion
over which concept was intended, not from contextdependent modifications to a default concept. In summary,
there is little evidence to be found in this study that
modifications to the context of the typicality rating task
have a significant effect on the structure or content of the
concepts employed by the participants.

Conclusions
I argued that Barsalou and Prinz’s claims for concept
instability rest on a bad interpretation of previous
experimental results. But past studies on family resemblance
were conducted in such a way that unstable concepts could
not entirely be ruled out. The experiment described in this
paper provided evidence that even when the immediate
context of the task is disrupted, neither within- nor betweengroup agreement is affected. It is reasonable to conclude
from this that participants are in fact able to access an
invariant concept when presented with a category name, and
thus there is little reason to believe that the massive
flexibility of thought is due to flexibility or instability built
into the concepts themselves. Variability in categorization
and other tasks likely results from interaction effects
between a number of cognitive systems and sources of
knowledge.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Robert J. Stainton and Craig Leth-Steensen for
repeated discussion of the material presented in this paper,
and to Edina Torlakovi for comments on an earlier draft.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory and
Cognition, 11(3), 211-227.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 11(4), 629-654.
Barsalou, L. W. (1987). The instability of graded structure:
Implications for the nature of concepts. In U. Neisser
(Ed.) Concepts and Conceptual Development. Cambridge
University Press.
Barsalou, L. W. (1989). Intra-concept similarity and its
implications for inter-concept similarity. In S. Vosniadou
& A. Ortony (Eds.) Similarity and Analogical Reasoning.
Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Bran Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Bellezza, F. S. (1984). Reliability of retrieval from semantic
memory: Common categories. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 22(4), 324-326.
Bellezza, F. S. (1984). Reliability of retrieval from semantic
memory: Information about people. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 22(6), 511-513.
Bellezza, F. S. (1984). Reliability of retrieval from semantic
memory: Noun meanings. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, 22(5), 377-380.
Guildford, J. P., & Fruchter, B. (1973). Fundamental
Statistics in Psychology and Education. New York:
McGraw Hill.
Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 18, 441-461.
1064

Malt, B. C., & Smith, E. E. (1984). Correlated properties in
natural categories. J Verb Learn Verb Be, 23, 250-269.
Prinz, J. J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind: Concepts and their
Conceptual Basis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
104(3), 192-233.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Roth, E. M., & Shoben, E. J. (1983). The effect of context
on the structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 15,
346-378.

Appendix
The following instructions were given to Group B
Participants:
This study has to do with what we have in mind when we use
words which refer to categories. Let’s take the word red as an
example. Imagine a true red. Now imagine an orangish red …
imagine a purple red. Although you might still name the
orange-red or the purple-red with the term red, they are not as
good examples of red (not as clear cases of what red refers to)
as the clear “true” red. In short, some reds are redder than
others. The same is true for other kinds of categories. Think
of birds. Everyone has some notion of what a “real bird”, a
“birdy bird” is. To me a sparrow or a robin is a very birdy
bird while an ostrich is a less birdy bird. Notice that this kind
of judgment has nothing to do with how well you like the
thing; you can like a purple red better than a true red but still
recognize that the color you like is not a true red. You might
think that the ostrich is much more interesting than other
kinds of birds without thinking that it is the kind of bird that
best represents what people mean by birdiness. This judgment
also has nothing to do with how frequently you see or think
about the thing; you could live on an ostrich farm and deal
with ostriches every day, but still think that they are a pretty
bad example of what people generally mean when they talk
about birds.
In this study you are asked to judge how good an example
of a category various instances of that category are. The
computer will present a category followed by an item. You
are to use the buttons labeled 1 to 7 to rate how good an
example of the category each instance is. A 7 means that you
feel the item is a very good example of your idea of what the
category is. A 1 means you feel the member fits very poorly
with your idea or image of the category. A 4 means you feel
the member fits moderately well. It is also possible that you
may not know what the example is, in which case you should
press the button labeled “?”. You also may feel that the
instance is not actually a member of the category at all, in
which case you would press the button marked “X”. You can
go at your own speed, and you will be given a chance to
practice before the experiment starts.
Don’t worry about why you feel that something is or isn’t a
good example of the category (and don’t worry about whether
it’s just you or people in general who feel that way) – just
mark it the way you see it.

