UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sound Symbolism and Early Word Learning in Two Languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0x80838r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Yoshida, Hanako
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sound Symbolism and Early Word Learning in Two Languages
HanakoYoshida (hayoshid@indiana.edu)
Linda. B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)

Psychology Department, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-7007 USA

Abstract
Verb learning seems especially difficult for children
learning many languages, at least relative to nouns.
Many have speculated because this is because verbs
refer to relational events that are components of much
more complex events. Consider a buying-selling event.
If the child hears the verb “buy”, does it mean sell, get,
handover, give money, or perhaps smile? By this view,
a key problem in learning verb is parsing complex
events into relevant components and then attending to
the right components. This study presents evidence that
parents use sound symbolism to direct children’s
attention to the proper component and that children
readily use that information when learning new verbs.
The study specifically compares two languages that
differ in their sound-symbolic words—Japanese
language with its class of mimetics that are heavily
used in speech to children and English language which
is commonly considered to be a less sound symbolic
language. The results indicate that both Japanese- and
English-speaking parents use sound symbolism to teach
verbs and that both children learning Japanese- and
English benefit from this symbolism. This work
provides new insight into verb learning, the nature of
the input, and the universal aspects of sound symbolism
in language use.

Introduction
Most studies of early vocabulary growth point to a noun
advantage in early language. In particular, nouns
dominate verbs in early productive vocabulary,
dramatically so in English and to a lesser degree in
“verb heavy” language such as Mandarin or Japanese
(Gentner, 1982; Goldin-Meadow, Seligman & Gelman,
1976; Markman, 1989; Gelman & Tardif, 1998). A
variety of explanations have been offered. Gentner and
Boroditsky (2001) suggest that general cognitive and
perceptual factors contribute to the dominance of noun
in early vocabularies. Specifically, nouns are said to
refer to cohesive perceptual bundles. As a result, they
argue, young word learners universally learn nouns
easily. Verbs, in contrast, refer to relational aspect of
events, which are not perceptually given. Thus different
languages lexicalize verbs differently and they are
harder to learn, indeed a product of lexical learning
other than a precursor.

1287

The ideas especially make sense when one thinks
about the contexts in which children typically learn
early nouns and verbs. Children typically learn object
names, through ostensive definition. Adults point to the
object and say the name. Perceptually segregating the
referent from the larger scene is clearly relevant to
mapping the name to the right referent and this is easy
for objects which are stable, unitary wholes. Further,
basic level object categories are well organized by
similarity and particularly by similarity in shape
(Rosch, 1973; Biederman, 1989). Thus, beds are
usually somewhat regular and boxy, cups are cup
shaped, dogs are dog shaped, and so forth. The fact that
object names map to object categories with similar
perceptual organizations, that is shape-based, may also
give young learners a leg-up (Sandhofer, Smith & Luo,
2000).
These factors that help noun learning --- coherent
perceptual bundles and similar category structures --are not there for verbs. The motions and relations to
which verbs refer are not perceptually obvious units.
First, motions and relations are transitory events.
Second, these actions and relations appear as a
compound of the performed or ongoing event.
Moreover, these complex events can include initial
states, actions, outcomes, and objects. Consider, for
example, the verb ‘hit’ – there is, in any hitting event,
the agent, the instrument, the object and if the object is
a person, a perhaps dramatic outcome. Therefore, verbs
refer to an abstract relation in a complex event, and are
not so directly perceived. Further, different verbs refer
to different kinds of relations and actions. Whereas,
common concrete nouns refer to objects well organized
by shape, common verbs such as ‘put’, ‘see’ and ‘jump’
have very different (and much more complex) semantic
structures. This may make the mapping of verbs to
actions non-obvious and difficult for children.

Possible role of sound words
Many languages use sound-symbolic words.
Onomatopoeia words that sound like what they mean,
for example, ‘bow-bow’ and ‘cock-a-doodle-doo’ that
depict animal sounds and an ideophone, for example,
‘helter-skelter’ and ‘zig-zag’ are some of sound
symbolic words that capture more abstract type of
information in English.
The present experiments focus on particular types
of onomatopoeic words in Japanese, gitaigo. This

gitaigo words are closely related to onomaopoeic words
in that language sounds are used expressively, but
express aspects of incident which may not produce
sounds (e.g., sara-sara conveys smoothness of
aspect/object) rather simple imitation of natural sounds.
Mimetic words that imitate non-sound events (state or
manner) are not so common in other European
languages, this particular class of words translated in
many ways: mimetic words, onomatopoetic words,
onomatopes, mimesis, sound symbolic words, etc (Oda,
2001). To make it simple, I specifically use gitaigo for
conventionalized mimetics that specifically express
non-sound events (e.g., zig-zag), onomaopoeic words
for conventionalized mimetic words that specifically
imitate natural sound (e.g., pop!). These mimetic words
including gitaigo and onomaopoeic words iconically
represent aspects of motion as in as; ‘pyoko-pyoko’
[jumping up and down], ‘pisyan’ [a sound when two
thin entities are hit] and ‘gyobogyobo’ [gurgling]
(Tsujimura, 1996). Interestingly, the combination of
this mimetic word and light verbs; suru/shita/shinai
(do, did, don’t) yield a varied supply of verbs, specific
to specific events. And, a particular mimetic based verb
refers to a particular event systematically. The
relationship between mimetic words and the referred
events give arise to the idea that mimetic words may
naturally segregate actions, taking the listener to the
right perceptual components, by mimicking the aspect
of the referred to events. Moreover, if children attend to
a relevant element (action) in complex events by
attending to the similarity between the sound of the
label and perceptual properties, then they might easily
map the presented label to the part of the segregated
event that is similar to the label. These ideas lead to
specific questions about development of word learning.
1) Do Japanese-speaking parents use mimetics in the
speech to children when teaching them about action
events?
2) Do English-speaking parents use sound symbolism
in these same contexts?
3) Does sound symbolism facilitate verb learning in
children learning English and Japanese?
4) Is there any advantage in verb learning for Japanesespeaking children with a codified sound symbolism
language than for English-speaking children?

Experiment 1
To naturalistically study the nature of the input to
children, we asked parents to teach their child about
four novel toys that involved interesting actions.
Parents were not told that the experiment was about
verbs or language or language learning, but only to
show their child the toy, the action and to encourage
their child to perform the action. In this way, we hoped
to measure the frequency and nature of sound-

1288

symbolism in spontaneous parent speech when engaged
in complex action events with their child.

Method
Participant. Fifteen monolingual English-speaking
children who were between 18.75 to 47.3months and
their mothers, and 15 monolingual Japanese-speaking
children who were between 17.43 to 47.6 months and
their mothers participated in the study.
Stimuli and procedure. Parents and children were
brought to a testing room with a couch, table television
monitor, and rug on the floor. Parents were told that
they were going to watch a video demonstrating a play
activity and then after watching that video, they would
be given the same toys and were to teach the activity to
their child, and to encourage their child to play with the
toy in the same way (see Table 1). There were four
video demonstrations each followed by a 2 minute play
session with the real toys. The four demonstrations
were: putting a pole through colored rings, sprinkling
glitter into a cup, pulling open a tape measure and then
winding it closed, and spinning a holding a sand toy to
upside down and pushing it along the table so that its
wheel turned, and presented as a fixed order
respectively (see Figure 1) . The child and parent were
alone in the testing room during the demonstrations and
video and all interactions were video taped for late
coding.

Results
The sessions were transcribed by a native speaker.
These transcriptions were coded for the following: (1)
the use of gitaigo words (i.e., lexicalized mimetic words
that express non-sound property --in English ‘zigzag’),
(2) onomatopoeia (e.g., ‘pop’), (3) invented mimetic
words (e.g., chugi-chugi when moving the object), and
sound effect (e.g., gurgling sounds). In addition, we
coded all sound synchronies involving standard lexical
items, mimetics, onomatopoeia, and invented words.
Sound synchronies consisted of the use of words linked
in time to the action event. There were three main
kinds: (1) linking the duration of the word to the
duration of the event, (2) repetitions of words
synchronous to repetitions of actions, and (3) intonation
contours in time with action contours. Descriptions of
these are given in Figure 2. Table 2 shows the
proportion of trials on which each of the following
occurred: gitaigo, invented mimetic words, sound
effects, onomatopoeias, and real words that were also
sound synchronous with the action. Note that while
Japanese parents use gitaigo words frequently (75% of
the trials), English-speaking parents rarely do. This
reflects a real difference between the two languages.
But, notice that English-speaking parents make up for
this by making non-mimetic words ‘iconic’ by

dynamically linking them to the action. For example,
one parent pulled a tape measure out by says “look,
puuuuulllllll” as to fulfill the duration of the action with
the word. Another example is a mother repeated the
word ‘winding! winding! winding! as she winded the
tape measure to close.
These results suggest that sound symbolism may be a
regular part of all children’s language learning
experiences, that Japanese language may lexicalize,
codify, a universal aspect of language—using
iconicities across sounds and actions—to perceptually
link the two.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 tell us that parents use
sounds in ways that link those sounds iconically to
actions. But does this link matter? Does it help children
map verbs to the right relational features in complex
events? Experiment 2 was designed to address this
question. Here we presented twenty English-speaking
and twenty Japanese-speaking children with a novel
verb learning tasks. The children were presented with
novel verbs that were either arbitrary or mimetic or
arbitrary but presented in the same syntactic form used
for the mimetic (control) along with novel events
performed in video. Children were then presented test
events using the same or different objects and the same
or different action. The question was whether children
would learn the mapping and extend it to the same
action involving a different object.

Method
Participants. Twenty monolingual English-speaking
children who were between 24.2 to 47.01 moth olds and
20 monolingual Japanese-speaking children who were
between 20.23 to 50.72 moth olds participated in the
study. Ten children in each language group were
randomly assigned to either the Arbitrary condition or
the Mimetic condition or the Control condition.
Stimuli. Pre-training events. All the stimuli used in the
study were shown on color television monitors. There
were 4 different types of trials in the experiment;
familiarization, training, learning measure, and crucial
trials. The familiarization phase provided pre-training
events in which participants were introduced to the task
with an animation showing a doll sleeping on the bed.
The experimenter then said, “Look! Do you see that?
She is sleeping.”[hora mitegoran. onnanoko ga
neteirune.] Then another animation showed a bear
jumping. And the experimenter asked, “What about this
one? Is this one sleeping? [ja, kore-wa doukana?
neteiruno kana?] Participants who said “no” were
given feedback, but participants who said “yes” to the
question, or did not respond were told, “Look, that one
is not sleeping, that is jumping.” [hora yokumite,
netenaiyo janpu shiteiruyo] The purpose of this

1289

familiarization phase is for children to be exposed to
questions, and answering “yes” or “no”. Also, with the
feedback, the familiarization helps practice focusing on
the action of the event.
Training events. Through out the task, total of 24
training events were shown accompanied by novel
Arbitrary/Mimetic verbs or Arbitrary verbs in mimetic
syntactic forms. There were 2 types of training events:
target event and contrast event. The target event
involved a yellow drop shaped puppet moving up and
down in a hoping like fashion. This target event was
always presented along with the phrase “this one is
morping” for the Arbitrary verb condition, “this one is
doing bing-bing” for the Mimetic verb condition, and
“this one is doing morp” for the Control group to ensure
the syntactic frame presented with the Mimetic verb
condition (“this one is doing___”) does not help
children to learn novel verbs any ways rather than the
iconicity provided by the Mimetic verb condition. The
contrast event involved a blue square shaped puppet
scooting back and forth. This contrast event was always
presented along with the phrase “this is spoging” for the
Arbitrary verb condition, “this one is doing shug-shug”
for the Mimetic verb condition, and “this one is doing
spogg” for the Control group (see Figure 3). The target
event was presented total of 15 times and the contrast
event was presented total of 9 times through out the
task. For neither of the training event, no questions
were asked, thus no feedback was provided.
Test trials. The events used for the test trials were all
combination of target and contrast objects and actions
(see Figure 4).The crucial trials are those in which the
original objects and actions are crossed. There were 12
instances of the 4 kinds of test trials.

Procedure
Children were invited to a testing room with their
mother/preschool teacher and asked to take the sheet
with him/her at a distance of about 1.5 meters from the
television monitor. Mothers of participants and the
teachers in the testing room were asked to not to react
to experimental stimulus, questions and participants’
responses. To begin the experiment, children were
instructed to watch events that would show up on the
monitor carefully and answer some questions by saying
yes or no. The video was then started and participants
were preceded to the familiarization trials. Following
the familiarization trials, first 5 training events, 4 target
events and 1 contrast events) were introduced with
either a novel verb (morping for target, spogging for
contrast) or a novel mimetic (doing bing-bing for target,
doing shug-shug for contrast.) After the first 5 training
trials, rest of the 19 training events, 12 learning
measure trials and 12 crucial trials were presented in a
random fixed order. The total number of trials
including the first 5 training trials was 48.

Table

Discussion
The results from these two experiments provide new
insights into the nature of the input in early verb
learning and the role of sound symbolism in language
learning. When parents are teaching children about
complex action events, they naturally and
spontaneously use iconicities between sound and
actions to bring children’s attentions to the critical
event. Japanese-speaking parents do so through the use
of gitaigo, codified mimetic words. English-speaking
parents do not have much of these kinds of words at
their disposal, but that does not stop them. Instead they
make arbitrary English words with no mimetic
properties iconically linked to the action by
synchronizing their production of the word with the
production of the action. This suggests that sound
symbolism is a universal aspect of language, one that
brings attention to the right properties of complex
events by building on natural perceptual cross-modal
similarities. And, the results indicate that children
learning two languages exploit these similarities
between sound and action when learning verbs.
These facts raises profoundly important question. If
sound symbolism is naturally present in language use, if
particular sound words help children maping words to
referents, why is not language more iconic? Why aren’t
most words mimetic? The arbitrary symbolic nature of
most words seems likely to bring computational power
that iconic forms cannot. Specifying exactly why this is
so will be important contribution to cognitive sciences.

1290

Table 1: The instruction used in Experiment 1.

There will be 4 different demonstrations on
videotape. When the videotape indicates,
“START”, then you should use the same object to
teach your child how to do the same action, then
let him/her perform the action. When a beep
sound occurs, the videotape will indicate “END”,
then stop your work and pay attention to the
screen again—there will be the second
demonstration on the screen. Repeat the same
procedure. There will be four segments for you to
show your child.

Table 2: Proportion of trials on which iconic way of
referring occurred.

Japanese

The correct answers from the crucial four conditions
were submitted an analysis of variance, 2(English,
Japanese) X 2(Verb, Mimetic). Figure 5. shows the
percentage correct on crucial and learning measure
trials. As it apparent, over all, both English-speaking
and Japanese-speaking children learned the mimetic
more readily than the arbitrary verbs (regardless of the
presented syntactic frames). There was a main effect of
type of novel words, F= 7.758 p<.01, and this indicates
that regardless of the language groups, participants
learned the target novel mimetics better than target
novel mimetics (see Figure 5). There was no interaction
between language and type of word. Participants in the
Control condition did not learn the novel verb any
better than those in the rest of the conditions. This
indicates the syntactic frame in which novel verbs were
presented did not contribute to children’s verbs learning
as much as the mimetic use.

English

Results

total
M

Gitaigo
39
2.60

Onomatopoeic
0
0.00

Invented
word
7
0.47

sounds
effect
33
2.20

Non
mimetic
7
0.47

%
total
M

75.00%
3
0.25

0.00%
0
0.00

11.67%
1
0.08

55.00%
17
1.42

11.67%
37
3.08

6.25%

0.00%

2.08%

35.42%

77.08%

%

Figures

Figure 1: Actions and stimuli used for Experiment 1.

Linking the duration Examples: spinning a sand toy
against a table, as he/she says “vrooooooooommm”
fulfilling the duration of the action with word.

Figure 3: stimuli and action used for the Training trials

Test trials

Puppet

learning measure
with target

&

action

yellow

yellow

[ “vrooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooommm” ]
time

crucial with target
gray

Repetitions of words synchronous to repetitions of
actions Examples: as one spin a sand toy against a
table, he/she says “vroom” the time/number thus
correspond to the time/number of action.

crucial with contrast
learning measure with
contrast

gray

Figure 4: stimuli and action used for the Test trials
[ “vroooooooooommm!”
time

“vroooooom…. ]

Intonation contours in time with action contours
Examples: as one spin a sand toy against a table, he/she
says “vroom” by adding intonation at the end as to
differentiate/mark the end of the action.

Mean # of "correct"

Novel word learning
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

verb

mimetic
English

contrast

morping

spoging

target

contrast

Control
target

contrast

doing
morp

doing
spogg

Novel word

Puppet & action

target

doing
doing
bing-bing shug-shug

Japanese

References

Figure 2: Examples of sound synchronies (using
standard lexical items)
Mimetic

mimetic

Figure 5: mean number of correct answers in the Test
trials

[ “vrooooooooooooooooooooooooommm” ]
(intonation goes up at “mmm”)
time

Arbitrary

verb

1291

Biederman, I. (1989). "Recognition-by-components: A
theory of human image understanding": Clarification.
Psychological-Review. 96
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before
verbs: Linguistic relativityversus natural partitioning.
In S. A. Kuczaj (Ed.) Language development, 2
Language, thought and culture.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relational relativity and early word learning. In M.
Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.), Language
acquisition and conceptual development. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A. & Tardif, T. (1998). Acquisition of
nouns and verbs in Mandarin and English. Clark, E.
V. (Ed) The proceedings of the twenty-ninth annual
child language research forum. Stanford, CA, USA:
Center for the Study of Language and Information.

Goldin-Meadow, S., Seligman, M. E. & Gelman, R.
(1976) Language in the two-year-old. Cognition. 4
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming: in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Oda, Hiromi (2001) An embodied semantic mechanism
for mimetic words in Japanese. Dissertation Abstracts
International Section A: Humanities & Social
Sciences. Vol 61(7-A), pp. 2686
Rosch, E. (1973). On the internal structure of
perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E. Moore
(Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of
language. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sandhofer, M. C., Smith, B. L. and Luo, J. (2000).
Counting nouns and verbs in the input: differential
frequencies, different kinds of learning? Child
Language. 27. Cambridge University Press.
Tsujimura, N. (1996). An Introduction to Japanese
Linguistics. MA, USA: Blackwell Publishers Inc.

1292

