UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strategic, Metacognitive, and Social Aspects in Resource-oriented Knowledge Exchange

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6037b71r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Cress, Dr. Ulrike

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Strategic, Metacognitive, and Social Aspects in Resource-oriented Knowledge
Exchange
Dr. Ulrike Cress (u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de)
Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
The increasing use of internet and intranet fosters the
possibilities for resource-oriented knowledge exchange in
large groups of people working in parallel. However, the
individual decision to contribute information to a shared pool
builds up a public-goods dilemma, and people are often
discouraged from sharing knowledge because of strategic
reasons. Additionally, the highly anonymous situation where
resource-oriented knowledge exchange takes place could
further amplify the tendency to withhold knowledge: this
situation provides almost no metaknowledge about the
importance of one’s information for the others and almost no
social cues. In two experiments the effects of metaknowledge
and social standards are investigated. Results show that the
former influences the quality of the exchanged information,
whereas the latter influences the quantity.

Resource-Oriented Knowledge Exchange
One form of collaborative media use which is becoming
more and more important in organizations is the use of
shared databases as knowledge repositories. They provide
an opportunity for sharing distributed knowledge1 in groups
or organizations. Databases collect information which
normally is distributed over all members of an organization,
save it permanently and thus make it accessible and
searchable for all members of a group or organization
(Beckmann, 1999; Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995). Hence,
shared databases can be used to establish some kind of
organizational memory.
Such shared databases are especially useful in big
organizations in which partly similar tasks are accomplished
by different people or departments and subgroups (Cress,
Barquero, Buder & Hesse, i.p.). Here all group members do
not really work together, instead they work in parallel: the
different persons or subgroups work on different or partly
different tasks, and no common goal exists beyond the
general goal that each person should perform the task as
best s/he can. In those groups knowledge exchange is
especially useful if the performances of the persons or
subgroups are interdependent, and each person can benefit

1

In this article we do not distinguish between knowledge
and information, even we are aware that from a cognitive
point of view there are differences.

from each other’s work. In such a situation, the knowledge
exchange enhances the performance of all.
An example for such a parallel work situation is the
following: In a consultancy each consultant’s task is to
attend to different companies. To decide which the best
strategy is for one of his/her companies, a consultant should
know about the efficacy of different possible strategies in
other companies which are taken care of by one of her
colleagues. To do his/her job in the best way s/he should be
able to get information from those other projects. Therefore,
knowledge exchange could enhance her/his performance.
But the question arises how knowledge can be effectively
exchanged in such big organizations. Direct and demandoriented knowledge exchange through asking each other
isn’t very efficient when group members do not know which
persons are working on which tasks and who the experts are
in which domain. Additionally, direct knowledge exchange
through asking is not very efficient when similar questions
arise for different people. In this case, answering each
question separately is an ineffective method of knowledge
exchange. Thus, in bigger groups, an effective kind of
knowledge exchange seems to be one that is resource
oriented instead of demand oriented. This kind of
knowledge exchange is based on the idea that each member
contributes that part of his/her knowledge which is possibly
useful for other members of the organization.
But even if the resource-oriented knowledge exchange
seems to an effective method for knowledge exchange in
parallel working groups, it is reported in many knowledge
management projects that implemented databases in
organizations that people were reluctant from entering their
knowledge into such a shared pool. From a psychological
point of view this behavior can be described as a strategic
one, resulting from the fact that the situation can be
described as a social dilemma.

Strategic Aspect: Knowledge Exchange as
Social Dilemma
From a psychological point of view the resource-oriented
knowledge exchange has the formal structure of a social
dilemma (Fulk, Flanagin, Kalman, Monge & Ryan, 1996;
Hollingshead, Fulk & Monge, 2002; Thorn & Connolly,
1987): People are reluctant to enter their knowledge into a
shared database because contributing is associated with
individual costs. As knowledge in organizations is quite
often seen as a kind of power, the contribution of knowledge
to a shared pool is perceived as a loss of individual power
1

282

and reduced social influence. Other costs are related to the
communication tool and the specific situation in which the
communication takes place. It requires much time and effort
to write down the information. And because the information
should be useful for as many people as possible, the
messages have to be worked out elaborately, so that the
topics can be understood by people of different background
and expertise. Thus, compared with direct verbal
communication, a person must invest much more effort and
work in preparing messages for knowledge repositories, and
this extra effort competes with the daily work a person has
to do.
If these individual costs for each contributor are lower than
the group’s total benefit from having access to the
information, then the situations turns into an n-person
Prisoner’s Dilemma game: Individually, a person has no
benefit from entering information into the database. Quite
contrary, there are only private costs because time and effort
must be invested. This means that every person would be
better of if s/he does not enter any information and behaves
uncooperatively in this way. Thus, in terms of decision
theory, withholding information is the dominant strategy
leading to Nash Equilibrium. But if all people behave in
such a way, there is no knowledge exchange at all, and
people can’t benefit from each other. Then, the group has a
lower benefit than if all had cooperated. Therefore,
withholding is a pareto-inferior Nash Equilibrium. In this
context contributing is the altruistic decision, whereas
withholding means defection.
With respect to research about social dilemmas,
entering information into a shared database defines a kind of
public-goods dilemma. Public goods are characterized by
non-rivalry (which is also called “jointness of supply”,
Barry & Hardin, 1982) and non-excludability (Head, 1972).
Non-rivalry means that the amount and value of information
in a database (as a kind of public good) is not reduced if a
person uses the information. Non-excludability means that
the whole content of the database is in principle accessible
to all members. Thus, nobody can be prevented from using
the database – even if s/he contributed nothing.
This means that a potential knowledge provider cannot
have any founded expectation of a direct balance between
costs and benefits. S/He cannot expect that if s/he gives
away information, s/he will also obtain information from
those people who could retrieve the provided information.
Instead of this direct exchange, there is a kind of
“generalized exchange” (Markus, 1990; Yamagishi & Cook,
1993). A knowledge provider can only have a slight hope
that to possibly benefit from the knowledge of others as a
whole. But it is a certainty that any other member can use
provided knowledge, irrespective of that member’s own
contribution.
By considering the knowledge exchange as a socialdilemma situation the observed tendency for withholding
knowledge can be interpreted as a strategic behavior of the
group members. From the individual point of view

withholding information is the most effective strategy, and
therefore - individually seen - it is quite rational to do so.
But even if knowledge exchange is a dilemma situation
the question arises which factors could influence a person’s
motivation to cooperate in this dilemma.

Metaknowledge: Knowledge about the
Importance of one’s own Knowledge
The communication via databases is an extremely
anonymous communication situation. In demand-oriented
knowledge exchange a person directly is asked to share
knowledge. Therefore a knowledge provider knows that
somebody is interested in his/her knowledge, and through
the question of the person asking, one at least partly can
anticipate the specific needs of the recipient. Additionally,
through the verbal and non-verbal reactions during the
dialog a provider continuously receives feedback on
whether the recipient understood the messages. Thus one
gets to know if the questioner is satisfied with the answer.
In resource-oriented knowledge exchange all these verbal
and non-verbal cues are missing. Additionally, large groups
of persons do not primarily work cooperatively. Instead they
work in parallel which provides specific problems to
develop an adequate transactive memory (Moreland, 1999;
Wegner, 1987). A transactive memory relies on the idea that
other group members can be a source of knowledge, thus
leading to a distribution of relevant knowledge over the
whole group. Consequently, metaknowledge about mutual
expertise becomes important for efficient work. Transactive
memories emerge through collaborative learning and
working (Moreland, Argote, & Krishnan, 1996) where each
person gets to know which expertise s/he and others have.
Therefore persons get informed about what the others know
and who the experts are on which domain.
Large groups with members working in parallel normally
aren’t able to develop a reliable transactive memory. When
persons don’t have to work together a person cannot know
for certain which pieces of information others really need. In
resource-oriented knowledge exchange this leads to a
situation where a person has to decide to enter information
into a shared pool without knowing if others already have
this information, or if this information is irrelevant for their
work. And in the context of the information sampling theory
it was shown that metaknowledge about the distribution of
expertise across the group members in fact increases the
communication of non-shared knowledge (Stasser, Stewart
& Wittenbaum, 1995). If people know about their own
expertise and know that others need the information they
own, they are more willing to communicate their knowledge
to the group.
This prediction can also be deduced from decision theory
and their formal analysis of payoffs. In the database
situation a contributor’s individual payoff doesn’t differ if
s/he contributes information that is more or less useful for
the others. However, the payoff of the other group members
in fact does: If a person contributes information that is
2

283

important for others, their payoff is higher than if s/he
contributes information of less importance. Thus, if the
decision to contribute or not contribute is not only based on
maximizing one’s own payoff, but also on maximizing the
group’s payoff (altruistic decision, Costa-Gomes, Crawford
& Broseta, 2001), then the amount of contributions that are
important for the others should increase.
In sum, we expect that the metaknowledge about one’s
own and about others’ expertise effects the decision of
persons to contribute information to a database or not.
Metaknowledge about the importance of information for
others should be used as criterion for the decision to enter
information into a shared database or to withhold it.

Social Aspect: Information about the Social
Standard
By considering a social aspect we assume that feedback
about the amount of contributions made by others influences
a person’s contribution behavior.
In the situation where a person decides to contribute
information or not, there exists no objective standard how to
behave adequately. Is it adequate to provide as much
knowledge as possible, even if this conflicts with the
individual interests, or is it adequate to behave strategically
and withhold or partly withhold one’s own knowledge? It is
assumed that persons being in such an unclear situation try
to get information about others’ behavior to get a social
standard. If a person gets to know how many contributions
the others made it is possible to adjust one’s own
cooperativeness to that of the others. Thus, information
about others’ contributions helps to establish norms which
will influence the member’s behavior.
The SIDE-Model (Social Identity and De-individuation
Model) posits that in computer-mediated communication
such group norms become very important (Lea & Spears,
1991; Postmes, Spears & Lea, 1998; Spears & Lea, 1992).
This model assumes that in highly anonymous situations
people tend to categorize others as group members and also
perceive themselves more as a group member than in faceto-face situations. Thus, the model predicts that in computer
mediated communication situations persons exhibit stronger
group conformity than in less anonymous groups. Hence,
we can expect that in the situation of resource-oriented
knowledge exchange group norms affect the decisions to
contribute information or not.

Experimental Environment
For an experimental investigation of the metaknowledge and
social aspect within the knowledge exchange dilemma we
developed an environment which maps those features that
are typical for resource-oriented knowledge exchange via
shared database:
- A knowledge provider does not communicate knowledge
to people that are known personally, but to an anonymous
group.

- The groups only possess an unreliable transactive
memory: A potential knowledge provider does not know
on which tasks the other database users are working.
Thus, neither is knowledge of the others is known, nor
can the relevance of one’s knowledge be anticipated.
- Additionally, there could be high redundancy of
information within the group. So, a potential provider
can’t be sure that the information s/he wants to enter is
already known by many others, too.
- A provider has no direct benefit from making knowledge
available. Instead, there are only costs associated with
contribution.
- In the knowledge exchange there is only a low expectancy
of reciprocity. A provider can’t be sure that an equivalent
amount of information will be obtained from others.
- The full database information is useful for any group
member, independently of whether s/he entered some
information into the database or not.
- Thus, the database content has the properties of a public
good.
These situational characteristics were realized through an
experimental setting where both costs due to database
contributions, and benefits from using database information
can be accounted for by a single scale. In the experimental
setting each participant works in a team of 6 persons and
calculates salaries of salesmen. Each salary is composed of
two values: a base salary which is calculated in the first
phase of a trial and the provision, which is calculated in the
second phase. In the first phase a subject earns 0.25 Euro for
each base salary s/he calculated. But after each calculation a
person has to decide whether s/he wants to contribute this
result to the shared database. The transfer to the database
costs time (15 sec.) and, because the two phases are timelimited (9 and 12 minutes), the more one contributes the less
base salaries one can calculate and - consequently - the less
one earns.
In the second phase, each group member has to calculate
the total salary of as many salesmen as possible. In this
phase a participant gets 0.30 Euro for every total salary
calculated. But for the calculation of a salesman’s total
salary the base salary is needed. If a participant did not
calculate it in the first phase, and if this value was not
contributed to the database by at least one of the other group
members, s/he has to calculate it in the second phase and
hence will lose time. Thus, being collaborative and
contributing base salaries to the database in the first phase
may facilitate the performance of the other group members
in the second phase. But according to the individual payoff,
a person has no benefit from contributing a base salary to
the database because in the second phase a person has the
base salaries s/he calculated in the first phase anyway.
Concerning the benefit of the others, it is not sure if they
really need a specific base salary because a person doesn’t
know which total salaries others will calculate in the second
phase. Moreover, persons can’t be sure that the information
they contribute is really unique because other group
members could have calculated the base salaries of the same
3

284

salesman, too. So it is possible that the database contribution
of a base salary has no use for others. Therefore, the
experiment reproduces a typical feature of knowledge
exchange where the information a person has might be
redundant or even unnecessary for others.

Experiment 1: Metaknowledge about the
Importance of one’s own Knowledge
In the first experiment we provided the participants with
metaknowledge about the importance of their information.
We varied this importance of information in a withindesign. Therefore we introduced two different kinds of basic
wages in the experiment: After each calculation of a basic
salary, the result appeared (with a probability of 50%) as
red. The red color indicates that a basic wage is high.
Participants are informed that the total salaries of salesmen
with high basic wages will have to be calculated first in the
second phase. This denoted that the probability of needing a
“red” basic salary in the second phase is higher than the
probability of such a need for a non-red basic salary. So, on
group level, the others’ payoff is different if a person
contributes important vs. less important information.
We expected that people select their contributions
accordant with their metaknowledge. Thus, people should
contribute more important basic wages than less important
ones.

Method
Subjects: Subjects of this study were 20 students of the
University of Tuebingen (Germany). The participants were
on average 24.5 years old and 50% were women.
Procedure: The participants worked in groups of 4 to 6
persons in one room with 6 computer workstations. The
group members couldn’t see each other’s displays and
couldn’t communicate because the working places were
separated through dividing walls. The groups where told
that they had access to one shared database. But in fact they
worked totally independent from each other and the other’s
actions were faked. The task (containing phase 1 and phase
2) was repeated three times. After the experiment each
participant was paid according to the number of basic
salaries and total salaries calculated during the three trials.
On average each participant earned about 20 Euro. None of
the participants noticed that the groups were faked.
Design: A 2x3 analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
calculated with the within-factors importance of information
and trial. Because the participants became faster from trial
to trial, we did not use the absolute number of contributions
as dependent variable. Instead we used the contribution rate,
describing the ratio of contributed basic wages to the
number of calculated basic wages.

Results and Discussion
The ANOVA yielded two significant main effects, F(1,
19)=12.96, p<0.001, η2=0.41, for importance, and F(2,
38)=3.56, p<0.05, η2=0.16 for trials. The mean contribution
rate of important values was 0.58 (SD=0.07), and for less
important values 0.31 (SD=0.08). Across the trials
contribution rate decreased from 0.54 (SD=0.07) in the first
trial, to 0.44 (SD=0.08) in the second, and 0.37 (SD=0.08)
in the third trial.
There was no significant interaction.
The results confirmed the metaknowledge hypothesis. In all
trials more important than non-important basic salaries were
contributed. This main effect was very strong and could
explain 41% of the variance.
We replicated this effect size in other studies in our
laboratory where we used different costs for contribution
and diverse bonus systems (Cress, Barquero, Buder, Schwan
& Hesse, 2003). These studies show that the effect of
metaknowledge is quite stable: in situations where
contribution costs for more and less important information
are equal, people select their database contributions
according to their metaknowledge. This reflects that a
person’s decision to contribute is not only based on
considering individual payoff but also on considering the
payoff of the others. By primarily contributing highly useful
information the contributors individually have no more
costs, but they enable higher benefits for others. With
respect to the individual payoff, withholding important
information is still dominant. But if one decided to provide
information at all, it is more effective to provide important
than non-important information. Thus, providing more
important information than less important is a strategic
behavior, too.

Experiment 2: Information about the Social
Standard
The second experiment deals with the effect of information
about the amount of contributions made by “co-workers”. It
is proposed that people in the situation of knowledge
exchange via databases use their knowledge about the
others’ contributing behavior as a kind of social standard. It
is assumed that they compare their own behavior with that
of the others and conform to the others (Smith & Bell,
1994). The sucker-effect (Orbell & Dawes, 1981) proposes
that those persons who feel exploited and perceive that they
contributed much more than the others should be motivated
to behave more egoistic, too. Thus, they should reduce their
amount of contributions. On the other hand, persons who
perceive that they contributed less than the others should
contribute more, even if this is against their individual
interest.
Thus, we expect that persons receiving feedback that
their co-workers made many contributions will enter more
information into a shared database than persons knowing
that their co-workers only made very few contributions.

4
285

Method
Subjects: 55 students of the university of Tuebingen took
part in this study (mean age 25 years, 70.4% were women).
They were randomly assigned to the two conditions with
low-cooperation group members (26 persons) and highcooperation group members (29 persons).
Procedure: The experimental task was the same as in the
first study, except for one feature: After the second phase of
each trial each subject got a feedback about the number of
contributions s/he made and a (faked) feedback on the mean
number of contributions the other group members made. A
bar diagram visualized these two values for direct
comparison. Ss in the high-cooperation group received
feedback that other group members on average contributed 8
(1st trial), 8.4 (2nd trial) and 6.4 items (3rd trial). Persons in
the low-cooperation condition got the information that the
others contribute on average only 3, 2 and 1 items,
respectively. To make sure that these feedback values were
credible, values were chosen based on study 1, representing
the first and third quartile of the number of actual
contributions in each of the three trials.
According to this feedback the number of database
entries a person was able to use in the second phases in each
trial had to differ between both conditions. Therefore the
task was constructed in a way that the persons in the lowcooperation group could use about 5 basic wages from the
database, whereas those in the high-cooperation group could
use about 12.
In this experiment there was no distinction between more
and less important basic wages as it was in the first
experiment.

Results and Discussion
A mixed two-factorial ANOVA with group as between
factor (high- vs. low-cooperation group) and trial (3 trials)
as within factor yielded a significant main effect for group,
F(1, 53)=4.48, p<.05. Persons receiving feedback about
highly cooperative co-workers showed a higher cooperation
rate (M=0.54, SD=0.31) than persons with a feedback about
less cooperative co-workers (M=0.45; SD=0.34). A post-hoc
analysis shows that this main effect is caused only by the
second and third trial, where both groups significantly differ
(second trial t=2.15, df=53; p<0.05, third trial=2.33, df=53;
p<0.05). In the first trial both groups didn’t differ in their
contribution rate. This is in line with our hypotheses
because before the first trial groups didn’t receive feedback
about the others’ behavior. In the first trial participants on
average contributed 4.95 (SD=3.29) basic wages which
gives a contribution rate of 0.5 (SD=0.34). Thus, every
second calculated basic wage was contributed. In the second
and third trial both groups adjust to their faked group
members. The participants with a feedback about highly
cooperative co-workers contributed 6.67 values (SD=3.81)
in the second trial and 6.31 (SD=4.36) basic wages in the
third trial. This is equivalent to contribution rates of 56%

(SD=0.33) and 51% (SD=0.04). Those with a feedback
about less cooperative co-workers contributed 3.73
(SD=0.03) and 2.85 (SD=0.04) values, which is equivalent
to basic rates of 35% (SD=0.04) and 27% (SD=0.04). The
absolute number of contributions show that the two groups
assimilate to their co-workers’ behavior. Indeed, persons
with highly cooperative co-workers don’t fully assimilate to
their co-workers’ cooperativeness. With 6.67 and 6.31
contributions in the second and third trial they still
contribute significantly less than the faked group members
whose contributions were 8 and 8.4 in the preceding trials 1
and 2 – t=1,9, df=28, p<0.10 and t=2,58, df=28, p<0.05. In
contrast, the groups with low-cooperation group members
assimilate to their faked co-workers’ number of
contributions. In this group there was no significant
difference to their co-workers’ number of contributions.
These results of this second experiment show that people in
the database situation in fact adapt to the behavior of their
co-workers. If they perceive them as highly cooperative,
people over time become more cooperative as well. If they
perceive them as very uncooperative, people become more
egoistic, too. But the results show that this adaptation to the
cooperativeness of the others’ isn’t equally strong in both
conditions. The assimilation to a low social norm of
cooperativeness seems to be stronger than the assimilation
to a higher level. It could be interpreted in a way that the
sucker effect seems to be stronger than the effect of social
facilitation. This difference in the degree of assimilation
between both effects of social norms could perhaps be
explained by the specific features of knowledge exchange
via shared databases. In this highly anonymous situation
where the behavior of each group members can’t be
identified by the others, the group members can’t detect the
free riders. Therefore, the social pressure for behaving as
cooperatively as the others is reduced through anonymity. In
contrast, in situations, where the group behaves very
uncooperatively, people assimilate to the group norm not
because of a feeling of social pressure, but because of a
feeling of exploitation. But this feeling isn’t reduced
through the high anonymity of database communication.

General Discussion
The two studies show that aspects of metaknowledge and
social standards in fact play important roles in knowledge
exchange via shared databases. The first experiment
revealed that people primarily contribute information which
they assume to be important for the others. This effect is
quite strong. However, comparisons between the mean
contribution rates in the first and second experiment show
that metaknowledge is only useful as a criterion for the
decision on which information to contribute, but is does not
increase the contribution rate in general. In both
experiments contribution rates didn’t differ, they were about
50%. Thus, in general, providing metaknowledge about the
usefulness of the information a person has, does not itself
increase the number of contributions. Therefore providing
5

286

this kind of metaknowledge does not solve the problem of
withholding information. But this kind of metaknowledge
could enhance the quality of information in a database,
because persons will contribute the information they expect
as being useful for others. Therefore the database will
contain more information that can be of interest for many
users. In sum, this kind of metaknowledge influences the
quality of shared pool, not the quantity.
The second experiment shows that quantity of database
contributions can be influenced by a different kind of metainformation: Providing information about the group’s
behavior can increase database contributions, - but only
when people perceive themselves as free-riders. On the
other hand, if they feel themselves exploited, they will
reduce their cooperativeness. Thus, providing metadata
about the behavior of the co-workers can have desired and
undesired effects - dependent on the group’s standard
contributing behavior.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a fellowship of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft awared to Prof. Dr. Hesse and the
author of this paper. The project is part of the Special
Priority Program “Net-based Knowledge Communication in
Groups”.

References
Barry, B. ,& Hardin, R. (1982). Rational man and irrational
society. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Beckmann, T. J. (1999). The current state of knowledge
management. In J. Liebowitz (Ed.), Knowledge
management handbook (chap. 1). New York: CRC Press.
Costa-Gomes, M., Crawford, V.P., & Broseta, B. (2001).
cognition and behavior in normal-form games: an
experimental study. Econometrica, 69, 1193-1235.
Cress, U., Barquero, B., Buder, J., & Hesse, F.W. (i.p.).
Social barriers for knowledge communication via shared
databases. In R. Bromme, F. Hesse, & H. Spada (Eds.),
Barriers and biases in computer-mediated knowledge
communication - and how they may be overcome. Kluwer:
Boston.
Cress, U., Barquero, B., Buder, J. Schwan, S., & Hesse,
F.W. (2003). Wissensaustausch mittels Datenbanken als
Öffentliches-Gut-Dilemma.
Die
Wirkung
von
Rückmeldungen
und
Belohnungen.
(Knowledge
communication via shared databases as public-goods
dilemma. The effect of feedback and bonus-systems.).
Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 211 (2), 75-85.
Fulk, J., Flanagin, A.J., Kalman, M.E., Monge, P.R., &
Ryan, T. (1996). Connective and communal public goods
in interactive communication systems. Communication
Theory, 6 (1), 60-87.
Head, J. G. (1972). Public goods: The polar case. In R. M.
Bird, & J.G. Head (Eds.), Modern fiscal issues: Essays in
honour of Carl S. Shoup (pp. 7-16). Toronto, Ontario:
University of Toronto Press.

Hollingshead, A. B., Fulk, J., & Monge, P. (2002). Fostering
intranet knowledge sharing: An integration of transactive
memory and public goods approaches. In P. Hinds, & S.
Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed work (pp. 335-355).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lea, M., & Spears, R. (1991). Computer-mediated
communication, de-individuation and group decision
making. Man-Machine Studies,43, 283-301.
Markus, M. L. (1990). Towards a "critical mass" theory of
interactive media. In J. Fulk, & C. Steinfield (Eds.),
Organizations and Communication (pp. 194-218): Sage.
Messick, D. M., & Brewer, M. B. (1983). Solving social
dilemmas. A review. Review of Personality and Social
Psychology, 4, 11-44.
Moreland, R. L. (1999). Transactive memory: Learning who
knows what in work groups and organizations. In L. L.
Thompson, J. M. Levine, & D. M. Messick (Eds.), Shared
Cognition in Organizations. The Management of
Knowledge (pp. 3-31). London: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Moreland, R. L., Argote, L., & Krishnan, R. (1996).
Socially shared cognition at work: Transactive memory
and group performance. In J. L. Nye, & A. M. Brown
(Eds.), What’s soacial about social cognition (pp. 57-84).
Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating
company. New York: Oxford University Press.
Orbell, J., & Dawes, R. (1981). Social dilemmas. In G.
Stephenson, & J. H. Davis (Eds.), Progress in Applied
Social Psychology, 1. Chichester, England: Wiley.
Postmes, T., Spears, R., & Lea, M. (1998). Breaching
or
building social boundaries? SIDE-effects of computermediated communication. Communication Research, 25,
689-715.
Smith, J. M., & Bell, P. A. (1994). Conformity as a
determinant of behavior in a resource dilemma. Journal of
Social Psychology, 134(2), 191-200.
Spears, R., & Lea, M. (1992). Social influence and the
influence of the social in computer-mediated
communication. In M. Lea (Ed.), Contexts of computermediated communication (pp. 30-65). New York.
Stasser, G., Stewart, D., & Wittenbaum, G.M. (1995).
Expert roles and information exchange during discussion:
The importance of knowing who knows what. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 31, 244-265.
Thorn, B. K., & Connolly, T. (1987). Discretionary data
bases: A theory and some experimental findings.
Communication Research, 14 (5), 512-528.
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A
contemporary analysis of the group mind. In B. Mullen, &
G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior (pp.
185-208). New York: Springer.
Yamagishi, T., & Cook, K.S. (1993). Generalized exchange
and social dilemmas. Social Psychology Quarterly, 56,
235-248.

6
287

