UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Structural Differences of Physical and Mental Events and Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x43n9v3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Xu, Xu
Wiemer-Hastings, Katja

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Structural Differences of Physical and Mental Events and Processes
Xu Xu (XXU@NIU.EDU)
Katja Wiemer-Hastings (KATJA@NIU.EDU)
Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University, De Kalb, IL 60115 USA

Abstract
Event structure has been intensively studied through
different approaches. A recent study by Rips and Estin
(1998) applied a property listing approach and documented
structural differences between physical and mental events.
Physical events were shown to have more distinct parts than
mental events, which were described as more homogeneous.
The present study replicated this study with one
modification. We added a factor that may have been
confounded with physicality in their study. This factor
further distinguishes events and processes. We examined
whether the observed structural differences between physical
and mental events was partly due to this factor. The results
show that distinctiveness of parts was a function not only of
tangibility (physical or mental event), but also of temporal
characteristics (event vs. process).
Furthermore, the
distinction of process and event was the only significant
factor when distinctive properties were weighted against
common properties.

Event Structure
People perceive everyday activities as discrete events. This
ability helps people understand what is happening around
them and recollect past experiences. Among all kinds of
events people experience, some events are characterized
mainly by physical elements such as people, objects,
locations, and actions, while others are also associated with
mental elements such as goals, beliefs, memory, etc. For
example, having breakfast requires person(s), food, and an
action of eating. In contrast, making a plan requires not
only physical elements, such as people, but also some
mental elements, such as a goal and a thinking process.
Whether physical or mental in nature, all events
unfold in time. Previous research on event structure was
usually carried out from one of two different perspectives, a
temporal perspective (e.g., Barsalou & Sewell, 1985;
Bower, Black, & Turner, 1979; Morris & Murphy, 1990;
Newtson, 1973; Schank & Abelson, 1977; Zacks, Tversky,
& Iyer, 2001) and a situational perspective (e.g., Lancaster
& Barsalou, 1997; McRae, Hare, Ferretti, & Elman, 2001;
Rifkin, 1985; Stevenson, Crawley, & Kleinman, 1994;
Thompson, Gomez, & Schvaneveldt, 2000), respectively. A
temporal perspective highlights sequential changes and
transitions of a situation across time, while a situational
perspective highlights the situational elements within an
event, the configuration of these elements, as well as the
organization of events in memory based on the common
elements shared by the events.
Studies with different approaches have shown that
temporal and situational information appear to be

1253

interdependent and that people make use of multiple
sources of information in thinking about event structures
(for a detailed review, see Zacks & Tversky, 2001). One
study (Boltz, 1998) about musical event duration and
structure provided some evidence. Boltz found that
nontemporal information in the form of pitch relations not
only mark the beginning and the end of a melody but also
unfold at a given rate over the total time span. Temporal
information and nontemporal information complement
each other in a musical event. Results from his study
showed that coherence between temporal and nontemporal
information could facilitate both better recall for event
duration and better pitch recognition, because even though
people may not necessarily attend to both of these two
dimensions at the time of encoding, the information would
still be represented in memory.
Although music seems unique in its regulated
relationship between nontemporal and temporal
information for aesthetic purpose, some studies showed that
other types of events show similar representational
structures. For example, Newtson (1977), in his study about
causal events, found that people perceive boundaries of
event temporal parts at the points where maximal changes
in physical features of object and actor motion occur.

Differences in Physical and Mental Events
Rips and Estin (1998) examined structural differences
among object, physical-event, and mental-event categories
in the way these categories participate in kind and partwhole relations. They found that people typically regard
both part and the whole of a mental event as being elements
of the same superordinate. For example, Using logic is a
part of reasoning, and using logic and reasoning are both a
kind of thinking. In contrast, the part and the whole of
objects belong to different superordinates, e.g. Stem is a
part of an apples, and apples are a kind of fruit, but stem is
not. Physical events appear to be an intermediate case.
Rips and Estin explored the sources for this difference in
a series of experiments. In the context of this research, we
will discuss only the findings regarding physical and
mental events. First, parts of physical and mental events
were collected. For example, organizing may be a part of
planning, using logic a part of reasoning, getting ID a part
of checking out books, and putting on lotion a part of
getting a suntan. The method in the main experiment was
a property-listing task on these parts. Participants were
presented with a part of a mental or physical event, and
instructed to list either common properties that this part
shared with other parts of that event, or distinctive
properties that are shared by no other parts of that event.

The critical measure was the number of distinctive
properties that participants listed. An event with a clear
structure was assumed to have parts that can be clearly
distinguished, hence, that have distinct properties. Rips
and Estin predicted that the parts of physical events would
be more distinctive than those for mental events. This is
indeed what they found. Temporal parts of mental events
appeared to be less distinct than those of physical events. In
other words, the temporal parts of mental events, such as
planning and reasoning, are more homogeneous than
temporal parts of physical events, such as checking out
books and getting a suntan.
As a result, people are more likely to think of a mental
event as a whole than a physical event. In contrast, they are
more likely to think of a physical event as a sequence of
steps that lead to the achievement of a goal than of a mental
event. It has been attributed to the apparent homogeneity
of parts in mental events that people tend to classify both a
mental event and a part of that mental event into the same
superordinate category.

Motivation of the Present Study
Rips and Estin’s findings suggest that the situational
characteristics of events affect how people think about the
temporal structures of the events. Mental events such as
making a plan involve more nonphysical elements than
physical events. Similar to physical events, mental events
can have different phases. However, due to the intangibility
and ambiguity of phases and phase boundaries, these
phases are difficult to differentiate from each other. In
contrast, physical events, which involve mainly physical
elements, are more likely to present clear phases along
temporal dimension.
One problem that potentially limits the conclusiveness of
these findings regards the materials. It appears that most of
the concepts used as physical events were really events,
whereas a lot of the mental concepts could more aptly be
described as processes. For example, catching a plane, and
checking out books, as examples for physical events, are all
actions that take place over a limited time period, and
involve some element of accomplishment (see Vendler,
1967).
Examples for mental activities used in the
experiment are reading, dreaming, and reasoning, all of
which can go on over a longer stretch of time and do not
imply a specific action as terminating the event.
This posits a serious challenge to the conclusions. It
appears that events have more distinct parts (such as
beginning and end) than processes do, which can generally
be described as continuous, phaseless activities that are
homogeneous throughout (Vendler, 1967). For example,
the process of reading does not require any differences in
action between the first seconds of reading and the last - at
any point the process can be called reading. In contrast,
checking out books, for example, begins with entering a
library, empty-handed, and ends by leaving it, holding
books. In the materials used by Rips and Estin, most
physical events were events and most mental “events” were
processes. Since both being physical (versus mental) and
being an event (versus a process) may lead to more

1254

homogeneous parts, the differences observed in the
experiment may have been at least in part due to the
difference between events and processes.

Physicality and Aspect
Our study aimed and untangling the effects of physicality
and aspect characteristics of activities. We adopted Rips
and Estin’s (1998) property listing approach, but
constructed materials that allowed us to estimate structural
differences due the distinction of physical versus mental
activities, as well as due to the effects of activity aspect.
We predicted that each factor would contribute to the
observed structural differences, thus that mental activities
would overall be more homogeneous than physical
activities, and processes more so than events.
To create stimulus sets that were more comparable, we
did not use activities described by different numbers of
words. Instead, all of our stimuli were individual nouns
(e.g., interview, imagination). We did not expect the noun
form to cause differences in the findings from gerundive
verbs as used by Rips and Estin, since frequently results for
nouns and verbs are equivalent (e.g., Rifkin, 1985).
Consistent with previous research (Rifkin, 1985), we
counted activities that involved a thought as a central
aspect of the activity as mental events or processes (e.g.,
imagination, recognition). Physical events and processes
were activities that were not centrally characterized by
mental elements (e.g. robbery, interview).
Furthermore, to differentiate events and processes,
stimuli were used that were either homogeneous activities
or activities that involved a moment of achievement or
accomplishment (Vendler, 1967). A norming study was
conducted to select, out of a larger pool of activity nouns,
items that were consistently classified as events or
processes. As a result, we constructed four groups of
stimuli: physical events, mental events, physical processes,
and mental processes.
It was predicted that the parts of mental activities would
be less distinctive, i.e., have less distinctive properties and
share more common properties with other parts of that
activity. Physical activities were expected to contain parts
that are more distinctive, i.e. that have more distinctive
properties and share less common properties with other
parts of that activity. Rips and Estin did not find
significant differences in the number of common properties
for parts of mental versus physical activities. Since we are
introducing a second factor, the number of common
properties was included in the analysis to detect possible
effects of the aspect manipulation.
In line with the arguments described above, we predicted,
with respect to aspect, that participants would describe
parts of events with more distinctive properties and fewer
common properties than parts of processes.

Method
Participants. 120 participants were recruited from
undergraduate introductory Psychology classes at NIU.
Most of these students were freshmen and sophomores.

Students obtained course extra credit for their full
participation in this experiment.
Materials. Seventy activity words were sampled from a
database. Four independent judges who were either faculty
or graduate students at Northern Illinois University and can
be considered able to discriminate activities with respect to
aspect were asked to classify these 70 words as events,
processes, or states, respectively. From the initial 70
words, only those words were retained that were classified
consistently by at least 3 of the four raters as either a
process or an event. From this word pool, 12 event and 12
process concepts were selected for use in the study so that
half of them were mental and half of them were physical.
Table 1 presents an example for each group.
Table 1: Example items for the four conditions of the
experiment
Physical
Mental
Event
Robbery
Judgment
Concert
Realization
Process
Acceleration
Contemplatio
Decomposition
n
Imagination

the activity. Taking interview as an instance, participants
will be asked to “list the properties of answering questions
that are true of all other parts of an interview”.
The other half of participants was assigned to the
distinctive property group. The instructions asked
participants to list properties of a part, which were true of
no other parts of the activity. Taking interview as an
instance, participants will be asked to “list the properties of
answering questions that are true of no other parts of an
interview”.

Main Experiment Design
The 24 event concepts and their parts were divided into
three sets. Each contained the parts generated for 2 pairs of
mental events, 2 pairs of physical events, 2 pairs of mental
processes, and 2 pairs of physical processes. By crossing
two types of instructions (common property listing or
distinctive property listing) with these three concept sets,
there were altogether six different conditions. The 120
participants were randomly assigned to receive one of the
six different types of property listing materials. All
materials were presented in booklets, and participants
recorded their responses using a paper and pencil
procedure.

Part Generation

Results

Parts of events were collected empirically.
Ten
participants, who did not participate the main study, were
recruited for a preliminary study and instructed to list parts
of each of the 24 common activities. The instructions
included two example words, exam and evaluation, with
parts to help participants understand the task.
Participants were told that they would read terms that
“refer to some common activities which can be divided into
different parts along the temporal dimension”. Participants
were asked to write down as many parts as they could think
of, but only parts that necessarily are contained by all
instances of that activity. For example, participants read:
“Here’s an activity – interview. An interview contains
different parts taking place in a certain order and covering
a certain period of time. Please think of as many parts as
you can, which are typical to any interview and write down
your responses in order.” The 24 items described above
were presented to participants in random order one at each
page in a booklet. One part of each concept was chosen
from among the most frequently listed responses by
participants. Synonyms of an item were counted as
instances of the same part. Non-responses such as “this is a
hard word” were not counted.

Main Experiment Instruction
In the main experiment, participants were presented with
questions about the parts of some activities generated from
the part generation study. Each question mentioned an
activity and one of its parts. Participants were randomly
assigned to perform one of two tasks: common property
listing, or distinctive property listing.
Participants in the common property group were asked to
list properties of a part, which were true of all other parts of

1255

Evaluation of Responses
The properties listed in the main experiment were analyzed
as follows. For each part in each condition, it was counted
how many participants had mentioned each particular
property. Synonymous expressions within the responses to
a same item were counted as the same property for that
item. Only properties listed by at least two participants for
an item were included in the analyses. In doing so, we
expected to eliminate idiosyncratic responses and increase
the reliability of the analysis. The mean number of distinct
and common properties was then computed for each type of
activity.

Differences in the Number of Parts
A one-way ANOVA was performed on the mean number of
parts generated for each concept of the four groups:
physical events, mental events, physical processes and
mental processes. The overall test indicated a significant
difference between groups, F = 14.85, MSE = .54, p <
0.001. A post hoc analysis revealed that people listed more
parts for physical events than for the concepts of the other
three groups (see Table 2), while there are no significant
differences between the mean numbers of parts listed for
mental events, physical processes, and mental processes.
Table 2: The mean number of parts for physical events,
physical processes, mental events and mental processes.
Activity Type
Physical Event
Physical Process

Mean
5.18
3.12

Std
1.04
0.76

Mental Event
Mental Process

3.17
2.52

0.51
0.50

Distinctive Properties
A 2 (physical/mental) X 2 (event/process) ANOVA was
carried out to examine the difference in the mean number
of distinctive properties listed for each concept. As
predicted, two main effects were found. The first effect
replicated the effect found by Rips and Estin (1998). There
was a significant difference in the distinctness of parts for
physical versus mental activities, F (1, 20) = 22.910, MSE
= 0.149, p < 0.001. Consistent with the previous findings,
more distinctive properties were listed for parts of physical
activities (M = 2.75) than for the parts of mental activities
(M = 2.00). Second, we also observed a significant effect of
the aspect groups, processes versus events, on the
distinctness of parts, F (1, 20) = 12.875, MSE = .149, p <
0.01. More distinctive properties were generated for the
parts of events (M = 2.66) than were generated for the parts
of processes (M = 2.09). There was no interaction of these
two factors.
3.5

Distinctive properties

3

Discussion

2.5
2

Event
Process

1.5
1
0.5
0

more properties, both distinctive and common, for physical
than for mental activities because it may be easier to
describe observable activities. If this is true, then the
number of distinctive properties may be higher simply
because more properties are listed overall, rather than
because the parts are more distinctive.
To build the difference score, the number of common
properties was subtracted from that of distinctive
properties. This score can discriminate among parts that
have many distinctive properties but also many common
properties, and parts that have many distinctive properties
but few common properties. The latter should receive a
higher difference score, reflecting higher distinctness. This
presents a more accurate measure of distinctness by taking
both commonalities and differences into account (Tversky,
1977). A main effect was observed for events versus
processes, F (1, 20) = 7.16 MSE = 0.45 p < .02. Event
parts had higher numbers of distinctive properties (M =
0.94) than process parts (M = 0.21), as one would expect.
The surprising result was that the physicality factor was not
significant in this analysis. This suggests that in fact the
distinction of events and processes may have a bigger
impact on homogeneity of activities than the distinction of
mental versus physical events.

Physical

Mental

Figure 1: The mean number of distinctive properties listed
for the four activity types.

Common Properties
A second ANOVA with the same factors was carried out on
the mean number of common properties listed for the parts
of the activities. Consistent with the findings by Rips and
Estin, we found no significant effects of physicality on this
measure, neither did the event / process distinction affect
the number of common properties.

Distinctive and Common Properties
From the analysis of distinctive properties, it seems that
both physicality and aspect contribute to differences in the
homogeneity of activity concepts, as measured by the
distinctness of the properties of their parts. To further
explore their effects on part properties, an additional 2
(physical / mental activity) X 2 (event / process) ANOVA
was performed on the difference score of distinctive
properties, minus the number of common properties for
each item. Intuitively, one would expect that people list

1256

The purpose of this study was to investigate the structural
differences in temporal parts between physical and mental
events and processes. Previous research had shown that
mental activities tend to be more homogeneous than
physical activities. We were concerned that part of this
difference may be due to the temporal characteristics of the
materials used, in which the mental / physical distinction
appeared to be confounded to some extent with the
distinction of events and processes. To examine the
differential effects of these two important factors, we
constructed materials that allowed to compare the effects of
physical versus mental nature of an activity and the effects
of its temporal characteristics as an event versus a process
on the homogeneity of activity parts. The results from our
study show that there are differences in temporal structures
between different event concepts, physical and mental.
Also, there are basic structural difference between events
and processes.
In the part generation task, participants listed more parts
for physical events than for mental events. This finding is
not surprising. Intuitively, physical events are more
tangible and easier to identify and describe their parts,
while mental events are more elusive to catch the details of
their characteristics. Vendler (1967) described processes as
successive phases following one another in time and any
part of a process is of the same nature as the whole.
According to this description, neither a physical nor a
mental process should contain more than one temporal
part, explaining our finding that the numbers of parts listed
for physical and mental processes are significantly smaller
than those for physical events. Furthermore, there is no
difference in the numbers of parts listed for mental events
and for both types of processes, suggesting that people tend

to judge any mental event as a whole instead of as a series
of detectable temporal parts. In other words, it may be due
to intangibility and uncertainty of phases and phase
boundaries within mental events, that people tend to treat
mental events as processes.

Homogeneity
In the property listing task, participants listed more
distinctive properties for parts of physical events than for
parts of mental events. This is consistent with Rips and
Estin’s findings. However, the further distinction of events
and processes allowed us to examine the effect in more
detail. We found that people describe the parts of events as
more distinctive than parts of processes, indicating that not
only tangibility (physical versus mental) but also aspect
(event versus process) affects how people perceive the
temporal structures of activities. These two factors were
confounded in some of the materials used previously (Rips
& Estin), which had actual physical events as physical
events, but mental processes as mental events. This may
have inflated the structural differences observed between
physical and mental activities. That is, the difference
between physical and mental events they found in their
study was not only due to tangibility but also due to the
effect of aspect.
To test this argument empirically, we examined the
difference scores between distinctive and common
properties for each concept. We found that participants still
described the parts of events as more distinctive than parts
of processes using this measure, but there was no difference
in distinctiveness between physical and mental activities.
Thus, overall, physical activities lead to more listed
properties, leading to higher numbers of distinctive
properties. The difference between distinctive and common
properties provides a more accurate measure of distinctness
of parts, since both the number of common and of distinct
properties should have an effect on it (Tversky, 1977).
Using this corrected measure, our data suggest that the
observed structural differences reported previously may in
fact be due to aspect as opposed to the distinction of mental
and physical events. This is a surprising result, considering
that there are obvious differences in our perception of
mental and physical activities.
Considering that crisp definitions of mental versus
physical and process and event are not really possible,
however, the finding reported here needs to be interpreted
with caution. We could imagine quite easily a continuum
on which activities gradually vary in both characteristics.
Accordingly, it may be possible that the stimuli in Rips and
Estin’s study were selected from the extreme ends of both,
whereas our stimuli may have been less distinct. This can
and should be followed up upon in future experiments.
It did not appear that there were substantial differences
in the numbers of common properties between activity
types. This is probably due to the limited number of
common properties listed for each item. Compared to the
listed numbers of distinctive properties, the numbers of
common properties were much smaller, F (1, 23) = 13.07,
MSE = .30, p < .001. The reason that participants listed
more distinctive properties than common properties in the

1257

same amount of time might be the use of a different
properties listing strategies for these two different tasks.
Participants who were instructed to list distinctive
properties produced both sub-phases of a part of an activity,
as well as abstract properties of the part as properties that
could distinguish the part from other parts of the activity.
In contrast, participants in the common property listing
group could not apply this strategy in their tasks. Thus, the
listing of common properties may have been a more
difficult task than the listing of distinctive properties,
especially when constrained by the same time limit. Some
adjustment could be made in future studies employing this
method.
To sum up, our findings support the hypothesis that
mental and physical activities, distinguished in this study as
activities that do or do not have a thought as a central
element, differ in homogeneity. This is consistent with the
findings by Rips and Estin. Our study provides stronger
support for their argument because we replicated their
finding after taking an important confound into account.
We obtained this effect only in the mean number of
distinctive properties listed by participants, however.
When the number of common properties is also considered
in the dependent measure, the effect of physical versus
mental activity on homogeneity disappears, while the
difference between events and processes is still significant.
A limitation of the current study is the small number of
stimuli. Since listing properties for abstract concepts such
as mental events is a relatively difficult task to accomplish
in a limited amount of time, fewer words might have
ensured the quality of responses but lowered the effect size
of the results. More words should be included in future
studies.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the thoughtful and very helpful
contributions of Dr. Betty Birner and Dr. Joseph Magliano
to this study. We also thank our four raters for the
classification of seventy activities into events, processes and
states for norming purposes, which was a critical
component in the aspect manipulation of the materials.

References
Barsalou, L. W., & Sewell, D. R. (1985). Contrasting the
representation of scripts and categories. Journal of
Memory & Language, 24, 646-665.
Boltz, M. G. (1998). The processing of temporal and
nontemporal information in the remembering of event
durations and musical structure. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human perception and performance, 24,
1087-1104.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts
in memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177-220.
Graesser, A. C. & Clark, L. F. (1985). Structures and
procedures of implicit knowledge. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hampton, J. A. (1981). An investigation of the nature of
abstract concepts. Memory & cognition, 9, 149-156.

Lancaster, J. S., & Barsalou, L. W. (1997). Multiple
organisations of events in memory. Memory, 5(5), 569599.
McRae, K., Hare, M., Ferretti, T. R., & Elman, J. L.
(2001). Activating verbs from typical agents, patients,
instruments, and locations via event schemas. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 617-622). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Morris, M. W., & Murphy, G. L. (1990). Converging
operations on a basic level in event taxonomies. Memory
& Cognition, 18(4), 407-418.
Newtson, D. (1973). Attribution and the unit of perception
of ongoing behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 28, 28-38.
Newtson, D., Engquist, G., & Bois, J. (1977). The objective
basis of behavior units. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 35, 847-862.
Rifkin, A. (1985). Evidence for a basic level in event
taxonomies. Memory & Cognition, 13(6), 538-556.
Rips, L. J., & Estin, P. A. (1998). Components of objects
and events. Journal of Memory & Language, 39, 309330.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stevenson, R. J., Crawley, R. A., & Kleinman, D. (1994).
Thematic roles, focus and the representation of events.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 519-548.
Thompson, L. A., Gomez, R. L., & Schvaneveldt, R. W.
(2000). The salience of temporal cues in the developing
structure of event knowledge. American Journal of
Psychology, 113(4), 591-620.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell Univ. Press.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin,
127(1), 3-21.
Zacks, J. M., Tversky, B., & Iyer, G. (2001). Perceiving,
remembering, and communicating structure in events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(1),
29-58.

1258

