UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of space in socially distributed cognition: some issues for cognitive engineering

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9b38c1j5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Perry, Mark
O'Hara, Kenton
Spinelli, Gabriella
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of space in socially distributed cognition:
some issues for cognitive engineering
Mark Perry (mark.perry@brunel.ac.uk)
DISC, Brunel University
Kingston Lane, Uxbridge, Middx, UB8 3PH UK

Kenton O’Hara (kenton@appliancestudio.com)
The Appliance Studio
University Gate, Park Row, Bristol, BS1 5UB, UK

Gabriella Spinelli (gabriella.spinelli@brunel.ac.uk)
DISC, Brunel University
Kingston Lane, Uxbridge, Middx, UB8 3PH UK

Bill Sharpe (bill@appliancestudio.com)
The Appliance Studio
University Gate, Park Row, Bristol, BS1 5UB, UK
Abstract
This paper explores and identifies cognitive issues that
develop out of the use of representational media by
collaborating groups of people involved in problem
solving. We take the analytic perspective of distributed
cognition to examine the role that these artifacts have on
information processing activity in augmenting human
action and in transforming the problem space. The
analysis is further used in identifying issues for cognitive
engineering in the design of spatial, augmentative
resources to support collaborative problem solving.

Introduction
A key paradigm within cognitive science is the notion
that mental activity involves symbol manipulation in
computations that allow us to traverse problem spaces.
One of the things that humans can do is to externalize
these symbols into the world to change the
representation of the problem spaces and to make more
effective use of the limited cognitive resources that we
have available to us. This can both amplify our abilities,
for example by increasing the size and reliability of our
memories, through, for example a checklist, but it can
also transform the nature of the problem (see Cole,
1990; Norman, 1991) to one that we are more easily
allocate our mental resources to in its resolution (an
isomorphic problem, but with a problem space that is
organized differently). The design of computer-based
tools to support and take advantage of this is known as
cognitive engineering, and this is an important applied
area of research for the discipline.
As well as being able to distribute problems over an
individual and a (set of) tools, humans make use of
another important resource – other people. Symbolic
manipulations on group problems are carried out in
much the same way as they are by individuals – the
difference is that the way that the symbols are
externalized and their manipulations are coordinated

916

between the diverse participants involved in the
problem solving activity. One of the most common
representational forms that these symbols are encoded
into is language – and in particular, speech. However,
humans also make use of several other forms of
physical symbolic structures in the world in their
communications with one another. Common forms of
these include paper documents or physical reminders or
pointers to one another. Simple physical manipulations
to these artifacts in the environment - by one or more
people - result in a transformation to their informational
status as a symbolic representation, and several
successive changes to their representational state may
result in goal resolution.
Space is an important organizing principle in the use
of artifacts and the representational states that artifacts
embody, yet it is a little understood, and underresearched area of interest, particularly given its applied
importance in the design of computer systems that are
intended to augment problem solving activity – both as
individuals and working in groups. Whilst some
research has been published on the role that space plays
in supporting the activity of individuals, this is not the
case (at least as an explicit aim) for supporting
problem-solving activity by groups. In order to better
understand how groups of people perform problem
solving, this paper takes on the theoretical perspective
of distributed cognition: this is briefly introduced in the
following section.

Socially distributed cognition
The form of distributed cognition advanced here
(differentiated as “DCog” to distinguish it from other
disciplines that have appropriated the term) has adapted
the framework of individual cognition to explain how
cognitive resources are organized within a context,
drawing on multiple actors and other representational
and non-representational elements in the environment

to perform problem solving. Hutchins calls this
‘socially distributed cognition’ (1995a). Socially
distributed cognition describes group activity in the way
that individual cognition has traditionally been
described - computation realized through the creation,
transformation and propagation of representational
states (Simon, 1981; Hutchins, 1995a). Central to this is
the idea of work being distributed over a range of media
and over a number of people. It is concerned with
representational states and the informational flows
around the media carrying these representations. The
goal of a DCog analysis is to describe how distributed
units are coordinated by analyzing the interactions
between individuals, the representational media used,
environment within which the activity takes place (the
functional system). The DCog framework allows
researchers to consider all of the factors relevant to the
task, bringing together the people, the problem, and
tools used into a single unit of analysis – although
notably, DCog takes an explicitly cognitive stance on
symbolic manipulation. This makes it suitable for
developing an understanding of how representations act
as intermediaries in the process of collaborative work. It
is therefore an ideal method to use to discover the
artifactual, social and cultural dimensions of work.
By performing simple manipulations on external
resources, humans can logically process information
without performing logic operations in their heads (c.f.
Rumelhart et al, 1986). Preece, Sharpe and Rogers
(2002) describe the process of ‘external cognition’ as
people creating and using information in the world,
rather than simply within their heads to do three key
things. These involve externalizing information to
reduce memory load (such as reminders), to simplify
cognitive effort by ‘computational offloading’ onto an
external media, and in allowing us to trace changes, for
example over time and space, through annotation (such
as crossing items off a list, or marking progress on a
map) or in the creation of a new representational form
to reflect this change. Whilst this description is a good
characterization of how external cognition operates, at
least for an individual, DCog attempts to place a
stronger theoretical framework around this. The key to
understanding the application of DCog is in its use to
uncover how systems coordinate transformations on
representations in goal seeking behavior. Bringing
representations into co-ordination with one other
involves a process of mapping a representation from
one media onto another. This co-ordination may be at
an individual level, as an individual creates or
manipulates representations, with a focus on the coordination of how the representation is propagated
between the representational media in pursuit of their
goal, or at a group level, with a focus on the coordination of representations that are propagated
between individuals through a variety of media.
The aim of DCog is therefore to understand how

917

intelligence is manifested at the systems level and not
the individual cognitive level (Hutchins, 1995a).
Analysts require a means of describing the components
within this system to explain the mechanisms that coordinate groups of collaborators. In cognitive science,
these properties are described in terms of the
representations and computational processes of
individual thought. This cognitive framework can
theoretically be expanded to examine larger units, to
include individuals interacting with external
representations, and the interactions of multiple
individuals in a work setting. DCog analyses have been
used to examine the cognitive properties of airline
cockpits (Hutchins, 1995b), navigation systems of naval
vessels (Hutchins, 1995a), air traffic control
(Halverson, 1995), shared CAD systems (Rogers &
Ellis, 1994) and collaboration between programmers
(Flor and Hutchins, 1992) amongst others.
One of the most important features in the analysis of
socially distributed cognition are the objects that
support co-ordination (also known as common artifacts,
coordinating representations or boundary objects in
different academic disciplines). These artifacts are
involved in making information publicly available and
help create a ‘shared awareness’ between the actors in a
distributed cognitive system. These artifacts allow
problem solvers to co-ordinate their behaviors and bring
their individual work contributions together, to interact
with one another t h r o u g h the object itself, as
collaborating participants’ activities are mediated and
rendered visible through them. Yet the objects of
coordination do not simply exist socially – they exist
within real spaces, and these spaces carry meaning and
provide particular constraints that support (or in a broad
sense, ‘afford’) particular forms of use and suggest
particular interpretations as to their meaning. It is this
these spatial qualities that are imbued in the use of
artifacts that we examine in the next sections.

Environmental setting: a cognitive resource
Little attention has been paid explicitly to the role of
space within socially distributed cognition although it
has been indirectly acknowledged as an important
factor in a number of DCog analyses using the broader
reference of ‘context’. The reason for this appears to be
the core focus of DCog on the internal structure of
external representations, and the transformational role
that these representations play in problem solving. This
is not to say that internal structure of cognitive artifacts
is unimportant, but the spatial context within which
these cognitive artifacts are used has an importance that
has, so far, only been acknowledged in passing.
One of the main papers that space has been addressed
in supporting cognitive action is Kirsh’s (1995) seminal
work on the topic – however, even here, the cognitive
role of space is applied solely in reference to its support
of individual cognition. Whilst several of the factors
noted by Kirsh about the role that space has in

supporting the individual can be extrapolated from to
show how they would support the activity of a
functional system composed of several individuals, the
domain is theoretically rather barren. In order to better
understand the role that space plays in organizing
human action at the level of an individual, the next
section discusses Kirsh’s work on the ‘intelligent use of
space’. At the core of Kirsh’s argument is the role that
space plays in supporting cognitive behavior, and the
notion that our externalized structuring actions reduce
the descriptive complexity of our environments and
simplify the cognitive complexity of the world. The
three main elements that Kirsh describes that are of
relevance to this paper are discussed in the following
sections.

Using space to simplify choice
Humans use cues and constraints from their
environments to support their cognitive activities.
Decision problems are made combinatorially less
complex by information ‘read’ from the environment,
and Kirsh describes three ways that this can occur:
a) Reducing the number of perceived possible actions at
decision points. This can be achieved through making
use of the affordances of objects, either by ‘hiding’
affordances (constraining what is feasible, otherwise
known as a forcing function–Norman, 1985), and
‘highlighting’ affordances (cueing attention to one
approach).
b) Simplifying perceived possible actions, thereby
reducing the need for previously necessary decisions.
This is achieved by substituting choice with compliance
in the design of the representational artifacts and the
constraints of the space within which they are used.
c) Creating arrangements that act as heuristics to
indicate the desirability of an action. An example of this
is the use of linear space to encode the temporal order
of actions (with the result of offloading memory into
the environment).

Spatial arrangements that simplify perception
This involves reorganizing arrangements of objects
within space to facilitate perception. Again, Kirsh
suggests several approaches used to achieve this:
a) Clustering to categorize, highlighting the similarities
between entities, allowing groups of things can be
categorized by factors such as similarity or purpose.
This works because it is harder to ‘lose’ big things than
small ones (especially in a visual search), or to forget
the function of the larger group of things,.
b) Symbolic marking allows us to draw attention to, or
provoke recall of things; we can monitor the
informational state of an item in a task, or signal its
importance through symbolic marking - although we
cannot display what that marking means (for example,
placing one of a series of posit-notes on its side to mark

918

it as being particularly important).
c) Finally, clustering is used to support perceptual
recognition: similar things tend to look alike (within
certain contexts). To discriminate between items, they
can be grouped into categories by similarity, and then
searched within those categories so that the differences
between the grouped items are easier to pick out.

Saving internal computation
This last factor involves the computational exploitation
of the physical form of objects within an environment
involving a “visual cue that serves to make the property
of the physically displayed entity in question explicit.
a) Problem solving computations can be offloaded onto
physical manipulations on objects. For example,
moving an artifact is cognitively simpler (quicker and
less error prone) than mentally ‘rotating’ it.
b) By externalizing representations, we can perform
‘perspective flipping’ (i.e. trying out conjectures). This
allows us to open up ideas to computations that are far
more complex when mentally conducted.

Group artifacts in space
The role that space plays in social interaction is hugely
complex and beyond the scope of this paper. It has been
addressed by a number of disciplines with different
focal perspectives, ranging from social psychology and
ethnomethodology to human geography. For the
purposes of this paper, we examine the role of space in
the use of artifacts through its influence on the creation,
interpretation and transformation of those artifacts, and
the cognitive impact of this on problem solving within
the group.
There are a number of ways that space can itself be
used as an organizing resource in support of group
function – forming an important part of the architecture
of the distributed cognitive system. One of the more
obvious distinctions is that between items located
within preconfigured (designed) spatial arrangements
(e.g. item placement within vertical or horizontal visual
displays) and arrangements of items within previously
non-configured spaces (e.g. ongoing arrangement and
categorization of written ideas into separate piles of
paper). Kirsh (1995) respectively refers to these ‘prestructuring’ and ‘jigging’ – and this has clear links to
ill-structured and well-structured problem solving (cf.
Simon, 1973).
The internal constraints (or affordances) of the
artifacts used and the constraints understood to be
common to by the actors within distributed cognitive
system (or their ‘cultural affordances’) provide
opportunities for appropriation of those artifacts for
behavioral functions, and in the case that we are
interested in, in the organization of action within a
socially distributed cognitive system.

Supporting research framework
As a means of identifying the role that space plays in
the use of artifacts, we have turned to real world data
collected in a series of ethnographic field studies.
However, we do not present the full data set given the
extended and discursive nature of ethnographic
observation and its representation These studies were
conducted in office-based environments looking at
artifact use in the design process within meeting rooms
and group areas. Whilst this domain (design) and the
particular locations examined are not necessarily
representative of the totality of collaborative artifactbased problem solving, this data provides a useful
perspective onto, and grounded findings for the area.
Ethnography has developed within the disciplines of
sociology and anthropology as a technique for gathering
naturalistic data. At its core, the ethnographic analysis
provides a means of exploring how work is organized
(see Hammersley and Atkinson, 1995 for an overview).
A huge range of artifacts and resources were used in
the coordination of the groups observed and in the
performance of their work tasks. To list a few, these
included paper (as printouts, drawings, sketches,
photocopies, notebooks, post-it notes and loose leaves),
whiteboards and foam-boards (for sticking and pinning
materials onto). In some respects, it might appear that
the meeting room seems to be something of a desert in
respect of tools for social interaction, but even the
simplest of these resources provide support for the
manipulation of cognitive resources within the
environment.
The majority of group-working tools used by the
observed participants within these settings were noncomputational (in the sense of digital technology),
although email and (to a lesser extent) web pages were
used. This was particularly evident in face-to-face
working, which was largely supported with paper-based
(A4 paper, post-its, etc.) and paper-like materials (e.g.
black/whiteboard), and other simple resources available
in offices (tables, chairs, wall-space, etc.). This was not
to say that all of the collaborative activity that was
observed was verbal with the available informational
resources being used as simple memory aids. The
participants’ behavior was far more subtle and complex
than this, making effective use of artifacts to coordinate
and drive collaborative action.

Use of space to orient problem solvers to a
common perspective
Perhaps the most obvious aspect of using spatially
organized artifacts is that they are available to all of the
actors within line of sight. They can be referred to in
speech and pointed at (deixis), adding contextuality to
speech. At a basic level, this is used as a mechanism as
actors try to maintain a single perspective with which to
interpret inputs into and representations within the
cognitive system. We identify three characteristics of

919

this factor that focus the orientation of problem solvers
onto a common perspective:
• Visibility to all: factors that are taken to be critical to a
discussion (both of its content and structure) can be
made explicit and represented (semi-)permanently
within space. Depending on the shared areas’ spatial
configuration, information can be oriented to show to
only those people within visual range as a filtering
device; this can be used to cut down the complexity of
the problem in the division of cognitive labor across
the larger group. This element integrates with the
mobility of people as they physically move within a
space. In terms of DCog, this simple reorganization of
information and individuals in space to re-orient
themselves to information involves a change to the
functional architecture of the cognitive system.
• Visibility of the perspective of other actors: the
visibility of artifacts (see previous point) and the
visible orientation of other problem solvers to those
artifacts provides actors with cues to interpreting the
division of labor (i.e. the computational structure) in
the distributed cognitive system. This allows them to
organize and optimize their problem solving activities
so that there is less likelihood of unnecessary
redundancy of effort, and to initiate communication
pathways directly to those people that their individual
or collective work processes are likely to butt against.
This can be observed at a number of levels, as people
orient themselves towards general areas of interest, or
towards particular areas of informational content
within an artifact or set of artifacts.
• Externalized collective ‘memory’ – the generation and
display of artifacts provides a focus for those present
that is retained over time, and which can be referred
to, reorganized, brought into focus, transformed and
placed back into the background again. It is also
possible to restructure displayed content so that
associations can be created for searching within that
content. The residual visual artifacts left behind in the
process of working on external representations also
provides a 'view' back into the problem solving
process to see how decision had been made, and
allowing the problem solvers to discuss their
decisions and collectively step back through the
process to renegotiate issues. The spatial aspect of
material on display allows a ‘zooming’ effect to be
applied in which items can be physically moved into
the foreground or background. This can be loosely
compared to human working memory and long-term
memory in terms of its utility in information
processing, with similar (but physically constrained)
limits on the number of (literally) ‘chunks’ of material
displayed in close proximity for detailed examination.

Using space to structure social organization
Aside from the role of visibility in providing a focus for
social organization, actors within a distributed cognitive
system can use space as a resource in structuring the

division of their cognitive labor. Three important
elements regarding this are addressed below:
• Organizing the parallelism of collaborative work
processes - physically present artifacts can be used as
cognitive resources in different concurrent activities.
Conversely, this means that they can accidentally be
used concurrently, and whilst this redundancy is often
useful, this duplication of effort can also add to the
workload of the problem solvers. By manipulating the
proximity and access to artifacts and people within a
space, this physical access to resources can effectively
structure the computational architecture of the
cognitive system. The time and effort costs of this can
be lower than doing this organization explicitly
through negotiated agreements. It also allows for a
greater degree of flexibility and contingency because
spatial arrangements can be more easily and simply
changed than explicitly and verbally renegotiating
task responsibilities, lines of communication and
individual workloads.
• Physical distribution of work – The ability of artifacts
to be moved within space allows them to be removed
from a common space to a private one (or even to
‘create’ a private space without changing the physical
display through behavioral cues and body posture
around it). This public-private transition provides a
physical instantiation of the division of cognitive
labor in the distributed cognitive system –
representation-bearing artifacts cannot be worked on
easily if they are not accessible. Moreover, the fact
that artifacts may be visibly not present (for example,
leaving a gap in a display space) or currently being
used within a public space provides a clue to other
problem solvers that this task is being worked on
independently, and that they should organize their
own work activities around this. As an example of
this, we have seen displayed materials (foam boards)
physically assigned to people with the delegation of
work complete when all of the materials have left the
display space to be worked on individually.

Using space to structure collaborative
computations
Spatial arrangements can be used to configure
collective computational action within the distributed
cognitive system. Three characteristics that support this
are described below:
• A unique physical reality – physical space allows only
one current solution of arrangements, unless material
is duplicated. This is particularly important in work
involving categorization in which material can be
ordered in multiple ways.1 Whilst different problem
solvers involved in the activity may interpret the
1

This can be a drawback: visualizing material simultaneously
in multiple ways can also be useful in searching for multiple
solution pathways, and this can be supported by a variety of
computer tools.

920

layout of the artifacts in space, this interpretation is an
order of magnitude of complexity lower than there
being no unique visible representation of its structure.
• Spatial placement constrains the order of action –
materials can be physically ordered and re-ordered
into structures embodied within the physical
environment. Stacking, or ordering, artifacts presents
the viewers of an information-rich space with a linear
structure of the items in it for discussion and working
on. Pre-structuring the environment places constraints
on the use and interpretation of the representational
artifacts that are intertwined in these embodied
networks. For example, a post-it note stuck on a
document requires its examination and removal
before the material underneath it can be read - this
may affect the interpretation of that material. Space is
also dynamic reconfigurable allowing the restructuring of materials within it in an ongoing
manner, thus supporting sequential rearrangements of
the problem space. An example of this was seen in the
fieldwork, in the way that the foam boards were
arranged around a team room. Each foam board
contained all of the paper-based artifacts related to a
single design concept. This ordering of the foam
boards around the room embodied the ordering that
was used to create a narrative for a client presentation.
• Structural arrangements map conceptual
arrangements – spatial organization allows cultural or
socially determined symbolic meanings to be made
explicit. Humans have developed conventions for
interpreting and making use of these, for example in
western culture, linear developments often follow the
convention of written text – starting on the left,
moving to the right, and moving progressively from
the top to the bottom of a visual space. These need not
always be culturally determined – for example, a local
agreement could be made that the left and right side
of a space carry a common symbolic meaning. In a
simple example from our fieldwork, one design team
used different locations in their project space to
categorize ideas, placing ideas on pieces of paper that
were categorized as being weak in a distant corner.

Engineering artifacts and spaces to support
cognition
Whilst this work is clearly interesting in and of itself in
understanding the role of space in structuring the
computational architecture of socially distributed
cognitive systems, this understanding clearly has an
applied dimension to it. As designers of our own
spaces, both physical (in terms of architecture and
managerially in providing physical resources to
problem solvers) and virtual (in terms of the computerbased technologies that we can design in support of
people working in real and virtual spaces) we can use
this knowledge to augment socially distributed problem
solving that is mediated through spatial arrangements.
If we take the three key factors raised in the paper, each

of these has important design-related consequences in
building spatial environments and technologies:
1. Visible presence: space has an important role in
providing an orientation to the available artifacts and
other individuals and their role within the problemsolving situation. However, it is not only making the
artifacts and other people visible, but making visible the
historical and social context of problem solving.
Moreover, physical manipulations to artifacts within
space do not require an abstract knowledge of
information within the artifact, and physical effects
such as ‘zooming’ have simple yet powerful
consequences in focusing group attention.
2. Organizing effort: the location and movement of
artifacts within space has important consequence for the
division of labor within problem solving groups. Spatial
cues and constraints are used as mechanisms for the
allocation of tasks and shared knowledge about the
computational structure of the group. We need to
support this simple approach to spatial organizational in
collaborative problem solving through the design of
appropriate spaces and technologies.
3. Spatial structure: space is used in the ordering and
categorization of information within it, forming a
physical informational ‘state’ of the cognitive system.
Simple methods of allowing visible structuring,
restructuring and association are clearly of relevance.

Conclusions
The paper presents a critique of the current
understanding of the use of space in cognitive science,
discussing three cognitive functions that space supports:
the use of space to orient problem solvers to a common
perspective, in structuring social organization and in
structuring collaborative computations. This develops
and extends previous work by Kirsh; however, when we
reexamine Kirsh’s work, several aspects apply equally
to patterns of activity in a socially distributed cognitive
system (the use of space to simplify choice, spatial
arrangements that simplify perception and in saving
internal computations). Interestingly there is a
difference in the way that these are applied in socially
distributed cognition, in that these patterns of activity
are typically mediated through social and cultural
norms, and explicitly agreed up protocols generated in
the course of the artifact’s use, and are not applied in
the same way as might be the case for an individual,
although functionally of a similar equivalence.
The research presented in this paper is not intended to
be an exhaustive discussion of the role that space plays
in structuring and forming cognitive processes within
socially distributed problem solving groups, but it is
intended to highlight what we have seen as important
issues arising from our data collection, and to challenge
researchers about their assumptions within, and their
use of cognitive theory in this domain. The role of
space clearly requires a great deal more consideration

921

than it has so far received in terms of its impact on
collaborative problem solving behavior.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by the Appliance
Studio and also by EPSRC Grant no. GR/RO9503/01
(Designing for mobile and distributed work).

References
Cole, M. (1990) Cultural psychology: A once and
future discipline. In Berman (Ed.) N e b r a s k a
Symposium: Current Theory and Research in
Motivation - Cross-Cultural Perspectives, 37, p. 279335.
Flor, N. & Hutchins, E.L. (1992) Analysing distributed
cognition in software teams: a case study of team
programming during perfective software
maintenance. In Eds. Joenemann-Belliveau, Moher &
Robertson, Empirical Studies of Programmers: 4th
Workshop, p. 36-64. USA: Ablex.
Halverson, C.A. (1995) Inside the cognitive workplace:
new technology and air traffic control. PhD Thesis.
Department of Cognitive Science, University of
California, San Diego.
Hammersley, M. & Atkinson, P. (1995) Ethnography:
principles in practice. 2nd Edition. Routledge:
London.
Hutchins, E. (1995a) Cognition in the Wild. Bradford:
MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b) How a cockpit remembers its
speeds. Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The Intelligent Use of Space.
Artificial Intelligence, 73: 31-68.
Norman, D. A. (1988) The Psychology of everyday
things. New York, Basic Books.
Norman, D.A. (1991a) Cognitive Artifacts. In Carroll
(Ed.) Designing interaction: psychology at the human
computer interface. Cambridge: CUP. p. 17-38.
Preece, J. Sharpe, H. and Rogers, Y. (2002) Interaction
Design. NY: J. Wiley &Sons.
Rogers, Y. & Ellis, J. (1994) Distributed cognition: an
alternative framework for analysing and explaining
collaborative working. Journal of Information
Technology, 9, 119-128.
Rumelhart, D.E., Smolensky, P., McClelland, J.L. &
Hinton, G.E. (1986) Schemata and sequential thought
processes in PDP models. In McClelland, Rumelhart,
& the PDP Research Group (Eds.) Parallel
distributed processing: explorations in the
microstructure of cognition. Vol.2, Psychological and
biological models. p. 7-57. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Simon H.A. (1981) The Sciences of the Artificial. 2nd
Edition. USA: MIT Press.
Simon, H.A. (1973) The structure of ill-structured
problems. Artificial Intelligence, 4: 181-204.

