UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Concept of Voluntary Motor Control in the Recent Neuroscientific Literature

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3xt174b8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Tibbetts, Paul

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Concept of Voluntary Motor Control
in the Recent Neuroscientific Literature
Paul Tibbetts, Ph.D. (paul.tibbetts@notes.udayton.edu)
Philosophy and Cognitive Science, University of Dayton
300 College Park, Dayton, OH 45469-1546

Volition, Motor Effects, and Neuroscience

Abstract
The concept of voluntary motor control (VMC) frequently
appears in the neuroscientific literature, specifically in the
context of cortically-mediated, intentional motor actions. For
cognitive scientists, this concept of VMC raises a number of
interesting questions: (i) Are there dedicated, modular-like
structures within the motor system associated with VMC? Or (ii)
is it the case that VMC is distributed over multiple cortical as
well as subcortical structures? (iii) Is there any one place within
the so-called hierarchy of motor control where voluntary
movements could be said to originate? And (iv) in the current
neurological literature how is the adjective voluntary in VMC
being used? These questions are here considered in the context
of how higher- and lower-levels of motor control plan, initiate,
coordinate, sequence, and modulate goal-directed motor outputs
in response to changing internal and external inputs. Particularly
relevant are the conceptual implications of current neurological
modeling of VMC concerning intentional agency.
Key Words: causal agency, intentional behavior, motor system,
volitions, voluntary motor control, will.
(Note: A more extended version of this paper has been
submitted and revised for publication in the periodical, Brain
and Mind.)

The Concept of Voluntary Motor Control
in the Recent Neuroscientific Literature
Despite many years of effort, there is still no complete
understanding of the sequence of events that leads from
thought to movement, and it is fair to say that the picture
becomes increasingly blurred the farther one moves from
the muscles themselves. (Purves et al., 1997, p. 292)
More than in sensory systems, our understanding of motor
events decreases rapidly as we move from the periphery
into the central nervous system. This is a consequence of
the fact that there are many pathways converging onto
motoneurons from higher centers, and even more onto the
higher-order cells. (Nicholls et al., 2001, p. 448)

1158

Regarding voluntary motor control (hereafter, VMC), a
primary objective of the historical and contemporary
neuroscientific literature is to model how higher- and lowerlevel structures within the motor nervous system plan, initiate,
sequence, modulate, and coordinate voluntary movements
(Finger, 1994, pp. 191-239; Jordan & Wolpert, 2000;
Passingham, 1993; Purves et al., 2001, pp. 347-441).
Accordingly, there are few metaphysical claims made in this
literature concerning either the reality or non-reality of
volition, choice, or so-called ‘acts of will.’ Neuroscientists
simply assume as a working hypothesis that people can initiate
and sustain volitional control over their actions, contingent on
normal signal exchange between cortical, subcortical, and
spinal-cord motor structures. Consequently, in modeling the
processes and computations associated with these structures,
we understand what makes VMC possible in the first place. So
goes the reasoning of much contemporary neuroscientific
thinking concerning motor control (Kolb & Whishaw, 1996;
Purves et al., 2001; Victor & Ropper, 2001).
How much light this strategy throws on more philosophical
concerns regarding volition and choice is, of course, another
matter (Brand, 1995). E.g., do volitions and intentions belong
to one level of analysis, and motor-system analyses to another?
Alternatively, could an account of volitions and intentions be
folded into an account of the hierarchy of motor-control
structures and computations? To explore this latter possibility
requires some understanding of the hierarchy of motor control,
from spinal-cord motoneurons to subcortical and cortical
structures.

A Preliminary Pass Through the Primate Motor
System
Complex, coordinated movements such as reaching for,
grasping and writing with a pen require signal sequencing to
multiple muscle groups in the shoulder, arm and hand. Such
movements are initiated by signals from the primary motor
cortex (hereafter, M1) to lower motor neurons in the spinal
cord and, in turn, to skeletal muscles. However, M1 output is
modulated by input from other motor structures, some cortical
(e.g., premotor and prefrontal cortical areas), some subcortical
(e.g., basal ganglia and cerebellar inputs). Where some of
these inputs to M1 are internally generated (such as the
motivation to write this manuscript), other M1 inputs are

externally cued (locating the pen and notes with which to
begin writing) (Mushiake et al., 1991). However, whether in
response to internal or external inputs, M1I outputs to spinalcord motor neurons and, in turn, to the trunk and limb muscles,
are constantly being modulated, updated and, in effect,
supervised by a number of motor structures. To achieve even
a rudimentary understanding of how this signaling process
works, we now examine the voluntary motor system (VMS) in
somewhat greater detail.

A Second, More Technical Pass Through the Primate
Nervous System
As with any other science, the neurological literature
regarding motor control is characterized by its own distinctive
terminology, methodologies, and causal models. This
literature’s causal models are particularly complex given: (i)
the distribution of motor control over a number of cortical and
subcortical structures, (ii) converging as well as diverging
inputs and outputs between these structures, and (iii)
feedforward and feedback loops within the system.
Consequently, the physical and computational complexities of
the motor system can only be hinted at in a manuscript of this
length (Churchland & Sejnowski, 1992; Georgopoulos, 2000;
Jordan & Wolpert, 2000; Tibbetts, 2002).
The corticospinal (or pyramidal) tract consists of those
axons originating in upper motor neurons (UMNs) in more
medial areas of M1 and synapse on lower motor neurons
(LMNs) in the spinal cord. On the other hand, axons of the
corticobulbar tract originate in UMNs in more lateral areas of
M1. These latter axons synapse on interneurons in the brain
stem which, in turn, synapse on cranial nerves to innervate
facial muscles (Purves et al., 2001, pp. 18 and 376-381).
While some of these descending projections from higher- to
lower-motor control levels are associated with VMC, other
projections provide the requisite stability for voluntary
movements (Purves et al., 2001, p. 347). E.g., in deciding to
retrieve my dropped pen, my posture must change as I reach
down otherwise I will lose my balance. In this example, in
response to visual and proprioceptive cues, preprogrammed
circuits in the brain stem provide the requisite postural
stability. Additionally, my intention to move across the room
to where pages of my manuscript have landed also involved
central pattern generators (CPGs) in the spinal cord to enable
the rhythmic motor patterns associated with walking by
alternatively extending and flexing lower limbs (Longstaff,
2000, pp. 213-214).
To summarize the preceding, VMC is associated with higherlevel cortical areas, particularly with M1 outputs to LMNs in
the spinal cord. [Sherrington referred to these LMNs as the
‘final common pathway’ for voluntary movement and postural
stability (Nicholls et al., 2001, p. 449).] However, actual
execution of these motor commands, as transmitted by the
corticospinal tract, is controlled by local circuitry in the spinal
cord. Given these intermediate relay circuits between motor
cortex and muscles, there is no direct translation of voluntary
motor intentions into body movements. Accordingly, while

1159

cortical motor areas function in some sort of supervisory and
initiating role, there are a number of lower-level, middle
managers who exercise discretionary power in how to translate
supervisory intentions and commands into goal-directed
actions (Zigmond et al., 1999, pp. 931-949).
Regarding these spinal-cord motoneurons and local circuit
neurons, for Gazzaniga et al. (1998, pp. 379-383), this
arrangement:
is truly hierarchical in that the highest levels need be
concerned only with issuing commands to achieve an
action, while lower-level mechanisms translate the
commands into a movement. [E.g.,] the highest level of
the hierarchy need represent only the ultimate goal
[reaching for a cup]–the elbow and hand assume a
position where the cup can be grasped with minimal
effort. How this goal is met does not have to be included
in this representation. Lower levels of the hierarchy are
concerned with translating a final goal into a certain
trajectory.
Following are examples of how different structures within
this hierarchy contribute to motor control. UMNs in the motor
cortex and brain stem signal to local circuits in the spinal cord
to initiate coordinated, complex movements. More
specifically, UMNs in the premotor cortex select appropriate
goal-directed movements contingent on internal or external
cues (Purves et al., 2001, pp. 384-385). In turn, the premotor
cortex receives input from parietal association cortex regarding
current, on-going motor responses (Saper et al., 2000, pp. 356357). Supervisory control over these cortical outputs is
associated with basal ganglia (inhibitory) output through
thalamic relays (Longstaff, 2000, pp. 254-257; ). A crucial
computational function of these basal ganglia output is gating
and dampening movements for coordinated behavior (Graybiel
et al., 2003). Accordingly, with lesions to the basal ganglia (as
in the case of Huntington’s and Parkinson’s motor disorders),
patients “cannot switch smoothly between commands that
initiate a movement and those that terminate the movement”
(Purves et al., 2001, p. 391, italics added; Victor & Ropper,
2001, pp. 1121-1137).
The basal ganglia also play a supervisory role in:
(i) suppressing unwanted movements, (ii) priming the upper
motor circuits involved in initiating voluntary movements,
(iii) switching one action for another, and (iv) linking cortical
motor areas with UMNs in the brainstem (Graybiel et al.,
2003). E.g., regarding (iv), for Purves et al. (2001, p. 391),
neurons in this signaling loop between basal ganglia,
motor cortex, and brainstem neurons, respond in
anticipation of and during movements, and their effects on
upper motor neurons are required for the normal initiation
of voluntary movements. When one of these components
of the basal ganglia or associated structures is
compromised, the patient cannot switch smoothly between
commands that initiate a movement and those that
terminate the movement.

A Specific Example of Voluntary Movement
Let us consider the contribution to voluntary movement of
a specific motor structure: the frontal eye fields (FEFs) in
the frontal lobes. The FEFs are associated with saccadic
eye movements, where the eyes move from one fixation
point to another in the visual field. The FEFs project to
‘saccade-related burst neurons’ in the intermediate layer of the
superior colliculus (SC) which, in turn, project to cranial
nerves in the brain stem and then to extraocular muscles.
Lesions to the FEFs result in an inability to initiate voluntary
shifts from one external visual target to another (Purves et al.,
2001, p. 437).
The respective contributions of FEFs, M1, and the lateral
and medial premotor areas, to voluntary eye movements are
illustrated in the following example of locating and retrieving
my coffee cup: (1) The medial premotor cortex (associated
with internal, including intentional and motivational cues to
locate the cup) selects appropriate goal-directed movements
which, in turn, signal UMNs in M1. (Regarding the
contribution of posterior parietal association cortex to
intentions, see Anderson et al., 2002, and Snyder et al., 1997.)
In turn, M1 signals the cranial (accessory) nerve for head and
neck movements. (2) Visually searching for my cup amidst the
books and clutter on the desk involves the FEFs and saccadic
eye movements. (3) As the cup is located, providing external
cues for motor control, output to M1 shifts from medial to
more lateral premotor cortices. (4) Stabilizing the retinal image
of the cup on the fovea as I shift my head and body involves
smooth-pursuit eye movements and vestibulo-ocular
involuntary reflexes. (5) Reaching for the cup is initiated by
motor neurons in those areas of M1 where head, neck, arm and
hand muscles are cortically represented. Reaching for the cup
when the cup is in full view involves the premotor cortex
(Fitzgerald & Folan-Curran, 2002, p. 250). (6) Additionally,
there is the contribution of the posterior parietal cortex in
coordinating sensorimotor transformations (Wurtz & Kandel,
2000, p. 567). (7) Initiating arm and shoulder movements
involves the corticospinal tract, interneurons, and motoneurons
in the spinal cord. (8) The basal ganglia exercises supervisory
control over these cortical inputs by dampening excessive arm
movements to steady the cup. Clearly there is more to
intentionally reaching for my cup than M1 output to
motoneurons in the spinal cord! (Gazzaniga et al., 1998,
pp. 375-378; Ivry & Fiez, 2000; Victor & Ropper, 2001,
pp. 53-55; Zigmond et al., 1999, pp. 946-947.)

A Philosophical Objection: The Confusion of
Intentional Causes With Material Conditions
If someone said that without bones and sinews and all
such things, I should not be able to do what I decided, he
would be right, but surely to say that they are the cause of
what I do, and not that I have chosen the best course...is
to speak very lazily and carelessly. The cause of my
sitting here [in this cell] with my limbs bent is that, after
the Athenians decided it was better to condemn me, for
this reason it seemed best to me to sit here and more right

1160

to remain and to endure whatever penalty they ordered.
Imagine not being able to distinguish the real cause from
that without which the cause would not be able to act as a
cause.
--Socrates, Phaedo (98c-99b)
In the preceding quote, Socrates (Plato) distinguished
between (i) the causes of his actions (i.e., his decisions and
intentions) and (ii) the bodily conditions (‘bones and sinews
and all such things’) by which (i) are expressed and
instantiated. Plato therefore anticipated the later distinction
between actions and movements or, more accurately, between
a language of actions and a language of movements (Searle,
1996). A language of actions, with its reference to intentions,
choices and desires, is clearly not synonymous with physical
descriptions of ‘bones, sinews and all such things.’
Let us now extend this account of actions and movements to
Plato’s distinction between (i) the (intentional) causes as
against (ii) the (material) conditions for acting. On his account,
causes and conditions belong to different descriptive and, it
would appear, different explanatory languages; namely, the
(intentional) language of actions and the (scientific, i.e.,
physicalistic) language of movements. If, as Plato claimed, the
two languages are not inter-translatable then the explanatory
language of intentions and actions is semantically complete
and independent of references to material (bodily)
considerations, including the motor system in general. If we
adopt this two-languages strategy we are saying, in effect, that
motives, intentions and choices can not be causally modeled
by either the physical or the computational languages of
neuroscience.
In response, the concept of VMC (which is associated with
the language of intentions) is in fact currently modeled in the
vocabulary of neuroscience. Consequently, either (i) the
language of intentions and the language of neuroscience are (at
least for some concepts) inter-translatable, or (ii) the concept
of voluntary in VMC is simply empty of intentional content as
currently employed in the neuroscientific literature. In defense
of (i), examples of the translation of intentional into
neurological language is at least implicit in the following
(emphasis added): (a) Self-initiated movements and the
encoding of intentions (Purves et al., 2001, p. 385). (b) The
role of multiple cortical areas as ‘the brain generates a
voluntary movement’ (Zigmond et al., 1999, p. 941). (c) The
neural planning and initiation of goal-directed movements
(Nicholls et al., 2001, pp. 464-468). And (d) “planned,
learned, skilled, purposeful movements that depend heavily,
among other sources, on premotoneurons in the cerebral
cortex” (Slaughter, 2002, p. 173).
Claims (a)-(d) implicitly share certain assumptions: (i) the
motor encoding of intentions and, in turn, (ii) operationalizing
the concept of voluntary control in terms of voluntary motor
control; (iii) operationalizing VMC in terms of control and
processing within subcortical as well as cortical motor
structures. Combining (i)-(iii) we derive (iv): A strictly
neurocomputational account of causal agency.

A Distributed Account of VMC
On Plato’s line of reasoning, the study of motor systems is as
irrelevant to understanding intentional actions as is the study
of the mechanical workings of an automobile to understanding
the driver’s decisions to take one road rather than another.
However, this driver/vehicle analogy only makes sense if
intentional systems are in the nervous system in the way
drivers are in vehicles, that is, as cause-initiating agents. But
perhaps we are not in our nervous systems but are those
systems! Ironically, this alternative was suggested by
Descartes, the philosopher historically most associated with a
dualism between cognitive agency and that agent’s body
(Cottingham, 1995, pp. 193-195). In his Meditations on First
Philosophy (1641/1988, p. 116), Descartes alluded to a nondualist alternative regarding agents and their bodies:
Nature also teaches me, by these sensations of pain,
hunger, thirst and so, that I am not merely present in my
body as a sailor [or pilot] is present in a ship, but that I am
very closely joined and, as it were, intermingled with it, so
that I and the body form a unit.
If, to use Descartes’ language, we are ‘intermingled with our
bodies to form a single unit,’ then it appears arbitrary to
exclude the motor system, particularly the motor system
associated with voluntary control, from this ‘single unit.’
Given that, on Descartes’ model, the pilot is intermingled as a
single unit with his ship, Plato’s supposed distinction between
intentional causes, as against the material conditions by which
those intentions are instantiated and realized, would be
conceptually blurred. In other words, there would be no place
one could point to and say, ‘this causes that’ or ‘this is the
(intentional) cause and that the (material) condition.’
One traditional metaphysical name for a non-material,
intentional agency has been ‘the Will’ (Flanagan, 2002;
O’Shaughnessy, 1994). Alternatively, the literature on motor
control surveyed in this paper suggests a purely neurological
reconstruction in terms of: (i) the distribution of motor control
over a number of cortical, subcortical, brainstem and spinalcord structures within the motor system, (ii) feedforward and
feedback information loops between different processing
modules within this hierarchy, responding (iii) to internal or
external cues and triggers (Jordan & Wolpert, 2000; Mushiake
et al., 1991). Given (i)-(iii), it may therefore constitute a
conceptual as well as an empirical error to identify any one
processing structure within the motor-system network as the
place where intentions and voluntary movements causally
originate and are supervised. So, perhaps the concept
voluntary in VMC simply denotes cortically-supervised and
cortically-mediated motor responses to the internal and
external inputs noted earlier. Perhaps VMC in this sense is the
neurological equivalent of Plato’s causal agent/agency!
One further point regarding motor control. The voluntary
motor system (VMS) is frequently modeled in the
neuroscientific literature in terms of higher- as against lowerlevel motor-control processors and therefore as an hierarchical
system. In turn, a hierarchical model implies that system
commands originate at the top of the system and then relayed

1161

to lower-level control modules. However, this pyramid of
control metaphor has not gone unchallenged. E.g., for Cotterill
(1998, p. 58; emphasis added),
The trouble with such a picture is that one is ultimately
confronted with the need to put a label on the pyramid’s
uppermost point. But it is possible that the various cortical
areas form no such upwardly pointing pattern, either
anatomical or conceptual. I believe that one could look
upon the brain as what could rather be called a
lowerarchy... An immediate reward would be that one is
thereby relieved of deciding which part of the cerebral
cortex is to be accorded primacy. That elusive top of the
pyramid would be replaced by something rather more
tangible: the top of the spinal cord!

Motor Orchestration Without a Conductor: A
Concluding Metaphor
Imagine a world where there were tracks and trains,
conductors and engineers, passengers and freight, etc., but no
supervisors who surveyed the entire scene from a god-like
perspective and issued commands. Would trains run off their
tracks? Would passengers and freight be stranded? Would
conductors and engineers become immobilized and indecisive?
No, not if the system had evolved without ever having required
system-independent supervisory control in the first place!
Alternatively, let us take any one structure within the motor
system and categorically state: ‘Here is where intentional,
voluntary movement is initiated!’ M1 is as good a candidate as
any for this elevated status. As Zigmond et al. (1999, p. 931)
remark, “While the motor cortex is not ‘the whole story,’ it is
clearly the place to begin.” However, to say that M1 initiates
voluntary movement would be like saying a conductor initiates
the train moving by signaling to the engineer. Question: What
set of prior internal or external events initiated the process of
the conductor raising and signaling with the lantern?
However, as suggested above, perhaps we have the story and
therefore the question all wrong. We need to challenge the
Cartesian assumption of an identifiable cause (namely,
intentional, volitional states) sufficient to initiate the train of
motor events issuing in the conductor’s arm and lantern to be
raised. It has been argued here that there simply is no
identifiable cognitive nor neural event that, in and of itself, sets
events in motion.
Rather, and as argued for in this paper, computations at
different levels within motor nervous systems initiate,
coordinate, modulate and sequence movements without
Cartesian-like executives. Obviously, tracks, trains, engineers,
and conductors break down from time to time, as do nervous
systems. Disruptions in railroad schedules occur for the same
reasons as do dysfunctions in motor systems: problems in
signal transmissions between stations; broken or blocked
tracks/tracts; equipment and system overload; and so on. It is
not the Will or Volition or some other metaphysical
agent/agency that breaks down here but components within the
system itself, that is, within the system’s physical or
computational architectures (Farah & Feinberg, 2000; Heilman

& Valenstein, 1993; Mazzoni & Rowland, 2001; Simon et al.,
1999; Victor & Ropper, 2001).
References to a supervisor who initiates voluntary
movements only invite an infinite regress of questions
concerning what, in turn, initiates the supervisor’s (or
conductor’s) choices. In the following passage, Flanagan’s
(1991, p. 43; see also his 2002) proposal is entirely consistent
with the naturalistic model of VMC developed here.
Concerning the voluntary in VMC, we must relinquish:
the requirement that there must always be an outside
comprehender or observer, and endow some part of, or the
whole of, the brain...with reflexive powers, with the
ability to loop around itself. If the only way to stop the
infinite regress [of causal agents] is to allow the
reflexivity we obviously possess at some point, then why
not allow it a place in the cognitive system from the very
start? This is precisely the direction in which a naturalist
must move.

References
Anderson, R.A. & Buneo, C.A. (2002). Intentional maps in
posterior parietal cortex. Ann. Rev. Neurosci, 25, 189-220.
Brand, M. (1995). Volition. In R. Audi (Ed.), The cambridge
dictionary of philosophy (pp. 843-844). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Churchland, P.S. & Sejnowski, T.J. (1992). The computational
brain. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Cotterill, R. (1998). Enchanted looms: conscious networks in
brains and computers. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Cottingham, J. (1995). Rene Descartes. In R. Audi (Ed.), The
cambridge dictionary of philosophy (pp. 193-196). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Descartes, R. (1641/1988). Meditations on first philosophy. In
J. Cunningham, R. Stoothoff, & D. Murdoch (Eds.),
Descartes: Selected philosophical writings (pp. 73-122).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Farah, M.J. & Feinberg, T.E. (Eds.). (2000). Patient-based
approaches to cognitive neuroscience. Cambridge, MA.:
MIT Press.
Finger, S. (1994). Origins of neuroscience. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
FitzGerald, M.J.T. & Folan-Curran, J. (2002). Clinical
neuroanatomy and related neuroscience. New York, NY:
Saunders.
Flanagan, O. (1991). The science of the mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Flanagan, O. (2002). The problem of the soul. New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Gazzaniga, M.S., Ivry, R.B., & Mangun, G.R. (1998).
Cognitive neuroscience. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Georgopoulos, A.P. (2000). Neural mechanisms of motor
cognitive processes: functional MRI and neurophysiological
studies. In M.S. Gazzaniga (Ed.). The new cognitive
neurosciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 525-538). Cambridge, MA: MIT

1162

Press.
Graybiel, A.M., Delong, M.R., & Kitia, S.T. (Eds.). (2003).
The basal ganglia VI: advances in behavioral biology.
Hingham, MA: Kluwer.
Heilman, K.M. & Valenstein, E. (Eds.). (1993). Clinical
neuropsychology (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Ivry, R.B. & Fiez, J.A. (2000). Cerebellar contributions to
cognition and imagery. In M.S. Gazzaniga (Ed.) (2000).
The new cognitive neurosciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 999-1011).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jordan, M.I. & Wolpert, D.M. (2000). Computational motor
control. In M.S. Gazzaniga (Ed.). The new cognitive
neurosciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 601-618). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kandel, E.R., Schwartz, J.H., & Jessell, T.M. (Eds.). (2000).
Principles of neural science. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I.Q. (1996). Fundamentals of
neuropsychology (4th ed.). New York, NY: W.H. Freeman.
Longstaff, A. (2000). Neuroscience. New York, NY: SpringerVerlag.
Mazzoni, P. & Rowland, L.P. (Eds.). (2001). Merritt’s
neurology handbook. Philadelphia, PA: Lippencott,
Williams and Wilkins.
Mushiake, H., Inase, M., & Tanji, J. (1991). Neuronal activity
in the primate premotor, supplementary, and precentral
motor cortex during visually guided and internally
determined sequential movements. J. Neurophysiol., 66,
705-718.
Nicholls, J.G., Martin, A.R., Wallace, B.G., & Fuchs, P.A.
(2001). From neuron to brain (4th ed.) (pp. 472-473).
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
O’Shaughnessy (1994). The will. In S. Guttenplan (Ed.)
(1994). A companion to the philosophy of mind (pp. 610617). New York, NY: Blackwell.
Passingham, R. (1993). The frontal lobes and voluntary
action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press
Purves, D., Augustine, G.J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L.C.,
LaMantia, A-S., & McNamara, J.O. (1997). Neuroscience.
Sunderland MA: Sinauer Associates.
Purves, D., Augustine, G.J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L.C.,
LaMantia, A-S., McNamara, J.O., & Williams, S.M. (2001).
Neuroscience (2nd ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates.
Saper, C.B., Iversen, S., & Frackowiak, R. (Eds.) (2000).
Integration of sensory and motor function. In E.R. Kandel,
J.H. Schwartz, & T.M. Jessell (Eds.). Principles of Neural
Science (4th ed.) (pp. 349-380). New York, NY: McGrawHill.
Searle, J.R. (1996). Contemporary philosophy in the United
States. In N. Bunnin & E.P. Tsui-James (Eds.). The
blackwell companion to philosophy (pp. 1-24). Cambridge,
MA.
Simon, R.P., Aminoff, M.J., & Greenberg, D.A. (1999).
Clinical neurology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Slaughter, M. (2002). Basic concepts in neuroscience. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

Snyder, L.H. Batista, A.P., & Anderson, R.A. (1997). Coding
of intention in the posterior parietal cortex. Nature, 386,
167-170.
Tibbetts, P. (2002). The brain and its physical and
computational architectures. Quarterly Review of Biology,
77(1), 38-43.
Victor, M. & Ropper, A.H. (2001). Adams and Victor’s
principles of neurology (7th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-

1163

Hill.
Wurtz, R.H. & Kandel, E.R. (2000). Perception of motion,
depth, and form. In E.R. Kandel, J.H. Schwartz, & T.M.
Jessel (Eds.). Principles of neural science (pp. 548-571).
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Zigmond, M.J., Bloom, F.E., Landis, S.C., Roberts, J.L., &
Squire, L.R. (Eds.). (1999). Fundamental neuroscience.
New York, NY: Academic Press (esp. 855-992).

