UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Meaning(s) of “If”: Conditional Probabilities and Mental Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36w4w441

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Oberauer, Klaus
Wilhelm, Oliver

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Meaning(s) of “If”: Conditional Probabilities and Mental Models
Klaus Oberauer (ko@rz.uni-potsdam.de)
Allgemeine Psychologie I, University of Potsdam
PO box 60 15 53, 14415 Potsdam, Germany

Oliver Wilhelm (oliver.wilhelm@rz.hu-berlin.de)
Department of Psychology, Humboldt-University Berlin
Hausvogteiplatz 5-7, 10117 Berlin, Germany
p
¬p
¬p

Abstract
Three experiments with a probabilistic truth-table
evaluation task suggest that most people interpret
conditionals as asserting a high conditional probability of
the consequent, given the antecedent. A minority seems
to endorse an interpretation in terms of a single explicit
mental model (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). There was
no evidence that a substantive number of people interpret
conditionals as material implications. We propose a
revision of the theory of mental models that can
accommodate both prevalent interpretations as two levels
of elaboration of model-based representations.

Introduction
How do people understand statements of the form “if p
then q”? Conditionals seem to have a chameleon-like
meaning that varies with content and context (c.f.
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002). Still, people can reason
systematically from conditional statements even with
abstract material presented out of context, as in typical
experiments on deduction (for an overview see Evans,
1993). This suggests that there is a psychological core
meaning associated with the connective “if ... then”.
The experiments reported here put to test two theories
of the psychological meaning of conditionals - the
theory of mental models (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991) and the hypothesis that conditionals are
interpreted as conditional probabilities (Edgington,
1995; Evans, Handley, & Over, 2003; Oaksford &
Chater, 2001; Oberauer & Wilhelm, in press).
According to the theory of mental models, a conditional
of the form “if p then q” is initially represented as one
explicit mental model together with one implicit model
(expressed by the three dots):
[p]

q
...

The square brackets around p signify that there are no
other possible cases with p, so all the implicit models
must be cases of ¬p. The initial representation can be
“fleshed out” if necessary, yielding three explicit
models:

q
q
¬q

Thus, the full set of mental models represents those
cases from a truth-table that make the conditional
statement true. The initial representation corresponds to
what has been called a “defective truth table”, based on
the observation that people often regard the cases with a
negation of the antecedent (¬p) as irrelevant to the truth
of the conditional (Johnson-Laird & Tagart, 1969).
According to the conditional probability view, this is
not a defective judgment at all. Edgington (1995),
building on earlier work in the philosophy of logic,
proposed that the reasonable degree of belief in a
conditional “if p then q” equals the subjective
conditional probability P(q|p). This depends on the
relative frequency of pq cases and p¬q cases, whereas
cases with negated antecedent are irrelevant.
Our experiments used a probabilistic truth-table
evaluation task. Participants were given information
about the frequencies of the four cases of the truth-table
and asked to judge how likely a conditional statement
was true (Experiments 1 & 2) or whether it was true or
false (Experiment 3). Two factors were varied
orthogonally: The relative frequency of pq, and the ratio
of pq to p¬q cases. Table 1 shows the resulting design.
Table 1: Design of Experiments
Cases | Conditions
pq
p ¬q
¬p q
¬p ¬q

HH
900
100
500
500

HL
900
900
100
100

LH
90
10
950
950

LL
100
100
900
900

Legend: HH = high frequency of pq, high P(q|p), HL =
high frequency of pq, low P(q|p), LH = low frequency
of pq, high P(q|p), LL = low frequency of pq, low
P(q|p).
If people interpret “if p then q” as asserting that the
conditional probability of q, given p, is high, then their
judgment of how likely this statement is true should
depend only on the ratio variable. Thus, they should

874
1

judge the likelihood of the conditional to be high in
conditions HH and LH, and low in the other two
conditions. Assuming further that people accept a
conditional as “true” if P(q|p) surpasses a threshold
close to, but not equal to one, this account would
predict that a larger number of people would be willing
to accept the conditional statement as true in conditions
HH and LH than in the other two.
The theory of mental models predicts that people
estimate the probability of a statement by the relative
frequency associated with the mental models of the
statement, set in relation to the number of all cases
(Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto, Legrenzi, &
Caverni, 1999). Thus, people working with the initial
model representation should judge the likelihood of a
conditional as a function of the relative frequency of pq
cases, independent of the ratio factor. People who
employ the full set of three explicit models should
estimate the probability of a conditional as the sum of
the frequencies of the cases pq, ¬pq, and ¬p¬q,
divided by the sample size (i.e., 2000), which equals 1P(p¬q). Their judgments should thus depend on the
relative frequency of the p¬q cases only. Within our
design, this can be decomposed into a main effect of
ratio and a main effect of frequency of pq. Note that the
predicted effect of the frequency of pq goes in the
opposite direction of that expected from the initial
model representation: Within each category of ratio,
high frequency of pq goes with high frequency of p¬q,
which should yield low estimates of the likelihood of
the conditional.

the probability that a card selected at random had a
particular feature combination (e.g., that it had a blue
A). The second pair of questions asked about the
probability that a single card, which happens to have an
A printed on it, was red, and the probability that it was
blue. These two questions targeted directly the
conditional probability corresponding to the conditional
statement introduced in the third question. As an
introduction to the third question, participants were
informed that a random set of 10 cards was drawn from
the pack. They were then asked to estimate how likely it
is that the following statement is true for the 10 cards:
“If a card has an A, then it is red”. All estimates of
probabilities were to be given on a scale from 0
(“absolutely impossible”) to 100 (“absolutely certain”).
The final question asked participants to imagine a bet
on the truth of the conditional. If the conditional turned
out to be true for the sample of 10 cards, they would
win 100 DM, otherwise they would lose their bet. They
were required to indicate the maximum amount they
would be willing to bet on the truth of the conditional.

Results
Figure 1 plots participants’ estimates of the conditional
probability P(q|p) and their estimates of the probability
of the conditional, P(“if p then q”) in Experiment 1.
The third line represents subjective probabilities of the
conditional calculated from participants’ bets by the
formula P = bet/(bet+100), multiplied by 100 for
compatibility with the estimates. Figure 2 shows the
corresponding data from Experiment 2.

Experiments 1 and 2

Conditional Probability
Probability of Conditional
Prob. of Conditional from Bet

100
90

Method
Probability Estimate

80

Participants. Experiment 1 was a paper-pencil study
realizing the design in Table 1 within subjects.
Participants were 61 high school students (age range
17-21). Experiment 2 realized the same design between
subjects as an internet survey, to which 2255 people
contributed data. We accepted only respondents who
provided an email address for feedback that was not
entered before in order to reduce the likelihood of
multiple participations of the same person.

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

HH

HL

LH

LL

Condition

Materials and Procedure. Participants of Experiment
1 received a five-page booklet, with one page for a brief
introduction into the task and one for each condition.
Each condition introduced an imaginary set of 2000
cards, each card having either an A or a B printed on it
in either red or blue. Next the frequency information
was given about each combination of letter and color
(e.g., “There are 900 cards with a red A”). Participants
were then asked four sets of questions for each
condition. The first set of four questions asked about

Figure 1: Probability estimates (on a scale from 0 to
100) for the conditional probability P(q|p), the
probability of the conditional statement, and the
probability of the conditional calculated from
participants’ bet; Experiment 1. Conditions H = high, L
= low, first letter refers to the frequency of pq, second
to the ratio of pq to p¬q. Error bars represent one
standard error.

875
2

Discussion
The estimated probabilities of the conditional
statements were submitted to an ANOVA with
frequency of pq (2) and ratio (2) as factors. Both main
effects were significant in both experiments; for the
effect of ratio, F (1, 60) = 58.67 and F (1, 1998) =
576.4, for Experiment 1 and 2, respectively; for the
effect of frequency of pq, F (1, 60) = 21.7 and F (1,
1998) = 33.5. The interaction was not significant (F =
.02 and 3.7, respectively).
Equivalent ANOVAs on the conditional probabilities
of q, given p, yielded comparable results. There was a
main effect of ratio, F (1, 60) = 233.4 and F (1, 1998) =
1199.6, for Experiment 1 and 2, respectively. The main
effect of the frequency of pq also was significant, F (1,
60) = 8.44 and F (1, 1998) = 104.5. The interaction was
not significant.
Finally, the same analysis was conducted with the
probabilities calculated from bets, and again there was a
main effect of ratio, F (1, 60) = 17.9 and F (1, 1998) =
57.4. The effect of frequency was not significant in
Experiment 1 (F = 2.1), but it was in Experiment 2, F
(1, 1998) = 4.9.
Conditional Probability
Probability of Conditional
Probability of C. from Bet

100
90

Probability Estimate

80
70
60

Experiment 3
The results of the foregoing experiments could have
been biased toward a probabilistic reading of the
conditional statement because the task was embedded in
a context of probability estimations. Therefore,
Experiment 3 was designed as a further test of the two
theories in a context that avoided mention of
probabilities altogether.

Method

50

The third experiment was again a web-based survey,
using the same design as Experiment 2. The only
difference was that each participant answered a single
question: “Someone claims that the following general
rule about the playing cards holds: ’If there is an A on a
card, then it is red’. Do you think this is true or false?”
Responses were obtained from 2198 people.

40
30
20
10
0

The data provide compelling support for the view that a
majority of people interpret statements of the form “if p
then q” as expressing a high conditional probability of
q, given p. In addition, the smaller effect of frequency
of pq suggests that a minority of people judge the
probability of a conditional statement on the basis of a
mental model representation that contains only the case
pq as an explicit model. This minority could be
responsible for the difference in overall level between
the estimated probabilities of the conditional and the
P(q|p) estimates: For this group, the probability that the
conditional is true would be considerably smaller than
P(q|p) – except in condition HL, where the two
estimates were in fact very close in both experiments.
The low level of probabilities derived from bets are
probably due to conservative betting (hardly anyone bet
more than 100 DM), which can be explained by loss
aversion (Kahneman & Tversky, 1984).

HH

HL

LH

LL

Condition

Figure 2: Results from Experiment 2; see Figure 1 for
legend.

Results and Discussion

Figures 1 and 2 show that in all cases the ratio
variable was the dominant determinant of people’s
judgments: High ratios of pq to p¬q were associated
with high estimated conditional probabilities, with high
estimated probabilities of the conditional statement, and
with higher bets on its truth. In addition, higher
frequencies of pq slightly increased the estimates of the
probability of the conditional and the bets on its truth,
and, surprisingly, also the estimates of P(q|p).
In Experiment 2, 52% of participants gave an
estimate of the probability of the conditional that
exactly matched their estimate of P(q|p). Ten percent
gave estimates that matched exactly their estimates of
the unconditional probability of the pq case.

The percentage of participants regarding the conditional
statement as true in the four conditions was 21 for HH
(i.e., high frequency of pq, high ratio), 10 for HL, 20 for
LH, and 12 for LL. A log-linear analysis performed on
the frequencies of responses in each condition revealed
a significant effect of ratio, Chi² (2) = 43.0, but no
significant effect of frequency of pq, Chi² (2) = 1.90.
The results are in good agreement with the
probabilistic account of conditionals. People can be
assumed to accept a conditional statement as true when
the conditional probability of the consequent, given the
antecedent, surpasses a threshold close to one. The
precise location of the threshold can vary between
individuals, such that some, but not all of them are
willing to accept a conditional when P(q|p) is only .9,

876
3

and considerably less, but still a few are apparently
willing to accept it even when P(q|p) is only .5.

General Discussion

otherwise, the cognitive system would have no idea
what to do with a model such as:


The experiments summarized here (for a more
detailed report see Oberauer & Wilhelm, in press)
provide strong support for the contention that people
interpret conditional statements as asserting a high
conditional probability of the consequent, given the
antecedent (Edgington, 1995; Oaksford & Chater,
2001). In addition, they provide evidence for a minority
of people who base their judgments on a representation
akin to the initial mental model representation
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). Hardly anyone, it
seems, endorsed a representation corresponding to the
full set of three mental models making the conditional
true. This elaborate set of mental models corresponds to
a reading of the conditional as a material implication.
Thus, our results also demonstrate that people untrained
in formal logic don’t interpret conditionals as material
implications. In a recent series of experiments similar to
ours, Evans et al. (2003) obtained a pattern of results
strikingly matching those presented here.
These findings pose a serious problem for a truthfunctional account of the psychological meaning of
conditionals. The most prominent such account is the
theory of mental models (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). In its present form, the mental model theory of
the conditional can account well for the pattern of
responses demonstrated by a minority of participants,
who based their degree of belief in the conditional on
the frequency of the pq case. This would be expected if
they represent the conditional by a single explicit model
of pq. The mental model theory cannot account,
however, for the observation that most people’s degree
of belief in “if p then q” is determined by their
subjective conditional probability P(q|p).
In order to accommodate the two most prevalent
interpretations observed in our experiments, as well as
those from Evans et al. (2003), we propose a modified
version of the mental model account. Every statement
in ordinary discourse implicitly refers to a domain of
discourse, which defines what is relevant for the truth
or falsity of the statement. For example, “Peter is in
Paris or he is in Moscow” refers to a somewhat
extended present on the time dimension and to a
particular person named Peter whom both speaker and
hearer happen to know. A statement such as “there is a
triangle or there is a square” makes sense only when we
assume a spatially as well as temporally restricted
domain of discourse (e.g., what is drawn on a certain
blackboard right now). Mental models for such
statements can be interpreted only if the cognitive
system frames them into a domain of discourse, which
defines the scope of application of the model –



Conditionals can be interpreted as stating the truth of
the consequent in a domain of discourse in which the
antecedent is true. The conditional is true to the extent
that the consequent is true in the domain of discourse
defined by the antecedent. It follows that a reasonable
degree of belief in the conditional should depend on the
proportion of pq cases among all p cases, that is, among
all cases in the domain of discourse. This is exactly the
conditional probability of q, given p. Cases of ¬p are
irrelevant to the truth of the conditional, because they
are outside the domain of discourse. This is exactly
what most participants express in truth-table evaluation
or production tasks (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Tagart,
1969).
In order to represent the meaning of conditionals by
mental models, one has to make explicit the domain of
discourse specified by the antecedent in the
representation. To this end we introduce the concept of
a reference frame into the ontology of mental models.
A reference frame defines explicitly a region in a
mental space of possibilities relative to which a mental
model should be interpreted. Reference frames are most
obviously necessary in mental models of containment
relations
in
space,
and
the
computational
implementation of the theory developed by Bara,
Bucciarelli, and Lombardo (2001) uses them to
represent, for example, statements like “There is no
ashtray in Holmes’ house” (p. 855).
Bara et al. (2001), however, did not introduce
reference frames as a special kind of entity into their
“ontology” of mental model representations. We
propose that this should be done. A conditional can then
be interpreted as an instruction to construct a reference
frame defined by the antecedent and to construct a
model of q (or of the conjunction pq) within it. Thus,
reference frames take over the function of the square
brackets in the original model theory of conditionals.
Different from the square brackets, they are not
symbolic annotations linked to individual models, but
regions in mental space in which models are
constructed.
The explicit representation of the domain of discourse
by a reference frame can be done more or less
completely, and this variation, we suggest, accounts in
part for the individual differences in understanding of
conditional
statements.
Different
variants
of
representing “if p then q” by mental models are
sketched in Figure 3.
We believe that the initial mental model constructed
by logically untutored adults corresponds to one of the

877
4

first two variants (Figure 3a or 3b). With the model in
Figure 3a the person endorses a “conjunctive”
interpretation of the conditional. The domain of
discourse is left implicit, such that the model of pq is
interpreted relative to an unrestricted space of
possibilities. Thus, the degree of belief in the
conditional depends on the frequency of pq cases
relative to all other cases in the population.

pq

A

P
pq

B

P
pq

C

¬p

Q
D

¬q

P
pq
¬pq

¬p¬q

Figure 3: Four levels of elaboration of mental models of
a conditional “if p then q”. Ellipses designate explicitly
represented domains of discourse in the space of
possible situations. Capital letters define these domains
by marking what is true in situations belonging to them.
Small letters refer to mental models of situations.
Figure 3b illustrates a model where the domain of
discourse is made explicit as a reference frame. Within
this frame, again only pq is represented by a model.
This follows from the “principle of truth”, which is one
of the basic assumptions in mental model theory:

Models represent only true possibilities, not false ones
(Johnson-Laird, 2001; Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi,
Girotto, & Legrenzi, 2000). Therefore, p¬q is not
represented. Since the domain of discourse defined by p
is represented explicitly, it is possible to assign
frequencies or probabilities to p as well as to pq in the
way proposed by Johnson-Laird et al. (1999). Thus,
with this representation the degree of belief in the
conditional should equal the proportion of pq cases
within the set of p cases, and hence the conditional
probability P(q|p). The frequency of pq relative to the
total population (including ¬p cases) should not be
regarded as relevant.
Figures 3c and 3d depict more elaborate
representations, which reasoners can form to meet
special requirements. When the negation of p is brought
to the person’s attention – for example through explicit
mention in discourse or by perception – it will be
represented explicitly outside the domain of discourse
defined by the conditional. This will be the case, for
instance, in a denial of the antecedent inference task
where the minor premise is “p is not the case”. More
generally, this is the kind of representation employed
for counterfactual conditionals: The true situation is ¬p,
and the conditional invites one to consider a
counterfactual situation p. A negation of q will also be
represented explicitly outside the reference frame
defined by p, because the conditional disallows ¬q
cases within the reference frame. A natural
consequence of this arrangement is to infer ¬p from ¬q
(modus tollens) and the other way round (denial of the
antecedent). This pattern of inferences corresponds to a
“biconditional” interpretation of conditional statements.
Figure 3d shows a more sophisticated way of
elaborating the conditional when presented with
negated cases. Here the set of q cases is represented as a
second reference frame in which the p frame is
embedded. This representation rests on the flexible
engagement of p and of q as potential domains of
discourse and thereby effectively coordinates the
conditionals “if p then q” and “if q then either p or ¬p).
This is a representation that supports conditional
reasoning in accordance with propositional calculus:
acceptance of modus ponens and modus tollens, and
rejection of denial of the antecedent and acceptance of
the consequent.
The four versions of mental models to represent
conditionals can be mapped onto the three successive
stages in development of mental models proposed by
Barrouillet and Lecas (1999, Barrouillet, Grosset, &
Lecas, 2000). In the first stage children endorse a
conjunctive interpretation of the conditional, based on a
single model of pq. They accept inferences with
positive but not negative minor premises (i.e., modus
ponens and acceptance of the consequent). This
corresponds to the representation in Figure 3a. In the

878
5

second stage children construct an additional model
¬p¬q. This leads them to interpret conditionals as
biconditionals. They accept all inferences involving one
of the four possible minor premises (p, ¬p, q, ¬q) as
valid. This corresponds to an initial model like Figure
3b, which is elaborated as in 3c in the face of negative
minor premises. The third stage of Barrouillet and
Lecas (1999) is reached when people build all three
models required to represent the conditional as material
implication.
The evidence presented in this article suggests that
people hardly ever represent the conditional as material
implication. Instead, we believe, people on the second
and third stage identified by Barrouillet and Lecas
(1999) still represent the core meaning of a conditional
as in 3b, but they elaborate it as in 3c or 3d when
necessary, that is, when a negation of the antecedent or
of the consequent is given. An elaboration into a
representation as in 3c supports all four standard
inferences, equivalent to a biconditional reading of the
conditional premise, whereas the more complex
representation depicted in 3d supports only modus
ponens and modus tollens, corresponding to a use of the
conditional as material implication. We regard these
elaborations not as part of the core meaning of “if”, but
as context-dependent modulations of it, of which there
are probably many more than the two discussed here
(c.f. Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002).
The modified mental model theory of conditionals
specifies four levels of elaboration for a representation
of conditionals. Which level is actually used depends on
the working memory capacity of the person (higher
levels requiring more capacity) and the requirements of
the task (assessing the truth or probability of a
conditional requires only a representation of level B,
whereas reasoning with negated premises requires
higher levels). Through the introduction of reference
frames that explicitly designate a relevant domain of
discourse, the theory can explain why most adults
interpret conditionals in terms of conditional
probabilities. At the same time, it preserves the
explanatory power of the model theory for conditional
reasoning, because the model (or models) built within
the reference frame (or frames) are the same as in the
original model theory.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, grant FOR 375 1-1).
We thank Karina Schimanke for help with collecting
the data, as well as Robin Hörnig and Andrea
Weidenfeld for valuable comments on an earlier version
of the text.

References
Bara, B. G., Bucciarelli, M., & Lombardo, V. (2001).
Model theory of deduction: a unified
computational approach. Cognitive Science,
25, 839-901.
Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N., & Lecas, J. F. (2000).
Conditional reasoning by mental models:
chronometric and developmental evidence.
Cognition, 75, 237-266.
Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J. F. (1999). Mental models in
conditional reasoning and working memory.
Thinking and Reasoning, 5, 289-302.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104, 235329.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (1993). The mental model theory of
conditional reasoning: critical appraisal and
revision. Cognition, 48, 1-20.
Evans, J. S. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. E. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probabilities.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 29, 321-335.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Mental models and
deduction. Trends in Cognitive Science, 5,
434-442.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).
Deduction. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: a theory of meaning, pragmatics,
and inference. Psychological Review, 109,
646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., &
Legrenzi, M. S. (2000). Illusions in reasoning
about consistency. Science, 288, 531-532.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V.,
Legrenzi, M. S., & Caverni, J. P. (1999).
Naive probability: A mental model theory of
extensional reasoning. Psychological Review,
106, 62-88.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Tagart, J. (1969). How
implication is understood. American Journal
of Psychology, 82, 367-373.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values,
and frames. American Psychologist, 39, 341350.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 5, 349-357.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (in press). The meaning(s)
of conditionals - Conditional probabilities,
mental models, and personal utilities. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition.

879
6

