UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Use of Mass Nouns to Quantify Over Individuals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98p530pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Barner, David
Snedeker, Jesse

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Use of Mass Nouns to Quantify Over Individuals
David Barner (barner@fas.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, William James Hall, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, William James Hall, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract
Theories of the mass-count distinction in linguistics,
philosophy and psychology commonly argue that count nouns
are distinguished from mass nouns by their reference to, and
quantification over, individuals (e.g., Bloom, 1999;
Wisniewski, Imai & Casey, 1996). We present experimental
evidence that both children and adults interpret some mass
nouns as quantifying over individuals, and suggest a model of
the mass-count distinction that includes these cases.

Introduction
In many languages, a syntactic distinction exists between
count nouns and mass nouns. For example, in English, only
count nouns can appear as both singular and plural. Also,
count nouns can be modified by the indefinite article, terms
like many or few, or by cardinal or quasi-cardinal numerals
(e.g., two, three, several), while only mass nouns can be
modified by much or less (see Gillon, 1992 for details).
The use of particular terms as mass or count is highly
flexible (see Bunt, 1985; Gillon, 1992; Jackendoff, 1991;
Quine, 1960; Ware, 1979). Common examples include
hamburger, difference, apple, carrot, meaning, water,
orange, banana, chicken, deer, fish, duck, steak, coffee, tea,
hope, etc. (see Barner & Bale, 2002; Gillon, 1992; Quine,
1960; Ware, 1979). A number of devices contribute to this
flexible use. For example, most words that are typically
used as mass nouns can also appear as count nouns when
referring to types of things (e.g., many French cheeses use
raw milk). Also, partitive constructions (e.g., an inch of
cigarette; a piece of cake), and distinctions between things
and the food they yield (e.g., my pet duck; my duck a
l’orange) often yield mass-count flexibility.
In general, the use of a term in one category or the other
has predictable consequences for interpretation. For
example, the use of a term as a singular count noun entails
that the thing being referred to is an individual of some type
or another (Bloom, 1999; Bunt, 1985; Gillon, 1992; Gordon,
1985; Jackendoff, 1991; Link, 1983, 1998). Thus, according
to Bunt (1985), count nouns, but not mass nouns, provide a
"default dimension and unit of measurement, that of
counting individuals.” (p. 137). Discrete physical objects
(e.g., cats), portions of substances (e.g., two coffees), actions
(e.g., several jumps), and abstract entities (e.g., hopes and

115

dreams), are all individuals that can be thought of as being
discrete and bounded, and which are subject to being
counted. This entailment persists even in cases where
particular lexico-semantic knowledge is absent. Talk of
three blickets, while not terribly informative, does
nevertheless imply that three individual things, whatever
they may be, are being referred to. Such examples suggest
that speakers might “conceptualize the referents of count
nouns as distinct, countable, individuated things and those
of mass nouns as non-distinct, uncountable, unindividuated
things” (Wisniewski, Imai, & Casey, 1996, p. 271).
This semantic distinction has been argued to play a
critical role in the child’s initial construction of the syntactic
categories mass and count (e.g., Gordon, 1985; Bloom,
1999). For example, Bloom argues that young children
determine the syntactic categories of these words using the
rules in (1) (from Bloom, 1999).
(1) individual Æ count noun
non-individual Æ mass noun
Thus, upon hearing a word used to refer to an individual
thing (e.g., a dog), the child could infer that it was a count
noun. Similarly, reference to a non-individual (e.g., some
milk) could be taken as evidence of a mass noun. Using
such rules, Bloom (1999) notes that children could
capitalize on their ability to represent and enumerate not
only physical objects (e.g., Shipley & Shepperson, 1990),
but also such abstract entities like actions (Wynn, 1996) and
sounds (Starkey, Spelke, & Gelman, 1990), and collections
(see Bloom & Keleman, 1995; Wynn, Bloom, & Chiang,
2002). Later in development these same syntax-semantics
correspondences could allow the child to use linguistic
context to close in on the meanings of novel nouns (as in
Brown, 1957).
While a host of linguists, philosophers, and psychologists
have embraced reference to individuals as the key
distinction between count nouns and mass nouns (e.g.,
Bloom, 1999; Bunt, 1985; Link, 1998; Wisniewski et al.,
1996), others have objected that various exceptions exist.
For example, Gillon (1992) notes that many mass nouns in
English have individuals in their extensions, including
furniture, hair, spaghetti, silverware, jewelry, clothing,
traffic, infantry, and footwear (see also Chierchia, 1998;

Quine, 1960), and that counting such things poses no
particular problem. At least extensionally, these ObjectMass terms do not appear to differ from co-referential count
nouns such as furnishings, hairs, noodles, and utensils. In
each case, it seems that the mass noun in question has
individuals in its extension, and refers to them as such.
In response to such objections, several researchers have
suggested that, although words like furniture h a v e
individuals in their extensions, they do not in fact quantify
over them as such, but refer to them in a non-individuated
fashion (Bloom, 1990; Wierzbicka, 1988; Wiesniewski et al,
1996). Thus, Wiesniewski et al. (1996) note that: “on a
particular occasion, we may conceptualize a swan, several
ducks, and a heron on a lake as an unindividuated group
called waterfowl, and not think of them individually as
birds.” (p. 295) By this view, objects such as furniture can
be construed in multiple fashions, sometimes as individuals,
and sometimes as an unindividuated mass, or group.
Construal of things, and not their ontological classification,
determines whether words are classified as mass or count.
Thus, while mass nouns may not care about what they have
in their extensions, they may care about how such
extensions are construed. Use of mass nouns to name
individual things may cause these things to be construed as
non-individuals. Likewise, words used to name individual
things in the world might be interpreted as mass nouns when
the things are construed as non-individuals.
While this solution preserves the semantic purity of the
categories mass and count, it raises the question of how the
child learns to construe these objects in the same manner as
the adults around her. What could enable the Englishspeaking child to see the furniture as an unindividuated
mass while the young French speaker comes to view les
meubles as distinct individuals? Given the subtlety of the
distinction, we might expect that children would frequently
misclassify Object-Mass terms as count nouns. But few
such errors are made (Gordon, 1985). By the time these
words appear, children are able to use syntactic cues to
determine the grammatical category of the word and thus
could presumably correct any semantic misconstruals (see
Gordon, 1985; and Soja, 1992 for evidence of early
sensitivity to mass-count syntax). 1
Wisniewski and colleagues (1996) explored the
hypothesis that we construe referents of mass and count
superordinates differently. Adult subjects judged that
members of mass superordinates (e.g., tables, chairs for
furniture) co-occur more often than members of count

1

This early sensitivity to syntactic cues is not problematic for
Bloom’s particular version of semantic bootstrapping (1999). If
semantic and syntactic categories are truly equivalent, rather than
merely correlated, then the linking rules are bidirectional and
syntactic and semantic evidence should be equally diagnostic. On
this account we might expect that children would be able to use
determiners to classify (and construe) novel nouns as soon as they
identify their selectional restrictions.

116

superordinate terms (e.g., lions, tigers for the superordinate
animal), and that people are more likely to interact with
multiple mass superordinate referents at one time. In a
separate experiment subjects made speeded category
membership judgments of basic-level concepts belonging to
either mass or count superordinate categories. When asked
to judge whether a single noun belonged to a superordinate
category, subjects were faster for count superordinates than
for mass nouns (e.g., ferns are plants vs. chairs are
furniture). But when test sentences involved more than one
subordinate term (e.g., a pig and a cow are livestock vs. a
lion and a tiger are animals) performance was faster for
mass superordinates. Based on such results, Wisniewski et
al. argued that mass superordinates encode “knowledge
about an unindividuated group of objects united by spatial,
temporal, and functional contiguity.” (p. 292)
However, there is equally strong evidence suggesting that
Object-Mass terms quantify over individuals. For example,
Gillon, Kehayia and Taylor (1999) performed a lexical
decision task comparing mass nouns like furniture to those
like water and m u d. Subjects were shown a determiner
prime, such as these, much, or many and then asked to
decide if the following string was a word. Interestingly,
while subjects’ responses were faster for words like water
when the preceding determiner was grammatically
congruent (e.g., some, much) and slower when it was
incongruent (e.g., many, three), responses for words like
furniture showed the opposite pattern. Gillon and colleagues
argue that Object-Mass nouns were primed by determiners
for plural count nouns because these terms, like plural count
nouns, denote quantities of individual things.
While each of these studies is suggestive, they fail to
resolve the question of whether Object-Mass nouns quantify
over individuals. Wisniewski’s judgment tasks do not
directly test the quantificational properties of
superordinates. Reference to multiple objects does not
preclude quantification over individuals, as demonstrated by
plural count nouns (e.g., chairs) nor does spatio-temporal
co-occurrence (e.g., Siamese twins and ducklings). The
relation between the priming results and quantification is
equally murky. Object-Mass nouns could be primed by
plural determiners because they quantify over individuals.
However priming could also reflect their status as
superordinates, their relationship with subordinate plural
count nouns, or the nature of their extensions rather than
their construals.
The present study examined how adults and young
children interpret the quantification of mass nouns like
furniture. Perhaps the most transparent measure of
grammatical quantification is quantity judgment behavior.
For example, we can verify that the count noun c a t
quantifies over whole, individual creatures by asking
whether one overfed 15 pound cat is more cats than three 2pound cats. The fact that three cats, whatever their size, are
always more cats than one cat, indicates that the term cat
quantifies over individuals when used as a count noun.

Likewise, the fact that one giant 15 pound chunk of fudge is
more fudge than three 2 pound chunks of fudge indicates
that the term fudge does not quantify over individuals.
Applying this logic, the present study assessed the
quantification judgments of adults and children for common
Count nouns referring to objects, for Substance-Mass nouns
referring to substances, and for Object-Mass nouns (e.g.,
furniture), to determine whether some mass nouns quantify
over individuals. The first experiment examined adults’
quantity judgments for the three types of noun by asking
subjects to indicate which of two characters had more stuff
(e.g., furniture, cups, mustard). Of interest was whether
judgments regarding Object-Mass nouns were based on
number of individuals, like Count nouns, or on continuous
extent, like Substance-Mass nouns.

Experiment 1a
If all mass nouns represent unindividuated groups of
objects, subjects should not quantify over individuals when
interpreting Object-Mass nouns, but should always judge
one large object to be more than the three small ones, when
the large object occupies more space than the three small
objects combined. In contrast, if Object-Mass words do
quantify over individuals, subjects should base
quantification judgments on number. In either case, it was
expected that subjects would quantify over continuous
extent when tested on Substance-Mass nouns such as
ketchup and toothpaste, and over individuals when given
Count nouns such as plate and candle.

Method
Subjects
The subjects were 16 Harvard University undergraduates,
including 8 males and 8 females, who participated as part of
a course requirement.
Procedures and Stimuli
Subjects were presented with two characters and were asked
to point at or choose which of the two had more of some
substance or thing on each trial. Three categories of word
were used: (1) Count nouns that refer to physical objects
(e.g., shoe, plate, cup, candles); (2) Substance-Mass nouns
that refer to substances (e.g., mustard, ketchup, peanut
butter, toothpaste); and (3) Object-Mass nouns that refer to
discrete physical objects (e.g., furniture, jewelry, silverware,
mail). For trials involving discrete physical objects (i.e.,
Count and Object-Mass noun trials) one character was
shown with one large object, while the other was shown
with three smaller objects of the same kind. In each case, the
large object exceeded the volume and had greater overall
surface contour than the three small objects. For example,
on furniture trials, one character had one large chair that
comprised more overall stuff than the other character’s three
tiny chairs combined. For trials involving substances (i.e.

117

Substance-Mass trials), one character was shown with a
large portion of the substance (e.g., ketchup), while the
other character had three smaller portions that amounted to
less overall stuff.
The complete list of test words are shown in Table 1.
Extra words are provided in the Object-Mass category, in
anticipation of Experiment 1b, which tests the judgments of
young children. For adults, the Object-Mass words were
selected at random from the list. This difference in method
motivated our separate analysis of data for children and
adults.
All test questions had the same general format: “who has
more x, Cowboy Brown or Captain Blue?”, where the
variable “x” was replaced by words from one of the three
categories of test words. Each subject was provided two
familiarization trials, where continuous variables such as
volume were confounded with number. For example, in one
trial one character was shown with three napkins and the
other with one of the same size, and the subject was asked to
point at the character with more napkins. In the other trial,
one character was shown with one large piece of crumpled
paper, and the other with tiny piece of paper.
Table 1. Count, Substance-Mass and Object-Mass nouns
used in test stimuli sentences
Count
Shoe
Plate
Cup
Candle

Substance-Mass
Ketchup
Mustard
Peanut Butter
Toothpaste

Object-Mass
Clothing
Furniture
Fruit
Silverware

Mail
Jewelry
Company

Side of presentation was counterbalanced to ensure that
the set of three objects/portions appeared equally often on
each side and with each character for each type of noun.
Subjects were encouraged respond by pointing at and
naming the chosen character.

Results and Discussion
For the analysis of quantity judgments, the dependent
measure was the number of judgments based on number of
individual objects or portions (versus the number of
responses based on a continuous extent).
A 2¥ 2 ¥ 3 ANOVA was performed with gender (male vs.
female) and order of presentation (order 1 vs. order 2) as
between factors, and with word category (count vs.
substance mass vs. object mass) as a within-subjects factor.
Figure 1 shows the mean percentage of judgments based on
number of individuals, for each category of word. There was
a significant effect of word category, with individual
judgments more frequent in the Count and Object-Mass
conditions than in the substance mass condition (100% and
97% vs. 0%; F (2, 24) = 1215.02, p < .000). There were no
effects of gender or order of presentation.

greater Boston area, aged 4;0 to 4;6. This age group was
selected based on an informal analysis of the entire English
language CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000), which
revealed the very low frequency of target words in child
speech before 4 years of age. A total of 4 girls and 2 boys
were tested.

80
60
40
20
0
Count

SubstanceMass

ObjectMass

Figure 1. Adults’ quantity judgments, as a percentage of
judgments based on number of individuals
Adult quantity judgments were based almost exclusively
on number of individuals for both the Count and ObjectMass conditions, but never for the Substance-Mass
condition. Thus, adult subjects interpreted the question
“who has more x” as pertaining to the number of individuals
only for the count and Object-mass conditions. This pattern
of judgments fails to support the hypothesis that ObjectMass nouns like furniture cause adults to construe referents
as unindividuated.

Experiment 1b
The second experiment employed the same method, to
examine the quantification judgments of four-year-old
children. Experiment 1a clearly demonstrates that adults
quantify Object-Mass nouns over individuals, undermining
the semantic characterization of the mass-count distinction.
But many authors have argued that semantic-syntactic
correspondences are particularly potent early in
development (Pinker, 1984; Macnamara, 1982). Children
may begin with semantically homogenous syntactic
categories, which become more diverse as the child
accommodates this scheme to wider range of concepts or
encounters clear counterexamples.
If young children rigidly equate count nouns with
individuals and mass nouns with non-individuals, then their
performance on this task should be radically different from
that of the adults. Any mass noun, regardless of its
extension, cannot quantify over individuals. Since children
this age correctly use mass noun syntax with Object-Mass
terms (Gordon, 1985), we would expect them to interpret
even the Object-Mass as quantifying over continuous extent.
These intuitions might change later in life, with the
development of numerical and world knowledge.

Method
Subjects
The subjects were 6 English-speaking children from the

118

Procedures and Stimuli
The procedures and stimuli used were identical to those
used in Experiment 1a, except that Object-Mass words were
selected on the basis of a pretest to ensure that children
knew the extension of the term. For each word, children
were shown a page with a target picture and three distractors
and asked to point to the picture that matched the word
(“Can you find the luggage?”). Children were tested on the
first four words they correctly responded to.

Results and Discussion
Analyses for Experiment 1b were identical to those used for
Experiment 1a. Figure 2 shows the mean percentage of
judgments that were based on number of individuals (rather
than continuous extent) for each category of word.

100
% Individuals

% Individuals

100

80
60
40
20
0
Count

SubstanceMass

ObjectMass

Figure 2. Children’s quantity judgments, as a percentage of
judgments based on number of individuals
These data suggest that, as with adults, children’s quantity
judgments are based almost exclusively on number of
individuals for both the Count and Object-Mass conditions
but not for the Substance-Mass condition. Although only six
children had been tested at this time, there was a significant
effect of word category, with judgments based on number
being more frequent in the Count and Object-Mass
conditions than in the Substance-Mass condition (88% and
88% vs. 0%; F (2, 4) = 31.148, p < .004). There were no
effects of gender or order of presentation.

General Discussion
The results of this study demonstrate that adult and child
quantity judgments are based almost exclusively on number
of individuals for Object-Mass nouns, but not for the
Substance-Mass nouns. Thus, subjects interpreted the

question “who has more x” as pertaining to the number of
individuals both the Count and Object-Mass conditions.
This pattern of judgments suggests that children and adults
interpret certain mass nouns as quantifying over individuals,
and fails to support the hypothesis that Object-Mass nouns
like furniture cause adults to construe referents as
unindividuated. If the quantificational content of ObjectMass terms were truly unindividuated, subjects should not
have accessed and employed information regarding number
to perform judgments of quantity.
This result raises the question of whether a systematic
account of mass-count semantics is possible. To date, most
proposals of the mass-count distinction, like Bloom (1999)
and Wiesniewski et al. (1996), have proposed a uniform
representation for the semantics of mass nouns. While some
researchers have proposed, like Wisniewski et al., that no
mass nouns quantify over individuals, others have taken the
opposite view, claiming that cases such as furniture are
evidence that all mass nouns must as some level refer to
individuals (see Chierchia, 1998).
However, a third possibility exists, if we accept that
there’s a distinction between quantificational entailments of
syntax, and entailments of particular lexical items. For
example, based on the common observation that use of
terms as count nouns creates an entailment of reference to
individuals, we might propose that this entailment is
generated by the syntax itself, and is unrelated to the
semantics of particular lexical items. Thus, for most lexical
items, the entailment of reference to individuals is created
by use in a count noun context. Use in a mass context
creates no entailment. That is, mass syntax is underspecified
with regards to reference to individuals (Gillon, 1992). For
other items, such as furniture or jewelry, features regarding
individuation are stored in the lexicon, and combine with
underspecified mass syntax to create entailments about
reference to individuals.
An example of how this might work is provided by
Jackendoff (1991). In his discussion of the mass-count
distinction, Jackendoff suggests that all nouns have lexicoconceptual feature relating to internal structure (+/- i) and
boundedness (+/- b). Here, the feature +i “entails a medium
comprising a multiplicity of distinguishable individuals” (p.
19) and characterizes the semantics of bare plurals and
Object-Mass nouns like f u r n i t u r e. The feature +b
corresponds to the boundaries entailed by an expression, and
applies in cases where number is explicitly specified (e.g., a
cat; three dogs), but not for bare plurals or Object-Mass
nouns, where number is left open. According to Jackendoff,
linguistic expressions come about their features in two
ways. First, all nouns are specified lexically for either +/-b
and +/-i. Second, features can be added by functions, or
rules, that correspond to inflectional morphology such as the
plural morpheme –s, or to larger phrases, involving partitive
constructions like “a piece of bread”. Thus, for example, the
representation of a dog would be [+b, -i DOG], while dogs
would be [-b, +i (+b, -i DOG)], where the embedded set of

119

features corresponds to a single individual, and the second
set to an unspecified multiplicity of individuals. While such
specifications would need to be added by rules for words
like dog (i.e. to get a dog and some dogs), words like
f u r n i t u r e could come lexically equipped with the
specification (-b, +i), as could terms like rice (see
Jackendoff, 1991).
Given the correct description of where features such as
+/-b and +/-i originate, we believe that such a model can
account for mass-count semantics and distribution in
language use. While Jackendoff notes the featural
specifications for singular count nouns, he does not indicate
what features a bare root might have. We would like to
suggest that the functions proposed by Jackendoff remove
the need for lexical specification of features related to the
mass-count distinction, and that almost all such features
may be introduced in the syntax (see Barner & Bale, 2002,
for discussion of lexical underspecification and adding of
features in the syntax). For example, since count syntax
uniformly creates an entailment that reference is to
individuals, we propose that these features are added in the
syntax with corresponding morphology such as the
indefinite article “a”, or the plural morpheme “-s”. Where
feature combinations like [+b, -i] are clearly not contributed
by the syntax (e.g., as is the case for mass noun
constructions), yet are evidenced by quantification
judgments, the features must be thought of as being marked
lexically.
Using this type of scheme, several interesting predictions
can be made. First, the fact that both plural count nouns and
Object-Mass nouns cannot be pluralized, while SubstanceMass nouns often can be (e.g., two waters; two coffees),
suggests that the featural combination of [-b, +i] blocks
pluralization in the syntax (as in Jackendoff, 1991).2 Also,
the combination of [-b, +i] appears to block reference to
substances. Although talk of “dog all over the road”
conjures images of a horrible accident, talk of chairs or
furniture all over the road do not. Furniture and other
Object-Mass nouns, it seems, are unlike many other mass
nouns in not allowing reference to substances. Thus, while
we can use mass-count syntax to shift construals for terms
like apple (e.g., allowing either reference to the individual
or the stuff between one’s teeth), terms like furniture can
never be used to refer to substances, and seem to allow only
reference to individuals. Similarly, while many mass nouns
can be converted to count nouns to refer to portions (e.g.,
two coffees, two soups), portions of furniture, jewelry,
infantry and traffic cannot be named using count nouns.
Their lexical features appear to be fixed, allowing reference
to individual portions only through phrases (e.g., a piece of
2

Pluralization to refer to types seems possible (e.g., “Acme
Furniture: Supplying fine furnitures for over 35 years”). However,
this does not involve pluralization of terms with the features [-b,
+i], but must affect a singular count noun [+b, -i], which must be
accessible to all type interpretations of NPs.

furniture).
This view of mass-count semantics is consistent with one
version of the semantic bootstrapping hypothesis, where
bootstrapping is seen as a process of using semantics to
discover syntactic constructions, rather than specifications
of individual lexical items (see Barner & Bale, 2002). By
using correspondences between syntax and semantics,
children could find count and mass contexts, and then learn
the phonological values associated with each context (e.g.,
for the plural morpheme, or for quantifiers such as each and
all, etc.). Having acquired the fundamental syntactic
distinction between mass and count, the child could then use
morphological evidence to isolate Object-Mass words and
mark them lexically. For example, the use of words with
semantic features resembling a plural count noun yet
lacking a plural morpheme (e.g. furniture), could signal the
child to mark the features lexically, since attributing them to
syntactic features would not be an option (due to the lack of
count noun morphology to which features could be
mapped). In this way, both distributional and semantic
features of words could be used to identify syntactic
constructions and lexically mark exceptional items as
Object-Mass nouns.
According to this study of mass-count semantics, some
mass terms, like water, do not quantify over individuals, and
others, like furniture do. Both adults and children in our
study used Object-Mass nouns like furniture, jewelry and
clothing to quantify over individuals. These results suggest
that quantificational entailments are generated not only by
the syntax, but also in some cases by individual lexical
items. This, in turn, supports a model of grammar in which
features relating to mass-count semantics are added both in
the syntax and in the lexicon, and a model of acquisition
where syntax-semantics correspondences interact with
distributional analysis to specify mass-count semantics.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sylvia Yuan for her help organizing
experiments, and Alan Bale, Susan Carey, Ray Jackendoff,
Peggy Li, and Laura Wagner for comments used in their
development.

References
Barner, D., & Bale, A. (2002). No nouns, no verbs:
Psycholinguistic arguments in favor of lexical
underspecification. Lingua, 112, 771-791.
Bloom, P. (1990). Syntactic distinctions in child language.
Journal of Child Language, 17, 343-355.
Bloom, P. (1999). The role of semantics in solving the
bootstrapping problem. In: Jackendoff, R., Bloom, P.,
Wynn, K. (Eds.), Language, Logic, and Concepts: Essays
in Memory of John Macnamara. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bloom, P., & Keleman, D. (1995). Syntactic cues in the

120

acquisition of collective nouns. Cognition, 56, 1–30.
Brown, R. (1957). Linguistic determinism and the part of
speech. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 55,
1-5.
Bunt, H.C. (1985). Mass terms and model-theoretic
semantics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chierchia, G. (1998). Plurality of mass nouns and the notion
of "semantic parameter". Events and Grammar, 70, 53103.
Gillon, B. (1992) Towards a common semantics for English
count and mass nouns. Linguistics & Philosophy. 15,
597-639.
Gillon, B., Kehayia, E., & Taler, V. (1999). The mass/count
distinction: Evidence from on-line psycholinguistic
performance. Brain & Language. 68, 205-211.
Gordon, P. (1985). Evaluating the semantic categories
hypothesis: the case of the mass/count distinction.
Cognition, 20, 209–242.
Jackendoff, R. (1991). Parts and boundaries. Cognition, 41,
9–45.
Link, G. (1983). The logical analysis of plurals and mass
terms: A lattice-theoretical approach. In: Bauerle, R.,
Schwarze, C., Stechow, A. (Eds.), Meaning, use, and
interpretation of language. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Link, G. (1998). Algebraic semantics in language and
philosophy. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of
Language and Information.
Macnamara, J. (1982). Names for Things: A Study of Human
Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language
development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Soja, N.N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of nouns:
the relationship between perception and syntax. Cognitive
Development, 7, 29-45.
Shippley, E., & Shepperson, B. (1990). The what-if of
counting. Cognition, 36, 285-289.
Starkey, P., Spelke, E.S., Gelman, R. (1990). Numerical
abstraction by human infants. Cognition, 36, 97–128.
Ware, R. (1979). Some bits and pieces. In: Pelletier, F.J.
(Ed.), Mass terms: Some philosophical problems. D.
Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland.
Wierzbicka, A. (1988). The semantics of grammar.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wisniewski, E.J., Imai, M., & Casey, L. (1996). On the
equivalence of superordinate concepts. Cognition, 60,
269-298.
Wynn, K. (1996). Infants' individuation and enumeration of
actions. Psychological Science, 7,164-169.
Wynn, K., Bloom, P., & Chiang (2002). Enumeration of
collective entities by 5-month-old infants. Cognition, 83,
B55-B62

