UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of emotion on conditional reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h8049th

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Blanchette, Isabelle
Richards, Anne

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of emotion on conditional reasoning
Isabelle Blanchette (isabelle.blanchette@man.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Manchester
Oxford Road, Manchester, UK, M13 9PL

Anne Richards (a.richards@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Birkbeck College, University of London
Malet Street, London, UK, WC1E 7HX
Abstract
In two experiments, we explore whether logical
reasoning abilities are affected by emotion. In both
experiments, we compared participants’ performance on
a conditional reasoning task when the content was
emotional and neutral. In Experiment 1, conditional
statements included either emotional words or neutral
words. In Experiment 2, we manipulated the emotional
connotation of initially neutral words using a
conditioning procedure. Words were repeatedly paired
with either positive, negative, or neutral images. These
words were then used in a conditional reasoning task. In
both experiments, participants’ performance was more
likely to deviate from prescriptions of normative logic
when the content was emotional compared to when it
was neutral.

The idea that emotions affect people’s reasoning is
widespread. There is a commonsensical notion that
emotions have the power to disrupt logical thinking.
This contrasts with current views in the scientific study
of emotion that emphasize the functional aspects of
emotions. There is however, a paucity of empirical
work on the effect of emotion on reasoning. In two
experiments reported here, we investigated whether
conditional reasoning is affected by emotion.
Contemporary approaches to the study of affect in
psychology and the neurosciences have consistently
emphasized the adaptive value of emotion. In fact, a
functionalist account of emotions is often regarded as
the cornerstone of current investigations of affective
phenomena (Cornelius, 1996; Ekman & Davidson,
1994; Keltner & Gross, 1999). The functionalist
approach is based on the notion that emotions serve
important functions and that they provide benefits to
individuals and groups who experience them.
Interactions between cognition and emotion have been
studied within this framework.
Different types of empirical evidence support this
general assumption. One type of evidence concerns the
relation between reasoning abilities and the experience
of affective states. Neurological research focusing on
patients with specific brain lesions has shown that
people who are unable to experience emotions are also

151

seriously impaired on decision-making tasks,
particularly when thinking about complex interpersonal
situations (Damasio, 1994; Damasio, Grabowski, Frank,
Galaburda, & Damasio, 1996; Dimitrov, Phipps, Zahn,
& Grafman, 1999). This suggests that impairments in
emotion actually produce deficits in normatively correct
thinking. Thus, emotions may promote sound thinking
rather than hinder it. This functionalist perspective is a
radical departure from earlier philosophical views.
Studies on non-clinical samples also support the
view that emotions are adaptive. A number of cognitive
biases associated with different emotional states have
been identified by recent research (e.g., Forgas, 2000).
For instance, anxiety, related to the basic fear system,
produces systematic biases in attention towards threatrelated materials (Fox, Russo, Bowles, & Dutton, 2001;
Mathews, Mackintosh, & Fulchner, 1997; Mogg,
Bradley & Hallowell, 1994; Richards & French, 1992;
Yiend & Mathews, 2001). Anxiety appears to modulate
the cognitive system by channelling resources towards
threat-related, highly relevant, materials. Thus, in most
circumstances, and in moderation, cognitive biases
associated with emotions are generally thought to be
functional.
While beneficial effects of emotion on cognition
have recently been emphasized, potential impairments
related to emotion remain relatively unexplored.
Research in psychopathology does document that
certain clinical disorders involving important emotional
dysfunctions may be associated with impairments in
reasoning (e.g., Pelissier & O’Connor, 2002). However,
it is not clear whether these impairments are directly
caused by the emotional dysfunctions or whether both
the emotional and reasoning dysfunctions are
manifestations of a general underlying aetiology.
There are two specific issues concerning the effect of
emotion on reasoning, and more specifically on logical
reasoning performance. One possibility is that the
affective state a person is experiencing affects their
reasoning. Another is the possibility that the
emotionality of the materials affects reasoning
performance. In other words, do people reason
differently when they reason about emotional and nonemotional materials? While there is some research on

the former issue (e.g., Bodenhausen, Kramer, & Susser,
1994; Oaksford, Morris, Grainger, & Williams, 1996)
the latter remains largely unexplored. It is the issue we
investigate in the experiments reported in this paper.
We set out to explore this issue by using a
conditional reasoning task. Conditional reasoning is a
form of deductive reasoning that involves statements of
the form If p, then q (e.g.: If you ride a bicycle, then
you burn calories). This form of reasoning is both the
subject of rigorous prescription based on normative
logic and frequently used in everyday thinking. Based
on such statements, there are two inferences that are
logically valid: Modus Ponens (MP): p, therefore q
(e.g.: Chris rides a bicycle, therefore he burns calories),
and Modus Tollens (MT): not q, therefore not p (e.g.:
Chris does not burn calories, therefore he does not ride
a bicycle). There are however two inferences that are
not logically valid but that people often draw: Denying
the antecedent (DA): not p, therefore not q (e.g.: Chris
does not ride a bicycle, therefore he does not burn
calories), and Affirming the consequent (AC): q,
therefore p (e.g.: Chris burns calories, therefore he rides
a bicycle). These inferences are logically incorrect
because the rule does not specify what happens in the
absence of p. The presence of q could be brought about
by things other than p (i.e., Chris could not be riding a
bicycle but still be burning calories through other
means). People’ s performance on these tasks often
departs from normative expectations (Evans & Over,
1996; Shafir & LeBoeuf, 2002). The semantic content
of the rules often has an important influence on
people’ s behaviour, contrary to what normative logic
would prescribe. Yet, the effect of emotional content on
people’ s performance has remained unexplored.

Overview of the experiments
In two experiments, we compare the performance of
participants on a conditional reasoning task when the
reasoning materials are emotional and neutral.
Conditional statements (If p, then q) were presented,
and participants had to answer questions (e.g., p is
present, is q present?) relating to each of four possible
inferences. In Experiment 1, words used as p and q
were emotional or neutral. In Experiment 2, we
independently manipulated the emotional connotation
of words used as p and q using a conditioning
procedure.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Thirty individuals participated in this study.

152

Materials
We used 18 conditional statements. There were two
classes of statements: emotional (e.g. If the situation is
tragic, then one cries) and neutral (e.g. If one is in a
library, then one sees books). Nine statements included
emotional words as p and q and nine included neutral
words. The emotionality of the words used was based
on John’ s (1988) published norms of emotionality
ratings. The words that we used in the emotional
statements obtained an average rating of 5.71 (on a
scale from 1 to 7), compared to 1.66 for the words used
in the neutral statements. The emotional statements
could be further differentiated according to the type of
emotion they referred to. Three statements contained
words relating to each of the following categories:
anxiety, sadness, and joy.
For each conditional statement there were four
questions. Each question presented a minor premise
concerning the occurrence or non-occurrence of p or q,
followed by a question about the other (e.g. Anne is in a
tragic situation. Does she cry?). The four questions
invited each of the four types of inferences based on a
conditional statement: Modus Ponens (p, therefore q ?;
e.g. Anne is in a tragic situation. Does she cry?),
Denying the Antecedent (not p, therefore not q?; e.g.
Christine is in a happy situation. Does she cry?),
Affirming the Consequent (q, therefore p?; e.g. Laura is
crying. Is she in a tragic situation?), and Modus Tollens
(not q, therefore not p?; e.g. Gayle is not crying. Is she
in a tragic situation?). In an equal number of cases we
used “not p” (e.g. Gayle is not crying) and alternates
(e.g. Gayle is smiling).
Procedure
The task was performed on a computer. Participants
were initially told that they would read conditional
statements (or rules) about how people act or feel in
different situations. They were told these rules could
appear more or less plausible but that they should
answer the questions based on what follows logically
from the rule they have been given. The order in which
participants received each of the conditional statements
was randomly determined. The conditional statement
was first presented on the screen for five seconds. It
then remained in the same position but turned to a light
shade of grey while participants answered each of the
four questions, which were presented in a random
order. Each question was presented individually on the
screen and remained on the screen until participants
provided their answer by pressing the appropriate key
on the computer keyboard. The specific instructions
given to participants were: “You can answer each
question by YES, NO, or MAYBE. Your answers
should be based on the conclusions that follow logically
from the rule.”.

Table 1: Mean number of responses (and SD) (possible maximum = 9), Experiment 1.
Significant pairwise comparisons are highlighted.
MP
DA
AC
MT

Emotional
Neutral
Emotional
Neutral
Emotional
Neutral
Emotional
Neutral

Yes
7.5 (2.3)
7.6 (2.1)
0.2 (0.7)
0.2 (0.5)
2.8 (2.6)
1.9 (1.5)
0.1 (0.4)
0.2 (0.4)

No
0.1 (0.3)
0.1 (0.3)
4.4 (2.9)
2.9 (2.1)
0.1 (0.4)
0.4 (0.7)
6.5 (2.7)
6.4 (2.1)

Results and Discussion
We first performed a general analysis including
responses to all four questions. Answers were scored in
relation to a conditional response pattern. A conditional
interpretation is the normatively correct interpretation.
It corresponds to the following answers: YES answers
to MP (p ~ q?) (e.g., Anne is in a tragic situation. Does
she cry?), MAYBE answers to both DA (not p ~ q?)
(e.g., Christine is in a happy situation. Does she cry?),
and AC (q ~ p?) (e.g., Laura is crying. Is she in a tragic
situation?), and NO answers to MT (not q ~ p?) (e.g.,
Gayle is not crying. Is she in a tragic situation?). We
entered the average number of each of these responses
as the dependent measure in a general ANOVA
including two within-subject factors: question type
(MP, DA, AC, MT), and emotion (emotional vs.
neutral). The main effect of question type was
significant, F(3, 87)= 7.30, p<.05, as well as the main
effect of emotion, F(1,29)=14.69, p<.05, and the
interaction between emotion and question type,
F(3,87)=4.40, p<.05. Overall, participants provided
more conditional-like answers in response to MP
(M=7.6, SD=.39, out of nine possible trials), followed
by MT (M=6.5, SD=.41), AC (M=6.4, SD=.40) and DA
(M=5.1, SD=.43). The main effect of emotion reveals
that, across all questions, participants were more likely
to provide the normatively correct response in the case
of neutral statements (M=6.7, SD=.26), compared to
emotional statements (M=6.1, SD=.24).
These main effects were qualified by a two-way
interaction. The difference between emotional and
neutral statements varied across different questions.
Specifically, while conditional answers to MP and MT
were not different across the emotional and neutral
statements, answers to DA and AC did differ. The
complete distribution of answers is presented in Table
1.
We statistically compared the frequency of
committing logical fallacies in response to DA and AC
questions. We compared the mean number of No
answers to DA questions for emotional and neutral
trials using a paired-sample t-test. This showed a
significant effect, t(29)=4.04, p<.05. Participants were

153

Maybe
1.4 (2.2)
1.1 (2.0)
4.4 (2.8)
5.9 (2.2)
6.1 (2.6)
6.7 (1.9)
2.3 (2.5)
2.3 (2.0)

more likely to answer No in response to emotional
statements (see Table 1). We also compared the number
of Yes responses to AC, again using a paired-sample ttest. This comparison was also significant, t(29)=2.42,
p<.05, again showing that this fallacy was more
frequent in response to emotional statements.
We examined the effect of specific emotional
contents on the two inferences where emotion had a
significant effect (DA and AC). We used paired-sample
t-test to compare the difference between sadness, joy,
and anxiety-related statements, taking into account the
number of comparisons made. For DA, there were no
differences in the number of No answers to statements
including the different specific emotions (all ts>0.7)
Similar comparisons on the proportion of Yes answers
to AC again shows no differences between specific
emotions (all ts>0.6).
Thus, overall, participants’ performance was more
likely to deviate from normatively correct responses
when they reasoned about emotional, compared to
neutral statements. This was similar when statements
included joy, sadness, or anxiety related words.
Because we used existing emotional and neutral
words, features other than the emotional connotation of
these words may account for the results. Specifically,
features associated with semantic content, independent
of emotion, or other features differentiating between
emotional and neutral statements may contribute to the
results of Experiment 1. In order to isolate the effect of
emotion on reasoning performance, we needed to vary
the emotional valence independently of semantic
content. This is what we did in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we use a conditioning paradigm to
manipulate the emotional connotation of the words used
as p and q, independently from semantic content. In the
first block of the experiment, neutral words and nonwords were repeatedly paired with emotional or neutral
images. The neutral stimuli should this way take on
some of the affective quality associated with the paired
stimulus (Walther, 2002). This pairing was done
randomly so that across participants, the same words

were paired with neutral pictures in some cases, and
emotional pictures in other cases. In the second block,
these words were used as p and q in the conditional
reasoning task. We compared participants’ responses to
emotional and neutral statements. In a third block, we
asked participants to rate the emotionality of the words,
to verify that the conditioning procedure was effective.

Method
Participants
Forty individuals participated in this study.
Materials
The conditioning procedure paired neutral words and
non-words with neutral or emotional (positive or
negative) photographs. We used 18 neutral words, taken
from published ratings of word emotionality (e.g.,
sandwich, vitamin, camera) (John, 1988). These words
received an average emotionality rating of 1.62
(SD=0.32), on a scale from one to seven, where one
represents “ not at all emotional” . We also created 18
non-words that sounded like English words (e.g., gruss,
axpart, fisk). The words and non-words were divided
into three lists. Each of these lists would be paired with
photographs of either neutral, negative, or positive
emotional valence. This pairing was determined
randomly and was different for different participants.
The photographs were taken from the International
Affective Picture System. We used thirty-six
photographs of each type. On negativity/positivity
scales (1-9), the negative photographs received an
average rating of 2.72 (SD=0.47), comparatively to 4.93
for the neutral ones (SD=0.42), and 8.06 for the positive
ones (SD=0.31).
Procedure
The first block involved a conditioning procedure using
the initially neutral words and non-words and the
affective pictures. A blocked presentation of the wordpicture pairs was used. For instance, all negative
conditioning trials were presented first, followed by all
neutral, and then all positive trials sequentially. This
order was randomly determined. Each block involved
60 word-picture pairings. Each word was presented 5
times, each with a different photograph of the same
emotional valence.
Each trial lasted 2000 ms. The photograph first came
up on the computer screen for 500 ms. While the
picture remained on the screen, the word, written in
white on a small black rectangular, then appeared in the
middle of the screen for 1500ms. There was a 500ms
blank before the start of the next trial.
The second block consisted of the conditional
reasoning task. We used the same procedure as in
Experiment 1 but the statements were different as we
used the conditioned words and non-words as p and q.
Participants again saw conditional statements, followed
by a minor premise in the form of a question which they
had to answer by either Yes, No, or Maybe. There were

154

18 conditional statements, six of which were “ positive” ,
six “ neutral” , and six “ negative” .
In the third block, following the reasoning task,
participants completed a word rating task meant to
assess whether the conditioning procedure had been
successful. The words were presented one by one on the
computer screen. Participants were asked to rate their
emotional connotation. Answers were given on a scale
from one (very negative) to seven (very positive).

Results and Discussion
We analysed participants’ responses in the same way
as in Experiment 1, first entering the number of
conditional-like responses in a general ANOVA. Three
variables were included in this ANOVA: question type
(MP, DA, AC, and MT), word type, (word, non-word),
and emotionality (emotional, neutral). The three main
effects were significant: question type, F(3,117)=23.77,
p<.05, word type, F(1,39)=34.17, p<.05, and
emotionality, F(1,39)=5.42, p<.05.
The main effect of question type is as expected.
Participants were more accurate in response to MP
(M=.87, SD=.03) and MT (M=.79, SD=.04), followed
by AC (M=.51, SD=.05) and DA (M=.45, SD=.05),
F(1,39)=34.26, p<.05. The main effect of word type
confirms participants provided more conditional-like
answers when rules included actual words (M= .72,
SD=.03) compared to non-words (M=.60, SD=.03).
Emotionality had a significant impact on
participants’ performance. Participants were more
accurate when the statements were neutral (M=.67,
SD=.03), than when they were emotional (M=.63,
SD=.03). Although this did not interact with question
type in this experiment, we performed planned
comparisons to compare responses to emotional and
neutral statements for each specific question. Although
all comparisons show the same pattern of means
(responses to neutral statements being more likely to
conform to conditional interpretations, see Figure 1),
this only reached significance for AC, t(39)=2.3, p<.05.
Emotional

5.5

Neutral

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
MP

DA

AC

MT

Figure 1: Mean number of conditional responses
(possible maximum = 6) to each of the
four questions, Experiment 2.

We compared participants’ responses to positive and
negative trials more specifically. Collapsing over words
and non-words, we entered the number of conditional
answers in a 4x2 ANOVA involving question type and
valence (positive vs. negative). No effect was
significant. Conditioning words with positive or
negative pictures produced similar effects on the
reasoning task.
Evidence of the effectiveness of the conditioning
procedure is found in participants’ subsequent ratings of
the word stimuli. We entered the average ratings in a
2x3 ANOVA involving word type (word vs. non word)
and picture type (negative, neutral, positive). There was
a main effect of word type, F(1,39)=134.4, p<.05.
Participants rated actual words more positively than non
words (M=5.4, SD=.12, and M=3.5, SD=.09
respectively). There was also a main effect of picture
type, F(2,78)=3.5, p<.05, showing that the conditioning
paradigm produced the expected effects on the word
ratings (see Figure 2). The negative conditioning
however appears to have had a stronger effect on the
word ratings than positive conditioning. Planned
comparisons reveal that while the difference between
the negative and neutral conditions was significant, F(1,
39)=5.35, p<.05, that between neutral and positive
conditions was not, F(1, 39)=0.12, p>.05.
Thus, overall, the conditioning procedure was
successful in attaching emotional connotations to
neutral words and non-words and this emotional
connotation had a significant impact on the way
participants reasoned. Across participants, the same
words were associated with different types of pictures
(negative, neutral, or positive). Thus, the effect cannot
be attributed to the semantic content of the words.
Rather, we argue that the emotional valence of the
words, acquired through conditioning, lead to
deleterious effects on logical performance.

5

average emotionality rating

4.9
4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2
4.1
4
Negative

Neutral

Positive

Figure 2: Mean rating of emotional valence of
conditioned words, Experiment 3.
(1=very negative, 7=very positive)

155

General Discussion
In two experiments, participants’ performance on a
conditional reasoning task was significantly affected by
the emotionality of the materials they reasoned about.
In both cases, participants’ responses were more likely
to deviate from normatively correct responses when
they reasoned about emotional, compared to neutral
materials. This was evident both when materials were
positive, and negative in emotional content. We believe
the findings of Experiment 2 are particularly important,
as this is a controlled demonstration that individuals
reason differently when they reason about emotional
and non-emotional materials. In that experiment, the
emotional connotation was varied independently of
semantics. The same words were for some participants
emotional, and for other participants neutral. Thus,
differences in reasoning cannot be attributed to
confounded semantic factors.
The conditioning procedure was relatively successful
in attaching novel emotional connotations to initially
neutral stimuli, if judged by participants’ emotionality
ratings at the end of the experiment. Clearly, the
emotion induction was mild. We think this is significant
as it shows that even relatively mild changes in the
degree of emotionality of the reasoning materials will
significantly affect the way that people reason logically.
While clearly we cannot extrapolate from these results
to situations in which the degree of emotion is very
high, such as in traumatic events, it does suggest that it
is important to consider the affective dimension in order
to come to a fuller understanding of human reasoning.
One important experiment has previously examined
emotion and conditional reasoning, and produced
results congruent with ours. Oaksford and colleagues
(Oaksford, Morris, Grainger, & Williams, 1996)
manipulated participants’ mood and then compared
their performance on the Wason selection task.
Participants in both positive and negative moods were
less likely to provide normatively correct answers,
compared to participants in a neutral control group.
This is consistent with the results of our experiments.
The study by Oaksford and colleagues addressed the
question of whether the emotional state of the reasoner
affects their performance. That is, do people reason the
same way when they are in positive, negative, or neutral
affective states. We did not manipulate participants’
mood, but examined the effect of the emotionality of
content. In other words, we asked whether people
reason differently when they reason about emotional
and neutral materials. Crucially, it appears that answers
to these two questions offer important parallels.
There are a number of possible mechanisms that may
be responsible for the effect of emotion on reasoning.
Oaksford and colleagues (1996) investigated the
possible involvement of working memory (WM)

capacity. At least for positive moods, there was some
suggestion that performance on the reasoning was
related to reduced central executive capacity. If
processing emotional content is similar in nature to
experiencing an affective mood, then the effect we
identified may as well be mediated by WM capacity.
This is a possibility that we are actively exploring in
ongoing experiments.
The fact that our findings show mainly impairments
in normatively correct reasoning as a result of emotion
is consistent with the commonsensical notion that
emotions impair logical reasoning abilities. It is also
consistent with important philosophical traditions,
going back to the Stoics, that have emphasized the
deleterious effects of passion on reason. Nevertheless,
we believe this is not incompatible with a general
functionalist account of emotions. The effect of
emotion may generally be beneficial, but there are
circumstances under which their contribution will be
disruptive. This is readily acknowledged in the case of
dysfunctions of emotions, either through their unusual
duration or intensity. A number of factors may
influence whether emotions will be beneficial or
detrimental for reasoning performance. Among others,
task difficulty, the nature of the reasoning materials,
and the relevance of the emotional dimension for the
response could affect whether emotions promote or
hinder logicality. We have identified an effect whereby
in non-clinical samples, and with relatively mild
emotion-inductions, we can produce decrements in
logical reasoning performance. In the case we studied,
the emotional dimension was irrelevant for the
reasoning task (i.e. the information conveyed by the
affective dimension of the stimuli was unrelated to the
response participants had to make), yet produced a
systematic effect. This suggests the relation between
emotion and cognition is highly complex. Moreover,
while it has often been ignored in the past in most
disciplines of cognitive sciences, our results exemplify
how affective information processing must6 be
acknowledged in order to come to a full understanding
of human cognitive processes.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a post-doctoral
fellowship from the Social Science and Research
Council of Canada to the first author and the
department of Psychology, Birkbeck College,
University of London. We thank Sylvain Sirois for his
useful comments on previous drafts of this manuscript.

References
Bodenhausen, G.V., Kramer, G.P., & Suesser, K.
(1994). Happiness and stereotypic thinking in social

156

judgment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66, 621-632.
Cornelius, R.R. (1996). The Science of Emotion. Upper
Sadler River, NJ,: Prentice Hall.
Ekman, P. & Davidson, R.J. (1994). The Nature of
Emotion: Fundamental Questions. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Evans, J.S. & Over, D.E. (1996). Rationality and
Reasoning. Hove, England: Taylor.
Fox, E., Russo, R., Bowles, R., & Dutton, K. (2001).
Do threatening stimuli draw or hold visual attention
in subclinical anxiety?. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 681-700.
Keltner, D., & Gross, J.J. (1999). Functional accounts
of emotions. Cognition & Emotion, 13, 467-480.
Damasio, A.R. (1994). Descartes’ Error. New York,
NY: Avon.
Damasio, H., Grabowski, T., Frank, V., Galaburda,
A.M., & Damasio, A.R. (1996). The return of
Phineas Gage: Clues about the brain from the skull of
a famous patient. Science, 264, 1102-1104.
Dimitrov, M., Phipps, M., Zahn, T.P., & Grafman, J.
(1999). A thoroughly modern gage. Neurocase, 5,
345-354.
Forgas, J.P. (2000). Feeling and thinking: The role of
affect in social cognition. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
John, C. (1988). Emotionality ratings and freeassociation norms of 240 emotional and nonemotional words. Cognition & Emotion, 2, 49-70.
Mathews, A., Mackintosh, B., & Fulcher, E.P. (1997).
Cognitive biases in anxiety and attention to threat.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 340-345.
Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P., & Hallowell, N. (1994).
Attentional bias to threat: Roles of trait anxiety,
stressful events, and awareness. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology A, 47A, 841-864.
Oaksford, M., Morris, F., Grainger, B., & Williams,
M.J. (1996). Mood, reasoning, and central executive
processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 22, 476-492.
Pelissier, M., & O’ Connor, K.P. (2002). Deductive and
inductive reasoning
in
obsessive-compulsive
disorder. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41,
15-27.
Richards, A. & French, C.C. (1992). An anxiety-related
bias in semantic activation when processing
threat/neutral homographs. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 45A, 503 -525.
Shafir, E., & LeBoeuf, R.A. (2002). Rationality. Annual
Review of Psychology, 53, 491-517.
Walther, E. (2002). Guilty by mere association:
Evaluative conditioning and the spreading attitude
effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
82, 919-934.
Yiend, J. & Mathews, A. (2001). Anxiety and attention
to threatening pictures. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54, 665-681.

