UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Benefits of Epistemic Action Outweigh the Costs

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5bg5p6bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Maglio, Paul P.
Wenger, Michael J.
Copeland, Angelina M.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Benefits of Epistemic Action Outweigh the Costs
Paul P. Maglio (pmaglio@almaden.ibm.com)
IBM Almaden Research Center
San Jose, California

Michael J. Wenger (mwenger1@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame

Angelina M. Copeland (ahill1@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame
Abstract
Epistemic actions are physical actions people take to
simplify internal problem solving rather than to move
closer to an external goal. When playing the video
game Tetris, for instance, experts routinely rotate
falling shapes more than is strictly needed to place
the shapes. Maglio and Kirsh (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994;
Maglio, 1995) proposed that such actions might serve
the purpose of priming memory by external means,
reducing the need for internal computation (e.g., by
way of mental rotation). This proposal requires that
information provided by epistemic actions (e.g., additional views of the shape) serve the same function
as memory primes, and that the bene t of such priming exceed the costs of performing the epistemic action. To calculate bene t, we used a novel statistical
method for mapping reaction-time data onto an estimate of the increase in individual processing capacity
a orded by seeing shapes in multiple orientations. To
calculate cost, we used an empirical estimate of time
needed to take action in a Tetris game. We found that
the bene ts of extra previews far outweigh the costs
of taking extra action.

Rotate

Translate

Drop

Filled
Row
Dissolves

Figure 1: In Tetris, two-dimensional shapes fall one a
time from the top of the screen, landing on the bottom
or on top of shapes that have already landed. The
object of the game is to fill rows of squares all the way
across. Filled rows dissolve and all unfilled rows above
move down.

Introduction
Intuitively, expertise is associated with economy, e ciency, and optimality of performance (Logan, 1988;
Newell & Rosenbloom, 1981). Data gathered from
players of the video game Tetris, however, suggest
that experts in fact take more action and do more
backtracking in that game than do beginners (Kirsh
& Maglio, 1994; Maglio & Kirsh, 1996). In Tetris,
players maneuver two-dimensional shapes as they descend from the top of the screen to fit the shapes onto
a playing surface at the bottom of the screen (see Figure 1). As players develop expertise, their performance
becomes faster, yet they also increase the number of
rotations made, requiring backtracking to correct for
over-rotation.
Maglio and Kirsh (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio,
1995) suggested that such counter-intuitive behavior
might result from expert players taking actions not
for their effect on the external state of the game, but
for their effect on the player’s internal problem-solving
state. Such actions are called epistemic actions, and
are used to simplify internal computations rather than
to move closer to an external goal state. In the case

752

of Tetris, Maglio and Kirsh suggested that extra rotations provide information that would otherwise be
obtained by mental rotation. Because shape identification can be facilitated by primes or previews oriented differently from a target shape (Cooper, Schacter, Ballesteros & Moore, 1992; Lassaline & Logan,
1993; Srinivas, 1995), it is plausible that Tetris players
might rotate shapes to facilitate identification. Moreover, studies have shown that problem solving in other
tasks is facilitated by taking extra actions, including counting coins (Kirsh, 1995), arranging letters to
spell words (Maglio, Matlock, Raphaely, Chernicky &
Kirsh, 1999), and solving the Tower of Hanoi (Neth &
Payne, 2002).
Though both appealing and compelling, Maglio and
Kirsh’s Epistemic Action Hypothesis has not yet
been put to a systematic test. The present study is
the last in a series aimed at making such a test. To
do this, we incorporate a novel method for evaluating
costs and benefits of epistemic action. A strong test
of the hypothesis that extra rotations in Tetris act as
epistemic actions must account for two main predictions:

Priming. Previews of a Tetris piece can prime later
decisions about that piece (e.g., whether it will fit
into the board in its present orientation).
Net Benefit. Previews allow the player to do more
with the available time than no previews (e.g., to
consider additional alternative placements).
With respect to the Priming prediction, we previously reported experiments investigating the conditions under which previews aid performance: specifically, by reducing the response time (RT) needed to
decide whether a Tetris piece fits into a given configuration of the playing surface (Maglio & Wenger, 2000,
2002). The results show that (a) increasing the number of distinct views that are available as previews
leads to decreases in RT, and (b) the positive effect of
the previews diminishes as the time between preview
and decision decreases. The first of these findings is
consistent with the possible shape-identification function of priming. The second can be understood by
noting that, as the time for the decision draws closer,
perceptual information available in the game display
may be su cient for the decision. Alternatively, with
very short lags between preview and decision, it may
not be possible for the prime to produce a memory
retrieval that can be completed before a decision must
be made.
The present paper investigates the Net Benefit
prediction. Does the benefit obtained by priming with
multiple orientations outweigh the costs of taking extra actions? That is, do extra previews actually allow
the player to be more effective? If it were possible
to measure a player’s ability to process game information per unit of play (imagine an instantaneous measure of a player’s “bandwidth” or capacity for internal computation), that measure would be higher when
previews are available than when they are not. This
would be true because the preview would relieve the
player of the need to perform the rotation mentally, allowing more information (e.g., about the current state
of the game) to be processed in a unit of time. But
because epistemic actions come with a cost—that associated with making additional rotations and consequent corrections—the benefit of the epistemic action
in increased capacity must be greater than the cost in
increased playing time. Otherwise, experts would take
longer to perform the task than would novices.
Simply put, to measure the cost of epistemic action, we will estimate the time cost of making extra rotations. This can be done by estimating the
time required for the epistemic action and its correction (two keystrokes). To measure the benefit of
epistemic action, we will estimate the increase in the
player’s mental capacity given extra previews of the
piece. For capacity, we need a measure that estimates
the extent to which a system is capable of completing a given amount of work (computation) in a unit of
time. To provide this measure, we draw on theoretical and empirical results of Townsend and colleagues
(Townsend & Ashby, 1978, 1983; Townsend & Nozawa,

753

1995, Wenger & Townsend, 2000), which suggest that
a specific method of characterizing the RT distribution provides a performance measure that can be interpreted as capacity. That measure is known as the
hazard function of the RT distribution.

The Hazard Function
The hazard function is a conditional probability function that assesses the instantaneous likelihood of completing a process, conditional on not yet having completed the process. In this sense, it is distinct from
the unconditional probability of completing a process,
since this latter measure may be low for some given
value of time, whereas the former may be very high.
For example, although the unconditional probability of
taking a long time to complete a process may be low,
the probability of completing the process at that point
in time given that the process has not yet finished
may be high. The conditional character of this function allows it to be interpreted in terms of intensity,
and indeed the function is known in certain engineering applications as the intensity function (Townsend &
Ashby, 1978). That is, a processor that is operating at
a high level of intensity will have a higher conditional
probability of completing the processing task in the
next instant (given that it has not completed its task
yet) than will a processor that is operating at a low
level of intensity. Mathematically, the hazard function
is defined as
h(t)

=
=

lim

∆t→0

P (t ≤ T ≤ t + ∆t|T ≥ t)
∆t

f (t)
,
S(t)

where f (t) is the probability density function (in our
case, for task completion times), and S(t) = 1 F (t)
is the survivor function. Because the survivor function is the complement of the cumulative distribution
function F (t) = P (T ≤ t), it gives the probability
that the task has not been completed by time t, that
is P (T > t).
We can represent the hypothesis of an increase in capacity in terms of the relationship between the hazard
function for conditions in which previews (available
from the additional rotation) are present to those in
which previews are absent. Specifically, if we let hp (t)
be the hazard function when previews are present, and
hn (t) be the hazard function when no previews are
present, we can test the statistical hypothesis of
hp (t)
>1
hn (t)
This is easily and directly done using a set of wellunderstood log-linear regression methods (Collett,
1994; Cox, 1972). Although these methods have not
traditionally been used with RT data, recent work suggests that they are robust with RT data (Wenger &
Gibson, 2002; Wenger, Schuster, Petersen & Petersen,

2002 in press; Wenger, Schuster & Townsend, 2002).
These procedures produce estimates of the magnitude
of the proportionality relationships among a set of hazard functions, as well as tests of the hypotheses that
these magnitude estimates are reliably different from
1. Finally, a simple transformation of these estimates
produces a value that can be interpreted in terms of
the percentage of change associated with a manipulation (e.g., the presence of a preview).

Costs and Benefits of Epistemic Actions
The hazard-function estimates let us discover how
much the processing capacity is increased given a preview (i.e., the benefit of seeing additional views of the
piece). But a complete account also requires an estimate of the cost of obtaining a preview (i.e., how long
it takes to perform an extra rotation and then another
rotation to correct for this extra move). To estimate
the time required to do this, we required participants
in the present study to make an additional keystroke
at various unexpected points during task performance.
We then multiplied this value by two to estimate the
time required for both an additional rotation and its
subsequent correction. The cost of these actions can
then be expressed as a percentage of change in the total time for an experimental trial. Thus, we have both
cost and benefit measured on the same scale. To the
extent that epistemic actions work as hypothesized,
the benefit (in percentage increase in capacity) should
exceed the cost (in percentage increase in trial duration).

Method
To test this hypothesis, participants viewed a highlyrestricted version of Tetris—the same as was used in
our previous work (Maglio & Wenger, 2000, 2002). In
this version, individual Tetris pieces are presented descending from the top of the computer screen toward
the bottom. We will refer to the presentation of each
piece in this sequence as a frame. At the end of the sequence, a test piece was presented immediately above
a board configuration, and participants had to judge
whether the piece in the test frame would or would
not fit into the board, either in its current orientation
or with a single rotation. In some of the trials of the
sequence that preceded the test frame, preview information (about the test piece, the board, or both) was
present. These trials were used to assess the potential benefit in capacity associated with the presence
of a prime. In addition, we included a set of trials in
which the test frame was replaced with the instruction
to press one of two keys. These trails were randomly
inserted into the total sequence of experimental trials,
and data from these trials were used to estimate the
cost of epistemic actions.

Participants
Fifteen participants were recruited from the University
of Notre Dame’s psychology subject pool, and participated voluntarily in exchange for course credit. All

754

participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision,
and none had participated in any of our previous Tetris
experiments.

Design
Two kinds of experimental trials were used. The first
was constructed so as to mimic the conditions that revealed differential effects of preview information in our
earlier work (Maglio & Wenger, 2000, 2002). We will
refer to these trials as the Tetris trials. The experimental design for these was a 2 (preview: present, absent)
× 2 (piece type:
, ) × 3 (relation between preview and test: prime related to board, prime related
to test piece, prime related to board and piece) × 2
(prime orientation with respect to test: same, different) × 3 (lag between presentation of preview and test:
0, 1, 2 frames) × 2 (status of the test piece with respect to the board: fit, does not fit) complete factorial
design, with all factors manipulated within observers.
The second kind of trials (keypress trials) involved a
random assignment of these factors to a total of 100
trials that involved a sequence of pieces terminating
in an instruction for a specific keypress, rather than
presentation of a test piece and board.

Materials
All pieces and boards were constructed from 20 × 20
pixel squares. Squares were outlined by light gray
lines, 1 pixel in width, and were filled in solid black.
The background for all displays was also solid black.
All piece types were composed of four blocks. All
boards were six blocks in height and width. Four “fit”
boards were defined for each piece type, corresponding
to four ways in which the piece could be snugly placed.
Each such board was used with equal frequency. Materials were displayed on a 43 cm (diagonal) VGA monitor controlled by a PC-compatible computer. Onset
and offset of each display was synchronized to the monitor’s vertical scan. A standard keyboard was used to
collect and time (to ±1 ms) responses.

Procedure
Participants were run in a single session that lasted approximately 90 min. All sessions were conducted in a
darkened room, with participants seated at an unconstrained distance from the monitor, and began with a
five min period for dark adaptation. Participants were
told that, on each trial, they would see a sequence
of Tetris pieces presented very rapidly. The pieces in
the sequence would begin falling from a location near
the top of the screen. Each successive piece would
appear below the one before to create a sequence of
falling pieces, much as in the Tetris video game. Each
piece was present for 250 ms, and each sequence consisted of between five and seven pieces, with the actual
number determined randomly (and with equal likelihood) on each trial. In the Tetris trials, this sequence
was terminated by the presentation of a test piece immediately above a board, and participants were instructed to indicate whether the test piece would fit

in the board (either without a rotation or with one
rotation). “Fit” responses were given using the index
finger of the observer’s dominant hand, and “no fit”
responses were given using the index finger of the observer’s non-dominant hand, using the Z and / keys.
In the keypress trials, the sequence of falling pieces
was terminated with an instruction to press either the
Z or / keys, with the specific key being chosen randomly on each instance of a keypress trial. In both the
Tetris and keypress trials, participants were instructed
to emphasize both speed and accuracy.

Results
We begin by examining the data from the Tetris trials
to determine whether preview (or prime) information
speeded responding, and if so, under what conditions
the benefit was most pronounced. We do this by examining both mean RTs and hazard functions. We then
consider the extent to which any benefits observed at
the level of the hazard functions exceeded the costs associated with the keypresses. A criterion level of 0.05
was used in all analyses.

Figure 2: Mean RTs from the Tetris trials as a function of the relationship between prime and test frame
(same or different), fit status of the test piece, and the
lag between prime and test frame.

Mean RT
Our first question was whether the presence of a preview speeded responding relative to the absence of a
preview. Mean RT for the preview-present trials was
528 ms, and the mean RT for the preview-absent trials was 673 ms, with this difference being reliable,
t = 5.09, p < .0001. Our initial examination of the
data from the preview-present trials indicated no main
effects or interactions associated with piece type. Consequently, we analyzed these data using a 3 (relation
between preview and test: prime related to board,
prime related to test piece, prime related to board and
piece) × 2 (prime orientation with respect to test piece
or board: same, different) × 3 (lag between presentation of preview and test: 0, 1, 2 frames) × 2 (status
of test piece with respect to the board: fit, does not
fit) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The reliable results from this analysis are presented in
Table 1. Mean RTs for the interaction involving prime
orientation, fit status, and lag are shown in Figure 2.
The results here replicate those obtained in our previous work (Maglio & Wenger, 2000, 2002). When the
preview primed both the test piece and the board, it
produced faster RTs than when it primed either alone.
RTs on trials where the test piece fit the board were
faster than RTs on trials where the test piece did not
fit. Finally, the positive impact of a preview increased
with increases in lag between preview and test.

Overall Capacity Analyses
Results of the RT analyses showed positive effects of
previews on performance, consistent with our previous work. As noted, inferences from these analyses
must be limited to overall speed, and do not address
processing capacity. To assess the extent to which previews produced increases in processing capacity, we fit
log-linear regression models for the hazard functions to

755

Figure 3: Mean value of the ratio of benefit to cost as
a function of lag. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals on the mean.
the data, allowing for the same set of main effects and
interactions as allowed by the ANOVA. This analysis
indicated that only a subset of the total possible effects were reliable. Table 2 presents the results for the
model including only reliable effects. Having a preview
increased capacity by almost 40% relative to not having a preview. This effect was attenuated at shorter
lags, increasing as lag increased. When a prime was
present, its effect was best when it was in the same
orientation as the test piece, the board, or both.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The overall analysis of the hazard functions showed
that the previews do more than simply increase the
speed of responding: they serve to increase the instantaneous capacity of players. To show that the benefit
obtained from previews exceeds the cost of performing
action, we must weigh the capacity increase against
the time cost of taking extra actions. The keystroke
trials allow us to estimate this cost: For each participant, we calculated mean RT on keystroke trials. We
then doubled this value, and added the result to the
fixed time associated with each trial (4.4 s). The cost
estimate was this total divided by the fixed time, and

Table 1: Reliable results from the ANOVA on correct RTs from the Tetris trials.
Effect
df
F
M SE
p
Prime/test frame (PTF)
2
65.39 1192.90 < .0001
Fit status (FS)
1
91.05 7580.00 < .0001
Prime/test lag (PTL)
2 284.47 1404.89 < .0001
PTF × FS
2
38.93 1089.08 < .0001
FS × L
2
14.31
910.84 < .0001
Prime orientation × FS × L
2
4.65
591.01
0.0181

Table 2: Results of the regression analyses of the hazard functions on RT, Tetris trials.
Effect
Prime presence/absence (PA)
Lag × PA
Prime orientation × PA

df
1
1
1

β
0.3204
0.2896
0.1087

multiplied by 100 to obtain a percentage.1
The benefit of previews was estimated as follows.
For each participant, we fit the proportional hazards
model, including only reliable effects, to obtain the
percent change (as in Table 2). To test the hypothesis that benefit exceeded cost, we first subtracted
the cost estimate for each subject from the benefit
in each condition, and then subjected this difference
score to a repeated measures ANOVA. At each lag,
the ratio of benefit to cost was reliably greater than 1,
and the value of this ratio increased with increases in
lag, F(2,28) = 31.25, MSE = 10.75 (see Figure 3). We
can conclude not only that the benefit outweighs the
cost of an epistemic action, but also that the benefit
is greatest when memory load is greatest, namely with
greatest time between preview and decision.

Discussion
A strong test of the hypothesis that epistemic actions
can explain the extra rotations performed by expert
Tetris players required that we determine whether the
benefit of previews outweigh the cost of taking the action needed to create the previews. We approached
this question of the Net Benefit in two steps. First,
we predicted that presentation of previews should lead
to an increase in capacity. Second, we predicted that
increase in capacity should outweigh the time cost of
performing the actions. To test the first prediction, we
used the hazard function on the RT distribution as a
measure of capacity. This conditional probability function can be interpreted in terms of the intensity with
which a system can perform its processing tasks, and
increases can be interpreted in terms of increases in capacity, something that is not possible with mean RTs
(Townsend, 1990). Our results showed that previews
produced increases in capacity, with benefits increasing as lag between preview and decision increased.
1
This cost overestimates the time of Tetris experts, who
have likely internalized the epistemic strategy and therefore
produce faster responses in practice.

756

χ2
96.85
295.40
80.20

p
< .0001
< .0001
< .0001

% Change
37.8
33.6
11.5

To test the second prediction, we needed to estimate
the cost of making an epistemic action. We made this
estimate by having subjects perform simple keystrokes
at unexpected intervals. We then doubled the time required for these actions to estimate the total cost of
an epistemic action—an over-rotation and a correction. We then compared the increase in capacity (for
each participant) to the cost, and found that the benefits more than outweighed the costs in all cases, with
the ratio of benefit to cost increasing with increasing
lag. Thus, this work provides strong evidence for the
plausibility of Maglio and Kirsh’s Epistemic Action
Hypothesis (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio, 1995).
Recently, others have considered related models and
shown similar results, largely in the context of humancomputer interaction. Wright, Fields and Harrison
(2000) describe the resources model, in which epistemic actions taken in the task environment are viewed
as resources that an agent can rely on in accomplishing
goals. Gray and Fu (2000) analyzed the task of setting
a videorecorder in several conditions, and found that
people routinely make tradeoffs in time and accuracy
depending on configuration of the task environment.
Neth and Payne (2002)’s study of the Tower of Hanoi
problem showed epistemic actions benefit steady-state
behavior but are helpful during learning. Kirlik (1998)
develops a specific mathematical formulation of the
epistemic action hypthesis, and tests in the context of
expert short-order cooks. In all these models and studies, the costs of taking physical action in the external
task environment is weighed against the benefit of the
information gained by taking the action. Of course,
not all actions are worth taking.
Our previous reports (Maglio & Wenger, 2000, 2002)
explored conditions under which previews in Tetris improve performance. Our present results are consistent
with these studies, and extend the findings by demonstrating that the benefits of taking action to generate
extra previews outweigh the behavioral costs. Taken
together, we see these results as being systematic,

thorough evidence in favor of the hypothesis proposed
by Maglio and Kirsh. We also see the sum of these
studies as providing a rich set of targets for a computational model, one that can allow for exploration of
mechanisms and conditions under which epistemic actions might aid in skilled performance more generally.

References
Collett, D. (1994). Modeling survival data in medical
research. London: Chapman and Hall.
Cooper, L. A., Schacter, D. L., Ballesteros, S., &
Moore, C. (1992). Priming and recognition of transformed three-dimensonal objects: Effects of size
and re ection. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 18, 43–57.
Cox, D. R. (1972). Regression models and life tables
(with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, B34, 187–220.
Gray, W. D. & Fu, W. (2000). The in uence of source
and cost of information access on correct and errorful interactive behavior. In Twenty-second Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages
663–668, Mahwah, NJ. Erlbaum.
Kirlik, A. (1998). The ecological expert: Acting to create information to guide action. In Fourth Symposium on Human Interaction with Complex Systems,
pages 15–27. IEEE Computer Society.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we
use our hands when we think. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Hillsdale, NJ. Erlbaum.
Kirsh, D. & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18,
513–549.
Lassaline, M. E. & Logan, G. D. (1993). Memorybased automaticity in the discrimination of visual
numerosity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 561–581.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492–527.
Maglio, P. P. (1995). The computational basis of interactive skill. Doctoral dissertation, University of
California, San Diego.
Maglio, P. P. & Kirsh, D. (1996). Epistemic action
increases with skill. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
pages 391–396, Mahwah, NJ. LEA.
Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky,
B., & Kirsh, D. (1999). Interactive skill in Scrabble.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 326–330,
Mahwah, NJ. Erlbaum.
Maglio, P. P. & Wenger, M. J. (2000). Two views
are better than one: Epistemic actions may prime.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Mahwah, NJ.
Erlbaum.

757

Maglio, P. P. & Wenger, M. J. (2002). On the potential of epistemic actions for self-cuing: Multiple orientations can prime 2D shape recognition and use.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 608–613,
Mahwah, NJ. Erlbaum.
Neth, H. & Payne, S. J. (2002). Thinking by doing:
Epistemic Actions in the Tower of Hanoi. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 691–696, Mahwah,
NJ. Erlbaum.
Newell, A. & Rosenbloom, P. (1981). Mechanisms of
skill acquisition and the law of practice. In J. R. Anderson (Ed.), Cognitive skills and their acquisition,
pages 1–55. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Srinivas, K. (1995). Representation of rotated objects
in explicit and implicit memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 1019–1036.
Townsend, J. T. (1990). Truth and consequences of ordinal differences in statistical distributions: Toward
a theory of hierarchical inference. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 551–567.
Townsend, J. T. & Ashby, F. G. (1978). Methods
of modeling capacity in simple processing systems.
In J. Castellan & F. Restle (Eds.), Cognitive theory
(vol. 3), pages 200–239. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Townsend, J. T. & Ashby, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes.
Cambridge: Cambridge University press.
Townsend, J. T. & Nozawa, G. (1995). On the spatiotemporal properties of elementary perception: An
investigation of parallel, serial, and coactive theories.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 39, 321–359.
Wenger, M. J. & Gibson, B. S. (2002). Using hazard
functions to assess changes in processing capacity in
an attentional cuing paradigm. under review.
Wenger, M. J., Schuster, C., Petersen, L. M., & Petersen, R. C. (2002, in press). Application of proportional hazards models to reaction time data. In
C. Bergeman & S. Boker (Eds.), Notre Dame Series
on Quantitative Methodologies, pages xx–xx. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wenger, M. J., Schuster, C., & Townsend, J. T. (2002).
Testing capacity hypotheses: Applying proportional
hazards and frailty models. Paper presented at the
35th Annual Meeting of the Society for Mathematical Psychology, Miami University of Ohio, Oxford,
Ohio.
Wenger, M. J. & Townsend, J. T. (2000). Basic response time tools for studying general processing capacity in attention, perception, and cognition. Journal of General Psychology, 127, 67–99.
Wright, P., Fields, R., & Harrison, M. (2000).
Analysing human-computer interaction as Distributed Cognition: The resources model. Human
Computer Interaction, 51, 1–41.

