UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The experiential basis of meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hg0c2dh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Matlock, Teenie
Ramscar, Michael
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The experiential basis of meaning
Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Michael Ramscar (michael@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Lera Boroditsky (lera@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307 USA

shown that people’s understanding of time supervenes on
their physical conceptions of space, to the extent that
manipulations of their spatial knowledge have predictable
affects on their temporal reasoning. In these studies,
participants were asked the ambiguous question shown in
(1) while engaging in spatial thought.

Abstract
How are abstract ideas acquired and structured? One idea is that
people’s understanding of abstract domains is constructed using
more basic, experiential knowledge that is acquired directly. For
instance, a series of studies (Boroditsky 2000, Boroditsky &
Ramscar, 2002) has shown that people’s understanding of time
supervenes on their physical conceptions of space, to the extent
that manipulations of people’s spatial knowledge have
predictable affects on their temporal reasoning. In this paper we
explore just how widespread this phenomenon is. To see
whether basing abstract knowledge on concrete knowledge is a
pervasive aspect of cognition, we investigate whether thought
about an abstract, non-literal type of motion called fictive motion
(Matlock, 2003a; Talmy, 1996) can influence the way people
understand time. Our results suggest that, contrary to previous
claims (Jackendoff, 2002), abstract, metaphorical knowledge
about motion involves the same structures used in understanding
literal motion, and that the activation of these “literal” aspects of
fictive motion serve to influence temporal reasoning. The results
provide further evidence of the intimate connection between
abstract and concrete knowledge.

(1) Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved
forward two days. What day is the meeting now
that it has been rescheduled?

Introduction
How are we able to think about things that we've never been
able to see or touch? Be it theorizing about invisible forces,
reasoning about the behaviors of atoms, or attempting to
characterize the nature of private mental experience, much
scientific progress depends on finding ways to conceptualize
and describe imperceptible phenomena. We face the same
problems in our everyday thoughts about time, justice, and
love, and other relatively abstract domains. How is it that
we are so good at reasoning about and representing abstract
domains despite the dearth of sensory information available
to us?
One suggestion is that abstract domains are understood
through analogical extensions from richer, more experiencebased domains, about which knowledge is acquired directly
(Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002; Gentner, Imai & Boroditsky,
in press; Gibbs, 1994; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999). For instance, a series of studies
(Boroditsky 2000; Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002) have

792

The answer to this question depends on how individuals
choose to think about time. If they think of themselves as
moving forward through time (ego-moving perspective),
then moving a meeting “forward” is moving it further in
their direction of motion—that is, from Wednesday to
Friday. If, however, they think of time as coming toward
them (time-moving perspective), then moving a meeting
“forward” is moving it closer to themselves —that is, from
Wednesday to Monday (Boroditsky, 2000; McGlone &
Harding, 1998; McTaggart, 1908). Most people have strong
intuitions about which answer to this question is correct. As
will become clear in this paper, the question is indeed
ambiguous and intuitions about the answers can change
dramatically depending on context (though their feelings of
certainty towards their answers generally remain intact). In
a neutral context, people are equally likely to think of
themselves as moving through time as they are to think of
time as coming toward them, and so are equally likely to say
that the meeting has been moved to Friday (ego-moving
answer) as to Monday (time-moving answer) (Boroditsky,
2000; McGlone & Harding, 1998).
The way in which the ambiguous question can reveal
the intimate relationship between space and time is
illustrated in a study by Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002), in
which people imagined being in one of two conditions. In
the ego-moving condition, people imagined sitting in a chair
while moving toward a specific point. In the time-moving
condition, people imagined standing at a specific point
while pulling a chair (attached to a rope) toward them. The

results showed that people’s responses were influenced by
whether they had imagined moving toward something or
imagined something move toward them. People were more
likely to say “Friday” after imagining themselves moving,
and “Monday” after imagining the chair moving toward
them.
In another study, Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002) had
people answer the ambiguous question in (1) in an airport.
If people had just flown in and gotten off a plane, they were
more likely to take an ego-moving perspective than people
who were sitting in the airport waiting to pick somebody up.
A further study posed the ambiguous question to people on
a train. If people were at the beginning or end of a journey
(highlighting the awareness of travel), they were more like
to take an ego-moving perspective than if they were in the
middle of a trip. Finally, Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002)
asked the same question of people standing in a long lunchline. In this case, individuals at the front of the line (closer
to the goal) were more likely to respond in a way that was
consistent with an ego-moving perspective than individuals
at the back of the line.
Taken together, the results of Boroditsky and Ramscar
(2002) demonstrate the intimate relationship between
abstract thinking and more experience-based forms of
knowledge. Specifically, people’s understanding of time is
closely linked to their thoughts about and experiences with
physical space. When people engage in particular types of
spatial thinking (e.g., thinking about a journey on a plane or
train, or standing in a lunch-line), they also unwittingly and
dramatically change how they think about time. Further,
Ramscar and Boroditsky’s findings demonstrate that actual
spatial motion is neither necessary nor sufficient to
influence people’s thinking about time. People merely
traveling on a train were at chance in their answers to the
ambiguous question, whereas people who had cause to think
about their journeys–either because they were about to
depart or arrive–showed significant space-to- time transfer.
Thus, it appears that thinking about spatial motion is what
underlies thought about time, and that, as shown by
Ramscar and Boroditsky, thought about abstract domains is
built on mental representations of more experience-based
domains functionally separable from those directly involved
in sensorimotor experience (see also Boroditsky, 2000).
Boroditsky and Ramscar’s findings suggest that the
representations underpinning abstract thought supervene on
representations underpinning basic experiential concepts,
such as space and motion. But how widespread is this
phenomenon? Does it apply to all abstract thought? Or is it
specific to concepts of space and time?
One might be tempted to generalize, and assume that
the meaning (and therefore underlying representation) of all
non-literal motion is linked to the representational structures
underlying the understanding of actual motion. But this is
by no means an obvious or even a motivated connection.
For instance, what sort of representation is activated when
people try to make sense of fictive motion sentences
(discussed in detail in next section), such as The tattoo runs

793

along his spine or The road goes along the coast? The
underlying representations of these sentences has been
argued by Talmy (1996) and other cognitive linguists to be
temporal, dynamic, and similar to those of actual motion
(e.g., The bus goes along the coast). At first, this might
seem counterintuitive, especially given that in the real
world, tattoos are incapable of moving independently of the
skin upon which they are inked, and roads incapable of
getting up and leaving the ground upon which they were
laid.
Thus, it seems reasonable to argue that the
representations underlying the understanding of tattoos
running along spines and roads running along coasts cannot
be the same as those that underly the understanding of
situations in which mobile agents, such as people, vehicles,
and so on move. This is exactly the position taken by
Jackendoff (2002). For Jackendoff, the representation
underlying a sentence such as The tattoo runs along his
spine is static and atemporal, in contrast to representations
underlying sentences that describe actual motion, which are
dynamic and temporal. On this view, such sentences involve
simultaneous activation of all points along a path or figure
(e.g., tattoo, road).
Before discussing a study aimed at determining whether
there is indeed “motion” in fictive motion, some background
on motion verbs is in order.

Actual motion and fictive motion
Actual motion verbs such as go and run describe situations
in which an animate agent moves from one location in
physical space to another, as in Julio runs from Cardiff to
Solana Beach or The train goes up the hill. Implicit in such
literal uses of motion verbs is a noticeable state change, the
passage of time, and a path connecting starting point and
end point (Talmy, 1975; Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976).
Motion verbs can also describe situations with no
observable physical motion. For instance, motion verbs
often specify a state change, as in She went from beer to
vodka and His argument ran all over the place, or a
temporal shift, as in Christmas went by quickly this year and
Have we passed Christmas yet? Such metaphorical
extensions of motion verbs are not limited to English and do
not evolve in a random fashion. They occur in language
after language and show consistent, parallel diachronic
developments, even in unrelated languages (Radden, 1996,
1997; Sweetser, 1990). Metaphorically extended motion
verbs also occupy a prominent place in the core vocabulary
of every language (Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976). The
ubiquity and regularity of these uses of motion verbs has
been attributed to people’s natural tendency to draw on their
experience with space and other basic experiential domains
when thinking about abstract concepts such as time (Clark,
1973; Gibbs, 1994; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
Non-literal uses of motion verbs also describe spatial
scenes lacking both motion and state change, as in The
tattoo runs along his spine and The road goes past several
alpine lakes. With these metaphoric extensions, which
Talmy (2000) refers to as fictive motion, a figure (e.g.,

tattoo, road) is conceptualized relative to a landmark (e.g.,
spine) or set of landmarks (e.g., alpine lakes) in a stationary
scene. According to Talmy and other cognitive linguists,
understanding sentences such as The tattoo runs along his
spine, requires “moving” or “scanning” from one part of a
scene to another, most notably, along the figure (e.g., spine,
road). On this view, this type of dynamic imagery enables or
facilitates spatial computation about the placement and
alignment of objects, for instance, a tattoo relative to a
spine, a road relative to a series of alpine lakes (see also
Talmy, 1983, 1996; Langacker, 1986, 2000; Matsumoto,
1996; Matlock, in press b). (Our study focuses on only one
type of fictive motion schema, Talmy’s co-extension path.)
Recent experimental work provides evidence for the
idea that understanding fictive motion involves simulated
motion. Matlock (2003a) had people read a fictive motion
sentence (hereafter, FM-sentence), such as The trail goes
through the desert, in the context of a story about a
protagonist traveling through a spatial region (e.g., desert).
In reading the FM-sentence, people had to make a speeded
decision about whether it related to the story. To make this
decision, people had to think about the travel as it was
described in the story, for instance, how fast the person was
going, what obstacles they encountered, and so on. The
results show that processing information about fast travel
made for quicker FM-sentence reading times than did
processing information about slow travel. Similar results
were found for reading about traveling a short distance
(versus long distance) and for reading about travel through
an uncluttered terrain (versus cluttered terrain). Together,
the results suggest that the way people understand space and
motion influences the way they understand fictive motion
language. Namely, they simulate movement along a path or
scanning along a trajectory.
Other experimental results further support the idea that
fictive motion involves simulation. Matlock (in press a) had
people think about and draw pictures to represent scenes for
FM-sentences, such as The road goes along the coast, and
comparable (at least on the surface) NFM-sentences (nonfictive motion sentences), such as The road is next to the
coast. People generally drew longer figures (e.g., road) to
depict their understanding of FM-sentences than they did for
NFM-sentences. The difference did not simply arise with
traversable paths or objects metonymically associated with
motion (i.e., roads are associated with motion). People also
tended to draw longer figures (lakes) for FM-sentences such
as The lake runs between the golf course and the railroad
tracks than they did for comparable NFM-sentences such as
The lake is between the golf course and the railroad tracks.
In addition, people drew longer lines to represent roads in
FM-sentences with fast-manner verbs such as jet, as in The
road jets through the city, than with slow-manner verbs,
such as creep, as in The road creeps through the city. The
same trend was observed for actual motion sentences, such
as The bus jets through the city and The bus crawls through
the city, suggesting that fictive motion construal and actual
motion construal are similar (see also Matlock, 2003b).

794

Together, these findings suggest that people’s
experience with space, including knowing how things move
and how terrain impedes or facilitates motion, influences
their understanding of stationary spatial scenes as described
by FM-sentences. However, it is not obvious from these
findings alone whether there is an actual “motion”
component to the representations underlying fictive motion.
To determine whether engaging in fictive motion
processing involves using the structures involved in
processing actual motion, the following experiment
examined whether engaging in thinking involving fictive
motion would influence people’s understanding of time.
Specifically, will thinking about and drawing a picture to
represent the meaning of an FM-sentence, such as The road
goes along the coast, influence the way people answer the
ambiguous question about the Wednesday meeting that had
“been moved forward two days” (shown in (1))?

Experiment
The following study investigated the possibility that
engaging in thought about fictive motion could influence
people’s reasoning about time. Participants were asked to
(a) to read a fictive-motion sentence (e.g., The road runs
along the coast) or a non-fictive motion sentence (e.g., The
road is next to the coast), (b) sketch what they imagined,
and (c) then answer the ambiguous question, “Next
Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward two days.
What day is the meeting now that it has been rescheduled?”
As mentioned, answers to this question were split
evenly between Monday and Friday when people were not
engaged in spatial reasoning per se. However, if participants
were thinking about themselves moving, or about people or
objects moving through space towards a distant goal, they
tended to adopt the perspective of the moving person or
object and were significantly more likely to answer Friday
(Boroditsky 2000; Boroditsky & Ramscar 2002).
We predicted that if people interpreted a fictive motion
sentence in terms of actual motion involving the figure
(referred to by the subject noun phrase, for instance, tattoo,
in The tattoo runs along his spine), they would be more
likely to answer “Friday” to the ambiguous question. Thus
people who have processed a fictive motion sentence ought
to be more likely to “move” forward in time when asked an
ambiguous question about “moving” a meeting date than
those who have processed a non-fictive motion sentence
(e.g., The road is next to the coast).

Participants
One hundred thirty-nine Stanford University psychology
students participated in return for course credit.

Method and materials
The study materials comprised a one-page questionnaire that
was completed as part of a packet of unrelated materials.
The questionnaire contained three apparently unrelated
questions. The first asked, “In the space below, please
sketch the image conveyed to you by the following

sentence.” Immediately below that was a fictive motion
(FM) sentence (e.g., The tattoo runs along his spine) or a no
–motion (NFM) sentence (e.g., The tattoo is next to his
spine), and below that, a blank space 4.5 (height) inches by
11 (length) inches in which the participant was to draw the
image. Table 1 shows the complete list of these stimuli. The
second question was the ambiguous question, “Next
Wednesday’s meeting had been moved forward two days.
What day is the meeting not that it has been rescheduled?”
Each participant was given only a single page (i.e., each
read a single FM- or NFM-sentence, drew a single picture,
and responded only once to the ambiguous question).
The final question was a filler question related to the
origins of denominal verbs.

when the meeting was than with “Monday” (time-moving)
after fictive motion thinking than after non-fictive motion
thinking. Of the participants primed with fictive motion,
70% indicated that they thought the meeting was on Friday,
and 30% thought it was on Monday. Of the participants not
primed with fictive motion, 51% thought it was Friday, and
49% thought it was Monday (χ2(1) = 5.56, p < 0.02.)

Figure1.

Drawing data. We wanted to see if there would be any
difference in length for the figures drawn in FM and NFM
sketches. First, the absolute length of figures (e.g., tattoo,
road) were measured in centimeters, as were the absolute
widths of figures.
(By “absolute” we mean length
regardless of curves or undulations in shape.) Length scores
for each figure were then calculated by dividing length by
width.

Table 1: Fictive motion and non-motion stimuli
FM Sentences
The bike path runs alongside the creek
The highway runs along the coast
The county line runs along the river
The tattoo runs along his spine
The bookcase runs from the fireplace to the door
NFM Sentences

Results
The task provided two sources of data for analysis, both the
participants’ answers to the ambiguous question, and also
the pictures that were drawn to illustrate the prime
sentences.
Question data. As predicted, the way people thought about
time while processing a fictive motion or a non-fictive
motion sentence influenced their reasoning about time (see
Figure 1). In particular, participants were more likely to
respond with “Friday” (ego-moving) to the question about
FM
NFM

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Monday

Friday

795

AVE LENGTH (L/W) in cm

12

The bike path is next to the creek
The highway is next to the coast
The county line is the river
The tattoo is next to his spine
The bookcase is between the fireplace and the door

Number of responses

Responses to the ambiguous question by

condition.

FM
NFM

10
8
6
4
2
0
FRI

MON

Figure 2. Mean length scores for figures in drawings.
Overall, people drew longer figures in depictions of
FM-sentences (M = 8.30) than in depictions of NFMsentences (M = 4.67), t(9) = 3.69, p < .005, as shown in
Figure 2. Interestingly, the effect size was much larger for
people who went on to answer Friday to the ambiguous
question (FM, M=9.3, NFM M=4.0; t(4) = 3.89, p < .01) than
for those who went on to answer Monday (FM, M=7.3,
NFM M=5.3; t(4) = 1.82, p < .07). Moreover, participants
who answered Friday drew longer pictures after an FM
prime than did those who answered Monday (FM-Friday,
M=9.3, FM-Monday, M=7.3, t(4) = 2.06, p < .05). Table 2
displays the mean figure lengths for all FM and NFM
sentences. Figure 3 shows two sample drawings for The

tattoo runs along his spine (FM) and The tattoo is next to
his spine (NFM).
Table 2: Mean length score per prime sentence.
FM Sentences
12.56
7.78
11.68
8.4
2.77

The bike path runs alongside the creek
The highway runs along the coast
The county line runs along the river
The tattoo runs along his spine
The bookcase runs from the fireplace to
the door

NFM Sentences
7.73
6.21
4.81
1.3
1.19

The bike path is next to the creek
The highway is next to the coast
The county line is the river
The tattoo is next to his spine
The bookcase is between the fireplace and
the door

consistent with earlier results (Matlock, in press b). Namely,
when people draw pictures to depict the meaning of spatial
sentences, they draw longer figures with fictive motion
sentences than with comparable non-motion sentences (even
when chance is factored into the analysis). This reflects a
natural tendency to simulate motion or scanning as people
build up a mental representation. Moreover, if we take these
drawings as providing insight into the level of activation of
actual motion structures resulting from fictive motion
comprehension, then what is interesting is that although our
participants drew longer figures after fictive motion primes
as compared to non-motion primes irrespective of how they
answered the ambiguous question, those participants who
went on to answer Friday to the ambiguous question showed
more activation (revealed by significantly longer figures in
their bdrawings) than did those who went on to answer
Monday. Consistent with the priming hypothesis put
forward by Boroditsky (2000; Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002)
it appears that while the fictive motion sentences always
succeeded in priming actual motion, as the activation of the
actual motion structures that this priming produced
increased (as evidenced by the drawings) so too did the
likelihood that spatial structures would subsequently be
activated.
Thus, these results are consistent with Borodistky and
Ramscar’s (2002) finding that the representations that give
rise to abstract thinking are directly related to the
experience-based representations from which they recruit
their structure.

General Discussion

Figure 3. Examples of FM and NFM depictions. The
tattoo runs along his spine (left) and The tattoo is next to his
spine (right).

Discussion
Our results---in which participants’ answers to the
ambiguous question were at chance after non-fictive motion
primes, but strongly biased towards Friday after fictive
motion primes---indicate that thought about fictive motion
does indeed influence the understanding of time. When
people think about a spatial description involving fictive
motion, they subsequently apply the same motion
perspective to thinking about time. In this case, they adopt
the perspective of the subject of the fictive motion sentence
moving through space, and accordingly activate an egomoving temporal schema that in turn produces a Friday
answer to the ambiguous question. When people think about
a spatial description without fictive motion, which does not
relate to a particular a motion schema, their temporal
thinking is unaffected (as there is nothing in such a static
spatial description to influence it). Thus, in answering an
ambiguous question about time, responses are at chance.
Further support comes from considering the drawing
data and question data together. The drawing results are

796

Since the structures that underpin our systems of temporal
knowledge are explicitly construed in terms of motion, it
seems that the only way that fictive motion thought could
influence the motion perspective that underpins a particular
way of thinking about time is if fictive motion thinking
served to activate a representation of the same motion
perspective. That is, understanding fictive motion appears to
activate a motion schema in which “forward” movement is
conceptualized along a path or trajector, which has in turn
activated the analogous temporal motion schema.
As discussed, it is not obvious that thinking about
fictive motion should involve any representation of actual
motion. Indeed, it has been argued that it does not. Because
the entities that the subject-noun phrases of fictive motion
sentences refer to do not actually move, it is plausible to
suppose that the representations underlying the
understanding of expressions of fictive motion are
fundamentally
different
from
those
supporting
understanding of actual motion (which unlike the
representations associated with fictive motion, do actually
represent movement).
Based on the evidence presented here, however, it
appears that language theories that appeal to the notion of
dynamic representation or mentally simulated action (e.g.,
Talmy, 2000) can better account for fictive motion than can
theories that advocate a purely static representation (e.g.,
Jackendoff, 2002). Our results indicate that some sort of
dynamic imagery is invoked when people process sentences

such as The tattoo runs along his spine or The highway runs
along the coast. Were this not the case, it is unlikely that
we would have seen the effects on people’s representations
of time in response to fictive motion primes that we did.
Metaphors enable people to take knowledge from more
experienced-based domains, such as actual motion through
space, to talk about more abstract domains, such as time and
the abstract spatial information described using fictive
motion. Consistent with this idea, the results reported here
suggest that people’s representations of both time and
fictive motion both share a common base and ancestor:
actual motion. As is usually the case when metaphors go
beyond what can be observed in experience, these abstract
ideas make use of the structures involved in talking about
the concrete domain, suggesting that some abstract
knowledge can be constructed and shaped by language
(Boroditsky, 2001).
All this makes the task of
characterizing abstract thought even more of a challenge.
The evidence suggests any such characterization will have
to take in not only what comes from innate wiring and
physical experience, but also the ways in which languages
and cultures have allowed us to go beyond these to make
ourselves us smart and sophisticated as we are.

References
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
Structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M. (2002). The Roles of Body
and Mind in Abstract Thought. Psychological Science,
13(2), 185-188.
Clark, H.H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. San Diego: Academic Press.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space
time metaphors. Language and cognitive processes,
17(5), Oct 2002, 537-565.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind: figurative
thought, language, and understanding. New York:
Cambridge.
Holyoak, K.J. & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, The MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R (2002). Foundations of language. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1986). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: Chicago Universtity Press.

797

Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh:
The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western
Thought. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Langacker, R.W. (1986). Absract motion. Proceedings of
the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics
Society, 455–471.
Langacker, R. W. (2000). Virtual reality. Studies in the
Linguistic Sciences, 29, 77-103.
McGlone, M.S. & Harding, J.L. (1998). Back (or forward?)
to the future: the role of perspective in temporal language
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 24(5), 1211-1223.
Matlock, T. (2003a). Fictive motion as cognitive simulation.
Journal submission under review.
Matlock, T. (2003b). Looking at fictive motion. Eighth
Annual International Cognitive Linguistics Conference.
University of La Rioja, Spain.
Matlock, T. (in press a). The conceptual motivation of
fictive motion. In G. Radden and R. Dirven (Eds.),
Motivation in grammar. Amsterdam: John H. Benjamins.
Matlock, T. (in press b). Depicting fictive motion in
drawings. In J. Luchenbroers, (Ed.), Cognitive
Linguistics: Investigations across languages, fields, and
philosophical boundaries. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Matsumoto, Y. (1996). Subjective motion and English and
Japanese verbs. Cognitive Linguistics, 7, 183-226.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Radden, G. (1996). Motion metaphorized: The case of
‘coming’ and ‘going’. In E. Casad (Ed.), Cognitive
Linguistics in the Redwoods: The Expansion of a New
Paradigm in Linguistics (pp. 423–458). Berlin, New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Radden, G. (1997). Time is space. In: B. Smieja and M.
Tasch (Eds.), Human Contact through Language and
Linguistics (pp. 147–66). New York, NY: P. Lang.
Sweetser, E.E. (1990). From etymology to pragmatics: The
mind-as-body metaphor in semantic structure and
semantic change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Talmy, L. (1975). Semantics and syntax of motion. In J. P.
Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Volume 4 (pp.181–
238). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.
Pick, & L.P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research, and application (pp. 225-282). New York:
Plenum Press.
Talmy, L. (1996). Fictive motion in language and
“ception”. In P. Bloom, M.A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M.F.
Garrett (Eds.), Language and space (pp. 211-276).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics, Volume
I: Conceptual Structuring Systems. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

