UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The use of “that” in the Production and Comprehension of Object Relative Clauses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5n3394p8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Race, David S.
MacDonald, Maryellen C.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The use of “that” in the Production and Comprehension of Object
Relative Clauses
David S. Race (drace@lcnl.wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
1202 W. Johnson Street, WI 53706 USA

Maryellen C. MacDonald (mcmacdonald@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
1202 W. Johnson Street, WI 53706 USA
clause (The story) is the object of the embedded
clause. As the example illustrates, the relative
pronoun “that” can be optionally inserted or omitted
without changing the meaning of the sentence.
Previous comprehension studies have found that
inclusion of “that” reduces comprehension difficulty
(Hakes, & Cairns, 1970; Hakes, & Foss, 1970;
Hakes, Evans, & Brannon, 1976). However, recent
evidence from production of the complementizer
“that” in sentential complement constructions such as
“I know (that) you missed practice” suggests the use
of optional “that” in this construction is modulated by
production difficulty, with increased use of “that”
when upcoming material is more difficult to produce
than when it is easier (Ferreira & Dell, 2000). In this
view, since “that” is a highly accessible and frequent
word, it can be inserted to allow extra planning time
for upcoming difficult material.
We conducted two experiments to determine
whether “that” use in ORCs was similarly affected by
production difficulty. A corpus analysis and oral
production experiment investigated “that” use in
ORCs in written and oral production, respectively.
Finally, a self-paced reading experiment examined
whether comprehenders were sensitive to the
distributional patterns of “that” use.

Abstract
We explore the interplay between production and
comprehension by investigating why producers insert or
omit the function word “that” in Object Relative Clauses,
and how this choice affects comprehension. We present
data from three experiments which suggests that producers
insert “that” to alleviate production difficulty and in doing
so create a distributional pattern of “that” use.
Comprehenders are shown to be sensitive to these patterns.
Implications for the interaction of comprehension and
production processes are discussed.

Introduction
Language inherently depends on the integration
of production and comprehension, yet each of these
processes is typically studied in isolation. MacDonald
(1999) argued against this tendency and suggested
that a consideration of production processes could
shed light on ambiguity resolution during
comprehension. Specifically, she argued that the
incremental nature of production (in which words or
phrases that are relatively easier to access and
produce tend to be placed earlier in the sentence,
(Bock & Levelt, 1994)) create distributional patterns
of word order in the language. Sensitivity to these
distributional patterns in turn create biases in
ambiguity resolution during comprehension.
MacDonald (1999) suggested that sensitivity to
production-motivated patterns could account for
patterns of ambiguity resolution preferences that
were otherwise unexplained in comprehension
accounts, and without recourse to specialized
ambiguity resolution principles. Here, we extend this
argument to a different phenomenon in both
production and comprehension. Whereas MacDonald
(1999) had investigated production constraints on
word order and their effect on ambiguity resolution,
we investigate production factors motivating the
optional use of “that” in Object Relative Clauses
(ORCs), and the comprehension consequences of
“that” use in this syntactically unambiguous
structure.
ORCs such as “The story (that) she read was
long”, are so called because the subject of the main

Experiment 1
The purpose of the corpus analysis was to extract
object relative clauses and identify production factors
that lead to the insertion or omission of "that". We
hypothesized that “that” is inserted in response to
production difficulty. Therefore, it was predicted that
the use of “that” in ORCs would increase as
production difficulty increased (Ferreira & Dell,
2000). Production difficulty in ORCs can stem from
several different factors. We specifically looked at
the factors of Embedded Subject NP type (pronoun,
common noun, proper noun), the use of a determiner
in the embedded subject, length in words of the main
subject NP, length in words of the embedded subject
NP, and length in words of the embedded clause after
the embedded subject NP. A regression analysis was
then carried out to observe whether they reliably
accounted for any of the variance of “that” use

946

clear that production difficulty does play a role in use
of the relative pronoun.

Method
The Penn Trebank's tgrep utility (Marcus,
Marcinkiewicz, & Santorini, 1993) was used to
extract all sentences from the Wall St. Journal corpus
for unreduced and reduced ORCs respectively.
Although the relative pronoun can be realized by a
number of lexical items (that, which, who, whom),
only ORCs containing "that" or no relative pronoun
were extracted for analysis. This was done mainly
because "that" is less subject to prescriptive claims
about when it should be used relative to who vs.
whom. Eventually, for reduced ORCs 1017 sentences
were returned, while 323 sentences were returned for
unreduced ORCs. The reduced and unreduced
sentences were then coded for the following factors;
(a) "that" use, (b) Main subject NP length in words,
(c) Embedded subject NP length in words, (d) Rest of
the relative clause length in words, (e) Embedded
Subject Type (pronoun, common noun, proper noun),
(f) Presence or absence of a determiner within the
embedded subject.

Table 1. Five production difficulty factors in a
hierarchical regression predicting “that” use.
Entering
Factors
1. Embedded
Subject noun
Type
2. Embedded
subject noun
Length
3. Determiner in embedded NP
4. Main
subject noun
phrase length
5. Rest of
Embedded
clause Length

Results and Discussion
A hierarchical regression was conducted to
uncover if any production difficulty factors
accounted for reliable amounts of variance in “that”
use. However, since Embedded Subject Type is
neither dichotomous or continuous, we first
conducted a chi-square analysis to determine whether
this factor could be handled within a hierarchical
regression. The analysis showed that the three NP
types were not distributed evenly across both levels
of “that” use, χ2(2) = 120.85, p < .05. Pairwise
comparisons, with correction for continuity, showed
that pronouns appeared more frequently in reduced
sentences than either common nouns χ2(1) = 87.82, p
< .05, or proper nouns χ 2(1) = 85.13, p < .05, but
common and proper nouns did not differ in their
distributions, χ2(1) = 0.02, n.s. We therefore
combined common and proper nouns into a single
“noun” value (to contrast with “pronoun” in NP type)
for the purposes of our analysis.
Table 1 presents the five factors that entered the
regression analysis, in the order they entered, and the
direction of each effect. The final result after all five
factors entered was r2 = .15, p < .05. In all cases,
more difficult material to produce (increased length,
absence of a determiner, a full noun phrase rather
than a short, high frequency pronoun) yielded
increased “that” use.
It appears that at least in written production,
producers can take advantage of optional "that" in
ORCs to allow more time for planning the embedded
clause. The relatively small amount of variance
accounted for by these five factors suggests that these
are not the only constraints on “that” use, but it is

Direction of Effect
“that” use associated more
with full noun phrase than
pronoun
“that” use increased with
increasing length of the
embedded subject NP.
Less “that” use if
embedded subject
contained determiner
Increased use of “that”
with the increasing length
of the main NP.
Increased use of "that"
with increasing length of
embedded clause after the
embedded subject.

r2
.09
.11
.13
.14
.15

The corpus analysis proved to be a useful tool for
uncovering the distributional pattern of “that” use in
written production. Factors such as prescriptive rules
during the editing process of writing may influence
the final product of a written corpus in ways that do
not occur in oral production, however. This concern
motivated the next experiment, which manipulated
“that” use and Embedded Subject Type, in a read and
recall oral production task.

Experiment 2
A production experiment was conducted to
determine whether the results of the corpus analysis
could be extended to oral production. The objective
was to manipulate production difficulty in oral
production and observe whether it significantly
affected the degree to which speakers inserted "that"
in ORCs. A sentence recall task similar to that used
by Ferreira and Dell (2000) was conducted, in which
participants read a number of individually presented
sentences and recalled them when cued. Since noun
vs. pronoun Embedded Subject Type accounted for
the most variance in Experiment 1, we manipulated it
here as well as the presence of “that” in the stimulus
sentences, which created four conditions
(+that/common noun, +that/pronoun, -that/common
noun, -that/pronoun).
The recall task is useful for this study because it
constrains participants to use an object relative
clause, but allows the optional use of "that".
Furthermore, research has indicated that the shortterm recall of sentences is generated from semantic

947

representations and proceeds through the system in
much the same manner as spontaneous production
(Potter & Lombardi, 1992). These claims taken
together suggest that ORCs generated in this
experiment will be subject to similar constraints
found outside the lab.

For experimental trials, the critical sentence was
always presented first followed by the presentation of
a non-relative clause sentence. In filler trials, the first
sentence never contained a relative clause of any sort,
and the second sentence was always a subject relative
clause. All sentences were presented in the horizontal
and vertical center of the screen for 5 seconds
followed by a 1-second, blank screen interval.
Participants had the task of reading each sentence
aloud and remembering them for later recall. After
the presentation of the second sentence, there was a
1-second interval before the recall stage began.
During the recall stage, the first two words of a
presented sentence in that trial were displayed to cue
recall of that sentence. For both experimental and
filler trials, cue words from the first presented
sentence were displayed first for half of the trials, and
second for the other half. The cue words remained on
the screen for 800 milliseconds after which they were
immediately replaced by a "timebar" made of red
asterisks. The timebar began with 5 asterisks and
decreased in number by one every 1-second, giving
participants five seconds in total to recall the
sentence. After the timebar had expired, the
experimenter used a button box to initiate the next
display of cue words. The recall stage of the second
sentence proceeded in the exact same manner as the
first sentence, except that afterward the experimenter
initiated the next trial. All of the experimental and
filler trials were randomized. The lists were
counterbalanced such that participants experienced
every condition, but saw each item in only one
condition. Participants were recorded on an audio
tape so that their utterances could be transcribed. The
experiment lasted approximately 30 minutes.

Method
Participants. Sixty-four students from the University
of Wisconsin-Madison received extra credit for their
participation in this experiment. All participants were
native speakers of English, and had normal or
corrected to normal vision.
Materials. The experimental sentences consisted of
28 ORCs that were manipulated for the use of "that"
and type of embedded subject. Example 1 below
presents an experimental item in all four conditions
of "that" use and embedded subject type.
1a. +that, common noun. The pastas that chefs
prepared for the reception were sticky.
b. +that, pronoun. The pastas that they prepared for
the reception were sticky.
c. -that, common noun . The pastas chefs prepared
for the reception were sticky.
d. -that, pronoun . The pastas they prepared for the
reception were sticky.
Each sentence began with a 2-word inanimate
plural noun phrase such as, "The articles" which was
optionally followed by "that". Next came the
embedded subject noun phrase, which consisted of a
plural animate noun such as "journalists", or the
plural pronoun "they". This was followed by a past
tense verb (e.g. wrote), and a three-word
prepositional phrase. The main clause was
reintroduced with the main verb "were", after which
the sentence was completed with an adjective.
Seventy filler items were also constructed ranging
from 5-11 words in length. Ten of these were
presented as practice items at the start of the
experiment. The fillers described a variety of
situations and used various types of syntactic
constructions, including subject relative clauses.

Results
Responses to the experimental stimuli were
transcribed and coded for acceptability and “that”
use. Trials were deemed unacceptable for any of the
following reasons: 1) During the presentation phase,
participants misread the sentence by inserting extra
words, omitting words, or mispronouncing words
(adding or dropping inflection for example). 2)
Recalling a sentence in an ungrammatical or
nonsensical manner. In effect an acceptable trial had
a correctly read sentence during the presentation
stage, and a grammatically acceptable object relative
clause during the recall stage. Overall, this method of
coding yielded 62% of the trials acceptable.
Occasional missing cells (because all trials for a
given participant and condition yielded unacceptable
sentences) were replaced by the average level of
“that” use from other cells for that participant.
Participants were expected to produce ORCs with
embedded subjects that corresponded to the
conditions in the presentation phase (+/- thatpronoun, +/- that-common noun). However, two new

Design/Procedure. A trial consisted of two stages,
presentation and recall. In the presentation stage, two
sentences were individually presented, and were read
aloud by the participant. In the recall stage, cue
words from each sentence were used to prompt recall
of one of the sentences. There were two types of
trials, experimental and filler. Experimental trials
presented one filler and one experimental sentence,
while filler trials presented two filler sentences. The
stimuli were presented on an iMac using Psyscope
software.

948

response types were also produced, in that
participants sometimes inserted the definite
determiner “the” in the embedded subject of the
common noun conditions, both when producing and
omitting “that”. The embedded subject nouns in the
stimulus sentences had never contained “the” and
thus this insertion represents a slight error in recall.
The resulting sentences are fully grammatical
however, and as “the” insertion may have similar
motivations from production difficulty as “that”
insertion, we included all sentences with “the” for
additional analysis.
An analysis of variance was conducted to
determine whether there was a significant difference
of “that” use based on Embedded Subject Type (noun
vs. pronoun), the presence of “that” in the initial
sentence presentation, and whether the critical
sentence was the first or second to be recalled in a
trial. This Order of Recall factor did not have a
significant effect on “that” use and will not be
discussed further. Since the definite determiner “the”
was predicted to play a similar role as the use of
"that”, for this analysis those two types of responses
were collapsed into the category “that”. The use of
“that” was significantly higher when it had been
present in the stimulus sentence [F1(1, 63) = 196.67,
p < .05; F2(1, 27) = 10.81, p < .05]. Figure 1 shows
the important result in this experiment, that “that”
was produced more often in the common noun
condition (75% “that” use) than in the pronoun
condition (41% “that” [F1(1, 63) = 107.194, p < .05;
F2(1, 27) = 2.67, p < .05]. Finally, there was a
significant interaction such that the difference in
"that" use between the common noun and pronoun
conditions was larger when "that" was absent from
the stimulus sentence [F1(1, 63) = 9.22, p < .05; F2(1,
27) = 5.02, p < .05].

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 support the
production difficulty hypothesis for oral production.
When the embedded subject was a common noun,
participants tended to produce “that” significantly
more often than when the embedded subject was a
highly accessible, frequent pronoun. Interestingly,
participants at times inserted “the” in the embedded
subject although it was not a part of any of the
conditions in the presentation stage. Although the
exact reason for this is not certain, as suggested
earlier, this tendency may be due in part to alleviate
production difficulty. Additional analyses may shed
light on the exact patterns of “that” use.
The sum of the corpus and oral production studies
suggests that as producers insert “that” to deal with
production difficulty, a distributional pattern
emerges. The use of “that” is associated with longer
embedded phrases, common and proper noun
embedded subjects, and lack of a determiner in the
embedded subject. The next step in this study was to
explore the interaction between production and
comprehension by ascertaining whether
comprehenders were sensitive to this distribution.
The final experiment employed the self-paced
reading task to observe whether participants’ reading
times reflected sensitivity to the probabilistic
constraints imposed by “that” use and type of
embedded subject.

Experiment 3
To test comprehender sensitivity to the
distributional pattern of “that” in ORCs, a self-paced
reading study was conducted which manipulated the
use of "that" with the type of embedded subject
(common noun vs. pronoun). By manipulating these
variables, conditions were created that were either
similar to the distributional pattern in normal
production (+that with common noun, -that with
pronoun) or dissimilar to that pattern (-that with
common noun, +that with pronoun). If participants
are sensitive to the distributional patterns of "that"
use in ORCs, it is predicted that processing will be
easiest when the conditions are similar to the
distributional pattern, which entails that the insertion
of "that" will not always be helpful. This prediction
contrasts with previous claims that “that” use always
helps comprehenders (Hakes, & Cairns, 1970; Hakes
& Foss, 1970; Hakes, et al., 1976). These earlier
studies contained a limited range of ORCs, however,
and typically investigated only ones with full noun
embedded subjects, that is, the subset that we predict
will be helped by “that” use.

80

60

40

20

0

Pronoun

Common Noun

Embedded Subject Type

Method

Figure 1: Percentage of “that” use for the
Pronoun and Common Noun conditions.

Participants. Thirty-six undergraduates from the
University of Southern California received extra

949

credit for participation in this study. Data from four
participants were lost due to technical error. All
participants were native speakers of English.

distributional pattern (common noun embedded
subjects) and detrimental in conditions where it was
not similar (pronoun embedded subject). An ANOVA
revealed an interaction of That, Embedded Subject
Type, and Region Position [F1(9, 279) = 3.65, p <
.01; F2(9, 243) = 3.98, p < .01]. For the common
noun condition presented in Figure 2, unreduced
sentences had faster reading times at every region.
For the pronoun condition presented in Figure 3,
reading times were similar at all regions except the
main verb, where reduced sentences were
significantly faster.

Materials. The items in this experiment were
lengthened versions of the items used in Experiment
2. The variables of “that” (insertion vs. omission) and
Embedded Subject Type (common noun vs. pronoun)
were manipulated in exactly the same manner as in
that study. The experimental items were lengthened
by increasing the number of words after the main
verb, so that factors involved with reading the end of
the sentence would not influence reading times on the
main verb. The experiment also contained 60 fillers,
10 of which were used for practice items. Yes/No
comprehension questions were created for all items,
with the correct answer being "yes" for half the items.

+that/noun
80

Reading Times

-that/noun

P r o c e d u r e . The stimuli were presented on a
computer screen in a moving window display. All
non-whitespace characters of individually presented
sentences were represented by dashes. By pressing a
key, the first word of the sentence was revealed. The
next keypress revealed the next word while the
previous word reverted to dashes. The sentence was
read in this manner until completion. After the
sentence was completed, participants answered a
comprehension question by pressing either a "yes" or
"no" key. An error message was displayed for
incorrect answers. The stimuli were presented in
random order in one of four counterbalanced lists.
Participants were instructed to read at a normal pace
and to answer questions as quickly and accurately as
possible. The experiment lasted approximately 25
minutes.

40

0

-40

-80

chefs

made

PP

were

Word/Region
Figure 2: Length Adjusted Reading Times for the
common noun conditions.

Results
The analyses of reading times included only
sentences in which the participant answered the
comprehension question correctly, which affected
11% of the trials. An analysis of variance (ANOVA)
revealed that there was no significant difference in
accuracy between conditions F’s < 1.
Reading times were adjusted for length using a
regression equation predicting reading time from
word length, constructed for each subject, using both
filler and experimental items (Ferreira and Clifton,
1986; Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994).
Length-adjusted reading times beyond 2 SD above
the condition mean for that word were trimmed,
affecting 5% of the data.
For the experimental sentences, reading times
were examined from five regions (1) embedded
subject, (2) embedded PP, (3) main verb, (4)
embedded verb, and (5) the final phrase after the
main verb. Reading times for regions 1-4 are shown
in Figures 2 and 3. Our Hypothesis was that the use
of “that” would be helpful in conditions similar to the

+that/pn
-that/pn

Reading Times

10

-10

-30

-50

they

made

PP

were

Word/Region
Figure 3: Length adjusted reading times for the
pronoun conditions.

950

References

Discussion
The results of the comprehension experiment
indicate that comprehenders are sensitive to the
distributional properties of “that” in language
production. The inclusion of "that" is helpful to
comprehenders, but only in environments that
parallel its use in language production. Experiments 1
and 2 converged to show that ORCs with a common
noun embedded subject tended to be produced with
"that" while those with pronoun embedded subjects
tended to be produced without "that". Participants
were sensitive to this pattern such that reaction times
were shorter throughout unreduced ORCs with
common noun embedded subjects, and at the main
verb for reduced ORCs with pronoun embedded
subjects. Importantly, for both types of embedded
subject, “that” had an effect at the main verb, which
has traditionally been a point to find experimental
effects. In accordance with previous research, the
comprehension of ORCs is dependant on the
satisfaction of multiple probabilistic constraints.

Bock, J. K., & Levelt, W. (1994). Language
production: Grammatical encoding. Gernsbacher,
Morton Ann (Ed). (1994). Handbook of
psycholinguistics. (pp. 945-984). San Diego, CA,
US: Academic Press.
Ferreira, V. S., & Dell, G. S. (2000). Effect of
ambiguity and lexical availability on syntactic and
lexical production. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296340.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C., Jr., (1986). The
independence of syntactic processing. Journal of
Memory and Language, 25, 348-368.
Hakes, D. T., Evans, J. S., & Brannon, L. L (1976).
Understanding sentences with relative clauses.
Memory & Cognition, 4(3), 283-290.
Hakes, D. T., & Cairns H. S. (1970). Sentence
comprehension and relative pronouns. Perception
& Psychophysics, 8, 5-8.
Hakes, D. T., & Foss, D. J. (1970). Decision
Processes during sentence comprehension: Effects
of surface structure reconsidered. Perception &
Psychophysics, 8(6), 413-416.
MacDonald, M. C., (1999). Distributional
information in language comprehension,
production, and acquisition: Three puzzles and a
moral. MacWhinney, Brian (Ed). (1999). The
emergence of language. (pp. 177-196). Mahwah,
NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
MacDonald, M. C. (1994). Probabilistic constraints
and syntactic ambiguity resolution. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 9, 157-201.
Marcus, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., & Santorini,
B. (1993). Building a large annotated corpus of
English: The Penn Treebank.
Potter, M. C. & Lombardi, L. (1992).
Theregeneration of syntax in short term memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 713-733.
Trueswell, J. C. (1996). The role of lexical frequency
in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 566-585.
Trueswell J. C., Tanenhaus M. K., & Garnsey, S, M.
(1994). Semantic influences on parsing: Use of
thematic role information in syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 33,
285-318.

General Discussion
The results of experiments 1-3 converge in
supporting the production-constraint approach to the
interaction between the production and
comprehension systems. Results from Experiment 1
indicated that production difficulty factors, such as
embedded subject type, and main NP length, can
influence the accessibility of the embedded subject
and therefore “that” use. Experiment 2 confirmed that
production difficulty factors found to influence “that”
use in written text, carry over to oral production.
Finally, Experiment 3 determined that
comprehenders are sensitive to the distributional
pattern of “that” use in ORCs.
These results suggest that as with the complex
syntactic ambiguities that MacDonald (1999)
investigated, production difficulty in ORCs also
creates clear distributional patterns that
comprehenders can detect.
The patterns in
MacDonald’s original investigation were dramatic
changes in word order as a function of production
difficulty, while the inclusion or omission of “that”
seems much more subtle.
Comprehenders
nonetheless showed clear effects of “that” use in
interpreting the ORCs. This suggests that the link
between production constraints, distributional
patterns, and comprehension processes is a
potentially important area in comprehension and
production work. More broadly, this work suggests
that the integrated study of comprehension and
production processes offers insight into the two
systems that is not easily obtained when each is
investigated individually.

951

