UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Affect on Risky Behavior: From the Lab to Real World Financial Behavior

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nz349kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Moore, Simon C.
Chater, Nick

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Affect on Risky Behavior: From the Lab to Real World
Financial Behavior
Simon C Moore (simon.moore@warwick.ac.uk)
Nick Chater (n.chater@warwick.ac.uk)
Decision Technology Research Group, Department of Psychology, Warwick University
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

Abstract
There is some evidence indicating a relationship between
variations in affect and risk aversion: under certain
conditions the behavior observed suggests less risk
aversion the more positive the affective state. The
research presented in this paper examined how variations
in everyday affective states influenced risk taking
behavior in the laboratory using simple gambling tasks
and then sought to corroborate findings in the laboratory
using data on real world financial decision making. We
observed a significant and positive relationship between
affect and risky behavior in the laboratory that we
replicated using structural equation modeling on real
world financial data. It is argued that cognitive theories
of affect and decision making might have real economic
consequences.

Introduction
It is generally accepted that the working population
across the industrialized world is not accumulating
sufficient wealth to support their retirement. Although
the causes and remedies to this crisis are many, one
contributory feature of savings behavior is that
individual portfolios are not sufficiently ‘risky’. In
general, funds invested in low return, but ‘safe’, savings
instruments such as savings accounts under perform
large diversified portfolios that contain greater ‘risk’.
Thus, cognitive research that improves our
understanding of what influences risky behavior may
contribute towards a better understanding of saving
behavior and may help to ameliorate some of the
problems surrounding the inadequacy of current savings
strategies.
The research presented in this paper
addresses how affect influences risky behavior and we
discuss the data with reference to cognitive models of
risk and affect (e.g. Ashby, Isen, & Turken, 1999).
Thus, this work provides an example of how cognitive
science may have substantial real-world implications.

Individual Differences and Risk
An individual may exhibit variations in behavior over
time. Risk preferences, for example, are found to covary with age, gender, marital status and occupation

822

(Bromiley & Curley, 1992, p12). Specific to the
research presented here, variations in affective state
also appear to bias risky behavior in hypothetical
investing scenarios (e.g. Arkes, Herren, & Isen, 1988;
Isen & Patrick, 1983; Kahn & Isen, 1993). The
research presented here sought to extend our
understanding of how decisions that are made involving
risky options are influenced by the affective state and
further explored techniques that may offer researchers a
means of testing cognitive models involving risk might
be tested in real world environments.

Affect and Risk in the Laboratory
Research conducted by Isen and her colleagues (Arkes
et al., 1988; Isen, Nygren, & Ashby, 1988; Isen &
Patrick, 1983; Kahn & Isen, 1993) suggests a complex
interaction between affect and risk in the laboratory.
Under certain conditions a more positive affective state
promotes risk taking, while other findings suggest
greater risk aversion with an increase in positive affect.
A full discussion of the possible reasons for these
seemingly discrepant findings is beyond the remit of
this paper. However, a key feature of this research is
that affect has been artificially manipulated in the
laboratory (usually through giving participants an
unexpected gift to induce a positive state) and to date,
there has been no systematic study of risk taking
behavior where the affective state is a consequence of
participants’ natural environment (cf. Hockey, Maule,
Clough, & Bdzola, 2000). Moreover, an important
requirement of cognitive research is that behaviors
exhibited in the laboratory are not isolated to the
laboratory (e.g. Hutchins, 1996).
Therefore, we
examined risk taking behavior in the laboratory with
reference to natural variations in participants’ affective
state. Second, we sought ecological validity through
examining whether real risk taking behavior in financial
decision making might also be modulated by the
affective state.
In the first study presented here, we employed the Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck & Steer, 1987) as a
measure of overall affective state and assessed the

relationship between BDI score and proportion of risky
options chosen on a gambling task (see below). The
BDI has been used in cognitive research into decision
making with good effect (e.g. Alloy & Abramson,
1979) and is generally regarded as measuring naturally
occurring affective states that are similar to those
affective states elicited through mood induction
procedures (Mayberg et al., 1999) used in laboratory
settings (Isen & Gorglione, 1983).

participant was exposed to all four values used to
construct the stimuli.

In summary, an existing literature on the relationship
between risk and affect would suggest participants in
this study exhibiting lower scores on the BDI (i.e. less
happy) will also exhibit behavior paradigmatic with
relatively less risk aversion, than their more depressed
counterparts, but only for low value gambles. For high
value gambles we would expect the reverse. An
alternative hypothesis has been developed by Moore
(2003, forthcoming) who suggest that positive affect is
in consequence of events unfolding in an unexpectedly
beneficial manner. Positive affect, as an adaptive
function, and elicited by unexpected positive events,
serves to mediate greater exploratory, or risk taking,
behavior. The rationale being that in an environment
where events are unexpectedly good it makes good
sense to take greater risks as this may lead to the
discovery of previously unknown rewards.

Data Reduction and Analysis. The number of risky
options (option B in the above example) chosen from
the sixteen items in the choice task was taken as a
measure of participants’ riskiness. The BDI was scored
according to guidelines (Beck & Steer, 1987) with a
greater score indicating a more negative affective state
and a median split divided participants into ‘happy’ and
‘sad’ affect groups. Analyses suggested that the
‘happy’ affect group selected a greater proportion of
risky options than the ‘sad’ affect group (sad affect
mean number of risky options chosen = 5.48, SD =
3.43, n = 21; high affect mean number of risky options
chosen = 13.88, SD = 3.01, n = 17; Mann-Whitney U
Test: U = 102, Z = 2.25, p < 0.05). Moreover, there
was no evidence to suggest an interaction between the
values of the risky options and affect group. The values
of the risky options (y in equation 1) were set at £100,
£200, £300 or £400. In order to determine whether
happier participants opted for low value risky options
but avoided high value risky options we classified
gambles into ‘High Value’ (£300 and £400) and ‘Low
Value’ (£100 and £200) and examined the risky options
selected by BDI category and value of risky option (Z <
1 for each comparison; see Figure 1). These data
present a simpler pattern than Isen’s findings, discussed
earlier.

The purpose of this experiment was to assess the
relationship between naturally occurring changes in
affective state (measured by the BDI) and risk taking
behavior.
Participants. 38 participants volunteered in return for
payment (£5/hour) and were recruited from the
Warwick University community.
Materials. Materials consisted of the Beck Depression
Inventory (Beck & Steer, 1987) and four versions of a
short choice-task consisting of 16 binary choice
gambles of the form “choose between a.) £200 OR b.) a
60% chance of winning £300”. For the ‘p chance of
winning y’ section of the choice, p values were set at
20%, 40%, 60% or 80%; y values were set at £100,
£200, £300 or £400. The certain amount (A in the
preceding example) was calculated from
1
γ

x = y. p
(1)
where x is the certainty equivalent (rounded to the
nearest £1 for x < £20 and to the nearest £5 for x > £20
(cf. Baron, 2000, pp 238-243).
Values of γ ,
corresponding to different levels of risk aversion, were
set at 0.35, 0.5, 0.65 or 0.8 giving 64 trials. Four tasks
of 16 trials were developed in such a manner that each

823

8

Number of Risky Choices

Methodology

Procedure. Participants first gave their full written
informed consent. They then completed the BDI and
then the choice-task. They were then debriefed, had all
their questions regarding the task answered and were
paid. The entire procedure did not take longer than 30
minutes.

6

4

Low Value Risk
High Value Risk

2

0
Sad

Happy

BDI Category

Figure 1: Affect and Risky Behavior. Average of
proportion of risky options chosen by affect group (with
standard error error bars of the mean) by value of risky
option (high value options, y = £300 or £400; low value
options, y = £100 or £200)

Of the possible confounding factors associated with this
analysis, gender is perhaps the most serious (Byrnes,
Miller & Schafer, 1999). Gender differences are
observed in normative BDI scores (Beck & Steer, 1987)
and in risk taking behavior (Byrnes, Miller & Schafer,
1999). Women are generally found to report higher
BDI scores and to be less risky. A multiple regression
with BDI and gender
(0, female; 1, male) as
independent variables and number of risky options
selected as the dependent variable suggested, however,
that gender did not explain the observations made here
(R2 = 0.33, p < 0.001; see Table 1).
Table 1 Multiple regression results see text for further
information
Beta
BDI
Gender

-0.394
0.465

Partial
Correlation
-0.432
0.491

t(35)
-2.830
3.339

p

gambles that involve amounts less then their perceived
recent subjective gain, but avoid risks on gambles that
might serve to wipe out those current subjective gains.
As earlier research has sought to manipulate the
affective state with surprise gifts, the finding that
positive affect participants are more risk averse for high
value gambles and less risk averse for low value
gambles may be a feature of the induction procedure
but not the mood it elicits (cf. Tversky & Kahneman,
1981). Thus, considering naturally occurring affective
states, as we have here, goes some way to circumvent
potential confounds associate with inducing affective
states and examining risk behavior.
If natural variations in affective state modulate degrees
of risk aversion, does the same relationship hold for
naturally occurring affective states in relation to real
world financial decisions? The following analysis
sought to address this question.

<0.01
<0.01

The multiple regression analysis indicated that both
gender and BDI score predicted risk behavior and did
so independently of one another (the correlation
between BDI and risk after partialling out the effect of
gender still suggests a significant relationship).

Discussion
Building on earlier research, the preceding laboratory
experiment examining the relationship between natural
variations in affective state and risky behavior found
relatively happier participants selected risky options
more often than relatively less happy participants. As
will be discussed, these data might contribute to current
understandings on the relationship between affect and
risk behavior.
As the affective state was not induced in the foregoing
experiment, but a natural feature of the participant in
the experimental setting, we circumvent some potential
issues that surround the use of induction procedures in
choice experiments. Specifically, research that has
sought to manipulate a positive affective state in
participants has, in some circumstances, achieved this
through giving participants a surprise gift with control
groups receiving nothing. The subjective value of this
gift may have bearing on how much risk participants
will take in risky choices.
For example, and
hypothetically, if a positive affective state was elicited
through surprising participants with $500 and then
those participants were asked to complete hypothetical
gambles where the amounts were of the magnitude $1
one might be expected to see an effect of gift size that
acts beyond the influence of affect. In other words,
participants might exhibit greater risk taking for

824

Risky Savings
There are very few studies that have explicitly sought to
characterize what, if any, individual differences
influence real world financial behavior (Blume &
Friend, 1975; Cohn, Lewellen, Lease, & Schlarbaum,
1975). Blume and Friend (1975) examined a large
sample of wealthy investors with respect to the level of
diversification in their portfolios.
Although
diversification is an accepted means of reducing risk in
a portfolio, diversification may also involve including
more risky options to achieve that end. Blume and
Friend (1975), although finding that diversification in
their sample was generally low, presented data
suggesting level of wealth was positively associated
with greater diversification.
Weaker positive
associations with diversification were found with a
male household head (as opposed to female) and a selfemployed household head. More direct evidence for
individual differences in financial risk taking are
presented by Cohn, Lewellan, Lease and Schlarbaum
(1975) who examined investing behavior in a sample
drawn from customers of a brokerage firm. They
classified assets as risky and non-risky and found
income was strongly and positively associated with
proportion of assets classified as risky. Weaker positive
associations were found with age and being single. The
preceding discussion suggests demographic information
shows some relationship with risk preference.
However, affect, and its fluctuation, is also an important
feature of day to day life. We know of no published
studies that examine how affect might influence risk
taking behavior in the real world. The following
analysis sought to explore techniques that might
uncover whether any relationship between affect and
risk found in the laboratory might be discernable in the

field, in real-world data on self-reported happiness and
financial decisions.

household income; ‘HH Income’ hereafter) as a
measure of respondents’ wealth in subsequent analyses.

Methodology

The hypothesis we sought to explore concerned the
possible relationship between happiness and risk taking.
As income is associated with both we used structural
equation modeling (SEM) to ascertain whether
happiness might play a role in how income affects
greater risky behavior in the financial domain.

The hypothesis we sought to explore in the following
analysis is relatively simple: that the happier a person is
over their life, the more likely they are to invest their
wealth in relatively more risky options. However, and
to the authors’ knowledge, no survey has been
specifically designed to assess this hypothesis.
Therefore, to determine if a relationship existed
between affective state and financial risk taking we
used data from Wave 10 of The British Household
Panel Survey (BHPS; Taylor, Brice, Buck, & PrenticeLane, 2002). The BHPS is a multi-purpose study that
follows the same representative sample of 10,300
individuals, drawn from 250 different regions of Great
Britain, over a period of years (the survey is now in its
10th year). The range of information collected from
each respondent is broad, including details on income,
savings strategy, happiness, leisure, etc., and is
therefore well suited to the current objectives of this
research.
From the BHPS we selected variables that closely
matched the variables of interest in this study. The
BHPS contains information on respondents’ savings
strategies across a range of options (e.g. questions
asked include: ‘do you save money in a bank account?’,
‘do you invest money in a bank account?’).
Respondents answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to each. Of these
options variable JNVESTE (Money in shares: UK or
foreign; ‘Financial Risk’ hereafter) represented the
riskiest savings option respondents were asked about.
We therefore used this variable as an indication of
whether respondents had any of their wealth invested in
a risky instrument.
The BHPS also contains
information on respondents self reported feelings.
From the 12 variables describing various aspects of
each respondent’s subjective state researchers
concerned with the construction of the BHPS have
derived an overall index of subjective well-being
(JHLGHQ1; Taylor et al., 2002; ‘Affect’ hereafter).
We used this variable as a proxy to the BDI employed
in the earlier experiment and as an indication of overall
affective state.
From the preceding discussion, it was apparent that
wealth has a strong association with proportion of
wealth invested in risky options (Blume & Friend,
1975). Moreover, there is evidence from the economic
literature that associates an increase in wealth with an
increase in subjective happiness (Blanchflower &
Oswald, 2000; Gardner & Oswald, 2001; Oswald,
1997). We therefore included JFIHHMN (level of

825

Data Reduction and Analysis.
Data from the BHPS was trimmed to include
respondents aged between 31 and 50 years of age and to
those who had invested money in at least one
investment vehicle (number of observations entered
into the analysis = 2,664, see Table 2 for descriptive
statistics).
Table 2 Descriptive statistics for the sample examined
Affect
HH Income
Financial Risk
AGE (years)

Mean
11.44
3009.21
0.28
39.73

Min
0.00
£0.00
0
31.00

Max
36.00
£38,766
1
50.00

Consistent with Blume and Friend’s (1975)
observations, we found a significant linear association
between HH Income and likelihood of investing in the
stock market (n = 2,664, R2 = 0.038, p < 0.0001).
In order to assess the hypothesis that affect may play a
role in the amount of risk respondents take with their
investments we used SEM with an asymptotically
distribution free Gramian discrepancy function and a
Golden Section line search method on the correlation
matrix derived from the three variables of interest (see
Table 3).
Table 3 Correlation matrix used in the SEM
Affect
HH Income
Financial Risk

Affect
1.000
-0.073
-0.049

HH Income

Financial Risk

1.000
0.195

1.000

The SEM found a solution that had a reasonable fit with
the data (χ2 goodness-of-fit = 84.83, RMS Standardized
Residual = 0.10; see Figure 2 and Table 3). Other
indices of fit suggest this parsimonious model fits the
data reasonably well (Joreskog GFI = 0.976, BrowneCudeck Cross Validation Index = 0.036).

HH Income

0.108 (5.89)

Affect

0.06 (3.22)

Financial
Risk

Figure 2 SEM model of the relationship between
income, affect and financial risk taking with parameter
estimates (t values in brackets, p < 0.001 for each).

Discussion
The SEM analysis appears to support the conjecture
that financial risk taking behavior may be associated
with overall affective state.
Those respondents
reporting generally higher levels of subjective
happiness were also more likely to invest in the stock
market. However, although the model presented is both
parsimonious and significant, it should be stressed that
it cannot represent the only relationship between
income and likelihood of investing in the stock market.
Clearly factors such as sound financial advice will play
an important role. The SEM analysis was designed to
allow any relationship between affect, risk taking and
income to become apparent assuming that potential
confounds were normatively distributed across the
variables of interest. Furthermore, a respondent’s
decision to invest in the stock market may have been
taken at times far removed from the administration of
the BHPS and therefore the measure of affect recorded
may not be a good representation of the level of affect
while that decision was made. These drawbacks are
methodological and cannot be addressed using existing
data sources of the scale offered by the BHPS. Future
research should seek to design data collection methods
that measure affect levels while these decisions are
made and might serve to validate laboratory based
research in real world settings.
Despite unavoidable drawbacks in the design of this
second experiment, the analyses broadly support the
notion that affect may play a role in how people decide
to invest their money and risk taking behavior
generally. Importantly, this represents an extension of
cognitive research from a carefully controlled
environment to real world choices. As such, we regard
the analysis presented as indicating a potentially
important direction for future research.

General Discussion
To extrapolate from past experiences and current
observations to predict what comes next is enormously
valuable: it allows us to avoid harm and manage our

826

environment. However, the world is an uncertain place
and despite our predictive abilities we are regularly
exposed to surprising events (cf. Kagan, 2002). It is
generally held that emotion is elicited at the juncture
where things do go wrong, or surprisingly better than
expected (e.g. Oatley & Johnson-Laird, 2002;
Scitovsky, 1976) with better than expected events
eliciting happiness and worse than expected events
eliciting unhappiness (Lazarus, 1966). One means,
therefore, of conceptualizing how the affective state
modulates consequent behavior is that it serves to
reduce exposure to uncertainty and biases the organism
to take less risk. The rationale being that choice options
that are more certain will hold no further surprises and
reduce exposure to further risk (in the case of negative
affect). Alternatively, positive affect may serve to
promote risky behavior if the environment appears to
offer previously unknown rewards.
Affect may
therefore have an adaptive function that is closely
related to risk taking behavior and the data presented
here may support this notion. Moreover, given the
ecological validity provided, cognitive models derived
from observing the modulation of behavior by affect
might play an important role in understanding real
world economic behavior in future research.
The proposed modulatory influence of affect on
cognition may be associated with the function of
mesocortical dopamine (DA). For example, Ashby
draws together many studies showing how affect
modulates cognition and argues DA (realized as
modulating the gain parameter in network models of
cognition) mediates the observed changes in behavior
(Ashby et al., 1999). Moreover, DA appears to play a
role in decision making and learning (Montague &
Berns, 2002) and plays an important role modulating
behaviors that are similar to those observed in the
research presented here. Thus, the dopaminergic
system may play a central role in how affect modulates
behavior. If this is the case then future research into the
role of affect in real world financial behavior offers the
opportunity to draw together observations made on real
world decision making with cognitive and
neuroanatomical models of behavior. In particular,
there appear to be notable individual differences in the
function of the DA system (e.g. in receptor density;
Kandel, Schwartz & Jessell, 1995) which might suggest
a more complex interaction between affect, individual
differences and financial decisions with respect to risk.
In particular, if the nature of these individual
differences proves to be stable and predictable, models
of financial behavior might gain considerably through
attending to them. In this paper we have suggested that
affect biases individual preferences for risk. If more
risky investments offer a higher return than more

conservative options then feeling happy might also
improve one’s financial standing, in the long-term.

Acknowledgments
The research presented here was supported through a
grant from the ESRC (L328253039). We would like to
thank Neil Stewart and Rod Freeman for help with
running experiments and Padraic Monaghan for
comments.

References
Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y. (1979). Judgement of
contingency in depressed and nondepressed students:
Sadder but wiser. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 108(4), 441-485.
Arkes, H. R., Herren, L. T., & Isen, A. M. (1988). The
role of potential loss in the influence of affect on risktaking behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 42, 181-193.
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, A. U. (1999). A
neuropsychological theory of positive affect and its
influence on cognition . Psychological Review,
106(3), 529-550.
Baron, J. (2000). Thinking and Deciding. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1987). Beck Depression
Inventory: Manual. New York: The Psychological
Corporation.
Blanchflower, D. G., & Oswald, A. J. (2000). Wellbeing over time in Britain and the USA. National
Bureau of Economic Research: NBER Working Paper
Series.
Blume, M. E., & Friend, I. (1975). The asset structure
of individual portfolios and some implications for
utility functions. Journal of Finance, 30, 585-603.
Bromiley, P., & Curley, S. P. (1992). Individual
differences in risk taking. J. F. Yates (Ed), Risk
Taking Behavior (pp. 88-132). London: John Wiley
and Sons.
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., & Schafer, W. D. (1999).
Gender differences in risk taking: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 125(3), 367-383.
Cohn, R. A., et al. (1975). Individual investor risk
aversion and investment portfolio composition.
Journal of Finance, 30, 605-630.
Gardner, J., & Oswald, A. (2001). Does money buy
happiness? A longitudinal study using data on
windfalls.
Hockey, G. R. J., et al. (2000). Effects of mood in
everyday decision making. Cognition and Emotion,
14(6), 823-855 .
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,

827

MA: MIT Press.
Isen, A. M., & Gorglione, J. M. (1983). Some specific
effects of four affect-induction procedures.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9(1),
136-143.
Isen, A. M., Nygren, T. E., & Ashby, F. G. (1988).
Influence of positive affect on the subjective utility of
gains and losses: It is just not worth the risk. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 55(5), 710-717.
Isen, A. M., & Patrick, R. (1983). The effect of positive
feelings on risk taking: When the chips are down.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 31(2), 194-202.
Kagan, J. (2002). Surprise, Uncertainty, and Mental
Structures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Kahn, B. E., & Isen, A. M. (1993). The influence of
positive affect on variety seeking among safe,
enjoyable products. Journal of Consumer Research,
20(2), 257-270.
Kandel, E. R., et al. (1995). Essentials of Neural
Science and Behaviour. London: Prentice Hall.
Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological Stress and the
Coping Process. New York: McGraw Hill.
Mayberg, H. S., Liotti, M., et al. (1999). Reciprocal
limbic-cortical function and negative mood:
Converging PET findings in depression and normal
sadness. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 675682.
Montague, P. R., & Berns, G. S. (2002). Neural
economics and biological substrates of valuation.
Neuron, 36, 265-284.
Oatley, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). Emotion and
reasoning to consistency: The case of abductive
inference. S. C. Moore, & M. R. Oaksford (Eds),
Emotional Cognition: From Brain to Behaviour .
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Oswald, A. J. (1997). Happiness and economic
performance. Economic Journal, 107(445), 18151831.
Scitovsky, T. (1976). The Joyless Economy: An inquiry
into human satisfaction and consumer dissatisfaction.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Servan-Schreiber, D., Printz, H., & Cohen, J. D. (1990).
A network model of catecholamine effects: Gain,
signal-to-noise, and behavior. Science, 249, 892-895.
Taylor, M. F., et al. (2002). British Household Panel
Survey User Manual. Colchester: University of Essex.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211,
4538.

