UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Embodied Intention in Early Lexical Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53n190hz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Yu, Chen
Ballard, Dana H.
Aslin, Richard N.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Embodied Intention in Early Lexical Acquisition
Chen Yu (yu@cs.rochester.edu)
Dana H. Ballard (dana@cs.rochester.edu)
Department of Computer Science; University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Richard N. Aslin (aslin@cvs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences; University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract
We examine the influence of inferring interlocutors’ referential intentions from their body movements at the early
stage of lexical acquisition. By testing human subjects
and comparing their performances in different learning
conditions, we find that those embodied intentions facilitate both word discovery and word-meaning association. In light of empirical findings, the main part of this
paper presents a computational model that can identify
the sound patterns of individual words from continuous
speech using non-linguistic contextual information and
employ body movements as deictic references to discover
word-meaning associations. To our knowledge, this work
is the first model of word learning which not only learns
lexical items from raw multisensory signals to closely resemble natural environments of infant development, but
also explores the computational role of social cognitive
skills in lexical acquisition.

Introduction
To acquire a vocabulary item, a young language learner
must discover the sound pattern of a word from continuous speech since spoken language lacks the acoustic analog of blank spaces of written text. Furthermore, learning a word involves mapping a form, such as the sound
“cat”, to a meaning, such as the concept of cat. The child
senses a multitude of co-occurrences between words and
things in the world, and he or she must determine which
co-occurrences are relevant.
In the last ten years, there has been tremendous
progress in understanding infants’ ability to segment
continuous speech, discover words and learn their meanings. Most research focuses on the role of linguistic information as the central constraint. A number of relevant
cues have been found that are correlated with the presence of word boundaries and can potentially signal word
boundaries in continuous speech. These include prosodic
patterns (e.g., Cutler & Butterfield, 1992), phonotactic
regularities (e.g., Mattys & Jusczyk, 2001), allophonic
variations (e.g., Jusczyk, Hohne, & Bauman, 1999)
and distributional probability (e.g., Aslin, Woodward,
laMendola, & Bever, 1996; Brent & Cartwright, 1996).
Recent computational approaches on child-directed corpora have also revealed that relatively simple statistical
learning mechanisms could make an important contribution to certain aspects of language acquisition (for review
see Brent, 1999).
Recently, a popular explanation of the word learning
problem termed associationism assumes that language

1293

acquisition is solely based on statistical learning of cooccurring data from the linguistic modality and nonlinguistic context. Richards and Goldfarb (1986) proposed that children come to know the meaning of a word
through repeatedly associating the verbal label with their
experience at the time that the label is used. Roy and
Pentland (2002) have developed a computational model
of infant language learning, in which they used the temporal correlation of speech and vision to associate spoken utterances with a corresponding object’s visual appearance. It seems quite reasonable to assume that the
human cognitive system exploits this statistical information. However, despite the merit of this idea, associationism is unlikely to be the whole story because it is based
on the assumption that words are always uttered when
their referents are perceived, which has not been verified
by experimental studies of infants (Bloom, 2000).
In addition to temporal co-occurrences of multisensory data, recent psycholinguistic studies (e.g., Baldwin
et al., 1996; Bloom, 2000; Tomasello, 2001) have shown
that other major sources of constraints in language acquisition are social cognitive skills, such as children’s ability
to infer the intentions of adults as adults act and speak to
them. These kinds of social cognitions are called mind
reading by Baron-Cohen (1995). Bloom (2000) argued
that children’s word learning actually draws extensively
on their understanding of the thoughts of speakers. His
claim has been supported by the experiments in which
young children were able to figure out what adults were
intending to refer to by speech. Baldwin et al. (1996) referential intent when determining the reference of a novel
label. showed that infants established a stable link between the novel label and the target toy only when that
label was uttered by a speaker who concurrently showed
his attention toward the target, and such a stable mapping was not established when the label was uttered by a
speaker who was out of view and hence showed no signs
of attention to the target toy.
In a complementary study of embodied cognition, Ballard, Hayhoe, Pook, and Rao (1997) proposed a cognitive
system of implicit reference termed deictic, in which the
body’s pointing movements are used to bind objects in
the world to variables in cognitive programs of human
brain. Also, in the studies of speech production, Cooper
(1974) found speakers have a strong tendency to look toward objects referred to by speech.

By putting together all those ideas on shared attention and intention, we propose that speakers’ body movements, such as eye, head and hand movements, can reveal their referential intents in verbal utterances, which
could possibly play a significant role in early language
development. A plausible starting point of learning the
meanings of words is the deployment of speakers’ intentional body movements to infer their referential intentions which we term embodied intention. This work takes
some first steps in that direction by examining the problem through both empirical research and computational
modeling with the hope to obtain a more complete picture. The next section presents the experiments that use
adult language learners exposed to a second language to
study the role of embodied intention in infant language
acquisition. In light of the human subject study, we then
propose a computational model of word learning to simulate the early stage of infant vocabulary learning. The
implemented model is able to build meaningful semantic
representations grounded in multisensory inputs. The essential structure models the computational role of the inference of speakers’ referential intentions by making use
of body movements as deictic references (Ballard et al.,
1997), and employs non-linguistic information as constraints on statistical learning of linguistic data.

with 9 subjects in each condition.
Stimuli. Subjects were exposed to the language by
video. In the video, a person was reading the picture
book of “I went walking” (Williams & Vivas, 1989) in
Mandarin. The book is for 1-3 year old children, and the
story is about a young child that goes for a walk and encounters several familiar friendly animals. The speaker
told the story in a way similar to a caregiver describing it
to a child. For each page of the book, subjects saw a picture and heard verbal descriptions. The study included
two video clips that were recorded simultaneously when
the speaker was reading the book, and provided different learning conditions for subjects: audio-visual condition and intention-cued condition. In audio-visual condition, the video was recorded from a fixed camera behind
the speaker to capture a static view. In the intentioncued condition, we recorded video from a head-mounted
camera to get a dynamic view. Furthermore, an eye
tracker was utilized to track the course of the speaker’s
eye movements and gaze positions were overlapped on
the video to indicate what the speaker was attending to.
Auditory information is same in both videos. Figure 1
shows the snapshots from two video clips.

Human Simulations
Previous language-learning studies have shown similar
findings for adults exposed to an artificial language and
children or even infants exposed to the same type of language (Saffran, Newport, & Aslin, 1996). This suggests
that certain mechanisms involved in language learning
are available to humans regardless of age. Lakoff and
Johnson (1999) argued that children have already built
up pre-linguistic concepts (internal representations of the
world) in their brains prior to the development of lexicon.
Thus, if we assume that those concepts are already established, the lexical learning problem would mainly deal
with how to find a sound pattern from continuous speech
and associate this linguistic label with a concept previously built up. As pointed out by Gillette et al. (Gillette,
Gleitman, Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999), although the representations of concepts of adults may differ from those
of young children, there should be little difference between adults and children with regard to acquiring simple words as long as they are provided with the same
information. In light of this, our first experiment was
conducted with monolingual adults exposed to a second
language to shed light on the role of embodied intention
in the early stage of infant language learning. The experiment consists of two phases. In the training phase,
subjects were asked to watch a video and try to discover
lexical items. In the testing phase, they were given the
tests of both speech segmentation and lexical learning.

Figure 1: The snapshots when the speaker uttered “the cow is
looking at the little boy” in Mandarin. Left: a snapshot from
the fixed camera. Right: a snapshot from a head-mounted camera with the current gaze position (the white cross).

Procedure. Subjects were shown video clips on a computer monitor and asked to try to identify both sound
patterns of individual words and their meanings. They
watched the same video five times before being tested,
and were given the opportunity to take a break in the
middle of each session, but few did.
Test. Subjects were given two written multiple-choice
tests: a speech segmentation test and a word learning test.
There were 18 questions in each test. For every question in the first test, subjects heard two sounds and were
asked to select one that they thought was a word but not
a phrase or a syllable. They were given as much time as
they wanted to answer each question. A second test was
used to evaluate their knowledge of lexical items learned
from the video. The images of 12 objects in the picture
book were displayed on a computer monitor. Subjects
heard one isolated spoken word for each question and
were asked to select an answer from 13 choices (12 objects and also an option for none of the above).

Methods

Results

Participants. 18 monolingual English speaking students at the University of Rochester participated in this
study, and were paid for their participation. Subjects
were randomly assigned to two experimental conditions,

Figure 2 shows the average correct answers of two tests.
In the speech segmentation test, subjects made significantly more errors in the audio-visual condition (
) than in the intention-cued condition

1294























(
). The further analysis revealed a significant main effect of conditions
. For word learning, a direct comparison of the intention-cued condition (
) with the audio-visual condition (
) also revealed a significant difference (
). This human subject study provides
substantial evidence for the hypothesis that embodied intention plays an important role in language acquisition.
This proposal suggests that a formal model that explores
the computational role of embodied intention in lexical
development, should show similar advantages to intentional cues.
word discovery
word-meaning association


















































































-- now the little boy is walking.
-- all the animals follow him.
-- the cat is in the rear.
-- then the horse and the cow.
-- the duck and the pig are
lined up and walking.
-- the dog is next to the boy.







































phoneme strings





-- n ow th eh ah l ih t l b oy iy
eh s w aw l k ih ng.
-- aw l hh th eh eh n ih m ow z
f er l ow hh ih m hh.
-- th eh k ae tcl t ih s ih n th eh
r ae er ih.
-- th eh n ih th eh h ao r z eh n
dcl d th ih k aw.
-- th eh dcl d uh kcl k eh d th
ih pcl p iy gcl g ih er l ay n uh
eh ih hh d w aw l kcl k ih ng.
-- th eh dcl d ao g eh z n eh ix
t uw th eh b oy iy.

-- n ow th eh ah l ih t l b oy iy
eh s w aw l k ih ng.
-- aw l hh th eh eh n ih m ow z
f er l ow hh ih m hh.
-- th eh k ae tcl t ih s ih n th
eh r ae er ih.
-- th eh n ih th eh h ao r z eh
aw
n dcl d th ih kk aw.
-- th eh dcl d uh kcl k eh d th
ih pcl p iy gcl g ih er l ay n uh
eh ih hh d w aw l kcl k ih ng.
-- th eh dcl
dcl dd ao
ao gg eh z n eh ix
iy
t uw th eh b oy iy.

Figure 3: The problems in word learning. The raw speech
is firstly converted into phoneme sequences. The goal of our
method is to discover phoneme substrings that correspond to
the sound patterns of words and then infer the meanings of
those words from non-linguistic modalities.

Figure 2: The mean percentages of correct answers in tests.

Computational Simulations
We supplement our empirical studies with a computational account. By implementing the descriptions of the
theories or claims explicitly in computer simulations, we
can not only test the plausibility of the theories but also
gain the insights of both the nature of the problems and
the possible solutions.
To simulate how infants ground semantics, our model
needs to be embodied in the physical environment and
sense the environment as a young child. To do so, we
attached multiple sensors to an adult subject who was
asked to act as a caregiver and perform some everyday
activities, one of which was reading a picture book for
a young child. Those sensors include a head-mounted
CCD camera to capture visual information of the physical environment, a microphone to sense acoustic signals,
an eye tracker to track the course of eye movements, and
position sensors attached to the head and hands of the
caregiver. In this way, our computational model (as a
young language learner) can acquire multisensory data
so that it shares the visual environment with the caregiver, hears infant-directed speech uttered by the caregiver and observes his or her body movements, such as
gaze and head movements, which are deployed to infer
the caregiver’s referential intentions.

The Model
To learn words from a caregiver’s spoken descriptions
(shown in Figure 3), three fundamental problems needed
to be addressed are: (1) object recognition to identify
grounded meanings of words from visual perception,
(2) speech segmentation and word spotting to extract
the sound patterns of the individual words which might
have grounded meanings, (3) association between spoken words and their meanings.

1295

Clustering Visually Grounded Meanings The nonlinguistic inputs of the system consist of visual data from
a head-mounted camera, head positions and gaze-in-head
data. Those data provide the contexts in which spoken
utterances are produced. Thus, the possible referents of
spoken words that subjects utter are encoded in those
contexts, and we need to extract those word meanings
from raw sensory inputs. As a result, we will obtain
a temporal sequence of possible referents depicted by
the box labeled “intentional context” in Figure 4. Our
method firstly utilizes eye and head movements as cues
to estimate the subject’s focus of attention. Attention,
as represented by eye fixation, is then used for spotting
the target object of subject’s interest. Specifically, at every attentional point in time, we make use of eye gaze as
a seed to find the attentional object from all the objects
in a scene. The referential intentions are then directly
inferred from attentional objects. We represent the objects by feature vectors consisting of color, shape and
texture features. For further information see Yu, Ballard,
and Zhu (2002). Next, since the feature vectors extracted
from visual appearances of attentional objects do not occupy a discrete space, we vector quantize them into clusters by applying a hierarchical agglomerative clustering
algorithm. Finally, for each cluster we select a prototype
to represent perceptual features of this cluster.
Comparing Phoneme Sequences We describe our
methods of phoneme string comparison in this subsection. Detailed descriptions of algorithms can be obtained
from Ballard and Yu (2003). First, the speaker independent phoneme recognition system is employed to convert spoken utterances into phoneme sequences. To fully
simulate lexical learning, the phoneme recognizer does
not encode any language model or word model. Therefore, the outputs are noisy phoneme strings that are different from phonetic transcriptions of text. Thus, the goal
of phonetic string matching is to identify sequences that
might be different actual strings, but have similar pronunciations. In our method, a phoneme is represented
by a 15-dimensional binary vector in which every entry
stands for a single articulatory feature called a distinc-

tive feature. Those distinctive features are indispensable
attributes of a phoneme that are required to differentiate
one phoneme from another in English. We compute the
distance between two individual phonemes as the Hamming distance. Based on this metric, a modified dynamic programming algorithm is developed to compare
two phoneme strings by measuring their similarity.
u1
transcripts the cat looks itself

u2
the little boy gives
the horse a hug

u3
the horse and the cat
follow along

u4
the little boy finds a
tree

spoken
utterances
phoneme
strings

th eh kcl k ae ih t l
uw k s ih t z eh l hh f

th eh l ih t l b oy iy gcl
g iy v z the ih hh ao aw
r z aa hh uh d

th eh hh ao r z eh n
d the ih kcl k ae t f
er l ow ah l ax ng

th ih l ih t l b oy f ih n
dcl d z aa tcl t iy

attentioal
objects
cat

horse

little boy

horse

cat

are clustered by a hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm. The centroids of clusters are associated with their possible grounded meanings to build
hypothesized word-meaning pairs.
To find correct lexical items from hypothesized lexical items, the probability of each word is represented
as a mixture model that consists of the conditional
probabilities of each word given its possible meanings.
In this way, the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is employed to find the reliable associations
of spoken words and their grounded meanings which
maximize the probabilities.

Experimental Setup

little boy

A Polhemus 3D tracker was utilized to acquire 6-DOF
head positions at
. A subject wore a head-mounted
eye tracker from Applied Science Laboratories(ASL).
The headband of the ASL held a miniature “scenecamera” to the left of the subject’s head, which provided
the video of the scene. The video signals were sampled
at the resolution of 320 columns by 240 rows of pixels
at the frequency of 15Hz. The gaze positions on the image plane were reported at the frequency of
. The
acoustic signals were recorded using a headset microphone at a rate of 16 kHz with 16-bit resolution. Six subjects participated in the experiment. They were asked to
read the picture book (used in the previous experiment)
in English. They were also instructed to pretend that they
told this story for a child so that they should keep verbal
descriptions of pictures as simple and clear as possible.
We collected multisensory data when they performed the
task, which were used as training data for our computational model.

intentional contexts



classification
classification

cat

u1 th eh kcl k ae ih t l
uw k s ih t z eh l hh f
u3 th eh hh ao r z eh n
d the ih kcl k ae t f
er l ow ah l ax ng

horse

little boy

th eh l ih t l b oy iy gcl
u2 g iy v z the ih hh ao aw
r z aa hh uh d

th eh l ih t l b oy iy gcl
u2 g iy v z the ih hh ao aw
r z aa hh uh d

u3 th eh hh ao r z eh n d
the ih kcl k ae t f er l ow
ah l ax ng

u4

th ih l ih t l b oy f ih n
dcl d z aa tcl t iy

similar sequence finding
cat

little boy

horse

w1 kcl k ae t

w1 hh ao r z

w1 l ih t l b oy

w2 kcl k ae ih t

w2 hh ao aw r z

w2 l ih t l b oy iy

w1

w1
w1

w2

w2

hypothesized lexical items
kcl k ae t

hh ao r z

l ih t l b oy







Results and Discussion

EM algorithm
kcl k ae t





word-like unit clustering

w2



hh ao r z

l ih t l b oy

Figure 4: Overview of the method. Spoken utterances are
categorized into several bins that correspond to temporally cooccurring attentional objects. Then we compare any pair of
spoken utterances in each bin to find the similar subsequences
that are treated as word-like units. Next, those word-like units
in each bin are clustered based on the similarities of their
phoneme strings. The EM-algorithm is applied to find lexical
items from hypothesized word-meaning pairs.

Word Learning Figure 4 illustrates our approach to
spotting words and establishing word-meaning associations, which consists of the following steps (See Ballard
& Yu, 2003 for detailed descriptions):
Phoneme utterances are categorized into several bins
based on their possibly associated meanings. For
each meaning (an attentional object), we find the corresponding phoneme sequences uttered in temporal
proximity, and then categorize them into the same bin
labeled by that meaning.
The similar substrings between any two phoneme sequences in each bin are found and treated as word-like
units.
The extracted phoneme substrings of word-like units

1296

To evaluate experimental results, we define the following
three measures: (1) Semantic accuracy is to measure
the accuracy of clustering visual objects (e.g., animals)
in the picture book. (2) Word discovery accuracy is to
measure whether the beginning and the end of phoneme
strings of word-like units are correct word boundaries.
(3) Word learning accuracy is to measure the percentage of successfully segmented words that are correctly
associated with their meanings.
Table 1: Results of word acquisition
Subjects

Semantics

1
2
3
4
5
6
Average

80.3%
83.6%
79.2%
81.6%
82.9%
76.6%
80.6%

Word
discovery
72.6%
73.3%
71.9%
69.8%
69.6%
66.2%
70.6%

Word
learning
91.3%
92.6%
86.9%
89.2%
86.2%
83.1%
88.2%

Table 1 shows the results of three measures. The
recognition rate of the phoneme recognizer we used is
75% because it does not encode any language model or

word model. Based on this result, the overall accuracy of
speech segmentation is 70.6%. Naturally, an improved
phoneme recognizer based on a language model would
improve the overall results, but the intent here is to study
the learning procedure without pre-trained models. The
error in word learning is mainly caused by a few words
(e.g., “happy” and “look”) that frequently occur in some
contexts but do not have visually grounded meanings.
Considering that the system processes raw sensory data,
and our learning method works in unsupervised mode
without manually encoding any linguistic information,
the accuracies for both speech segmentation and word
learning are impressive.
word discovery
word-meaning association

language knowledge is a challenging problem and has
been addressed by solely using linguistic information. In
contrast, our method appreciates the importance of nonlinguistic context in which spoken words are uttered. We
propose that the sound patterns frequently appearing in
the same context are likely to have grounded meanings
related to this context. Thus, by finding frequently uttered sound patterns in a specific context (e.g., an object
that subjects intentionally attend to), the model discovers word-like sound units as candidates for building lexicons. Secondly, a difficult task of word learning is to
figure out which entities specific words refer to from a
multitude of co-occurrences between words and things
in the world. This is accomplished in our model by utilizing speakers’ intentional body movements as deictic
references to establish associations between words and
their visually grounded meanings.

Sensory Level Modeling

Figure 5: A comparison of performance of the intention-cued
method and the audio-visual approach.
To demonstrate the role of embodied intention in language learning, we process data by another method in
which eye gaze and head movements are ignored, and
only audio-visual data are used for learning. In this
approach, we have to classify spoken utterances into
the bins of all the objects in the scene instead of just
the bins of attentional objects. Except for this point,
the method shares other implemented components with
the intention-cued approach. Figure 5 shows the comparison of two methods. The intention-cued approach
outperforms the other one in both speech segmentation
and word-meaning association. The significant difference lies in the fact that there exists a multitude of cooccurring word-object pairs in natural environments that
infants are situated in, and the inference of referential
intents through body movements plays a key role in discovering which co-occurrences are relevant.

General Discussion
The Role of Embodied Intention
We propose that the ability of a young language learner
to infer interlocutors’ referential intentions through the
observations of their body movements may significantly
facilitate lexical learning. This proposal has been verified
by the empirical studies in which adult language learners exposed to a second language in the intention-cued
condition outperformed the ones under audio-visual condition in both word discovery and word-meaning learning tests. Furthermore, in the computational model described in the previous section, a speaker’s referential intents are estimated and utilized to facilitate lexical learning in two ways. Firstly, possible referential objects
in time provide cues for word spotting from a continuous speech stream. Speech segmentation without prior

1297

The successful implementation of the model suggests
that with advances in machine learning, speech processing and computer vision, modeling lexical learning at
the sensory level is not impossible and it has some advantages over symbolic simulations by closely resembling natural environments in which infants develop. Our
model emphasizes the importance of embodied learning
for two main reasons. First, the motivation behind this
work is that language is grounded in sensorimotor experiences with the physical world. Thus, a fundamental
aspect of language acquisition is to associate the body
and the environment with words in language (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980). Second, infants learn words by sensing
the environments from their perceptual systems and coping with several practical problems, such as the variability of spoken words in different contexts and by different
talkers. To closely simulate infant vocabulary development, the computational model should also have the ability to remove noise from raw signals and extract durable
and generalizable representations instead of simplifying
the problem by using consistent symbolic representations
(e.g., text or phoneme transcripts).

Assumptions in the Model
The range of problems we need to address in modeling lexical acquisition in a purely unsupervised manner
and from raw multimodal data is substantial, so to make
concrete progress, some natural assumptions were made
to simplify the modeling task and allow us to focus on
the key problems in lexical acquisition. First, the model
mainly deals with how to associate visual representations
of objects with their spoken object names. This is based
on the finding that a predominant proportion of infant
early vocabulary are nouns, which has been confirmed in
various languages and under varying child-rearing conditions (Caselli, Casadio, & Bates, 2000). Also, the model
is able to learn only object names that are grounded in
visual perception but not other nouns that represent other
meanings or abstract notions. We believe that those initial and imageable words directly grounded in the physical environment serve as a foundation for the acquisi-

tion of abstract words that become indirectly grounded
through their relations to those grounded words. Second,
the model does not intend to simulate the development of
initial capabilities to recognize phonemes from acoustic
input. We assume that a language learner has knowledge of the phonetic structure of the language prior to
lexical development. Third, in natural conditions, a language learner observes the body movements of an interlocutor and infers referential objects by means of monitoring his/her gaze direction. Due to the difficulties to
track the speaker’s gaze directions and head movements,
and then search for a target object in that direction from
the learner’s perspective, in both empirical studies and
the computational simulation, an eye tracker and position sensors are utilized so that the language learner (i.e.
a human subject or the computational model) can directly
obtain the interlocutor’s gaze and head movements, and
also share the visual scene.

Conclusion
This work demonstrates a significant role of embodied intention in infant word learning through both human subject study and computational modeling. In both
cases, no matter a language learner is a human subject
or a computer program, the intention-cued approach outperformed the audio-visual approach. We conclude that
the solely statistical learning of co-occurrences in data
is less likely to explain the whole story of language acquisition. The inference of embodied intention, as one
of infants’ social cognitive skills, provides constraints to
avoid the large amount of irrelevant computations and
can be directly applied as deictic reference to associate
words with visually grounded referents in the environment. Here we do not claim that young children employ
the exact method presented in this paper. However, as
a computational model, this work provides an existence
proof for a machine learning technique that solves the
lexical acquisition task. It leaves the open question of
what techniques young children actually use to solve the
problem by further empirical study. We hope that this
work not only provides a computational account to supplement the existing related theories of language acquisition but also gives some useful hints to future research.

References
Aslin, R. N., Woodward, J. C., laMendola, N., & Bever,
T. (1996). Models of word segmentation in fluent
maternal speech to infants. In J. Morgan & K. Demuth
(Eds.), Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to
grammar in early acquisition. Hillsdale,NJ: Erlbaum.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., Bill, B., Desjardins,
R. N., Irwin, J. M., & tidball, G. (1996). Infant’s
reliance on a social criterion for establishing wordobject relations. Child development, 67, 3135-3153.
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K., & Rao, R.
P. N. (1997). Deictic codes for the embodiment of
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 13111328.
Ballard, D. H., & Yu, C. (2003). A multimodal learning interface for word acquisition. In Proceedings of

1298

the international conference on acoustics, speech and
signal processing. Hong Kong.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: an essay on
autism and theory of mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Brent, M. R. (1999). Speech segmentation and word discovery: A computational perspective. Trends in Cognitive science, 3(8), 294-301.
Brent, M. R., & Cartwright, T. A. (1996). Distributional regularity and phonotactic constraints are useful
for segmentation. Cognition, 61, 93-125.
Caselli, M. C., Casadio, P., & Bates, E. (2000). Lexical
development in english and italian. In M. Tomasello &
E. Bates (Eds.), Language development: The essential
reading (p. 76-110). Blackwell publishers.
Cooper, R. M. (1974). The control of eye fixation by the
meaning of spoken language: A new methodology for
the real-time investigation of speech perception, memory, and language processing. Cognitive Psychology,
6, 84-107.
Cutler, A., & Butterfield, S. (1992). Rhythmic cues to
speech segmentation: Evidence from juncture misperception. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 218236.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A.
(1999). Human simulations of vocabulary learning.
Cognition, 73, 135-176.
Jusczyk, P. W., Hohne, E. A., & Bauman, A. (1999). Infants’ sensitivity to allophonic cues for word segmentation. Perception and Psychophysics, 61, 1465-1476.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live
by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the
flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to western
thought. New York:Basic Books.
Mattys, S. L., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Phonotactic cues
for segmentation of fluent speech by infants. Cognition, 78, 91-121.
Richards, D., & Goldfarb, J. (1986). The episodic memory model of conceptual development: An integrative
viewpoint. Cognitive Development, 1, 183-219.
Roy, D., & Pentland, A. (2002). Learning words from
sights and sounds: A computational model. Cognitive
Science, 26(1), 113-146.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996).
Word segmentation: The role of distributional cues.
Journal of memory and language, 35, 606-621.
Tomasello, M. (2001). In M. Bowerman & S. Levinson
(Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual development. Cambridge University Press.
Williams, S., & Vivas, J. (1989). I went walking. Harcourt Brance and Company.
Yu, C., Ballard, D. H., & Zhu, S. (2002). Attentional object spotting by integrating multisensory input. In Proceedings of the 4th international conference on multimodal interface. Pittsburg, PA.

