UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
There Is No Naked Eye: Higher-Order Social Concepts Clothe Visual Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4qn717pf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Balcetis, Emily
Dale, Rick

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

There Is No Naked Eye:
Higher-Order Social Concepts Clothe Visual Perception
Emily Balcetis (eeb29@cornell.edu)
Rick Dale (rad28@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Uris Hall, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Abstract
Vision researchers have investigated many sources of
information that assist perception. Although basic visual
properties of stimuli can alter interpretation, the following 5
studies contend that complex, social information significantly
influences visual perception. Study 1 employed a scrambled
sentence priming procedure used to activate concepts without
participants’ awareness. Studies 2, 4, and 5 used less
contrived priming techniques that required participants to read
paragraphs related to the intended prime. Study 3 utilized selfgenerated primes created through minimal prompting. These
priming procedures resulted in an increase in the proportion
of initial percepts that were related to the primed concept.
These priming procedures not only demonstrate the influence
of complex information on perception of ambiguous figures
but of stimuli that approximate visually rich, natural scenes as
well.

Introduction
Human sensory systems are constantly exposed to
ambiguous stimuli and must decode information that lacks
richness. Even in the face of this handicap, sensory systems
are able to interpret and impose meaning on degraded
stimuli quickly and without awareness of possible
alternative interpretations. It remains crucial to investigate
the influences on the sensory systems’ task of deciphering
ambiguous information.
Vision researchers have investigated the general
instability of perception and specifically the influences on
interpretation of visual stimuli. For decades, it has been
debated whether object identification is purely the result of
bottom-up processes, or also incorporates top-down,
contextual information. Many contend that object
identification is driven by a synthesis and analysis of basic
components of the object (Kosslyn & Koenig, 1992;
Michelon & Koenig, 2002). Additionally, the visual system
relies upon focal areas, critical features (Long & Olszweski,
1999), fixation points (Georgiades & Harris, 1997; Loftus &
Mackworth, 1978), and texture (Julesz, 1978) as cues to
assist in identifying target object. Mast and Kosslyn (2002)
summarize this theoretical stance explaining “visual
perception is driven by the nature of the external world” (p.
57). Essentially, this system has evolved to process quickly
and efficiently visual information in the immediate
environment (Cutting & Massironi, 1998; Gibson, 1950,
1979).

109

Several research programs have suggested metaphors that
describe how basic external information feeds initial
perception. Posner, Snyder, & Davidson (1980) suggest that
detection of a visual stimuli requires the involvement of a
“limited-capacity attentional mechanism” that constrains the
amount of information available as input. Similarly, Eriksen
and Yeh (1985) proposed that attentional resources act as a
zoom lens to constrain visual information. As a result of
limited capacity, is not possible to process all the
information available (Broadbent, 1982). Essentially, initial
percept is the product of the limited number of basic
features that are or can be attended to.
In another direction, recent work supports the role of
attentional constraints and biases on low-level visual
perception. Research on single cells within cortical visual
areas of rhesus monkeys demonstrated a differential neural
sensitivity when attention was directed toward a target
stimulus (Motter, 1993). Additionally, Spivey and Spirn
(2000) have demonstrated effects of attention on visual
orientation believed to occur in the primary visual cortex.
Evidence such as this led other researchers to suggest a
union of high- and low-level systems. Specifically, they
contend that that top-down processing cues are required for
object perception. For example, Henderson, Pollatsek, and
Rayner (1987) demonstrated visual priming influences on
object perception specifically concluding that participants
were faster to identify target objects when they were
preceded with semantically related priming objects than
when preceded with semantically unrelated priming objects.
Additionally, congruent background contexts can impact
the speed with which objects embedded in that scene are
identified (Boyce & Pollatsek, 1992) and the accuracy of
their identification (Biederman, 1972; Biederman,
Mezzanotte, and Rabinowitz, 1982). In addition, work by
Boyce, Pollatsek, and Rayner (1989) suggests that
inconsistent background contexts do not impede object
identification. Instead, they contend that consistent
backgrounds provoke a type of spreading activation
response that prepares participants for the likely occurrence
of objects commonly paired with that background
environment.
Yet, these paradigms specifically draw attention to target
objects while participants identify them by “wiggling” or
rocking the target object back and forth within the scene. By
“wiggling” the object, visual attention is directed
specifically to the target object leaving the peripheral visual

field to capture the contextual information. Although the
results suggest the visual system is sensitive to and relies
upon context to improve performance on object
identification tasks, this paradigm does not investigate topdown influences on the disambiguation of objects that are
not easily identifiable because of the possibility for multiple
interpretations.
In the following studies, we sought to demonstrate the
impact of higher-order information on object identification.
There is indeed research supporting global influences, yet it
is relatively scarce and overlooks conceptual information
that is activated implicitly. Though top-down processing
effects have been demonstrated in visual perception, the
following studies demonstrate that perception can be
influenced outside of participants’ awareness and through
the activation of complex but relevant higher-order
information. To uncover what processes determine initial
perception, researchers have often used a variety of
reversible and multi-stable ambiguous figures. In tow, the
following studies demonstrate that top-down priming
through tasks representative of real-world activities have
direct and powerful effects on the perception of artificial
and naturalistic figures with multiple interpretations.
Study 1 begins an investigation into socially motivated
priming effects on visual perception. This study uses the
traditional scrambled-sentence priming technique and a
simple dual-interpretation ambiguous figure. Study 2 uses
the same figure but calls upon a more natural procedure for
activating higher order concepts. Study 3 attempts to
demonstrate the same top-down processing effects without
the labored priming strategies. Instead, participants in study
3 generate their own primes with minimal prompting. Study
4 employs a more complex yet still artificial ambiguous
figure that combines pictorial and orthographic elements.
Opponents to this research (Cutting & Massironi, 1998;
Gibson, 1950, 1979) may argue that the type of results
expected in studies 1-4 would be an artifact of the visual
stimuli used. They would argue that the visual system has
not evolved to process simple line drawings but rich visual
scenes. To begin to address this argument, study 5 leaves
behind the artistic images and calls upon a more naturally
occurring ambiguity that approximates a rich visual display.
Study 5 relies upon a photograph of an external environment
with 2 interpretations of the focal element. Each of the
successive demonstrations reveals that social, higher-order
information of a more naturalistic nature may come to
influence complex visual information.

Study 1
Method
Sixty-seven Cornell psychology and human development
undergraduates completed 1 of 3 scrambled sentence tasks
(female, music, or control) adapted from Srull & Wyer
(1979). In this priming task, participants constructed
grammatically correct 4-word sentences out of sets of 5

110

words presented in a scrambled order (e.g. the dry was wet
field) by eliminating a single word.
For those in experimental conditions, embedded within 15
of the 27 trials were words related to women in the female
condition (e.g. waitress, mother) or words related to music
in the music condition (e.g. gig, jazz). In all trials, those in
the control condition were exposed to words considered
neutral with respect to music or women (e.g. lectures,
pencil). It is important to note that in all conditions
participants were not exposed to words that directly
described the figure (e.g. face, saxophone). Participants then
completed a second, supposedly unrelated object
identification task in which they were shown the sax
player/face ambiguous figure for 1 to 2 seconds (Figure 1)
and were asked an open-ended question to indicate their
initial percept. Additionally, participants were asked if they
had seen the figure before and if they were aware of the
purpose of the study.

Figure 1: Sax player/face ambiguous figure.
We expected that the female prime would increase the
percentage of participants who reported seeing a face
compared to the base rate as determined by the neutral
condition. However, we expected that the music prime
would increase the percentage of participants who saw the
saxophone player as compared to the base rate.

Results and Discussion
These studies intended to demonstrate the effects of
conceptual priming on object recognition as opposed to
memory for previously viewed images. As a result, data
from participants who indicated that this figure was not
novel were removed (N = 19) leaving data from 48
participants for analyses. As expected, participants were not
aware of the true purpose of the study. No participant
indicated that the scrambled sentence task may have
influenced their responses in the object identification task.
As predicted, a greater percentage of music-primed
participants saw the saxophone player (40%, N = 7)
compared to the control condition (20%, N = 3), c2(1) =
4.01, p < .05. However, the female prime made little impact
on perceptions of the face. In the control condition, 80% (N
= 12) of participants saw the face, but this percentage was
not influenced by the female prime as 80% (N = 12) of
participants in this condition reported seeing a face as well,
c2(1) = 0.0, p = 1.0. We interpret this result as indicating

there is a ceiling effect for initial percept of a face, and a
favoritism that could not be overcome with the scrambled
sentence priming technique.

demonstrate the effects of study 1 and 2 without the heavyhanded influence of experimenter-created primes and that
even with greater variance within the activated information,
the effects on object identification are strong.

Study 2
Study 2 intended to replicate the conceptual priming effects
of the previous study. Although study 1 provided an initial
demonstration of implicit top-down processing effects of
complex information, study 2 modified the priming
procedure in order to better capture how such information is
activated outside the laboratory. Additionally, study 2
sought to demonstrate priming effects even in the face of
percept favoritism.

Method
Cornell University undergraduates (N = 108) read 1 of 2
sets of paragraphs: one set was composed of discussions on
the music file sharing controversy surrounding Napster
while the other asserted pro- and anti-pornography
arguments. Again, participants were not exposed to words
that directly described any component of the figure. Then,
participants were given an ostensibly unrelated object
identification task. Participants were shown the sax
player/face ambiguous figure (figure 1) for 1.5 seconds.
Immediately after, participants indicated their initial
percept, asked if they had seen this figure before, and
probed for suspicion of the hypotheses.
We expected that a greater percentage of participants
would report seeing a saxophone player after reading about
Napster than after reading about pornography.

Method
Sixty-three Cornell undergraduates were asked to assist in
the creation of the text and illustrations of a children’s book.
Participants completed 1 of 2 types of self-generated
priming packets. In the farm prime condition, participants
were asked to choose a farm animal as the main character of
a children’s story, list peripheral animal characters, and
write an introductory paragraph that incorporates all of the
characters. Participants in the sea prime condition received
the same prompts but created a tale surrounding a sea
creature. In a second task, participants were asked to judge
the appropriateness of a figure that was intended for
inclusion in the children’s book (figure judgment task). For
1 to 2 seconds, participants viewed the horse/seal
ambiguous figure (Figure 2). Immediately after, participants
indicated their initial percept, asked if they had seen this
figure before, and probed for suspicion.

Results and Discussion
Within this sample, a large number of participants wrote
down a generic description of the figure (N = 20) that did
not clearly indicate whether they saw the saxophone player
or the face (e.g. person). These responses were included in
the analyses as a separate response category. All data was
analyzed using a 2 (prime: Napster, porn) X 3 (response:
saxophone player, face, generic) chi-square to control for
these vague responses. Results indicate that there was a
significant difference in the percentage of participants who
saw the saxophone player depending upon prime type, c2(2)
= 8.99, p = .01. Of those in the porn prime condition, 0%
reported seeing a sax player but 18% (N = 8) of those in the
Napster condition did. Again, these effects occur outside
participants’ awareness as no one recognized the intended
connection between the priming and object recognition
tasks.

Study 3
Although studies 1 and 2 demonstrate the effects of complex
information on object identification, both used very
controlled priming techniques that did not allow much
variability in what information was activated. The purpose
of study 3, then, was to allow participants to self-generate
conceptual primes with minimal prompting. We intended to

111

Figure 2: Horse/seal ambiguous figure.
We expected that the distribution of percepts would vary as
a function of prime type. Specifically, we expected that a
greater proportion of participants would report a seal after
creating a sea animal story than after a farm animal story.

Results and Discussion
Again, data from participants who gave vague responses (N
= 10) or had seen the image before (N = 3) were removed.
Additionally, data from those participants who could
blatantly describe the purpose of the study and link the
prime to the figure judgment task were removed (N = 7) as
advised by Bargh and Chartrand (2000) due to concerns of
reactance towards the prime. For those who are aware of the
purpose of the prime, measures of the effects of implicit
priming techniques are not valid as contrast or at times
demand effects may occur. This left data from 43
participants for analyses. Results indicated that the
distribution of reported percepts significantly differed
depending upon prime type, c2(1) = 7.15, p = .008. Of those
in the farm prime condition, 0% reported seeing a seal.
However, 26% (N = 8) of those in the sea creature condition
reported seeing a seal.

Results

Study 4
Study 4 used a more complex figure that involved
orthographic and pictorial interpretations. Additionally, by
varying the rotation at which the figure was viewed, we
differentially modulate the favoritism in object
identification. With this study, we intended to demonstrate
that conceptual priming could override this favoritism and
still result in an interpretation in line with specific types of
activated information.

Method
One hundred forty-four Cornell undergraduates read a 2page transcript of a couple on a first date. Participants in the
flirting condition were asked to seek out examples of flirting
by underlining phrases and providing a brief explanation
about how those lines exemplify flirting. Because flirting is
not directly related to one particular interpretation of the
ambiguous figure, this condition served as a control for a
deception condition. As was instructed in the control
condition, those in the deception condition read the
transcript, underlined examples of the couple deceiving one
another, and justified their choices. The transcripts were
nearly identical except for minor alterations that made
flirting or deception more salient depending upon condition.
Following this, participants completed an ostensibly
unrelated object identification task. As a between-subjects
variable, participants viewed the liar/face ambiguous
(Figure 3) at 1 of 7 degrees of rotation (0, 10, 15, 20, 22, 25,
or 30 degrees) for 1 to 2 seconds. The figure was rotated
counterclockwise between 0 and 30 degrees making the
cursive word “Liar” increasingly parallel to the bottom of
the page and usual in its orientation. Participants were asked
for their initial percept of the static image of the figure. In
addition, participants were asked if the figure was novel to
them and probed for suspicion. We expected that in the
deception condition, increasing rotation would result in
increased reports of the word “Liar” in script. However, it
was expected that those in the flirting condition would not
be influenced by rotation and would be just as likely to
report seeing the face regardless of degree of rotation.

…
Figure 3: Liar/face ambiguous figure at 0 degrees rotation
on left and 35 degrees rotation on right.

112

Because data were binomial and distributed unequally
across cells, planned linear contrasts with harmonic n and
arcsine transformations were used. As can be seen in Figure
4, there was a significant interaction between prime type
and rotation conditions, t(inf) = 2.84, p < .005. This was an
artifact of the significant increasing linear trend for reports
of “Liar” with increasing rotation in the deception condition,
t(inf) = 5.62, p < .0005, and not in the control condition.
There was not a significant linear trend as rotation increased
in the flirting condition, t(inf) = 1.61 p > .05. To summarize,
as the figure was rotated, participants were more likely to
identify in the figure the word “Liar” after having sought
our deception but not after having sought out examples of
flirting.

Study 5
Study 5 sought to explore the bounds of the type of figure
used in the object identification portion of the experiments.
As mentioned earlier, some would argue against the use of
mere drawings for our purposes (Cutting & Massironi,
1998; Gibson, 1950, 1979). To begin to address this
concern, study 5 cast aside the artistic and artificial figures
calling upon naturally occurring ambiguity in a figure.

Method
Forty-five Cornell undergraduates completed an evaluation
of the text and pictures of 1 of 2 fictitious children’s books.
Participants in the sign condition read about Henry Ford, the
beginnings of the Cadillac Company, and the need for
regulation of automobiles on the road. Those in the space
condition read about various astronauts, space shuttle
missions, and space exploration. As in earlier studies,
participants were not exposed to words that directly
described the focal figure. Then, participants in both
conditions were asked to judge the appropriateness of a few
photos for inclusion in the children’s book they were just
acquainted with. Participants were shown the photo in
Figure 5 for 1 second, asked to describe what they saw, and
make judgments about the photo. Again, participants were
probed for suspicion.

Figure 5: Sign/moon illusion1.
Of interest was the description participants provided of the
light circle in the center of the photo. We expected that a
greater proportion of participants would report seeing the
back of a road sign after reading about Henry Ford than
after reading about space. However, it was expected that a
greater proportion of participants would describe the photo
as a view of the sun or moon perhaps obstructed by a rod
after reading about space travel.

Results
As was the case in study 2, a large number of participants
wrote down a generic description of the figure (N = 14) that
did not clearly indicate their interpretation of the ambiguous
object (e.g. desert scene). These responses were included in
the analyses as a separate response category. All data were
analyzed using a 2 (prime type: sign, space) X 3 (response
type: sign, sun/moon, generic) chi-square to control for
these vague responses. Results indicate that there was a
significant difference in the distribution of responses
depending upon prime type, c2(2) = 11.88, p = .003.
Because we made specific predictions regarding the
influence of each prime on initial percept, we applied
planned comparisons on the proportion of expected percepts
excluding the data from those participants who gave generic
responses. Specifically, we expected that a greater
percentage of participants would report seeing a road sign
after reading about Henry Ford than after reading about
space. The data support this expectation, c2(1) = 10.49, p =
.001. Of those in the who read the Henry Ford story, 50%
(N = 10) reported seeing a sign. However, only 8% (N = 2)
of participants who read the space story reported a sign.

Conclusion
These 5 studies suggest an instability of perception by
demonstrating the effects of activated higher-order concepts
on visual processing and specifically object identification.
Additionally, they advocate for continued study of the
integration of cognition and perception. The studies indicate
that the modulation of basic visual processing may be
mediated through both simple lexical influences, and even
1

Photo by Jerry Downs (Seckel, 2002)

113

complex social information that may set the occasion for an
interpretation of ambiguous visual information.
Additionally, it is not only the interpretation of simple
ambiguous figures that is modulated, but even the decoding
of ambiguities present in natural contexts that begin to
approximate rich visual environments. Although vision is
based on bottom-up processes, these studies demonstrate the
significant contribution of top-down influences.
These data contribute to the current debate on the nature
of perceptual mechanisms and have implications for the
broader integration that may occur across information levels
in a highly interactive cognitive system. Research on the
interaction of visual and linguistic information provides
further evidence for this (e.g., Spivey, Tanenhaus, Eberhard,
& Sedivy, 2002, argue for this perspective). As mentioned
above, future research should demonstrate that dynamic
visual information (“optic flow,” Gibson, 1979) can also be
strongly modulated by higher-order social information.
If perception has direct, non-conscious effects on
behavior, it is necessary to investigate the stability of
perception. We must understand how even basic perception
is manipulated. The effects of this inconsistent visual and
interpretive faculty loom large when considering the
ramifications in complex social situations—ones, perhaps,
that require immediate reactions but which are unclear.
Particular recent events may provide anecdotal evidence for
this effect.
For example, in February 1999, 41 bullets were fired by 4
New York Police officers which hit and killed Amidou
Diallo, an unarmed immigrant from West Africa (McFadden
& Roane, 1999). Although charged, the officers were
acquitted as the shooting was judged to be justified. When
police officers ordered Diallo to stop, he moved, producing
an object that later turned out to be a wallet. The police
defendants maintained that in this situation, they acted on
the information available to protect themselves from danger
(Fritsch, 2000). Although racial profiling explanations for
this incident abound, certainly context effects and the
activation of complex, social information played a role in
the interpretation of a supposedly ambiguous
object—however wrong that interpretation may have been.
This type of misinterpretation of ambiguous stimuli is not
a rare event. Payne (2001) produced a similar pattern of
results in the lab. In one experiment where they were asked
to respond as quickly as possible, participants misidentified
tools as guns when primed with Black compared with White
faces. Additionally, in a behavioral follow-up to this study
(Correll, Park, Judd, & Wittenbrink, 2002), not only were
participants more likely to misperceive tools as guns upon
activation of complex, social information, but participants
were more likely to react with aggression in response to this
misperception. These results suggest that stereotypical
information serve to bias the perception of weapons through
relatively automatic, uncontrollable processes.
The realms of social cognition and visual perception
therefore pose invaluable theoretical and practical questions.
In fact, it may be through the study of sensory-cognitive

interaction and social cognition that the domains of
cognitive science, social psychology, and applied
psychology will overlap. A joint effort by all the "tribes of
psychology" (Gilbert, 2002) may offer a hitherto unequaled
pursuit towards understanding the perceptual and social
world.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Richard Eibach, Michael Spivey,
Dave Dunning, and Stephanie Hankin for helpful comments
and suggestions.

References
Bargh, J. A. & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the
middle: A practical guide to priming and automaticity
research. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of
research methods in social and personality psychology.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Biederman, I. (1972). Perceiving real-world scenes. Science,
177, 77-80.
Biderman, I., Mezzanotte, R. J., & Rabinowitz, J. C. (1982).
Scene perception: Detecting and judging objects
undergoing relational violations. Cognitive Psychology,
14, 143-177.
Boyce, S. J. & Pollatsek, A. (1992). Identification of objects
in scenes: The role of scene background in object naming.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 18, 531-543.
Boyce, S. J., Pollatsek, A., & Rayner, K. (1989). Effect of
background information on object identification. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 15, 556-566.
Broadbent, D. E. (1982). Task discrimination and selective
intake of information. Acta Psychologica, 50, 253-290.
Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C. M., & Wittenbrink, B. (2002).
The police officer's dilemma: Using ethnicity to
disambiguate potentially threatening individuals. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1314 – 1329.
Eriksen, C. W. & Yeh, Y. (1985). Allocation of attention
in the visual fields. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 21, 628-634.
Cutting, J. E. & Massironi, M. (1998). Pictures and their
special status in perceptual and cognitive inquiry. In J.
Hochberg (Ed.), Handbook of perception and cognition.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Fritsch, J. (2000, February 26). The Diallo verdict: The
overview; 4 officers in Diallo shooting are acquitted of all
charges. The New York Times, A1.
Georgiades, M. S. & Harris, J. P. (1997). Biasing effects in
ambiguous figures: Removal or fixation of critical
features can affect perception. Visual-Cognition, 4, 383408.
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The perception of the visual world.
Oxford: Houghton Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.

114

Gilbert, D. (2002). Are psychology's tribes ready to form a
nation? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 3.
Henderson, J. M., Pollatsek, A., & Rayner, K. (1987).
Effects of foveal priming and extrafoveal preview on
object identification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13,
449-463.
Julesz, B. (1978). Visual texture discrimination using
random-dot patterns: Comment. Journal of the Optical
Society of America, 68, 268-270.
Kosslyn, S. M. & Koenig, O. (1992). Wet mind: The new
cognitive neuroscience. New York, NY, US: Free Press.
Loftus, G. R. & Mackworth, N. H. (1978). Cognitive
determinants of fixation location during picture viewing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 4, 565-572.
Long, G. M. & Olszweski, A. D. (1999). To reverse or not
to reverse: When is an ambiguous figure not ambiguous?
American Journal of Psychology, 112, 41-71.
Mast, F. W. & Kosslyn, S. M. (2002). Visual mental images
can be ambiguous: Insights from individual differences in
spatial transformation abilities. Cognition, 86, 57-70.
McFadden, R. D. & Roane, K. R. (1999, February 6). U.S.
examining killing of man in police volley. The New York
Times, A1.
Michelon, P. & Koenig, O. (2002). On the relationship
between visual imagery and visual perception: Evidence
from priming studies. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 161-184.
Motter, B. C. (1993). Focal attention produces spatially
selective processing in visual cortical areas V1, V2, and
V4 in the presence of competing stimuli.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 70, 909-919.
Payne, B. K. (2001). Prejudice and perception: The role of
automatic and controlled processes in misperceiving a
weapon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
81, 181-192.
Posner, M. I., Snyder, C. R. R., & Davidson, B. J. (1980).
Attention and the detection of signals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 109, 160-174.
Seckel, A. (2002). The great book of optical illusions.
Firefly Books: Toronto, Ontario.
Spivey, M. J. & Spirn, M. J. (2000). Selective visual
attention modulates the direct tilt aftereffect. Perception
and Psychophysics, 62, 1525-1533.
Spivey, M. J., Tanenhaus, M. K., Eberhard, K. M., &
Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Eye movements and spoken
language comprehension: Effects of visual context on
syntactic ambiguity resolution. Cognitive Psychology, 45,
447-481.
Srull, T. & Wyer, R. S. (1979). The role of category
accessibility in the interpretation of information about
persons: Some determinants and implications. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1660-1672.

