UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two Reasoning Mechanisms for Solving the Conditional ‘Fallacies’.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7js6c64n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Verschueren, Niki
Schaeken, Walter
d'Ydewalle, Gery

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two Reasoning Mechanisms for Solving the Conditional ‘Fallacies’.
Niki Verschueren (Niki.Verschueren@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Géry d’Ydewalle (Géry.Dydewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
There are two different reasoning mechanisms for solving ‘ifthen’-problems: one is based on likelihood-estimates and is
rather heuristic; the other one takes counterexamples into
account and is analytic in nature. Based on the difference in
input of the two reasoning mechanisms we found that the AC
problem is mainly solved by using likelihood-information,
whereas the DA problem is rather solved using
counterexample-information. Mental models adepts have
proposed some explanations to account for the differences in
processing difficulty and speed between AC and DA.
Considering the reasoning mechanism for AC and DA from a
dual process perspective provides an extra explanation for the
observed effects. This study indicates that framing
observations in a dual process account can provide additional
explanations for well-known phenomena.

Introduction
Reasoning with conditional sentences is one of the central
activities of our daily life. By using conditionals people are
able to predict and explain the occurrence of simple as well
as complex effects. There are situations in which these
inferences are made in an effortless and unconscious
manner, in other situations reasoners consciously initiate a
range of steps leading to a conclusion. This difference can
be framed within the general idea of dual processes (see e.g.,
Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman, 1996; Stanovich & West,
2000). The dual process theories bear a family resemblance
in distinguishing two types of cognitive processes. One
process operates in a fast, heuristic, implicit way and leads
to pragmatic conclusions. The other process is characterized
by rather slow, analytic and explicit way of processing and
yields more normative answers. In general the dual process
theories suffer from a trade-off between scope and precision.
The theories apply to a whole range of tasks: text
comprehension, attribution, induction as well as deduction
tasks, but in their general formulation they are not suited to
make precise predictions in specific task contexts (see e.g.,
Sloman, 1996; Osman, 2002).
The present article focuses on how simple everyday causal
conditional arguments are solved. There are four conditional
problem types: (1) modus ponens, MP: ‘if p, then q’, ‘p’, ‘q

1176

follows’ (2) modus tollens, MT: ‘if p, then q’, ‘not q’, ‘not p
follows’ (3) affirmation of the consequent, AC: ‘if p, then
q’, ‘q’, ‘p follows’ and (4) the denial of the antecedent, DA:
‘if p, then q’, ‘not p’, ‘not q follows’. These four conclusions
are the default conclusions; when reasoners give this
conclusion, we say that they accept the inference.
In classical logic, MP and MT are considered valid
inferences, whereas AC and DA are labeled fallacious. The
distinction between valid inferences and ‘fallacies’ does not
hold in everyday reasoning. The distinction valid/invalid is
based on the material implication interpretation of the ‘ifthen’ connector: ‘p’ is sufficient but not necessary for ‘q’. In
everyday (causal) reasoning there are sentences of all four
possible combinations of sufficiency and necessity, so the
material implication interpretation is just one out of four
possible interpretations of ‘if-then’. In general, instead of
considering the formal structure of the argument, reasoners
draw a conclusion based on the problem content, namely
whether the cause is necessary and/or sufficient for the
effect (see e.g., Cummins, Lubart, Alsknis, & Rist, 1991;
Thompson, 1994; Cummins, 1995; Newstead, Ellis, Evans,
Dennis, 1997). Although the truth-functionality of the
material implication does not apply to everyday reasoning in
general, some reasoners can still take the logical validity of
the inferences into account. Markovits and Barrouillet
(2002) and De Neys, Schaeken, and d’Ydewalle (2003)
claim that skilled reasoners can inhibit ‘relevant’ disabling
information when they are solving MP and MT; even when
the cause is not sufficient for the effect, MP and MT are still
accepted. To avoid this possible interference of logical
validity on the reasoning mechanism the present research
will be confined to the solving of the so-called fallacies, AC
and DA.
To find out how AC and DA are solved, we elaborate on
the question posed by Cummins (1995): Can naive human
reasoning best be characterized as an inductive probabilistic
process or is our naïve understanding based on the
consideration of alternative causes and disabling conditions?
To answer this question the two processes are linked to
two recent theories on deduction: the mental model account
and the probabilistic account. The two processes are brought
together in the dual process theory formulated by Evans and
Over (1996), but the specification can also be linked to other

dual process accounts. There is already evidence for this
dual process specification for causal conditional reasoning:
it was found that the heuristic reasoning mechanism delivers
a fast output and uses likelihood-information as input,
whereas the analytical process takes more time to produce a
conclusion and takes counterexamples into account
(Verschueren, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2003a). In this
specification both reasoning mechanisms that Cummins
proposed can be recognized: The heuristic process
corresponds roughly to the inductive probabilistic process,
whereas the analytical process focuses on counterexample
retrieval. In general the characteristics of the two reasoning
mechanisms for causal reasoning are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Characteristics of the specified dual process theory.
Heuristic mechanism
Consists of a single phase
Yields fast results
Implicit: only end-product is available to consciousness
Minor load on working memory capacity (automatic)
Rather pragmatic result
Analytical mechanism
Reasoning mechanism is a sequential process
Relatively slow process
Explicit: reasoner is conscious of the retrieved counterexample(s)
Influenced by working memory capacity
Rather normative result

Meta-analytic studies indicate that AC is endorsed more
frequently than DA. Additionally, it takes reasoners longer
to solve DA than to solve AC (Schroyens, Schaeken,
d’Ydewalle, 2002; Barrouillet, Grosset, & Lecas, 2000). In
the present article these differences in processing difficulty
and speed are approached from the perspective of dual
processes. It is possible that the observed differences
between AC and DA emerge from the characteristics of the
process by which the inferences AC and DA are mainly
solved. For instance, when the fast heuristic process is more
important for solving AC than for solving DA, then the
difference in problem solving time can already be explained.
The central question of the present article is: How are AC
and DA solved; what is the relative importance of the
analytical and heuristic reasoning processes? First, we will
outline how the two inferences are solved according to the
analytical and the heuristic process specification.
Analytical process
The specification of the analytical reasoning mechanism is
based on a recent variant of the mental models theory
proposed by Markovits and colleagues (see e.g., Markovits,
Fleury, Quinn, Venet, 1998; Barouillet, Markovits, & Quinn,
2001; Markovits & Barouillet, 2002). How AC and DA are
solved according to this theory will be illustrated with the
sentence: ‘If you pull a cat’s tail, then the cat will get
angry’. Regardless of the inference type, reasoners start the
reasoning process by representing the content of the causal
rule as a possible situation (initial model): ‘pull tail, cat
angry’ (1). The theory assumes that the active consideration

1177

of the problem content will lead to a semantic activation of
relevant information from long-term memory. This retrieved
information is used to extent the initial model. In case of
DA, the categorical premise contains a negation and will
strongly activate the complementary class. So after the
initial model construction, reasoners will retrieve the
following model: ‘don’t pull tail, cat not angry’ (2). The
construction of this second model is reserved for DA, it is
not constructed in case of AC. The retrieval process can stop
here, but not necessarily; other relevant information
structures can still be accessed automatically.
For AC and DA, the active consideration of the
conditional and the categorical premise will cue an
automatic search for alternative causes.1 An alternative
cause is a cause other than the given cause ‘p’ that can also
produce the effect ‘q’. Examples of alternative causes for the
sentence ‘If you pull a cat’s tail, then the cat will get angry’
are: take away its food, throw something at it, pull its ear….
In general, the alternative cause has the following structure:
‘don’t pull tail, cat angry’ (3).
Depending on whether reasoners retrieve an alternative
cause, they will accept or reject the default conclusion. First
for AC, when reasoners do not retrieve an alternative cause,
they only have a representation of the initial model (1); in
this case they will accept the default conclusion ‘p’, because
they have not found other situations leading to a different
conclusion. In case reasoners retrieve an alternative cause,
they have a representation of (1) and (3). This representation
informs them that there are two possible causes for the given
effect. So, they will not accept AC. For DA, we follow the
same line of reasoning. When reasoners do not retrieve an
alternative cause, they have a representation of (1) and (2).
This leads them to accept the inference because to their
knowledge there is only one possible consequence linked to
‘not p’, that is ‘not q’. In case reasoners do retrieve an
alternative cause, they have a representation of (1), (2) and
(3). These three models lead them to the insight that there
are two possible conclusions for ‘not p’- namely ‘q’ and ‘not
q’- hence they do not accept the default DA conclusion.
Heuristic process
In the heuristic process the conclusion is based on
probabilistic properties (see e.g., George, 1997; Lui, Lo &
Wu, 1996; Oaksford, Chater & Larkin, 2000; Stevenson &
Over, 1995). For solving causal conditional problems,
reasoners base their heuristic answer on conditional
likelihood estimates. The likelihood that the effect is
produced by the cause L(p|q) is used for solving AC and
DA.
For AC, reasoners have to infer what caused the
consequent ‘q’ to take place. To solve this problem
heuristically they will consider the categorical premise, ‘q’
1

This retrieval process is not overall ‘automatic’, working memory
is needed to actively generate cues for retrieval (De Neys,
Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2003). Verschueren, De Neys, Schaeken,
& d’Ydewalle (2002) also found that the types of counterexamples
that reasoners generate differ according to the working memory
capacity of the reasoners.

and automatically activate all situations that are relevant to
‘q’. Based on the range of relevant situations, reasoners then
induce L(p|q). Based on this likelihood reasoners
immediately draw their conclusion; when the likelihood is
high, they will accept AC, when the likelihood is low, they
will not accept the inference (see also Oaksford et al., 2000).
AC acceptance is in direct proportion to L(p|q).
For DA the heuristic reasoning mechanism based on
L(p|q) is less intuitively clear. Oaksford et al. (2000)’s core
reasoning principle is that reasoners endorse an inference in
direct proportion to the likelihood that the conclusion
follows given the categorical premise, for DA this would be
L(not q | not p). However, the categorical premise of DA
contains a negation and it is difficult to base a likelihoodestimate on a negative proposition. The main problem lies in
the contrast class that is constructed when processing a
negation (Oaksford & Stenning, 1992; Schaeken &
Schroyens, 2000; Schroyens, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle,
2001; 2002). If you have to access all situations that are
relevant to for instance, ‘not a dog’ you have to look at ‘a cat
or a bird or a fish or a sheep or a cow or…’ It seems unlikely
that DA is solved by use of a likelihood-estimate based on a
range of disjunctions. In previous research it is found that
the linear correlation between the proportion of DA
acceptance and L(p|q) is higher than the correlation between
DA acceptance and L(not q|not p) (R(DA, L(p|q))=.870,
R(DA, L(not q|not p)=.561, both N=20, p<.05). This
indicates that the likelihood used for solving DA is L(p|q)
rather than L(not q| not p). Indeed, it has repeatedly been
found that the likelihood-estimate L(p|q) is strongly related
to the percentage of DA acceptance (see e.g., Thompson,
1994). Verschueren et al. (2003a) propose a suppositional
strategy that makes clear how L(p|q) is used to solve DA.
The DA inference is based on the supposition that ‘q’ is the
case. Then by use of L(p|q) they heuristically infer ‘p’ (AC).
Reasoners are then faced with a gradual contradiction
between their tentative AC-conclusion about the likelihood
of ‘p’ and the categorical premise ‘not p’. This contradiction
will result in a proportional rejection of the supposition ‘p’
and a proportional acceptance of the conclusion ‘not p’.
When the L(p|q) is high, DA will be accepted more, when
L(p|q) is low, DA will be less accepted. These rule-like steps
of reasoning for solving DA are supposed to function in an
automatic and associative mode.
Relation between both processes
From a theoretical point of view the relation of both
processes has to be considered. It is assumed that heuristic
processes start automatically and by default. When the
analytical process reaches a conclusion, it overrides the
output given by the heuristic process (see e.g., Evans &
Over, 1996; Stanovich & West, 2000). This overrideprinciple is the centerpiece of the relation between the
heuristic and analytical processes and also applies to the
specified dual process theory. The are two possible
interaction scenario’s: either both processes produce their
conclusion in relative isolation from each other, or the
output of the heuristic process is used as input for the
analytical process. In the latter case the long term memory

1178

information needed to construct the initial model ‘p-q’ can
be used in a heuristic manner using L(p|q). But we refrain
from speculating about the specific interaction mechanism.
We confine ourselves to the psychological reality of both
processes.

Experiment
When seeking to investigate which of the two processes
are involved in reasoning, we have to pinpoint the crucial
difference between both reasoning mechanisms. Both
mechanisms appeal to long term memory information but
there is a fundamental difference in the way this information
is conceptualized. The heuristic process uses likelihoodinformation; this information is gradual and concerns a
generalization of all relevant situations. The analytical
process uses information about alternative causes; the
additional model is constructed only in case an alternative
cause is retrieved. In deductive reasoning tasks this leads to
a discrete effect on inference acceptance: When the
alternative model is constructed, reasoners reject the
inference, otherwise they accept the inference.
It has been shown that the availability of alternative
causes in long term memory as well as likelihood-estimates
affect the inference acceptance rates of AC and DA
(Thompson, 1994; Cummins, 1995; Stevenson & Over,
1995). In the paradigm that Verschueren et al. (2003a) used
to investigate the importance of both reasoning mechanisms,
the difference between the heuristic and analytic information
input is used to determine the relative importance of both
processes. One group of participants is asked to rate L(p|q),
another group of participants will check whether there are
alternative causes and a third group of participants is asked
to solve reasoning problems based on the same sentences.
By using multiple regression analysis it is possible to
investigate which information type (likelihood or
counterexample) accounts for most of the observed variance
in acceptance ratings.
Method
Design 291 psychology students participated as part of
course requirements. The participants were divided in three
groups. One group of 23 participants provided likelihood
information on 43 sentences. A second group of 23
participants provided counterexample-information. These
participants determined for all 43 sentences whether there
are alternative causes possible. A third and large group
(N=245) was given the reasoning problems. Each participant
received 16 problems based on 16 different sentences that
are randomly selected from the pool of 43 sentences. There
were 4 MP presented, 4 MT, 4 AC and 4 DA. Only the AC
and DA rates will be considered.
Material The 43 sentences were selected based on previous
research. The selection made sure that there was a
representative sample of everyday causal sentences. The
sentences concerned different semantic domains and there
was a nearly equal number of sentences with causes that are
(a) necessary and sufficient for the effect (b) necessary but

not sufficient, (c) not necessary but sufficient and (d) neither
necessary nor sufficient.
The likelihood-rating was constructed so that the result of
the rating mirrors the input of the heuristic process. Each
rating consisted of the conditional sentence and a subsequent
question, for instance: Sentence: ‘If you pull a cat’s tail, then
the cat will get angry’. Rating: ‘A cat is angry, did someone
pull its tail?’ Participants were asked to rate a likelihood,
they had to choose from: ‘never / seldom / sometimes / often
/ always’. Never was scored as 1, always was scored as 5.
The counterexample-rating mirrored the result of the
analytical retrieval process, namely: whether people could
retrieve an alternative cause. The counterexample-rating
looked as follows: Sentence: ‘If you pull a cat’s tail, then the
cat will get angry’. Rating: ‘Can a cat get angry without
someone pulling its tail?’ Participants chose ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Yes was scored as 0, no was scored as 1.
The reasoning problems were presented in an evaluation
format. An example of AC: Sentence: ‘If you pull a cat’s
tail, then the cat will get angry’. Situation: A cat is angry.
Participants were asked to choose one of four conclusions:
(1) Someone pulled its tail (2) Someone did not pull its tail
(3) It is possible that someone pulled its tail, but it is also
possible that its tail was not pulled (4) I don’t know.
Inference acceptance (1) was scored as 1, all other answers
were scored 0.
Procedure All participants were tested collectively at the
same time, the two rating tasks as well as the reasoning task
were presented in paper-pencil format. The participants were
divided in three groups and received instructions according
to the task they had to perform. For the reasoning task, the
participants were instructed to solve the problems as in an
everyday setting. No instructions concerning logical
deduction were given.

Results
For each of the 43 sentences we obtained the mean L(p|q)
(M=3.56, SD=.775), the mean percentage of no-responses
on the counterexample-rating (M=31,44, SD=24.54) and the
mean percentage of AC and DA acceptance. The correlation
between the likelihood-rating and the proportion of
inference acceptance was significantly larger for AC than for
DA (R(AC,L(p|q))=.826, R(DA, L(p|q))=.620, both N=43,
p<.05). This can already be a first indication that the
heuristic process is less important for solving DA than it is
for solving AC. There is no difference in the correlation
between the counterexample-rating and the percentage of
AC and DA acceptance (R(AC, alt)=.746, R(DA, alt)=.625).
In order to determine the relative importance of both
processes, a separate regression analysis for AC and DA will
be conducted. The mean results of the likelihood-rating and
counterexample-rating are entered as predictors for the
proportion of inference acceptance. Because there are only
two predictors, a classical MRA can be used to determine
the relative contribution of both information types. The
proportion of inference acceptance is transformed into
logit(p) to prevent the prediction of an invalid proportion

1179

(p>1 or p<0). The results of the regression analysis are
presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Results of the multiple regression analysis.
AC
L(p|q)
Alternatives?
DA
L(p|q)
Alternatives?

R²=.66
ß
.632
.203
R²=.41
ß
.251
.417

t(39)
3.626
1.162
t(40)
1.112
1.846

(N=42)
p
<.001
.252
(N=43)
p
.273
.072

For AC we found that only the likelihood-predictor
accounted for a significant part of observed variance in
inference acceptance. This implies that the main process for
solving AC takes likelihood information into account; thus
AC is mainly solved heuristically. For DA we found that
only the counterexample rating accounted for a marginally
significant proportion of variance. The retrieval of
alternative causes seems to be the dominant process for
solving DA problems. However, this analytical predictor is
only marginally significant, so other factors may also be
important in describing how DA is solved.
We found converging evidence in the results of a verbal
protocol-study (Verschueren, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle,
2003b). In this task participants were presented with a
reasoning problem and asked to give whatever information
they think is relevant (free production task). For DA there
were slightly more trials in which participants referred to a
counterexample to sustain their answer than for AC (.61 vs.
.55). According to the specified dual process account, the
explicit use of counterexample information indicates that
participants used an analytic reasoning mechanism. This
observation sustains our claim that DA is solved more
analytically than AC.
The results indicate that the relative importance of the
heuristic and analytic process is different for AC than for
DA; AC is mainly solved heuristically by using likelihoodinformation whereas DA is rather solved analytically by
using information about alternative causes. The adverb
mainly indicates that most participants use this reasoning
strategy most of the time. We do not exclude the possibility
that some participants sometimes solve AC analytically or
solve DA heuristically or that other factors intervene.

Discussion
There are a number of experimental findings and
theoretical assumptions that can be linked to the present
results. The characteristics of the two reasoning mechanisms
have implications for both the processing time and
processing difficulty of solving AC and DA. The heuristic
process yields fast results and poses a minimal load on
processing capacity, whereas the analytic reasoning
mechanism needs more time to attain a conclusion and
requires a considerable amount of processing resources.

Some differences in processing time and difficulty can
also be accounted for within one of the two reasoning
processes. The minimalist specification of the heuristic
process is not suited to make precise predictions regarding
the differences in the reasoning process of AC and DA.
Oaksford, et al., (2000) explicitly refrain from speculating
on how AC and DA are actually solved. From the
perspective of mental model theory the processing
differences between AC and DA have already been
addressed. The effects on processing speed and processing
difficulty are discussed separately. In this discussion we will
first sketch the explanations that have been proposed by
mental model theorists and subsequently frame the observed
effects in the dual process specification.
Reaction time
First, it is found that the mean reaction time for solving
DA is higher than the reaction time for solving AC (see e.g.
Barrouillet, et al, 2000). Classically, this is explained by
referring to the fact that for DA reasoners need to process a
negation, which is time-consuming.
The negation-hypothesis is indeed a valuable explanation,
but the present findings deliver a second possible
explanation. Both reasoning mechanisms can be
distinguished on a temporal dimension. Verschueren,
Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle (2003c) found that for fast trials
the likelihood-predictor is the only predictor accounting for
a significant proportion of the observed variance. For trials
in which inferences are solved rather slowly, the
counterexample-predictor is the only factor accounting for a
significant proportion of variance in acceptance ratings. The
present data indicate that AC is solved mainly heuristically,
which implies that due to the characteristics of the reasoning
mechanism mainly used for solving AC, the AC conclusion
is attained relatively fast. The DA conclusion is attained in a
rather analytical way, this analytical reasoning mechanism
takes more time to attain a conclusion, and hence in general,
solving DA will take more time. Another explanation for the
difference in reaction time between AC and DA can thus be
found in the temporal characteristics of the reasoning
mechanisms mainly used for solving AC and DA.
Processing difficulty
Second, the difference in processing difficulty between
AC and DA will be discussed. According to the mental
model theory AC and DA differ in a number of aspects.
A first aspect is that AC is a backward inference; DA is a
forward inference. It is found that forward inferences are
easier to solve than backward inferences (see Barrouillet, et
al., 2000). Second, it is assumed that denial inferences
(inferences containing a negation in their categorical
premise) are more difficult than affirmation inferences
(Barrouillet, et al., 2000). When MP and MT are included in
the comparisons, the differences forward/backward and
affirmation/denial are indeed very clear.
There is still a third reason for expecting a difference in
difficulty between AC and DA. One of the basic principles
of mental models theory is that the processing difficulty

1180

increases when reasoners have to take more models into
account for solving the inference. For solving DA, reasoners
need to take an extra model into account compared to when
they are solving AC (Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002; see
also Schroyens, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002). Due to the
necessity of manipulating the extra model ‘not p, not q’ to
solve DA, it is expected that within the analytical reasoning
mechanism solving DA is more demanding than solving AC.
Fourth, the kernel of the analytical process resides in the
retrieval of counterexamples. Concerning the ease of
retrieval, there are two additional differences between AC
and DA. On the hand, because the premises of DA contain
the explicit propositions of an alternative cause, it can be
easier to find an alternative cause in case of DA than in case
of AC. The automatic retrieval process of alternative causes
‘not p and q’ operates on the conditional premise and uses
the categorical premise as an additional retrieval cue
(Markovits & Barrouillet, 2000). Because these two
premises of DA contain the explicit propositions ‘not p’ as
well as ‘q’, we suggest that retrieving an alternative (‘not p,
q’) is easier for DA than for AC, where only affirmative
propositions are present. When AC and DA are based on
causal rules, the temporal order between ‘cause’ and ‘effect’
can also motivate a preferred directionality, which could
favor the retrieval process in case of DA. On the other hand,
it is recently found that the same retrieval process depends
on working memory capacity (see e.g., De Neys, et al, 2003;
Verschueren, et al, 2002). When reasoners are solving DA
they have to maintain an extra model in their working
memory (the complementary ‘not p, not q’-model), this can
cause an extra load on working memory, which in turn
burdens the efficient retrieval of alternative causes. In
conclusion, there can be differences in the ease of
counterexample retrieval between AC and DA, but at
present we are unable to pinpoint the exact difference in the
ease of retrieval of counterexamples.
This quest for finding the crucial difference in processing
needs between AC and DA has not yet yielded a satisfying
result. The present results deliver a valuable contribution for
explaining the observed differences in processing speed and
difficulty. From the general level of dual process theories, it
is found that AC is mainly solved heuristically whereas DA
is solved mainly analytically. So regarding the difference in
processing difficulty, the dual process approach reveals that
AC is mainly solved by use of a less demanding reasoning
mechanism than DA is.

Conclusion
The present experiment based on the specified dual
process approach shows that AC should be solved faster and
should be easier to solve than DA. This is because AC is
solved heuristically, which poses only minor demands on the
cognitive processing resources. DA is solved mainly
analytically, which implies a slower and more demanding
reasoning mechanism. On a more specific level, when we
look within one reasoning mechanism, e.g., the analytical
reasoning process, important differences in processing time
and difficulty can be revealed. However, when this specific
reasoning mechanism is the subdominant reasoning strategy

for some inferences, as it is for AC, we have to be careful in
using a single reasoning mechanism to explain observed
processing differences.
The general dual process theories are not well suited to
formulate precise experimental predictions, but they deliver
a valuable framework for specifying concrete reasoning
mechanisms. This implies that there are two conceptually
different levels of explaining experimental observations.
Either researchers confine themselves to one reasoning
mechanism to frame experimental findings, for instance the
mental model theory. Or one considers a broader perspective
on reasoning, being a dual process account, which can give
rise to alternative explanations for observed differences.

Acknowledgments
This work is carried out thanks to the support of the Fund for
Scientific Research Flanders (F.W.O-Vlaanderen).

References
Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N, & Lecas, J. (2000) Conditional
reasoning by mental models: Chronometric and
developmental evidence. Cognition, 75, 237-266
Barouillet, P., Lecas, J. F. (1999). Mental models in
conditional reasoning and working memory. Thinking and
Reasoning, 5, 289-302.
Cummins, D.D. (1995) Naïve theories and causal deduction.
Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins, D.D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991).
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory and
Cognition, 19, 274-282.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003a).
Working memory and everyday conditional reasoning:
Retrieval and inhibition of stored counterexamples.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Psychology Press.
George, C. (1997) Reasoning with uncertain premises.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 161-189.
Jeanveau-Breannan, G., & Markovits, H. (1999). The
development of reasoning with causal conditionals.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 904-911.
Johnson-Laird P. N. & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
England: Erlbaum.
Lui, I., Lo, K., & Wu, J. (1996). A probabilistic
interpretation of ‘If-then’. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49, 828-844.
Markovits, H. (2000). A mental model analysis of young
children’s conditional reasoning with meaningful
premises. Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 335-347.
Markovits, H. & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The development of
conditional reasoning: A mental model account.
Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Markovits, H., Fleury, M., Quinn, S., & Venet, M. (1998).
The development of conditional reasoning and the

1181

structure of semantic memory. Child development, 69,
742-755.
Newstead, S.E., Ellis, M.C., Evans, J.St.B.T., & Dennis, I.
(1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic material.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 49-76.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000). Probabilities
and polarity biases in conditional inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 26, 883-899.
Oaksford, M. & Stenning, K. (1992). Reasoning with
conditionals containing negated constituents. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 835-854.
Osman, M. (2002). Is there evidence for unconscious
reasoning processes? Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schaeken, W., Schroyens, W. (2000). The effect of explicit
negations and of different contrast classes on conditional
syllogisms. British Journal of Psychology, 91, 533-550.
Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., d’Ydewalle, G. (2001) The
processing of negations in conditional reasoning: A metaanalytic study in mental model and/or mental logic.
Thinking and Reasoning, 7, 121-172.
Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., d’Ydewalle, G. (2002). A
meta-analytic review of conditional reasoning by model
and/or rule: Mental models theory revised (Tech. Rep.
Nr.278) Leuven, University of Leuven, Laboratory of
Experimental Psychology.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Stanovich, K.E. & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences
in reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate?
Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Stevenson, R.J. & Over, D.E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain premises. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48, 613-643.
Thompson, V. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional
reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 22, 742-758.
Verschueren, N., De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2002). Working Memory Capacity and
the Nature of Generated Counterexamples. Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W. & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003a). A
dual process theory on causal conditional reasoning.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W. & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003b).
A verbal protocol study on causal conditional reasoning
(Techn. Rep.) Leuven, Belgium: University of Leuven,
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W. & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003c). A
different reasoning mechanism for sentences with low
versus high association strength. Manuscript submitted
for publication

