UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When it is Adaptive to Follow Streaks: Variability and Stocks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7x24t5zq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Burns, Bruce D.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When it is Adaptive to Follow Streaks: Variability and Stocks
Bruce D. Burns (burnsbr@msu.edu)
Department of Psychology; Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1117 USA

Abstract
Streaks of events are ubiquitous yet understanding the
behavioral effects of them has been restricted by the
lack of testable hypotheses concerning the most basic
question: When do we tend to follow streaks (positive
recency), and when do we tend to go against streaks
(negative recency)? From an analysis of positive
recency in terms of adaptivity, I develop two elements
of people's representation of the process generating a
sequence which should be predictive of people's use of
positive recency. The first factor is randomness, which
has already been tested empirically, and the second is
variability which is tested here. The context used is
stocks because not only do people seem to give weight
to streaks in the stockmarket, but recent evidence
suggests that it may be beneficial to do so. Participants
were told that a small company (more variable price)
and a large company (less variable price) had
experienced a streak of six months of
increased/decreased stock prices. As predicted,
participants were more likely to predict that the small
company would continue the streak next month.
However, regardless of the initial streak, participants
tended to switch which company would do better
between six months and ten years. The results show
that there are interesting behavioral phenomena
associated with streaks, and that Burns' (2001, under
review) analysis generates testable predictions.

Streaks and Basketball
A streak is simply a sequence of repeated outcomes in an
event stream experienced by a person. In response to a
streak, two expectations are possible for the next outcome:
The person may expect the streak will end (negative
recency), or that the streak will continue (positive recency).
Both behaviors have been observed empirically. Negative
recency is often known as the gambler's fallacy (Laplace,
1951) and an example of positive recency is belief in the hot
hand (Gilovich, Vallone & Tversky, 1985). As far back as
Fernberger (1913) negative recency effects in perceptual
experiments have been noted. Recently, Huettel, Mack and
McCarthy (2002) have shown with fMRI studies that
particular areas of the frontal lobe are activated by streaks
of events and that the magnitude of the response depends on
streak length. This suggests that streaks may have a
pervasive, even automatic, effect on behavior. However,
that the brain is sensitive to streaks does not answer a
fundamental question about the behavioral reaction to them:
why do people sometime tend to display positive recency,
and sometimes negative recency?

192

Possibly the best known empirical study of positive
recency is Gilovich et al.'s (1985) analysis of basketball.
They found that basketball fans overwhelmingly agreed
with a set of statements about the hot hand including the
following two: (Statement 1) “Does a player have a better
chance of making a shot after having just made his last two
or three shots than he does after having missed his last two
or three shots?”; (Statement 2) “Is it important to pass the
ball to someone who has just made several (two, three, or
four) shots in a row?” However Gilovich et al.'s analysis of
3200 shots attempted by a professional basketball team over
a season's worth of home games, found no evidence of shot
dependencies. (Perhaps more surprisingly, Gilden [2001]
pointed out that their analysis also implied stationarity of
shot success probabilities, suggesting that a player's
shooting percentage is a constant over the whole season.)
Tversky and Kahneman (1971) explained belief in the
gambler's fallacy as due to the representativness heuristic
leading to a belief in a law of small numbers. In order for a
sequence of events to be considered representative, people
think that every segment of a random sequence should
reflect the true proportion. Thus a streak of one type of
event must quickly end and be “evened out” by the other
events. Gilovich et al. (1985) argued that belief in the hot
hand is also due to belief in the law of small numbers. A
belief that things should "even out" will be challenged by a
long streak, therefore basketball players may reconcile the
apparently unusual streak and their belief in the law of small
numbers by assuming that the events are dependent.
However it is problematic to explain the opposite behavior
with the same principle (Gigerenzer, 2000, p. 290-291), yet
this is what has been done with the gambler’s fallacy and
the hot hand. The law of small numbers makes no
prediction regarding when people will display negative or
positive recency. However, analysis of streaks in terms of
adaptiveness predicts two aspects of people's representation
of the process generating events that should influence their
use of positive recency: randomness and variability.

Adaptiveness and Streaks
Various investigators in recent years have developed
models of cognitive processes based on the principle of
adaptivity (e.g., Anderson, 1990; Gigerenzer, 2000). The
adaptivity approach starts with the question of what helps
the system attain its goals, and then attempts to play out the
implications for the aspect of cognition under study. Thus,
for example, Gigerenzer and Todd (1999) focus on how
reasoning relates to the goals of the organism. Burns (2001,
under review) argues that the wrong conclusion has been

drawn regarding the hot hand phenomenon in basketball,
and that by applying the criterion of adaptiveness a different
conclusion can be drawn.
Thinking in terms of adaptiveness puts an emphasis on
the behavior associated with the hot hand, which reveals
that there are two different aspects of the hot hand that
Gilovich et al. (1985) did not distinguish. Statement 1 (i.e.,
better chance of hitting after a streak) concerns a belief in
the dependency of shots; whereas Statement 2 (give the next
shot to a player experiencing a streak) concerns the
behavior of allocating shots between players. Thus there is a
hot hand belief and a hot hand behavior.
The distinction between the hot hand behavior and belief
is critical to evaluating the adaptivity of positive recency in
basketball as a heuristic. Gilovich et al.'s (1985) empirical
results have held up over time and led many to cite belief in
the hot hand as an example of a strong human reasoning
fallacy. However, this conclusion is based on the implicit
assumption that showing a belief (dependence) to be a
fallacy is equivalent to showing a behavior (use streaks as
an allocation cue) is also invalid, but this connection cannot
be assumed. In basketball the goal is to maximize team
scoring, so if belief in the hot hand increases scoring, then
the behavior that appears to be based on it is adaptive.
Burns (2001) demonstrated by simulation that the hot hand
behavior meets the adaptive criterion of helping basketball
players achieve their goal of maximizing their team’s
scoring, even if shots are in fact independent events.

A formal model
A closed-form analysis of the adaptivity of the hot hand
behavior has been developed by Burns (under review).
Briefly, the analysis treats the first two shots of a basketball
game as a Markov model, and specifies two players on the
same team, X and Y. (There is no loss of generality in
simplifying the situation to only two players, or treating a
single hit as a "streak"). There are four model parameters.
The first two are x and y, the shooting percentages of
Players X and Y, respectively. The third parameter is a bias
b to give the ball to Player X. This parameter can represent
any bias that is not based on streaks, for example the fact
that Player X has a high shooting percentage. The fourth
parameter is h, which temporarily elevates the probability of
a player receiving the next shot after a hit. Thus, the
probability of Player X receiving the shot after a hit is b +
h(1 - b), instead of b. The values of these parameters can
range from 0.0 to 1.0. (Tversky & Gilovich [1989] report
that players are in fact more likely to receive the next shot
after they score, implying h > 0.) The model assumes that
the probability of hitting a given shot is independent of
hitting any other shot. After two shots, there are 16 possible
states, because for each shot there are two choice points:
who gets the shot and whether that player hits. The expected
number of hits after two shots is calculated by summing the
16 states' expected number of hits, which yields Equation 1
(a full derivation appears in Burns, under review):
E(hits after two shots) = 2(b(x - y) + y) + h(b - b2)(x - y)2

193

There are two critical aspects of Equation 1. First, the
term h(b - b2)(x - y)2 is never negative, which means that
application of the hot hand as a heuristic for allocating shots
can never lower the expected number of hits. The second
critical aspect is that any positive value of h will raise the
expected number of hits. However, there are two precise
conditions under which h has zero effect. When x = y, there
is no difference between the players so h is irrelevant, as is
any allocation cue. Also, h is irrelevant when b = 0 or b = 1,
but for good reasons allocating all shots to the same player
is never observed in real basketball (and rarely in any form
of sequential choice). Although the model simplifies
basketball shooting, doing so is justified by Gilovich et al.'s
(1985) data. Given that they showed that shooting is
equivalent to a stationary Bernoulli process, my analysis
shows that following streaks must increase scoring. Any
other conclusion must refute Gilovich et al.'s data.
This analysis can be applied to any sequence of decisions
that must be made between two options. Burns (under
review) expands on this and discusses the condition under
which following streaks should be beneficial.

Randomness
One implication of the model is that positive recency should
be beneficial when the possible options have unequal
probabilities of success. Thus positive recency should be
observed when this is true (as it is in basketball), however
Nickerson (2002) pointed out that observation is insufficient
to determine the actual probabilities of events (except in the
limit), thus the representation people have of the process
generating a sequence should have a significant effect on
their utilization of positive recency. If they have a
representation that implies unequal probabilities then they
should be more likely to display positive recency. Assuming
that people's representations generally correlate with reality,
it is adaptive for people to do so. In effect, positive recency
may be a heuristic that people have learnt to apply to events
generated by a mechanism they think offers options with
unequal probabilities. Therefore if people's representations
of the process generating a sequence was manipulated, that
should affect their tendency to use positive recency, even
when the sequence and the probabilities of events are kept
constant. This could be tested by manipulating people sense
that a process is random.
Nickerson (2002) suggested that the most common
assumption people make about a process they think is
random is that it selects events with equal probabilities.
Wagenaar (1991) proposes two other conditions: there is a
fixed set of candidate events, and the process that selects an
event ignores previous events (i.e., events are independent).
Thus if someone represents a fixed set of candidate events
as generated nonrandomly, that implies either they think
that independence or equal probability is violated. Without
knowledge of its nature, violation of independence alone
does not predict negative or positive recency. In contrast,
any representation in which the assumption of equal
probability is violated should lead a person to use positive
recency (in the absence of clear information about the
direction of dependencies). Thus if nonrandomness implies
unequal probabilities, a representation of the process

generating a sequence as nonrandom should result in people
displaying positive recency.
The implication that positive recency should be observed
more often if people represent the process as nonrandom,
was affirmed by Burns and Corpus (in press). They showed
that people were more likely to predict a streak to continue
when they were presented with a situation in which they
thought the generating process was nonrandom. Burns
(2002) presented another demonstration of this effect.

Variability

Thus a second predictor for positive recency can be
derived. If streaks are a stronger allocation cue the more
variable is the probability of success of an event, then the
decision maker's representation of this variability as
characteristic of the generating process should influence
their use of recency. People should be more likely to display
positive recency for a process they represent as having more
variability in its probability of success, than for a process
they represent as having less such variability.

Streaks in stocks

This paper will test another predictor that should influence
people's choice between negative and positive recency:
variability in success probabilities. This result is not directly
derived from the model presented, but from an analysis of
its limitations. In particular, the model does not allow any
variability in the probabilities of events. This was justified
on the basis of Gilovich et al.'s (1985) data, but as a result
the expected outcome is at a maximum when b=1 (i.e., the
best shooter takes 100% of the shots). If a professional
basketball team was to ever attempt to implement the
strategy of giving 100% of their shots to their one best
shooter, then that player would quickly find himself
surrounded by five opponents and would be likely to
experience a lowered shooting percentage (and a losing
team). Thus there would arise a negative sequential
dependency for that player's success in hitting shots.
Perhaps this is why no player in Gilovich et al.'s (1985) data
took more than 24% of the team's shots. At the levels of b
professional teams seem to use, the negative dependencies a
pure strategy would create do not appear to arise. In
probability learning experiments (e.g., Estes, 1964) with
constant probabilities, a pure strategy would be optimal but
it is rarely observed. Perhaps this is because it is only
optimal under narrow conditions, given that variability (or
at least its possibility) is the more usual state of the world.
Variability in success probabilities could be added into
the analysis generating Equation 1 but would require further
assumptions about the nature of that variability. However, it
is possible to reason through what implications variability
should tend to have for positive and negative recency. In
general, when the environment is unstable streaks should
increase in importance as allocation cues. This is because
the probability of a streak changes immediately when there
is a change in the underlying likelihoods of events, whereas
success rates are based on history and thus there is a lag in
their reaction to change. To take an extreme example, a
player injured such that he or she is incapable of shooting a
basketball will miss every shot they attempt. Thus a streak
of misses will immediate form but that players' career
shooting percentage will only change slowly. The impact of
variability underlies models such as McNamara and
Houston (1985) that argue that a forager should give greater
weight to recent information than older information. In any
multi-cue decision making process when the validity of one
cue is decreased, that suggests giving greater relative weight
to the other cues. If variability in success probabilities
increases, then in most cases the validity of base-rate (e.g.,
shooting percentages) as an allocation cue should decrease
relative to the validity of streaks as an allocation cue.

194

Gilovich et al.'s (1985) findings have long attracted interest
from economists partly because of the implications they
seem to have for behavior. Camerer (1989) framed the
question of interest to economists in terms of “whether
mistaken beliefs like the hot hand fallacy make allocation of
resources sub-optimal" (p. 1257). Empirical findings
regarding streaks interest economists because many aspects
of the economy form streaks. Furthermore, people tend to
act on streaks, in particular with regard to stocks.
Following streaks in stock markets has a history almost as
long as stock markets themselves. Under various names,
(Momentum trading, technical analysis, charting) some
investors have believed in buying stocks which have
recently been increasing in value, independent of other
factors. Just like basketball fans' belief in the hot hand,
many portfolio managers and stock analysts have this belief
to some degree (Jegadeesh & Titman, 2001). Yet Lo,
Mamaysky and Wang (2000) note that academics labeled
this "voodoo finance" and advocated fundamental analysis,
which sees stock price as purely a function of the
underlying qualities of the company.
However starting with Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehman
(1990), analyses of US stockmarket data going back to the
1920's have shown that momentum strategies could yield
abnormal profits. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993, 2001)
documented that momentum profits continued into the
1990's. Rouwenhorst (1998) extended these findings to 12
European countries, and Rouwenhorst (1999) did so for a
sample of 20 emerging markets. Thus the results have been
consistent enough that they cannot be dismissed.
How to explain momentum profits is a topic of current
dispute. Some explanations have focused on faulty
reasoning by investors. For example, Daniel, Hirshleifer,
and Subrahmanyam (1998) speculate that momentum
effects are due to overconfidence (e.g., Fischhoff, Slovic, &
Lichenstein, 1977) or the self-attribution bias (e.g., Langer
& Roth, 1975). Others explanations suggest that they may
be due to properties of markets. For example, Johnson
(2002) proposes that momentum effects can be rational in
that they may arise due to persistent growth rate shocks.
Conrad and Kaul (1998) propose that momentum effects
are due to the dispersal of mean rates of return across the
universe of all stocks, similar to the argument presented
here for the adaptiveness of the hot hand as taking
advantage of the dispersal of players' shooting percentages.
Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) argue against Conrad and
Kaul (1998) on the grounds that momentum effects do not
last forever, they are most effective up to a period of nine
months. However, stock streaks may provoke a reaction

once people notice then, thus putting a limit on how long
following a streak will be effective. Consistent with this is
that Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999) found that momentum
effects are strongest for small (in terms of capital), less
analyzed stocks. They suggest that this was because
information about them is diffused more slowly. However,
people also seem to expect more price variability for small
than for large stocks. My analysis suggests an alternative
explanation of Moskowitz and Grinblatt's findings, as it
predicts that following streaks may be more effective for
more variable stocks because streaks are inherently more
informative for such stocks.
If people expect stock to differ in degrees of variability,
stocks may provide an interesting domain for testing the
hypothesis that people are more likely to display positive
recency for generating processes they see as more variable.

An Experiment
To test the hypothesis that people will be more likely to
display positive recency for processes they see as more
variable in their probabilities of success, participants were
presented with two stocks: one from a large, well
established company; and one from a small recently
established company. The assumption that participants
would think the small company had a more variable stock
price than the big company was tested.
Participants were told either that the stock of both
companies had increased in each of the last six months, or
that the stock of both companies had decreased in each of
the last six months. Thus there were two conditions: positive
streak and negative streak. Participants chose between the
two companies for three different time periods: which stock
would be more likely to increase next month, which would
yield greater profits over the next six months, and which
over the next ten years.
Participants were predicted to be more likely to indicate
that the small (more variable stock price) company would
be the one more likely to continue the streak next month,
regardless of the direction of the streak. Thus they should
favor the small company to increase in price next month in
the positive streak condition, but favor the big company to
increase in price next month in the negative streak
condition. What will happen for the six-month and ten-year
periods was an issue to be explored. However on the basis
that momentum traders do not predict a stock experiencing a
streak to go up for ever, it was expected that most
participants would not answer all three questions the same.

Method
Participants. A total of 216 members of the Michigan State
University subject pool participated in the experiment.
Materials and Procedure. Participants in the positive
streak condition read the following text:
"Imagine that you are examining the history of the stock
prices of two different retail companies. One is big and well
established, the other is small and recently established. In

195

examining each, you notice that the stock price of both has
increased in each of the last six months. Please try to answer
the following questions by circling your response."
Participants in the negative streak condition read the same
text, but "increased" was changed to "decreased." They
were then asked to make a choice between the two
companies for three different time periods:
1. The stock of which company do you think is most
likely to increase in the next one month period?
2. If you were a short term investor looking to make a
profit in a six month period, which company would you
be more likely to invest in?
3. If you were a long term investor looking to make a
profit in a ten year period, which company would you be
more likely to invest in?
Participants were also asked, "Which company do you
think is likely to have the more stable stock price?" Then,
"Have you ever bought or sold any stocks yourself?"

Results
The variability manipulation was effective in that 94% of
participants indicated that they thought the big company
would have the more stable stock price (positive streak
condition 101 out of 107, negative streak condition 102 out
of 109). Twenty percent of participants indicated that they
had traded stocks, but this variable had no effect on the
other variables, so no separate analysis will be reported for
participants with or without experience with stocks.
Table 1: Number of participants answering big company or
small company for each time period.
Answer
Big
Small
Total
Next month
Positive streak
43
64
107
condition
Negative streak
74
35
109
condition
Next six months
Positive streak
condition
Negative streak
condition
Next ten years
Positive streak
condition
Negative streak
condition

55

52

107

64

45

109

70

37

107

70

39

109

Table 1 shows participants' responses to the three
questions about which company they expected to do better
in each of the three time periods. As predicted, there was a
significant relationship between which company
participants expected to experience an increase in stock
price in the next month, and the direction of the streak,
X2(1) = 16.7, p < .001. Participants were more likely to

display positive recency for the small company that they
considered to have the less stable price, in that more
expected the price of the small company to increase if the
streak was positive (64/107) but fewer expected it would
increase if the streak was negative (35/109).
The effect of streak direction seemed to wear off for the
six month, X2(1) = 1.17, p = .28, and ten years, X2(1) = 0.34,
p = .85, periods. However, an interesting effect emerges if
we look at how participants varied their answers for the
three different time periods. Table 2 presents how many
participants gave each of the eight combinations of answers.
Only 15% of participants answered all three questions
identically, indicating that most participants did not expect
one company or the other to do best over all three time
periods. The most critical transition appears to be between
the six-month and the ten-year periods. Table 3 presents the
frequencies of participants' combinations of answers to
these two questions, over both streak conditions.
Table 2: Number of participants giving each combination of
answers to the question of which company would do better
over one month, six months, or ten years.
Next month
Six months
Ten years
n
big
big
big
30
big
small
big
49
big
big
small
37
big
small
small
1
small
big
big
16
small
small
big
24
small
big
small
57
small
small
small
2
Table 3: Relationship between answers to the six month and
the 10 year time period questions, for each streak condition.
Answer next six months
Big
Small
Positive streak
Answer next Big
19
51
ten years
Small
36
1
Negative streak
Answer next
ten years

Big

27

43

Small

37

2

There was a significant relationship between participants'
answers to these two questions in both the positive streak
condition, X2(1) = 47.7, p < .001, and the negative, X2(1) =
32.8, p < .001. Overall, only 23% of participants thought
the same company would do best over both time periods.
Table 4 shows that there were also significant
relationships between participants answers for the one
month and six month periods in both the positive streak
condition, X2(1) = 5.41, p = .020, and the negative, X2(1) =
9.89, p = .002. However for these periods, participants
tended (64%) to give the same answer to these questions.
Overall the results show that streaks had an effect on the
immediate period, but their effect seemed to diminish as the

196

time horizon increased. However most participants did not
settle down to a consistent bias towards one stock or the
other.
Table 4: Relationship between answers to the one month
and six month questions, for each streak condition.
Answer next six months
Big
Small
Positive streak
Answer next Big
28
15
month
Small
27
37
Negative streak
Answer next
month

Big

51

23

Small

13

22

Discussion
The results supported the hypothesis that participants would
be more likely to predict the generating process with the
more variable probability of success (i.e., the small
company) to display positive recency in the next time
period. This is consistent with the analysis suggesting that
following streaks is more advantageous for more variable
than for less variable processes, assuming that people are
sensitive to such an advantage. Thus another factor that has
predictive value for when people apply negative and
positive recency can be added to the randomness effect that
Burns and Corpus (in press) found.
The results highlight another important aspect of streaks:
people do not expect them to continue forever. Thus people
do not necessarily interpret streaks as evidence that the
option experiencing the streak must be better than other
options. Instead a streak is just a temporary indicator that is
allocated a temporary increase in weight.
The model described earlier does not incorporate any
concept of time horizon, thus this is a limitation of the
model given that it would predict people should extrapolate
streaks infinitely into the future. However there are no other
existing theoretical tools for dealing with this phenomenon
either. Although decision making research often looks at
what people will do now in response to recent history, how
that information is extrapolated over different time periods
has not been explored. That people discount current
information as a predictor of events extended further into
the future makes sense from an adaptive viewpoint. In a
variable environment, assuming the current streak will be
predictive far into the future would be a poor strategy.
To advocates of momentum trading strategies it may not
be surprising that 85% of the participants altered their
choice over different time periods. A feature of these
strategies is not just following streaks, but trying to pick
when streaks will stop. However, it is not clear why the six
month to ten years transition was critical, although it is
consistent with Jegadeesh and Titman's (2001) finding that
momentum advantages are strongest over a medium term
(nine months). This finding needs more research before it
can be concluded that this is a general effect.

A possible limitation of this study is that participants
were presented with a description of a streak, rather than
experiencing it. Although this may mirror the way people
often use streaks in the stock market, to generalize this
effect it should be tested with streaks that participants
experience one event at a time.
Further research should try to generalize the variability
effect, and to investigate whether the reversal of choices is
something specific to stocks or a more general
phenomenon. More generally though, this study illustrates
that the analysis of streaks developed by Burns (2001, under
review) generates testable predictions, unlike descriptions
of streaks such as the law of small numbers.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Erik Altmann and Tom Carr for
helpful comments on an earlier draft.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Burns, B. D. (2001). The hot hand in basketball: Fallacy or
adaptive thinking? In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 152-157). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Burns, B. D. (2002). Does the law of small numbers explain
the gambler’s fallacy? Presented at the Forty-Third
Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Kansas
City, MO.
Burns, B. D. (under review). The Hot Hand in Basketball as
Fallacy and Adaptive Thinking. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Burns, B. D., & Corpus, B. (in press). Randomness and
inductions from streaks: "Gambler's fallacy" versus "Hot
hand.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Camerer, C. F. (1989). Does the basketball market believe
in the 'hot hand'? The American Economic Review, 79,
1257-1261.
Conrad, J., & Kaul, G. (1998). An anatomy of trading
strategies. Review of Financial Studies, 11, 489-519.
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., & Subrahmanyam, A. (1998).
Investor psychology and security market under- and
overreactions. Journal of Finance, 53, 1839-1885.
Estes, W. K. (1964). Probability learning. In A. W. Melton
(Ed.), Categories of human learning (pp. 89-128). New
York: Academic Press.
Fernberger, S. W. (1913). On the relation of the methods of
just perceptible differences and constant stimuli.
Psychological Monographs. 14, 1-81.
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., & Lichenstein, S. (1977).
Knowing with certainty: The appropriateness of extreme
confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human,
Perception, and Performance, 3, 552-564.
Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Surrogates for theories. In G.
Gigerenzer (Ed.), Adaptive thinking: Rationality in the
real world (pp. 289-296). Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.

197

Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Fast and frugal
heuristics: The adaptive tool box. In G. Gigerenzer, P.
Todd, & the ABC Research Group (Eds.), Simple
heuristics that make us smart (pp. 3-34). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gilden, D. L. (2001). Cognitive emissions of 1/f noise.
Psychological Review, 108, 33-56.
Gilovich, T., Vallone, R., & Tversky, A. (1985). The hot
hand in basketball: On the misperception of random
sequences. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 295-314.
Huettel, S. A., Mack, P. B., & McCarthy, G. (2002).
Perceiving patterns in random series: dynamic processing
of sequence in prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 5,
485-490.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990). Evidence of predictable behavior of
security returns. Journal of Finance, 45, 881-898.
Jegadeesh N, & Titman, S. (1993). Buying winners and
selling losers − Implications for stock market efficiency.
Journal of Finance, 48, 65-91.
Jegadeesh N, & Titman, S. (2001). Profitability of
momentum strategies: An evaluation of alternative
explanations. Journal of Finance, 56, 699-720.
Johnson, T. C. (2002). Rational momentum effects. The
Journal of Finance, 57, 585-608.
Langer, E. J., & Roth, J. (1975). Heads I win, tails it's
chance: The illusion of control as a function of the
sequence of outcomes in a purely chance task. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 951-955.
Laplace, P.-S. (1951). A philosophical essay on
probabilities (F. W. Truscott & F. L. Emory, Trans.).
New York: Dover. (Original work published 1814)
Lehman, B. N. (1990). Fads, martingales, and market
efficiency. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 128.
Lo, A. W., Mamaysky, H., & Wang, J. (2000). Foundations
of technical analysis: Computational algorithms,
statistical inference, and empirical implementation. The
Journal of Finance, 55, 1705-1765.
McNamara, J. H., & Houston, A. I. (1985). Optimal
foraging and learning. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
117, 231-249.
Moskowitz, T.J., & Grinblatt, M. (1999) Do industries
explain momentum? The Journal of Finance, 54, 12491290.
Nickerson, R. S. (2002). The production and perception of
randomness. Psychological Review, 109, 330-357.
Rouwenhorst, K. G. (1998). International momentum
strategies. The Journal of Finance, 53, 267-284.
Rouwenhorst, K. G. (1999). Local return factors and
turnover in emerging stock markets. The Journal of
Finance, 54, 1439-1464.
Tversky, A., & Gilovich, T. (1989). The "hot hand":
Statistical reality or cognitive illusion? Chance: New
directions in statistics and computing, 2, 31-34.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1971). Belief in the law of
small numbers. Psychological Bulletin, 2, 105-110.
Wagenaar, W. A., (1991). Randomness and Randomizers:
maybe the problem is not so big. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 4, 220-222.

