UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When two heads are better than one expert

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vp7j4wj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Wiley, Jennifer
Jolly, Cara

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When two heads are better than one expert
Jennifer Wiley (jwiley@uic.edu)

Cara Jolly (cjolly1@uic.edu)

Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street (M/C 285)
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Abstract
In a line of research on expertise and creative problem solving
(Wiley, 1998; Wiley, 1999), an instance in which two heads
do seem better than one has been found. In a study using a
Remote Associates Task, when high knowledge participants
were paired with a novice, solution rates actually increased
beyond what would be expected from either type of individual
working independently. The discovery of a “process gain”
condition is quite rare within the social psychology and group
problem solving literature.
Further, from a cognitive
standpoint, it is interesting that experts may sometimes need
the assistance of novices in order to be most effective, flexible
or innovative in their problem solving.

Introduction
Despite the intuitive appeal of the idea that two heads are
better than one, few experimental studies have
demonstrated an advantage for collaborative problem
solving over individual contexts. In fact, individuals in
collaborative contexts tend to produce fewer solution
attempts, and are judged to generate less creative solutions
than individuals acting alone (Mullen, Johnson & Salas,
1991; Taylor, Berry & Block, 1958). The present research
investigates conditions under which process loss (a term
coined by Steiner (1972) to describe the loss in productivity
that occurs when individuals must coordinate their efforts in
a group) may be avoided or even reversed into process gain.
When there is a synergetic or value-added effect observed
among individuals working as a group versus individuals
working alone, this has been termed “process gain”.
Why do groups experience process loss? Several social
factors have been identified as possible reasons. Process
loss has frequently been attributed to losses in motivation, a
lowered sense of responsibility, and less effort by each
individual (c.f. Sheppard, 1993). The presence of others
introduces an element of evaluation and conflict, not usually
present when people act alone. This can have advantages,
and theoretically could improve the quality of the group
contribution. For example, others may detect errors and
provide immediate feedback to any individual in the group.
On the other hand, the potential for being evaluated can also
have an inhibiting effect, and working with others can cause
evaluation apprehension causing poorer performance, and
the generation of fewer or less creative ideas. Further,
members of interactive groups may experience process loss
due to coordination problems. Ad Hoc groups need some
time together to get past organizational issues.

1242

A final reason why group performance may suffer is due to
production blocking or interference from collaboration.
That is, when others state their ideas it may cause an
interruption in the idea generation process and cause an
individual to lose their chain of thought. Working with
others adds information, but also adds new channels that
need to be attended to. Also, more time may be spent on
off-task topics (Dugosh, Paulus, Roland & Yang, 2000). In
the end, individuals may be more burdened and enjoy less
intact cognitive processing working in groups than when
working alone. Studies have directly tested this notion of
interrupted cognitive processing among groups, which has
been called “production blocking,” and support an account
of process loss as a function of increased disruption in faceto-face collaboration (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987; Stroebe &
Diehl, 1994).
Despite the evidence that most group problem solving
efforts result in process loss, there are theoretical reasons to
believe that groups may experience process gain. One
popular reason why people believe groups should be more
effective, flexible and innovative at problem solving is the
assumption that each group member brings to the task a
slightly different set of task-relevant knowledge. Through
discussion, the knowledge of each member can become
available for all, giving each member a larger pool of ideas
to draw from (Larson, Forster-Fishman, & Keys, 1994;
McGrath, 1984). Especially if members possess different
background knowledge, group problem solving will give
people more opportunity for novel associations. And it has
been suggested by a number of researchers that exposure to
others’ ideas, especially if these represent diverse
viewpoints, may increase both the quantity and quality of
idea generation in a group context (Jackson, 1996; Paulus,
2000).
There are a few studies in the cognitive science literature
that have explored the idea that diversity is the key to the
most successful and innovative scientific collaboration. For
example, in an investigation of several molecular biology
laboratories, Dunbar (1997) has reported that the diversity
of a group is very important. When scientists in a laboratory
are from diverse backgrounds, they are able to generate
many more alternative hypotheses and many different types
of analogies in the face of unexpected findings, which in
turn can lead to scientific breakthroughs. Although this is
an intriguing observation, the idea that diversity in
background knowledge contributes to process gain and
successful collaborative problem solving has not yet been

demonstrated experimentally. The present experiment
represents a first step toward an empirical investigation of
the role of diversity in background knowledge among group
members in effective collaborative creative problem
solving.
In previous studies on expertise and creative problem
solving, a particular context in which experts are fixated by
their knowledge on an incorrect solution has been
investigated. Expertise allows people access to a large
amount of domain-related information, as well as allowing
for fast and easy retrieval of typical solutions in problem
solving contexts (Chi, Glaser, & Farr, 1988; Ericsson &
Kinstch, 1995). However, when an atypical or creative
solution is required, then high-knowledge participants can
actually be slower and less likely to reach solution than
novices (Wiley, 1998). In following up this original
finding, ways to help high-knowledge participants escape
their fixation and reach creative solutions have been
investigated. Warnings not to use domain knowledge do not
help. Giving problem solvers an incubation period or break
between problem solving attempts improves problem
solving, but only for novices. The only condition that has
helped high-knowledge participants to escape their fixation
has been when they were given hints about the solution
during an incubation period (Wiley, 1999). This suggests
that experts may need external cues in order to prime new
associations, divert them from considering incorrect
solutions, or direct them toward the correct solution. If
experts need external cues to help them escape fixation, then
they might benefit from collaboration with a lessknowledgeable partner on creative problem solving tasks,
making this one case where working together in
heterogeneous knowledge groups may be especially
productive.
The present experiment tests the hypothesis that
collaborative pairs with diverse background knowledge will
experience the most process gain in their problem solving.
Students solved RAT problems in one of three conditions:
either in pairs where both partners had low knowledge; pairs
where both partners had high knowledge; or mixed
knowledge pairs. Of interest in this study is whether the
mixed pairing allows high knowledge participants to escape
fixation, and whether any pairs are able to solve more
problems together than both members might solve alone
(based on solution rates from prior studies).

Method
Participants
Undergraduates were recruited on the campus of
Washington State University, Vancouver campus to
participate in a problem solving study, and were paid for
their participation. Forty-two participants are included in the
full design.

1243

Materials
Participants were given a Remote Associates Task (RAT)
based on Mednick (1962). In the RAT, solvers need to find
a fourth word that forms a good phrase with each of three
other words. For example, given the problem KNIFE,
BLUE and COTTAGE, the solution is CHEESE. This task
is considered a creative problem solving task because it
requires the solver to consider a number of meanings for
each word, getting past typical uses of words and searching
for rare associates that might fit with all three words. The
selection and recombination of remote ideas is thought to be
an important process underlying creativity and innovation
(Mednick, 1962; Simonton, 2001). In this study, the
problem sets developed for Wiley was used (1998). Ten of
the RAT problems were neutral, based on original Mednick
items like the one above. An additional 10 problems were
baseball-misleading, such that the first two words primed a
baseball-related solution, while the third word could not be
paired with that solution. An example baseball-misleading
problem is PLATE, BROKEN and SHOT. In response to
this problem, participants with high baseball knowledge
frequently generate the solution HOME, and take longer to
reach a correct solution, or fail to reach a correct solution
more often than novices (Wiley, 1998).

Design
The between-groups manipulation has 3 conditions, students
either solve in low/low, high/high, or mixed knowledge
pairs. All solvers receive 10 neutral and 10 baseballmisleading RAT problems. This yields a mixed 3x 2 (pair
knowledge condition by problem type) design. Seven pairs
were run in each pair knowledge condition.

Procedure
Following informed consent, pairs were given a word
scramble as a warm-up task. Pairs were told that the purpose
of the experiment was to see if “two heads are better than
one” and they were encouraged to say all guesses out loud
as soon as they thought of them so that they could be the
most help to their partner. As a first task, the pair was given
the word WASHINGTON and asked to find as many words
as they could that could be formed out of its letters.
Following the scramble task, students were presented with
the RAT problems via computer. Solvers were told to type
in a solution as soon as they knew it. The program recorded
the typed response as well as the solution time. If no
solution was entered within 2 minutes, solvers were
prompted to type in a solution. After 30 seconds without
entering a solution, or as soon as a solution was entered, the
next problem was presented.
Following the completion of the RAT, the two participants
were seated at separate desks and asked to complete a 45item baseball knowledge questionnare (created by Spilich,
Vesonder, Chiesi, & Voss, 1979). Criteria from previous
studies (Wiley, 1998) were adopted, such that scores below

15 were considered low knowledge and above 15 were
considered high knowledge. Baseball knowledge could not
be assessed until the end of the experiment in case
completing the questionnaire beforehand might bias
performance on the RAT problems. Because the condition
of each pair was not known until after the pair was run, an
additional 3 pairs needed to be run to obtain 7 pairs in all
conditions. Only the first 7 pairs run in each condition are
included in the design.
The whole procedure was generally completed in under an
hour. All sessions were video and audio recorded so that
the content and number of guesses generated could be later
coded.

knowledge pair and the mixed knowledge pair correctly
solved roughly 2 problems more than we would expect from
average individual high and low knowledge performances.
Comparisons of observed versus expected outcomes
indicated that the mixed knowledge pairs performed
significantly better than would be expected based on
individual averages (t(6)=4.01, p<.05). The high knowledge
pairs also tended to do better than would be expected, but
this did not reach significance (t(6)=1.9, p<.10). The low
knowledge pairs did significantly worse than would be
expected based on past performance of low knowledge
participants (t(6)=2.42, p<.05).

Results
Performance on Word Scramble Task
The scramble task was included as a warm-up task, since it
has been shown that the best collaborative performance
requires some familiarity between group members.
Although a warm-up task is not a substitute for longstanding group membership, it nevertheless allows the pair
to get used to talking out loud and working together.
Further, the data from this task can be used to provide a
baseline comparison of the fluency and creativity of groups
across conditions. The average number of words generated
by all pairs was 33.38 (SD 6.1), and there were no
differences across groups (F<1).

Performance on Remote Associates Task
The critical analysis for this experiment is whether the
combination of knowledge levels in each pair affected
performance on the RAT.
Pairs in all three conditions did equally well on the neutral
problems, each pair getting almost all of them right
(M=9.47), as can be seen in Figure 1. On the baseball
problems, both the high knowledge pairs and the low
knowledge pairs solved about 6 baseball-misleading
problems correctly. Mixed knowledge pairs, on the other
hand, correctly solved 8 baseball-misleading problems on
average. The performance of the mixed knowledge pairs
was significantly better than the performance of the low/low
knowledge pairs, t(12)=2.12, p<.05.
The difference
between the performance of the mixed and high knowledge
pairs did not reach significance, t(12)=1.73, p=.10.
Solution rates from previous studies (Wiley, 1998) would
predict that each novice should get an average of 4 baseballmisleading problems correct, while high-knowledge
participants should get only around 2 misleading problems
correct. With these expectations in mind, we can see that
when two novices worked together, they correctly solved
around 6 problems on average, which is slightly less than
one might expect based on average solution rates for
novices in previous studies. However, both the high

1244

Average Number of
Correctly Solved Problems

Expected and Observed Performance by
Problem and Pair Type
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Predicted N eutral
O bserved N eutral
Predicted B aseball
O bserved B aseball

Low

Mixed

High

Knowledge Level of Pair

Figure 1: Expected and Observed Performance by Problem
and Pair Type
The results suggest the mixed knowledge pairs in this study
experienced process gain. On a creative problem solving
task where experts are fixated by their knowledge, solving
problems with a less knowledgeable partner increased
solution rates. Collaboration even seemed to help when
both partners were high-knowledge.

Preliminary Protocol Analysis
To follow up these results, the protocols of each
collaborative session were transcribed and coded in terms of
how many guesses each partner made, who contributed the
correct answers on the baseball items, and if there were any
apparent patterns in the discourse that could offer some
suggestion of how the mixed pairs achieved their superior
performance. The first, most obvious issue, was whether in
the mixed pairs the novice did all the work. For each pair,
the number of guesses and number of correct answers
guessed by each partner was tabulated. For the mixed
groups, the low knowledge partner made an average of 4.1
guesses on each baseball-misleading problem, while the
high knowledge partner offered an average of 3.4 guesses.
There was no significant difference in the number of
guesses on baseball-misleading problems offered by high

and low knowledge partners (t<1). Similarly, when correct
solutions to baseball-misleading problems were examined,
again on average both low and high knowledge partners
contributed roughly half of the correct solutions (t<1).
These results suggest that there was something about
collaboration that was allowing the high-knowledge subjects
to circumvent fixation due to domain knowledge. The most
striking pattern that emerged in first pass of coding these
protocols, was that the groups with high-knowledge
members were much more likely to actually explicitly state
the baseball-related solutions in the process of problem
solving. As shown in Figure 2, the mixed and high
knowledge pairs were much more likely than the low
knowledge pairs to mention a baseball-related solution in
their guesses, F(2,18)=5.65, MSE=2.07, p<.01. Follow-up
tests using Fisher's Least-Significant-Difference Test
indicated that both Mixed and High knowledge pairs
mentioned more baseball terms than did low knowledge
pairs.

Average Number of
Baseball Terms Guessed

Baseball Terms Mentioned by Pair Type
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Low

Mixed

High

Knowledge Level of Pair

Figure 2: Baseball Terms Mentioned by Pair Type
Thus, one possibility is that by saying the incorrect solutions
out loud, or hearing them, high knowledge participants were
able to recognize their impasse. This may allow them to
move beyond the solution that was fixating them. And, in
general, this suggests that when problem solvers reach
impasse due to prior knowledge, that collaborative contexts
may allow problem solvers to better consider alternative
solutions after the wrong solution is stated. The next step is
to examine exactly what occurs in the discourse on the
successful attempts, such as when the pair finds the solution
GLASS to the misleading example problem of PLATE,
BROKEN and SHOT, and especially what occurs after an
incorrect solution like HOME has been offered.

Conclusions, Implications, and Significance
The results of the present study suggest that, on a creative
problem solving task where high-knowledge participants are
typically fixated by their knowledge, solving problems with

1245

a less knowledgeable partner increased solution rates over
what would be expected if each partner worked alone.
There also seemed to be some advantage for highknowledge partners working with another high-knowledge
partner. This suggests that collaboration may be one
context in which experts may be released from the fixating
effects of their prior knowledge.
While this is an intriguing finding, there are a number of
specific details of the experimental context that this result
was found in that could be contributing to the observed
process gain. In particular, this study was run at a small
liberal arts campus, where familiarity between the student
pairs, as well as familiarity between the students and the
experimenters may have fostered a highly cooperative
atmosphere, allowing for the successful collaboration
observed here. However, it is important to note that the
students in the mixed pairs were NOT any more familiar or
less familiar with each other than were students in the other
two groups. Thus, there is still most likely an effect of
collaboration at work here. It is an important direction for
future research to see if collaboration also helps high
knowledge participants in pairs who do not know each other
beforehand. Further, it is hoped that more detailed analysis
of the protocols might shed greater light on whether there is
anything else in the interaction that is allowing the highknowledge participants to do so well.
The critical contribution of this line of research is that it is
the first experimental demonstration of the advantage of
collaborative contexts for high-knowledge problem solvers.
Admittedly this is a contrived task, and there may not be
much demand for "baseball expertise" in daily life nor in
any meaningful problem solving or decision making
contexts. However, the present demonstration can be seen
as having important implications for models of scientific
discovery, as the range of solutions that are considered in
any scientific investigation may be limited by the expertise
of individual investigators. The present results are consistent
with recent conceptualizations of scientific reasoning and
discovery being most effective when it is a distributed social
and cognitive process (Dunbar, 1999; Thagard, 1997). If
problem solvers can be fixated by their domain knowledge,
then collaboration and distributed efforts of diverse groups
with common goals may be critical for the formation of new
models in science, the ability to produce new hypotheses in
the face of unexpected data, and the discovery of new
principles.
Our society places a great value on group problem solving
and decision-making contexts. Juries, medical teams,
scientific research laboratories, thinktanks are all formed
because of the underlying assumption that the group context
will lead to more effective, flexible and innovative problem
solving and decision making than would be attained in
individualized efforts. Unfortunately, time and again
researchers have observed the opposite. Groups are less

productive, less creative, often biased in their judgments and
sometimes unduly influenced by one member. A variety of
social factors seem to be responsible for this process loss.
This ubiquitous finding of process loss is what makes the
present finding, in which diversity in background
knowledge led to process gain, of such interest from both a
social and a cognitive perspective.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Tim Hensley and Jennifer Pitts Weber for
their assistance in data collection.

References
Chi, M.T.H., Glaser. R., & Farr, M. (1988) The Nature of
Expertise. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1987) Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: Toward the solution of a riddle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 497509.
Dugosh, K., Paulus, P., Roland, E. & Yang, G. (2000)
Cognitive stimulation in brainstorming. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 722-735.
Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: On-line creativity
and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S. M.
Smith, & J. Vaid (Eds.). Conceptual Structures and
Processes: Emergence, Discovery & Change.
Washington, D.C, APA Press.
Dunbar, K. (1999) How scientists build models: In Vivo
science as a window on the scientific mind. In L.
Magnani, N. Nercessian & P. Thagard (Eds) Modelbased reasoning in scientific discovery, p.89-98.
Plenum Press.
Ericcson, K. A & Kintsch, W. (1995) Long term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Jackson, S. (1996) The consequences of diversity in
multidisciplinary work teams. In M. A. West (ed)
Handbook of Work Psychology. West Sussex, England:
Wiley.
Larson, J. R., Jr., Foster-Fishman, P. G., & Keys, C. B.
(1994). Information sharing in decision-making groups.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
446-461.
McGrath, J.E. (1984) Groups: Interaction and Performance.
Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall.
Mednick, S. A (1962) The associative basis of the creative
process. Psychological Review, 69, 220-232.
Mullen, B., Johnson, C. & Salas, E. (1991) Productivity loss
in brainstorming groups: A meta-analytic integration.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 12, 3-24.
Paulus, P. (2000) Groups, teams and creativity: The creative
potential of idea generating groups. International
Journal of Applied Psychology, 49, 237-262.
Sheppard, J. A. (1993) Productivity loss in performance
groups: A motivation analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
113, 67-81.

1246

Simonton, D. K. (2001). Creativity as cognitive selection:
The blind-variation and selective-retention model.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Spilich, G., Vesonder, G., Chiesi, H. & Voss, J. F. (1979)
Text processing of domain related information for
individuals with high and low domain knowledge.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19,
651-667.
Steiner, I. D. (1972) Group processes and productivity. New
York: Academic Press.
Stroebe, W. & Diehl, M. (1994). Why groups are less
effective than their members: On productivity losses in
idea-generating groups. In W. Stroebe & M. Hewstone,
(Eds.), European Review of Social Psychology, 5,
271-303.
Taylor, D. W., Berry, P. C. & Block, C. H. (1958) Does
group participation when using brainstorming facilitate
or inhibit creative thinking? Administrative Science
Quarterly, 3, 23-47.
Thagard, P. (1997) Collaborative Knowledge. Nous, 31,
242-261.
Wiley, J. (1998) Expertise as mental set: Negative effects of
domain knowledge on creative problem solving.
Memory & Cognition, 26, 716-730.
Wiley, J. (1999) Overcoming mental set due to domain
knowledge. Paper presented at the 40th Annual Meeting
of the Psychonomic Society, Los Angeles, CA.

