UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Working Memory Span and Everyday Conditional Reasoning: A Trend Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bg4b0b2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
De Neys, Wim
Schaeken, Walter
d'Ydewalle, Gery

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Working Memory Span and Everyday Conditional Reasoning: A Trend
Analysis
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Géry d’Ydewalle (Géry.dYdewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
This study presents evidence for the role of working
memory (WM) capacity in the retrieval and inhibition
of counterexamples (alternatives and disablers) during
everyday conditional reasoning. A total of 292
university students were given a measure of WMcapacity and a reasoning task with everyday, causal
conditionals. Results show that the acceptance ratings
of the logically valid Modus Ponens and Modus
Tollens inferences follow a quadratic, U-shaped trend
in function of WM-capacity, while acceptance ratings
of the logically invalid Affirmation of the Consequent
and Denial of the Antecedent inferences follow a
negative linear trend. Findings support the claim that
participants highest in WM-capacity spontaneously
inhibit the disabler retrieval process during everyday
reasoning.

Introduction
Suppose that you are given the following conditional
information: “If you pull the trigger, then the gun
fires”. Next, you are also told that “The gun fired”.
Would you draw the conclusion “The trigger was
pulled” on the basis of this information? Likewise,
suppose that in addition to the conditional “If the
match is struck, then it lights” you are told that “The
match is struck”. Would you then draw the conclusion
“The match will light”? In the present study we
examine how the extent to which people do draw such
conditional conclusions is related to their working
memory capacity.
Research on conditional reasoning typically focuses
on peoples performance on four kinds of arguments:
Modus Ponens (MP, e.g., ‘If p then q, p therefore q),
Affirmation of the Consequent (AC, e.g., ‘If p then q,
q therefore p’), Modus Tollens (MT, e.g., ‘If p then q,
not q, therefore not p’), and Denial of the Antecedent
(DA, e.g., ‘If p then q, not p, therefore not q). The
first (p) part of the conditional is called the antecedent
and the second (q) part is called the consequent. In
standard logic, MP and MT are considered valid
inferences, while AC and DA inferences are
considered fallacies. Thus, standard logic would tell
you to reject the AC conclusion “The trigger was
pulled” in the first introductory example and to accept
the MP conclusion “The match will light” in the
second example.
When people reason with realistic, content-rich
conditionals, the inferences they draw are affected by

prior knowledge about the conditional. For example,
when one thinks about the fact that the match might
be wet, one will be reluctant to infer that the match
will light when it is struck. Since in daily-life people
typically reason with content-rich conditionals it is
crucial for cognitive reasoning theories to address the
impact of background knowledge on inference
acceptance (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1994, 2002;
Oaksford & Chater, 1998). In the last few years this
issue has become one of the main foci of interest in
the literature (e.g., Byrne, 1989; Byrne, Espino, &
Santamaria, 1999; Cummins, 1995; De Neys,
Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002; Markovits &
Barrouillet, 2002; Thompson, 1994, 2000; Rumain,
Connell, & Braine, 1983).
At least two important kinds of information stored
in long-term memory have been shown to affect the
inference acceptance: Alternative causes and
disabling
conditions.
An
alternative
cause
(alternative) is a condition, besides the original
antecedent, that can bring about the consequent (e.g.,
lighting the match with another fire in the
introductory example). A disabling condition
(disabler) is a condition that prevents the antecedent
from bringing about the consequent (e.g., the match
being wet in the introductory example).
It is well established that when reasoners retrieve an
alternative during conditional reasoning they will tend
to reject the fallacious AC and DA inferences (e.g.,
Rumain et al., 1983; Cummins, 1995; JanveauBrennan & Markovits, 1999; Quinn & Markovits,
1998). Retrieval of a disabler results in rejection of
the valid MP and MT inferences (e.g., Byrne, 1989;
Cummins, 1995; Thompson, 1994; De Neys,
Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002, 2003b, in press).
Further on, we adopt Byrne’s (1989) terminology and
refer to alternatives and disablers as counterexamples.
Recently,
peoples
conditional
reasoning
performance with realistic, causal, conditionals has
been related to working memory (WM) capacity (De
Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2003a; Markovits,
Doyon, & Simoneau, 2002). De Neys et al. showed
that WM affects everyday conditional reasoning by
mediation of the counterexample retrieval process. In
a first experiment, participants were asked to generate
as much counterexamples as possible in limited-time
for a set of conditionals. Results indicated that
participants higher in WM-capacity were better at
retrieving alternatives and disablers. Findings implied
that in addition to an automatic counterexample
312

search process based on a passive spreading of
activation, people also allocate WM-resources to a
more active and efficient search process: The larger
the WM-resource pool is, the more resources can be
allocated to the search, and the more efficient the
search will be. In a further experiment, a group of low
and high spans (participants in the bottom and top
quartile of first-year psychology students’ WMcapacity distribution, respectively) were tested in an
everyday conditional reasoning task. Because of the
more efficient alternative retrieval De Neys et al.
reasoned that high spans (vs. low spans) should be
more likely to reject the fallacious AC and DA
inferences.
In the reasoning literature there is some debate
about whether people are able to adhere to normative
standards such as standard logic in reasoning (e.g.,
Evans, 2002; Stanovich & West, 2000). It is generally
assumed that all people have a basic
“contextualisation” tendency to search stored
background knowledge (e.g., counterexamples)
associated with the reasoning problem. However,
recent individual difference studies (e.g., Stanovich &
West, 1998, 2000) indicate that at least people of high
cognitive (WM) capacity also appear to have a
logical, “decontextualisation” tendency: A basic
ability to put background knowledge aside when it
conflicts with the logical standards. Remember that in
standard logic MP and MT are valid inferences. Since
disabler retrieval will result in the rejection of MP and
MT, a basic validity notion should conflict with the
disabler retrieval process. De Neys et al. reasoned that
high spans would therefore use their WM-resources
for an active inhibition of the automatic disabler
search. Despite the better intrinsic retrieval capacities,
this inhibition process should result in higher MP and
MT acceptance ratings for the high (vs. low) spans.
Results of the study supported the predictions.
In an additional dual-task study the hypotheses
were further confirmed. The basic assumption stated
that lower spans allocate WM-capacity to the disabler
retrieval, while high spans allocate WM-capacity
primarily to the retrieval inhibition. Consistent with
the hypothesis, the dual-task study showed that a less
efficient disabler retrieval under WM-load resulted in
higher MP acceptance ratings under load (vs. no load)
for low spans, while the less efficient inhibition
resulted in lower MP ratings under load (vs. no load)
for high spans.
Thus, there is evidence for the claim that high spans
are inhibiting the disabler retrieval process during
conditional reasoning. Inhibition of cognitive
processes deemed inappropriate is indeed one of the
key executive working memory functions (e.g.,
Baddeley, 1996; Levy & Anderson, 2002; Miyake &
Shah, 1999). The basis of the inhibition during
reasoning would be high spans’ minimal notion of the
standards of first-order logic. High spans would
adhere to the logical principle that the truth of the
antecedent implies the truth of the consequent. This

principle excludes the possibility that the consequent
does not occur when the antecedent occurs (i.e., a
disabler).
Note that it is assumed that the inhibition would
only occur for people highest in WM-capacity. If this
assumption is correct, it follows that people with
medium WM-capacities should show the lowest MP
and MT acceptance. Indeed, on one hand medium
spans (vs. high spans) should not inhibit disabler
retrieval. On the other hand, medium spans will have
a more efficient counterexample retrieval than low
spans because they can allocate more resources to the
search. Thus, the disabler retrieval during conditional
reasoning should be most successful for medium
spans. Consequently, it is expected that the MP and
MT acceptance ratings follow a U-shaped curve in
function of WM-capacity: Due to the limited
resources, people lowest in WM-capacity will not be
very successful at retrieving disablers and should
therefore show rather high levels of MP and MT
acceptance. Because of the more efficient disabler
retrieval, MP and MT acceptance should decrease for
the medium spans. Because of the disabler inhibition,
MP and MT acceptance ratings should increase again
for reasoners higher in WM-capacity.
Since retrieving alternatives results in the rejection
of AC/DA inferences and accepting AC/DA is
erroneous in standard logic there is no conflict
between a basic logical notion and the retrieval of
alternatives. Moreover, De Neys et al. (2003a) already
showed that the extent to which high spans accept AC
and DA is mediated by the alternative retrieval.
Therefore, the higher WM-capacity is, the more
efficient the alternative retrieval will be, and the less
AC and DA should be accepted. Contrary to MP and
MT, AC and DA acceptance ratings should therefore
follow a negative linear trend in function of WMcapacity. These predictions were tested in the present
experiment.
The present study will complete the previous work
of De Neys et al. (2003a) and Markovits et al. (2002).
De Neys et al. compared only a group of participants
from the bottom and top quartile of the WM-capacity
distribution. Thus , the crucial ‘medium’ span group
was missing. Markovits et al. looked only at the linear
correlation between WM-capacity and inference
acceptance. Given the a priori expectation of a
quadratic, U-shaped function for MP and MT, a mere
linear correlation analysis is not informative here.
With reference to the everyday nature of our
reasoning task we want to stress two crucial
distinctions with more formal, deductive reasoning
tasks. First, the study adopts meaningful, causal
conditionals so that participants have access to
relevant background knowledge about alternatives
and disablers. In addition, contrary to most
conditional reasoning studies participants are not
specifically instructed to reason logically (e.g.,
participants are not instructed to accept the premises
as always true or to derive only conclusions that
313

follow necessarily). Although participants are still
situated in a laboratory setting this should allow and
encourage people to reason as they would in everyday
life (Cummins, 1995; see also Galotti, 1989).

each participant to evaluate. The experiment was run
on computer. The following item format was used:
Rule: If Jenny turns on the air conditioner, then she feels
cool
Fact: Jenny turns on the air conditioner
Conclusion: Jenny feels cool

Method
Participants
A total of 292 first-year psychology students from the
University of Leuven (Belgium) participated in the
experiment in return for course credit. None of the
students had had any training in formal logic.
Material
Working memory task. Participants’ working memory
capacity was measured using a version of the
Operation span task (Ospan, La Pointe & Engle,
1990) adapted for group testing (Gospan, for details
see De Neys, d’Ydewalle, Schaeken, & Vos, 2002). In
the Ospan-task participants solve series of simple
mathematical operations while attempting to
remember a list of unrelated words The main
adaptation in the Gospan is that the operation from an
operation-word pair is first presented separately on
screen (e.g., ‘IS (4/2) – 1 = 5 ?’). Participants read the
operation silently and press a key to indicate whether
the answer is correct or not. Responses and response
latencies are recorded. After the participant has typed
down the response, the corresponding word (e.g.,
‘BALL’) from the operation-word string is presented
for 800 ms. As in the standard Ospan three sets of
each length (from two to six operation-word pairs) are
tested and set size varies in the same randomly chosen
order for each participant. The Gospan-score is the
sum of the recalled words for all sets recalled
completely and in correct order.
Participants were tested in groups of 21 to 48 at the
same time. Participants who made more than 15%
math errors or whose mean operation response
latencies deviated by more than 2.5 standard
deviations of the sample mean were discarded
(participants already in the bottom quartile of the
Gospan-score distribution were not discarded based
on the latency criterion). De Neys, d’Ydewalle et al.
(2002) reported an internal reliability coefficient alpha
of .74 for the Gospan. The corrected correlation
between standard Ospan and Gospan-score reached
.70.
Reasoning task. Sixteen causal conditionals from the
generation study of De Neys et al. (2002) and
Verschueren, De Neys, Schaeken, and d’Ydewalle
(2002) were selected for the reasoning task. The
number of possible counterexamples of the selected
conditionals varied systematically. The number of
counterexamples constituted a 2 (few/many) x 2
(alternatives/disablers) design with four conditionals
per cell. Two conditionals in each cell were embedded
both in the MP and DA inferences, while the other
two were embedded both in the AC and MT
inferences. This produced a total of 32 inferences for

Each argument was presented on screen together with
a 7-point rating scale ranging from 1 (Very certain
that I cannot draw this conclusion) to 7 (Very certain
that I can draw this conclusion) with 4 representing
can’t tell. Participants typed down the number that
best reflected their evaluation of the conclusion.
Procedure
All participants started with the Gospan task. After a 5
min break the reasoning task was presented.
Reasoning task instructions were presented on screen.
They showed an example item that explained the
specific task format. Participants were told that the
task was to decide whether or not they could accept
the conclusions. Care was taken to make sure
participants understood the precise nature of the rating
scale. Instructions stated that there were no time
limits. Participants used the keypad to type the
number reflecting their decision. The experimental
session was preceded by one practice trial.
We constructed four sets of eight inferences each.
All eight inferences in a set were based on different
conditionals. There were two sets with four MP and
four AC inferences in each set and another two sets
with four MT and four DA inferences in each set. The
order of presentation of the inferences within a set
was random. The conditionals for the four inferences
of the same type in a set were taken from the four
different cells within the 2 (few/many) x 2
(alternatives/disablers) design that the conditionals
constituted. Participants received the sets in the order
MP/AC, MT/DA, MT/DA, MP/AC. Eight
conditionals were used for the first two sets and the
remaining eight conditionals for the inferences in the
last two sets. Thus, the inferences in the first and last
two sets were always based on different conditionals.
After two sets (i.e., 16 inferences) were evaluated,
item presentation was paused until participants
decided to continue.
As we pointed out, the task instructions did not
mention to accept the premises as true or to endorse
conclusions that follow necessarily. Instead
participants were told they could evaluate the
conclusions by the criteria they personally judged
relevant.

Results
Ten participants were discarded (about 3.5 % of the
sample) because they did not meet the operation
correctness or latency requirements of the WM-task.
The remaining 282 participants were split in five span
groups based on the quintile boundaries of the
314

Gospan-score distribution. Mean Gospan-score for the
successive span groups was 18.21 (SD = 4.1), 26.97
(SD = 1.69), 32.26 (SD = .99), 37.56 (SD = 1.35), and
47.32 (SD = 5.07) for the fifth and top quintile group.
Each participant evaluated eight inferences of the
same inference type. The mean of these eight
observations was calculated. These means were
subjected to a 5 (span group) x 4 (inference type)
mixed model ANOVA with span group as betweensubjects factor and inference type as within subjects
factor. The effects of inference type were analyzed
with multivariate ANOVA tests.
There was a main effect of span group, F(1, 277) =
3.31, MSE = 2.35, p < .015, and inference type, Rao
R(3, 275) = 180.16, p < .0001, and the two factors
also interacted, Rao R(12, 727) = 1.83, p < .045. More
specifically, the impact of span group on AC and DA
differed from the impact of span group on MP and
MT, F(1, 277) = 2.72, MSE = .33, p < .03. Figure 1
shows the results.

6,5

Acceptance Rating

6
5,5

MP
AC

5

MT
DA

4,5
4
3,5
1

2

3

4

5

WM-Quintile

Figure 1. Mean acceptance rating of the four inference
types for participants in the successive span groups.
WM-Quintile 1 stand for the bottom quintile. The
rating scale ranged from 1 (very sure cannot draw this
conclusion) to 7 (very sure can draw this conclusion).
As figure 1 indicates the MP and MT acceptance
ratings indeed followed a U-shaped curve with people
in the middle quintile (‘medium’ spans) showing the
lowest acceptance levels. The trend analysis
established the quadratic nature of this trend for MP,
F(1, 277) = 3.13, MSE = .55, p < .08, and MT, F(1,
277) = 3.3, MSE = 1.33, p < .075. Neither on MP,
F(1, 277) < 1, nor on MT, F(1, 277) = 1.88, MSE =
1.33, p > .17, the quadratic trend was mediated by a
linear trend.
As expected, AC and DA acceptance showed a
different pattern with higher span groups tending
towards lower acceptance ratings. The trend analysis
established the linear trend in the AC, F(1, 277) =
11.97, MSE = .9, p < .001, and DA ratings, F(1, 277)

= 3.95, MSE = 1.25, p < .05, while a quadratic trend
was absent, both F(1, 277) < 1.
In order to make sure there was indeed a linear
trend without quadratic trend mediation on AC/DA on
the one hand, and a quadratic trend on MP/MT on the
other hand, we ran an additional analysis on the
combined MP/MT and DA/AC acceptance ratings.
This more powerful analysis confirmed the findings
[linear trend, F(1, 277) = 8.87, MSE = 1.71, p < .005,
without quadratic trend mediation, F(1, 277) < 1, on
AC/DA, and a quadratic trend, F(1, 277) = 4.46, MSE
= 1.30, p < .04, without linear trend, F(1, 277) = 1.67,
MSE = 1.30, p > .2, on the combined MP/MT
ratings]. The analysis also confirmed that there were
significant AC/DA by MP/MT interactions for the
quadratic, F(1, 277) = 5.16, MSE = .66, p < .025, and
linear trend, F(1, 277) = 4.42, MSE = .66, p < .04.

Discussion
The present results establish that MP and MT
acceptance ratings follow a quadratic, U-shaped trend
in function of WM-capacity, while the AC and DA
acceptance rating patterns follow a negative linear
trend. MP and MT acceptance ratings were lowest for
the ‘medium spans’ in the middle quintile of the WMcapacity distribution. This pattern is precisely what
one would expect if the disabler inhibition during
conditional reasoning occurs only for people highest
in WM-capacity. In the absence of a disabler
inhibition process, medium spans can allocate more
WM-resources to the disabler retrieval than lower
spans. Because high spans will inhibit the disabler
retrieval, the search will be most successful for the
medium spans. Consequently, the middle group
shows the lowest MP and MT acceptance ratings.
It is assumed that the basis of high spans’ disabler
inhibition is a minimal notion of the logical principle
that the truth of the antecedent implies the truth of the
consequent. While this notion conflicts with the
possibility that the consequent does not occur when
the antecedent occurs (i.e., a disabler), it does not
conflict with the possibility that the consequent occurs
in the absence of the antecedent (i.e., an alternative).
Thus, the process where alternatives are retrieved
from long-term memory should not be inhibited.
Successful retrieval of alternatives results in the
rejection of the AC and DA inferences. Since higher
WM-capacity allows a more efficient retrieval, higher
WM-resources will lead to lower AC and DA
acceptance ratings in the reasoning task. Consistent
with this framework, contrary to MP and MT, AC and
DA acceptance linearly decreased for the successive
span groups. These findings demonstrate the crucial
role of WM in the mediation of the counterexample
retrieval during everyday conditional reasoning.
In an earlier study, De Neys et al. (2002,
Experiment 3) measured the efficiency of the disabler
retrieval process in a generation task and linked this
with performance in a conditional reasoning task. It
315

was observed that a more efficient disabler retrieval
process resulted in lower MP and MT acceptance
ratings. Later, De Neys et al. (2003a) found that
although high spans were better at retrieving
disablers, they nevertheless accepted MP and MT
more than low spans. These findings seem to
contradict each other. However, De Neys et al. (2002)
only measured retrieval efficiency for 40 randomly
selected participants (WM-capacity was not assessed).
De Neys et al. (2003a) specifically selected
participants from the top and bottom quartile of firstyear psychology students’ WM-capacity distribution.
As De Neys et al. (2003a) argued, the top WM-spans
were probably small in number in the sample of 40
participants. The present data show that in that case
higher WM-capacity (and thus better retrieval) should
indeed result in lower MP and MT acceptance. Hence,
the trend analysis allows us to reconcile both studies.
The quadratic trend in the MP and MT acceptance
ratings implies that, in general, people with the
highest and lowest WM-capacity will accept MP and
MT to the same extent. Of course, when the
performance of a selected group of high and low
spans is contrasted (e.g., see De Neys et al., 2003a),
ratings may differ depending on the relative position
of the participants in both groups on the WM-capacity
distribution. Bluntly put, if the low group tends
somewhat more towards the middle than the high
group, the high group will also show somewhat higher
ratings and vica verca. The trend analysis provides the
bigger picture here. This underlines the importance of
examining the inference acceptance patterns over the
whole WM-capacity distribution.
Markovits et al. (2002) calculated linear
correlations between reasoning performance and
WM-capacity in a conditional reasoning task with the
kind of causal conditionals adopted in the present
study. Consistent with the present findings Markovits
et al. found significant correlations for AC and DA:
Higher WM-capacity resulted in a more frequent
rejection of the AC (r = .21) and DA (r = .20)
inferences. However, they also reported a smaller but
significant linear correlation for MP. In the present
study there was clearly no sign of a linear trend on
MP. We suspect that the difference with the present
findings lies in the task instructions. Markovits et al.
were interested in the study of deductive reasoning
with realistic conditionals. Therefore participants
were explicitly instructed to reason logically (i.e.,
participants had to assume that the premises were
always true). We are interested in the reasoning
process people use in everyday life whatever the
nature of this process may be (e.g., deductive or
probabilistic). Therefore, in our studies people can
evaluate the conclusions by the criteria they
personally judge relevant. Our data show that
reasoners in the top levels of the WM-distribution are
able to inhibit the disabler retrieval. The findings
thereby indicate that high spans spontaneously
(without being instructed) adhere to a standard logical

norm in their reasoning. Markovits’ data might
suggest that when the norm is explicitly presented
even medium span will tend to adhere to it. There is
some evidence (George, 1995; Vadeboncoeur &
Markovits, 1999) suggesting that stressing the logical
nature of the task reduces the MP rejection. Thus,
when properly instructed even medium spans might to
some extent block the disabler retrieval and
consequently show a boost in MP acceptance.
Because of the larger WM-capacity pool the resource
demanding inhibition will still be more successful for
the high spans. Since disabler retrieval is already
unlikely for participants lowest in WM-capacity, the
instructions should only have minimal impact on low
spans’ acceptance ratings. Therefore, one could
expect a more (positive) linear trend on MP and MT
acceptance with standard instructions. The higher
WM-capacity is, the more successful the inhibition
will be, and the more MP and MT will tend to be
accepted.
An important final remark concerns the status of
standard, first-order logic as a normative reasoning
system. As in most reasoning studies, we always refer
to first-order, ‘textbook’ logic as the logical norm
(Evans, 2002). However, note that despite its
widespread use in psychological reasoning studies the
status of standard logic as the correct normative
system for conditional reasoning is heavily debated
(e.g., Edgington, 1995; Evans, 2002; Oaksford &
Chater, 1998). Logicians have constructed alternative
logical systems with different validity characteristics.
Van Lambalgen and Stenning (2002), for example,
worked out a nonmonotonic logic where rejecting MP
and MT in the light of possible disablers is considered
valid. When we claim that participants higher in WMcapacity manage to inhibit the disabler retrieval, no
claims are made about the quality of the reasoning
process. It is not claimed that high spans are ‘better’
reasoners. One could argue that medium and low
spans adhere to a different normative system where
there is simply no need for a disabler inhibition.
However, the disabler inhibition phenomenon does
suggest that cognitively skilled reasoners have a basic
notion of the standard logical principle that a
conditional utterance excludes the possibility that the
consequent does not occur when the antecedent
occurs. Therefore, the findings do question the
opposite claim that standard logic would have no
bearing on peoples everyday life reasoning (e.g.,
Oaksford & Chater, 1998). For some people, to some
extent, it has.

Acknowledgements
We thank Kristien Dieussaert and Sara Verbrugghe
for their assistance in conducting the experiment.
Preparation of the manuscript was supported by grants
from the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders
(FWO).
316

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1996). Exploring the central
executive. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 49A, 5-28.
Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences
with conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.
Byrne, R. M. J., Espino, O., & Santamaria, C. (1999).
Counterexamples and the suppression of inferences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 347-373.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naive theories and causal
deduction. Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
De Neys, W., d’Ydewalle, G., Schaeken, W., & Vos,
G. (2002). A Dutch, computerized, and group
administrable adaptation of the operation span test.
Psychologica Belgica, 42, 177-190.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2002). Causal conditional reasoning and semantic
memory retrieval: A test of the semantic memory
framework. Memory & Cognition, 30, 908-920.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2003a). Working memory and everyday conditional
reasoning: Retrieval and inhibition of stored
counterexamples. (Tech. Rep. No. 295). Leuven,
Belgium: University of Leuven, Laboratory of
Experimental Psychology.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2003b). Causal conditional reasoning and strength
of association: The disabling condition case.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 15,
161-176.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (in
press). Inference suppression and semantic memory
retrieval: Every counterexample counts. Memory &
Cognition.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104,
235-329.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2002). Logic and human
reasoning: An assessment of the deduction
paradigm. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 978-996.
Galotti, K. M. (1989). Approaches to studying formal
and everyday reasoning. Psychological Bulletin,
105, 331-351.
George, C. (1995). The endorsement of the premises:
Assumption-based or belief-based reasoning. British
Journal of Psychology, 86, 93-111.
Janveau-Brennan, G., & Markovits, H. (1999). The
development of reasoning with causal conditionals.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 904-911.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1994).
Models,
necessity,
and
the
search
for
counterexamples. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
17, 775-778.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.

La Pointe, L. B., & Engle, R. W. (1990). Simple and
complex word spans as measures of working
memory capacity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16,
1118-1133.
Levy, B. J., & Anderson, M. C. (2002). Inhibitory
processes and the control of memory retrieval.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 299-305.
Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The
development of conditional reasoning: A mental
model account. Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Markovits, H., Doyon, C., & Simoneau, M. (2002).
Individual differences in working memory and
conditional reasoning with concrete and abstract
content. Thinking and Reasoning, 8, 97-107.
Miyake, A., & Shah, P. (Eds.). (1999). Models of
working
memory:
Mechanisms
of
active
maintenance and executive control. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1998). Rationality in an
uncertain world: Essays on the cognitive science of
human reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Quinn, S., & Markovits, H. (1998). Conditional
reasoning, causality, and the structure of semantic
memory: Strength of association as a predictive
factor for content effects. Cognition, 68, B93-B101.
Rumain, B., Connell, J., & Braine, M. D. S. (1983).
Conversational comprehension processes are
responsible for reasoning fallacies in children as
well as adults. Developmental Psychology, 19, 471481.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998). Individual
differences in rational thought. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 127, 161-188.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
23, 645-726.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in
conditional reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 22,
742-758.
Thompson, V. A. (2000). The task-specific nature of
domain-general reasoning. Cognition, 76, 209-268.
Vadeboncoeur, I., & Markovits, H. (1999). The effect
of instructions and information retrieval on
accepting the premises in a conditional reasoning
task. Thinking and Reasoning, 5, 97-113.
Van Lambalgen, M., & Stenning, K. (2002).
‘Suppression
effect’
and
nonmonotonicity.
Unpublished manuscript.
Verschueren, N., De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2002). Working memory capacity
and the nature of generated counterexamples.
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 24, 914-919.

317

