UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Your Task is my Task: Shared Task Representations in Dyadic Interactions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tz2979t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Sebanz, Natalie
Knoblich, Gunther
Prinz, Wolfgang

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Your Task is my Task:
Shared Task Representations in Dyadic Interactions
Natalie Sebanz (sebanz@psy.mpg.de)
Günther Knoblich (knoblich@psy.mpg.de)
Wolfgang Prinz (prinz@psy.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Psychological Research, Amalienstr. 33
80799 Munich, Germany

Abstract
While some cognitive scientists regard social interactions
as just another form of environmental interaction, others
have proposed that social interactions place special
demands on the cognitive systems involved, and may
have shaped individual minds in particular ways. One
consequence of the demands of action coordination
between several individuals could be that in social
interactions, others’ tasks are represented and integrated
in one’s own action plans even when coordination is not
required. To test this assumption, we investigated the
performance of pairs of participants carrying out
complementary and different tasks alongside each other,
and compared this to performance in exactly the same
tasks carried out alone. The task of another agent
influenced individual performance in the group setting.
Performance was also modulated by the nature of the
other’s task. This suggests that individuals shared task
representations and integrated each other´s task in their
own action planning. The results are consistent with the
view that the demands of joint action have shaped mental
processes, and support the claim that cognition must be
studied in relation to social context.

Introduction
As a proponent of the situativity of cognition, Greeno
(1998; Greeno & Engle, 1995) advocated that for a full
understanding of human cognition, two different lines
of research that have developed in relative isolation
from each other need to be integrated: one is the study
of individual cognition, the other the study of social
interactions. Whereas the first focuses on information
processing in single individuals and pays little attention
to the demands imposed by the interactions in which
people engage with each other and their environment,
the latter analyses patterns of coordination of activity,
but does not specify how informational contents of
interaction are involved in achieving task goals. This
paper makes an attempt to bring these two lines
together and to investigate the mechanisms underlying
the emergence of shared task representations in dyadic
interactions.

Embodied, Distributed, and Joint Cognition
During the last years, more and more cognitive
scientists have started to favour the idea that the mind

1070

cannot be understood independently of its relation to a
body that interacts with other agents and its
environment (e.g., A. Clark, 1997; Spivey, 2000;
Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991). Much of the
research inspired by the notion of embodiment has
focused on individual cognitive systems and their
continuous environmental couplings. Social interaction
has mostly been regarded as just another form of
environmental interaction. However, some approaches
have propagated the view that social interactions, in
particular those involving the coordination of actions,
may place special demands on the cognitive systems
involved.
According to the distributed cognition approach
(Hutchins, 1991; 1995), these demands are best
captured from a group perspective. Cognition is not
regarded as an activity of a single mind, but instead as
distributed across the interaction context. Hence,
instead of focusing on processes acting upon
representations in individual minds, the same cognitive
concepts are applied to the interactions among a
number of agents. It is assumed that cognitive systems
consisting of more than one individual have cognitive
properties that cannot be reduced to the cognitive
properties of individual persons. Thus humans
coordinating their actions can reach goals that are
beyond the capabilities of any individual member. The
coordination of distributed knowledge and tasks is a
major demand on the group. It is assumed that
coordination is achieved through shared representations
of goals.
The question of how individuals coordinate their
actions to reach a common goal has been addressed in
more detail in Clark’s work on joint action (1996).
Clark does not share the radical claim of distributed
cognition that representations must be investigated at
the group rather than at the individual level. However,
his approach is also based on the view that the results of
joint action cannot be explained by analysing individual
actions, and that the individual mind must be studied in
the context of its social interactions. According to
Clark, coordination depends crucially on the
knowledge, beliefs and suppositions – in short, the
common ground - shared by people acting together.
This shared basis is needed to form mutual expectations
about the actions the other will take. Common ground
emerges from two different sources: On the one hand, it

is based on the joint conceptual knowledge people bring
with them, such as knowledge about social norms. On
the other hand, common ground develops in the course
of a joint action due to joint perceptual experiences,
such as observed changes in the environment.
The latter aspect has been investigated empirically in
a study on real time action coordination in groups
(Knoblich & Jordan, 2000). The main finding was that
members of a group learned to extend the temporal
horizon of their planning by relying on changes in the
environment, but only when they received unambiguous
timing information about the other’s actions. Clearly,
the need to rely on external cues for anticipating future
events is specific to groups, as individuals can relate
conflicting actions to future events within the system.
The authors speculated that the need to rely on changes
in the environment for joint action may have fostered
the emergence of cognitive systems that are capable of
integrating effects of others’ actions into the planning
of one’s own.

way, e.g., by sharing a representation of the other’s
task.
To distinguish between these two possibilities, we
distributed the two action alternatives of a spatial
compatibility reaction time (RT) task (Simon, 1990)
among two participants, so that each participant
performed a go-nogo task. There were two different
group conditions: in one condition, participants
performed complementary tasks, responding to the
same stimulus feature. In the other, they performed
different tasks, acting upon different stimulus features.
If a general representation of the other as an agent is
formed, then there should be no difference between the
two group conditions. However, if one shares the task
representation with the other person, then one’s own
performance should be affected by the nature of the
other person’s task.

Sharing Task Representations
The division of labor and the coordination of individual
actions to reach common goals seem to place special
demands on groups and the individuals that are part of
them. From the perspective of individual group
members – on which we will focus in the following - ,
the challenge is to form shared goal representations
with other group members that allow one to coordinate
distributed knowledge and tasks. In real-time
coordination, others’ actions or their effects must be
predicted in order to coordinate one’s own actions with
theirs. These demands may have shaped individual
minds both phylo- and ontogenetically to make them
especially apt at observing and understanding others’
actions (Blakemore & Decety, 2001). One further
consequence of this social embodiment process
(Barsalou, in press) may be that in social interactions
individuals continuously monitor each other’s actions
and attend to each other’s tasks, anticipating that they
might need to engage in joint actions and thus may have
to coordinate their actions at some point. Thus, shared
representations in groups may arise even in situations
where coordination is not required, and where the
optimal performance strategy for each individual would
be to ignore the task or the actions of other persons.

Experiment
To address this issue, we investigated the performance
of pairs of participants carrying out a task alongside
each other, and compared this to performance in exactly
the same task carried out alone. Any changes in
performance between the individual and the group
setting must be due to the fact that participants in the
group integrate the other’s actions or task into their own
action plans in some way. This integration could either
take place at a very general level, in the sense that one
represents the other as an agent, or in a more specific

1071

Figure 1: Setting in the joint go-nogo condition (top),
and in the individual go-nogo condition (bottom).
We used pointing stimuli because processing of these
stimuli is known to be sensitive to the social context
(Tomasello, 1995). Participants were presented with
pictures of a hand pointing left or right. A red or a green
ring was attached to the index finger of the hand. Each
participant responded to one of the two colors, or to one
of the two pointing directions, respectively, so that the
task was always a go-nogo task. When color was taskrelevant for a participant, the pointing direction was
irrelevant for him or her, and vice versa. Responses
were given as fast as possible with a button press. In the
group setting (Fig. 1, top), one participant was sitting
on the left and the other was sitting on the right. In the
single person setting (Fig. 1, bottom) each participant
carried out exactly the same task as in the group setting,
while the other person’s chair remained empty.
There were four different conditions. The go-nogo
task in response to color was performed alone
(individual color), and the go-nogo task in response to
pointing direction was performed alone (individual
pointing). The go-nogo task in response to color was
performed alongside another agent responding to the
other color (joint color), and alongside another agent
responding to pointing direction (mixed-task).

The optimal perfromance strategy for the group
conditions would be to ignore the other agent’s task,
because it is not relevant for one’s own task and may
even lead to interference. If participants pursue this
strategy, there should be no difference between their
performance in the individual and the respective group
settings. However, if the other agent is represented and
integrated in one’s own action plan, this should
manifest itself through interference effects in the joint
tasks that are not present when the same task is
performed alone.
For the joint color condition the following results can
be predicted: given the social nature of pointing stimuli
(Tomasello, 1995), it is likely that the pointing finger
will take on the affordance of a turn taking signal in the
group. One may automatically interpret the finger
pointing at oneself as an indicator of one’s own turn,
and regard the finger pointing at the other participant as
a signal for the other’s turn. Thus actions should be
faster on trials where the finger points at oneself
(compatible trials), and slower on trials where it points
at the other agent (incompatible trials). Assuming that
the presence of another agent evokes or increases the
turn-taking affordance of the pointing stimuli, this
effect should be much weaker or absent in the
individual color condition.
In the mixed-task condition, where one person
responds to color and the other to the pointing direction,
the compatibility effect for the person responding to
color may be even stronger, because the pointing
direction that is irrelevant for both participants in the
joint color condition is now relevant for the other
participant. An increase in the size of the compatibility
effect is only to be expected, however, if the task
representation of the other person is shared. If the other
is only represented as an agent in a general way, i.e., as
somebody who performs a task that is not further
specified, then there should be no difference between
the two group conditions.
Finally, for the pointing task, the following
predictions can be made. In the individual condition,
where responses are always given to one pointing
direction, the irrelevant color cue should not have any
effect on RTs. In the mixed-task condition, it is
conceivable that one represents the color task of the
other participant and associates the other’s color with
his or her actions. Thus RTs on trials where one needs
to respond although the irrelevant color cue also
requires an action from the other participant may be
slower, compared to trials where the irrelevant color
cue does not require an action from the other person.
This effect may be more pronounced in the condition
where the person responding to the pointing direction
responds whenever the finger points at the other
participant, and not when it points at her- or himself.
The reason is that in this condition, the contingency
between the pointing direction and the other’s actions
may increase the turn taking affordance of the stimulus
and thus lead to increased response conflict.

1072

Method
Participants Thirty-two paid participants (7 male, 25
female) recruited by advertising at the University of
Munich, Germany, and in local newspapers took part in
the experiment. All were right-handed and had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision.
Materials and Procedure Half of the participants were
assigned to the color group, half to the pointing group.
Participants in the color group performed the following
conditions: 1) individual color, 2) joint color, 3) mixedtask (responding to color alongside a person responding
to pointing direction), 4) individual pointing.
Participants from the pointing group performed the
following conditions: 1) individual color, 2) joint color
task, 3) mixed task (responding to pointing direction
alongside a person responding to color), 4) individual
pointing. Half of the participants in the pointing group
always responded when the finger pointed towards
them (pointing-towards condition, n=8), and the other
half always responded when the finger pointed away
from them (pointing-away condition, n=8).
The order of the four conditions (individual color,
joint color, mixed-task, individual pointing) was
counter-balanced across pairs of participants. In the
joint conditions, participants sat side-by-side in front of
a monitor with a distance of 40 cm between them. In
the individual conditions, an empty chair remained
beside them (see Fig. 1).
Participants responded to digital photographs of a
right hand pointing either to the left or to the right. On
the index finger there was a clearly visible ring colored
red or green (see Figure 1). The stimuli were presented
centrally and the ring always appeared at exactly the
same location. Picture size was about 15 x 13 visual
degree horizontally and vertically. Each participant was
instructed to respond to one of the two colors or
pointing directions by pushing a single button. All
participants used their right hand do respond.
The sequence of events in each trial was as follows:
A black fixation cross appeared on the screen for 100
ms, followed after 100 ms by a picture of the hand. The
picture disappeared after 500 ms. The RT interval was
1000 ms from picture onset. The next trial was initiated
after 500 ms. In each condition, participants completed
4 blocks of 100 trials. Each of the stimuli appeared an
equal number of times within each block, and the order
of stimulus presentation was random. Stimulus
presentation and data collection were controlled by an
Apple Power PC. The pictures were presented on an
Apple 21" monitor with a horizontal resolution of 1024
and a vertical resolution of 768 pixels.

Results
We first present the results for the color tasks, followed
by the pointing tasks. Figure 2 shows the results for
responses to color only. From left to right, the panel
shows mean RTs on compatible and incompatible trials
in the individual color condition, the joint color
condition and the two mixed-task conditions (pointingtowards and pointing-away). Note that the two mixed
tasks were between-subjects, whereas the other tasks
were within-subjects. The error rates in all four
conditions were below 5% and were not analysed
further. Error trials and RTs greater than 600 ms were
excluded from the statistical analyses.
345

RT in ms

335

compatible
incompatible

325
315
305
295
indiv

joint

mixed
towards

and Compatibility, F(1, 31) = 7.46, p < .05. The
compatibility effect was larger in the group setting.
Joint Color and Mixed-Task (Pointing-towards)
Again, there was no significant difference in RTs
between the two different conditions, F(1, 7) = 1.42, p =
.27. The main effect for Compatibility was significant
F(1, 7) = 26.10, p <.01. As can be seen in Figure 2, the
interaction between the factors Condition and
Compatibility was also significant, F(1, 7) = 27.09, p <
.01. The compatibility effect was considerably larger in
the mixed-task condition.
Joint Color and Mixed Task (Pointing-away)
There
were no significant differences, all p >.05.
Mixed-Task (Pointing-towards vs. Pointing-away)
There was no significant difference in RTs between the
two conditions, F (1, 14) = .31, p = .59. The main effect
for Compatibility was significant, F (1, 14) = 14.88, p <
.01. There was also a significant interaction between the
factors Pointing Task and Compatibility, F (1, 14) =
30.58, p < .001. Post-hoc tests (Newman-Keuls)
showed that there was a significant difference in RTs on
compatible and incompatible trials in the pointingtowards condition, p < .001, but not in the pointingaway condition, p = .18.
Results Pointing Tasks

mixed away

345

Figure 2: Mean RTs for responses to color in the
individual color, the joint color, and the two
mixed-task conditions.

compatible
incompatible

In order to assess the statistical significance of the RT
differences, 3 within-subjects 2 x 2 ANOVAs with the
factors Condition (see below) and Compatibility
(compatible and incompatible) were performed: one for
the individual and joint color condition, one for the
joint color and the mixed-task condition where the
person responding to pointing direction responded
when the finger pointed at her- or himself (pointingtowards), and one for the joint color and the mixed-task
condition where the person responding to pointing
direction responded when the finger pointed away
(pointing-away). Finally, for the mixed-task conditions
a between-subjects 2 x 2 ANOVA with the factors
Pointing Task (pointing-towards versus pointing-away)
and Compatibility (compatible versus incompatile) was
also performed.
Individual and Joint Color There was no significant
difference in RTs between the individual and joint color
condition, F(1, 31) = .70, p = .41. The main effect for
Compatibility was significant, F(1, 31) = 43.37, p <
.001. As can be seen in Figure 2, there was also a
significant interaction between the factors Condition

1073

RT in ms

335
325
315
305
295
mixed towards

mixed away

Figure 3: Mean RTs for responses to pointing direction
in the two mixed-task conditions (pointing-towards and
pointing-away).
A two-sided t-test for paired samples showed that there
was no significant difference in the general RT level
between the individual and the group setting. Further ttests showed that responses to pointing direction were
faster compared to responses to color both in the
individual and the group setting, p < .05.
In the mixed-task condition, trials were coded as
compatible and incompatible from the point of view of
the participant responding to pointing direction.
Compatible trials were defined as trials where the ring

color was complementary to the color the color-person
was instructed to respond to, whereas incompatible
trials were such where the color required a response
from the color-person. E.g., when the color person was
instructed to respond to red, compatible trials for the
pointing-person were trials on which the ring was
green, and incompatible trials were ones on which the
ring was red.
Figure 3 shows the results for responses to pointing
direction in the two different mixed-task conditions.
From left to right, the panel shows mean RTs on
compatible and incompatible trials in the pointingtowards and the pointing-away condition.
A 2 x 2 ANOVA with the within-factor Compatibility
(compatible versus incompatible) and the betweenfactor Pointing Task (pointing-towards versus pointingaway) was conducted. There was a significant main
effect for Compatibility, F (1, 14) = 38.23, p <.001. The
interaction between Pointing Task and Compatibility
was marginally significant, F (1, 14) = 4.42, p = .05.
The compatibility effect was larger in the pointingaway than in the pointing-towards condition.

Discussion
The observed interaction between setting and
compatibility in the joint color task suggests that in the
group, the pointing stimulus gained the affordance of a
turn-taking signal, leading in particular to slower
responses when the finger referred to the person not to
respond. This change in the affordance of the pointing
stimulus can be explained by the assumption that the
other is represented as an agent who performs part of
the task.
From this result it cannot be concluded, however, in
what way the other is represented. Is he or she
represented as someone who generally performs a part
of the task, or is the concrete task of the other person
represented? The comparison between the joint color
condition and the mixed-task conditions allows one to
address this issue. The fact that the compatibility effect
increased when the other participant responded to the
pointing direction suggests that the task of the other
person became part of one’s own action plan.
Interestingly, the effect only increased when the other
person responded to pointing stimuli pointing at her- or
himself. This finding is in line with our turn-taking
account. When the pointing-person responds to stimuli
pointing at her- or himself, the turn taking affordance of
the pointing stimulus is reinforced for the color-person,
due to the contingency between the pointing direction
and the other’s actions. Hence, on incompatible trials,
where one has to respond although the finger points at
the other person, one’s own action will be inhibited.
The slower RTs on incompatible trials reflect the time it
takes to overcome this inhibition. However, when the
pointing-person responds whenever the finger points at

1074

the color-person, there is no response conflict for the
color-person, and thus no increase in RTs on
incompatible trials.
The results for responses to pointing direction in the
mixed-task conditions also provide evidence that the
task representation of the other participant was shared.
The fact that RTs on trials where the irrelevant color
cue also required an action from the other participant
were slower compared to trials where the irrelevant
color cue did not require a response from the other
person, suggests that the color was associated with the
other’s actions. In line with our predictions, the effect
was stronger in the pointing-away condition. We
assume that in this condition, the contingency between
the pointing direction and the other’s actions enhanced
the turn-taking affordance of the stimulus and thus led
to increased response conflict.
One may argue that RT differences in the mixed-task
conditions were due to the fact that on some trials, only
one action was required, whereas on others, a response
from each of the two participants was required. Two
results speak against this interpretation, however. First
of all, responses to pointing stimuli were faster than
responses to color. Thus on trials where both
participants responded, the anticipated actions of the
other rather than the actual responses must have
influenced the pointing-person´s actions. To anticipate
the other’s actions, the task must be represented.
Second, if the observed compatibility effect for
responses to pointing direction were only due to
differences in the responses, then the effect should be
the same in the two different pointing conditions,
because in both, incompatible responses are associated
with two actions. Instead, we observed an interaction
between pointing task and compatibility.

Conclusions
The results clearly show that the optimal performance
strategy, which would have been to ignore the other
person, was not pursued. Rather, our findings provide
evidence that individuals share task representations
with another group member and integrate the other’s
task in their own action planning. This sharing of task
representations was observed in a situation where
coordination was not required, and where the task could
equally well be performed on one’s own.
It is tempting to speculate that this automatic
emergence of shared task representations in dyadic
interactions has its origins in the need to coordinate
one’s own actions with others’. As pointed out by Clark
(1996), one of the most important prerequisites for joint
action is common ground. Actions can only be
coordinated when one is able to predict what the other
will do. Clark focuses mainly on the use of joint
declarative knowledge in discourse to show how
common ground is built. However, in non-linguistic
action domains, there may also be other ways of

establishing a mutual basis for joint action. One way to
conceptualize this is to assume that individuals learn to
anticipate each other’s actions through distal events
(Knoblich & Jordan, in press). Predictions can be based
on contingencies between one’s own actions, others’
actions, and jointly controlled events. This implies that
individual action plans are extended to include the
anticipated actions and action effects of others.
In the non-linguistic action domain, a great number of
tasks consists of well-defined subtasks that are
distributed among different agents. For example, think
of two people pitching a tent and trying to drive a peg
into the ground. One person needs to grasp and pull the
rope attached to the tent, while the other drives the peg
into the ground with a hammer. In joint actions where
pre-defined tasks are distributed, the best way to
anticipate others’ actions is to represent their task. This
can be achieved in different ways: one may simulate the
actions to be performed by the other, or one may form a
representation of the task in terms of the distal events
that are caused by the other’s actions (Knoblich &
Jorden, in press). In both cases, shared task
representations establish the common ground for joint
action. Creating shared task representations can thus be
regarded as one of several special demands on
individuals coordinating their actions. It is possible that
this demand has shaped cognitive systems in a way that
individuals cannot help observing others’ actions and
their effects, and integrating them in their own action
planning when possible. This should apply especially
when the task of another person is easy to grasp and the
demands on working memory are low, as was the case
for the tasks we used in our experiment.
The social situation we created in our experiment
seems to be quite different from everyday interactions
in that the tasks to be performed were very simple and
the two agents did not need to coordinate their actions.
However, we believe that studying social situations
with minimal coordination requirements allows one to
capture the basic elements of more complex
interactions, such as the emergence of shared task
representations, shared goals, and shared action
planning. According to Greeno (1998), there are two
ways of integrating the study of individual cognition
and social interactions. One is to expand the framework
of cognitive science by studying mental processes in
social context, the other is to begin with a framework of
interactional studies and zoom in on specific processes
occurring in the group. We believe that studying mental
processes in individuals during social interactions is a
promising way to investigate how social context has
shaped the mind, and to tackle processes that may occur
specifically in social situations.

Acknowledgments
We thank Birte Kröger and Veronika Schradi for their
help in collecting the data, and two anonymous
reviewers for their comments.

1075

References
Barsalou, L.W., Niedenthal, P.M., Barbey, A., &
Ruppert, J. (in press). Social embodiment. In B. Ross
(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Vol. 43. San Diego: Academic Press.
Blakemore, S.-J. & Decety, J. (2001). From the
perception of action to the understanding of intention.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 561-567.
Clark, A. (1997). The dynamical challenge. Cognitive
Science, 21 (4), 461-481.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge,
England, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing,
learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53
(1), 5-26.
Greeno, J. G. & Engle, R. A. (1995). Combining
analyses of cognitive processes, meanings, and social
participation: understanding symbolic representations. In J. D. Moore & J. F. Lehmann (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 17th annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 591-596). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Hutchins, E. (1991). The social organization of
distributed cognition. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine,
& S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially
shared cognition (pp. 283-307). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Knoblich, G., & Jordan, S. (2000). Constraints of
embodiment on action coordination. In Gleitman, L.
R., & Joshi, A. K. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 764-769). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knoblich, G., & Jordan, S. (in press). Action
coordination in groups and individuals: learning
anticipatory control. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Simon, J. R. (1990). The effects of an irrelevant
directional cue on human information processing. In
R. W. Proctor & T. G. Reeve (Eds.), Stimulusresponse compatibility: An integrated perspective
(pp. 31-86). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Spivey, M. J. (2000). Eye movements during
comprehension of spoken scene descriptions.
Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 487-492). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social
cognition. In C. Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint
attention: Its origins and role in development (pp.
103-130). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The
embodied mind: Cognitive science and human
experience. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.

