UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cognitive Model Testing Moral Seduction Theory: Unconscious Bias and the Role Played by
Expertise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2pz9k26x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Guiral, Andres
Ruiz, Emiliano
Rodgers, Waymond
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cognitive Model Testing Moral Seduction Theory:
Unconscious Bias and the Role Played by Expertise
Andrés Guiral (andres.guiral@uah.es)

Emiliano Ruiz (emiliano.ruiz@uca.es)

Department of Management Sciences
Plaza de la Victoria s/n, Madrid 28802, Spain

Department of Financial Management
Duque de Nájera, Cádiz 11002, Spain

Waymond Rodgers waymond.rodgers@ucr.edu)

José A. Gonzalo (josea.gonzalo@uah.es)

Department of Accounting, UCR
Anderson Hall 213, Riverside, CA 92521

Department of Management Sciences
Plaza de la Victoria s/n, Madrid 28802, Spain
profession is self-correcting and conflicts of interests can be
resolved through detection and through the release of more
regulation.
This research paper empirically tests Moore et al. (2006)’s
call for further research by building on previous theory and
providing the first empirical testing of the moral seduction
theory regarding both auditors’ conscious and unconscious
versions. In this paper, conscious behavior relates to auditors
following the auditing rules and guidelines; whereas
“unconscious” behavior is driven by auditors’ biases induced
by perceptual framing of a situation (Tversky & Kahneman,
1981). We implement a Throughput model (TP) in
connection with moral seduction theory enabling us to
examine how conflicts of interests may unconsciously bias
auditors’ decision making process.
Auditors are part of a set of professionals that are
confronted with conflicts of interests, especially after the
recent resounding financial scandals (Enron, WorldCom,
Global Crossing, etc.) and the demise of Arthur Andersen.
Auditors have the responsibility to evaluate in every audit the
ability of their clients to continue in existence. If doubts exist,
they should release a “going concern” opinion alerting
investors and other stakeholders regarding clients’ risk of
bankruptcy. This type of report is extremely important since
the issuance of a warning signal would significantly affect
investors and other third parties’ investments decisions (i.e.,
re-allocation of credit). However, several studies have shown
that the number of warning signals for firms with bad
financial health is scarce. DeFond, Raghunandan, &
Subramanyam (2002) concluded that only 4 percent of
financially distressed companies receive a warning signal
from auditors. Thus, auditors’ professional obligation
competes against their self-interest since they simultaneously
face the dilemma of the “self-fulfilling prophecy effect”: the
fear that the issuance of a warning signal may precipitate
client’s failure because of its negative impact on current and
potential investors, creditors, suppliers, and customers
(Louwers, Messina, & Richard, 1999). Thus, the selffulfilling prophecy effect implies auditors’ self-interest since
the fear to be dismissed after the release of that warning
signal. This paper illustrates whether auditors unintentionally
may be induced by this fear that, in turn, may help explain
their reluctance to issue a going concern opinion.
Previous research has pointed out that less experienced
decision makers tend to examine superficially and not to look

Abstract
We provide theoretical and empirical work on the moral
seduction theory suggesting unintentional professional bias. We
develop a cognitive model in connection with moral seduction
theory enabling us to examine the behavioral results on a
particular professional group, namely auditors. Eighty
experienced auditors from international accounting firms were
included in the sample. Our findings support previous research
suggesting that auditors may be morally induced by conflicts of
interests in an unintentional manner. However, our results show
that auditors’ expertise, in terms of frequency knowledge, may
help to mitigate their unintentional reporting bias.
Keywords: Unconscious biases; Moral seduction theory;
Throughput model; Expertise

Introduction
Professionals working in areas such as medicine, law, and
accounting are often placed in situations where they serve two
masters. Some conflicts of interest occur since a profession
takes on several roles while serving one goal; while others
assume one role but serve multiple goals. Of vital
significance is the degree to which the interest would tend
one toward bias on an issue. Moore, Tetlock, Tanlu and
Bazerman (2006) have recently suggested that the structural
features of the close auditor-client relationship may cause
auditors’ involuntary lack of independence. These authors,
using both moral seduction and issue cycle theories, provide
persuasive arguments demonstrating that auditors have strong
incentives to avoid the issuance of warning signals to
investors and other stakeholders. After the consideration of
those features, Moore et al. (2006) concluded that the current
accounting reforms, such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX),
are not adequate in addressing the independence problem
because the new regulation is a consequence of an incorrect
understanding of the main true source of auditors’ biases.
Therefore, more than increasing penalties for corrupt auditors,
the accounting profession should center on an involuntary
lack of independence. In contrast, Nelson (2006)’s reply to
Moore et al. (2006) defends that the current auditing reforms
(i.e., SOX) have the potential ability to reduce auditors’
incentives and clients’ pressures to bias reporting. As a result,
it appears to be a dilemma between two extreme positions.
First, from a psychological point of view the current auditing
systems may be interpreted as fatally flawed due to auditors’
unconscious biases. Second, some believe that the auditing

519

and explicit even when they are overtly expressed”
(Kahneman, 2003, p. 699). The second stage (information)
involves issues of available information for processing that is
important to independent auditors in their determination of a
client’s ability to continue in existence. The most recent
theoretical development of decision theory emphasizes dual
processes in reasoning and decision making, with two
corresponding systems (Sloman, 2002). The first system can
be fast, associative, and intuitive (see perception and
information stages), whereas the second one is typically slow,
deliberate, and analytical (see judgment stage below). Dualprocess approaches provide an explanation for why human
decision making seems simultaneously impulsive and
reflective, intuitive and analytical, qualitative and
quantitative. In the third processing stage (judgment),
perception along with financial and non-financial information
is analyzed.
The judgment stage thus includes appraisal and judgment
of alternative information and perception outcomes. The
perception link also can give ideas and suggestions based on
the auditor’s previous experiences and knowledge bases. The
appraisal of alternatives may be based upon a single criterion
or methodology, or a combination of criteria or
methodologies such as compensatory or non-compensatory
weighting schemes. Finally, both perception and judgment
elements affect the fourth processing stage, decision choice.
In the TP, the perception mode highlights “moral seduction
theory” that can provide further insights regarding auditors’
conflicts of interests. In addition, moral seduction theory
indicates why auditors’ decision making in the going concern
task might be not exclusively based on the analytical behavior
required by auditing standards. Moore et al. (2006) define
moral seduction theory as the cognitive processes by which
the structural features of the auditor-client relationship exert
their effects on auditors’ professional judgment. In this
regard, these authors point out how selective perception,
escalation of commitment and discounting of information
biases may help understand auditors’ unintentional
corruption. Selective perception bias refers to auditors’
involuntary tendency to reach their own self-interest even
when they follow the auditing guidelines pertaining to
independence. Therefore, independence refers to following
the rules and guidelines of the auditing profession, whereas
self-interested actions are usually more immediate,
compelling and certain. Since auditors are hired and fired by
their own clients, they have persuasive economic arguments
to support client-preferred goals. Thus, in order to maintain
expected audit fees, auditors may be reluctant to issue
qualified audit reports. Escalation of commitment is defined
as the tendency to continue to invest in the losing course of
action, in the hope of a favorable turn of events. Thus,
assuming that after the issuance of a clean audit report the
auditor will keep the client, he or she will be morally
compromised to act in the same “unethical” way for
subsequent audits. Further, discounting of information bias
refers to people tendency to be only aware of immediate
consequences of their course of action. This bias may lead
auditors to perceive potential reputation losses and lawsuits

at long-term implications of a situation (Chi, 2006). We also
test whether expert auditors are more sensitive to the long
term consequences of their opinions. We argue that auditors
with higher expertise in going concern evaluations, measured
by their auditing experience and the frequency with which
they audit financially distressed clients, will offer a higher
tendency to release warning signals in order to maintain their
reputation and avoid the costs of financial scandals.

Connecting the TP with Moral Seduction
Theory
Auditors develop analytical procedures in order to guide them
to objective conclusions that their clients have the ability to
continue in existence. Indeed, auditors’ decision making
should consist of an analytical evaluation of the evidence
(both positive and negative), its cognitive integration via
judgment (i.e., an estimation of clients’ bankruptcy
probability), and finally a decision to issue an audit opinion
(Information (I) →Judgment (J) →Decision (D) pathway in
Figure 1). However, since auditors may face threats to their
independence the assumption of a normative behavior seems
to be far away from reality.
Figure 1: TP cognitive model/schematic representation
P
unconscious

un
co

inten

ns
cio

tiona
l

us

J

I

analytical

D

al
lytic
ana

Where P= perception, I= information, J= judgment, and D= decision

Since Rodgers (1997) developed the TP it has been applied
successfully to different economic and social settings such as
loan analysis, managerial ethical decisions and sexual
harassment (Rodgers, 1999; Rodgers & Gago, 2001). The TP
separates the decision-making processes into four main
processing stages of perception (P), information (I), judgment
(J) and decision choice (D). Perception and information
covary since information can influence how a decision-maker
frames a problem (perception) or vice versa (see Figure 1),
i.e., how an individual selects the evidence (information) to
be used in the two later stages of the decision-making process
(judgment and decision choice) is perceptually framed. The
first processing stage (perception) involves the framing of
information (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). For auditors, this
processing stage includes framing of financial information
and other internal and external information that could affect
their decision making. The double-ended arrow connecting
perception and information represents this relationship.
Perception concerns heuristics of framing effects (Kahneman,
2003). Often perception is based on some kind of patternmatching process to earlier experiences with the use of
information. These processes are neither voluntary nor
verbally explicit; however, “judgments are always intentional

520

dismissed after the negative effects of the self-fulfilling
prophecy. This leads to the first hypothesis:

costs as distant and uncertain, favoring the issuance of clean
audit reports. Thus, Moore et al. (2006)´s moral seduction
theory may help explain why strengthening independence
through more regulation does not guarantee the elimination of
conflicts of interests in auditing. The impact of these conflicts
of interests should be interpreted as an involuntary bias rather
than a deliberate corruption. This unconscious bias in auditor
reporting is depicted in the TP by (i) the direct arrow from
perception to the judgment stage, and (ii) the indirect
interaction between perception and information when the
auditor employs an analytical behavior. Finally, the TP also
illustrate the possibility that the presence of conflicts of
interests may lead auditors to an intentional corruption by a
direct impact of perception on decision. Thus, this potential
unethical behavior would lead auditors to making a decision
based on their own self-interest by disregarding available
information (Rodgers & Gago, 2001). In sum, the TP in
connection with the moral seduction theory is used in this
paper to improve our understanding that auditor’s failure
when evaluating their clients’ financial status may be a
consequence of an unconscious reporting bias. This argument
implies that the current auditing model may be fatally flawed
since assumes auditors’ independence without considering
that conflicts of interests faced by auditors may
unintentionally distort their decisions.

H1. Auditors’ conflicts of interests negatively impair their
judgments when evaluating their clients’ ability to continue in
existence.

Moore et al. (2006) have argued that auditors’ deliberate
corruption, should be interpreted as an exception. They
assume that in general terms auditors act as an independent
profession and follow their professional standards and code of
ethics. However, the problem at this point is that their
decision making may be unintentionally affected by the
dilemma of the self-fulfilling prophecy effect. Thus, the main
true source of auditor’s biases, rather than intentional, seems
to be unintentional. These arguments lead to our second
hypothesis:
H2. The self-fulfilling prophecy effect causes an unconscious bias
that negatively affects auditors’ tendency to release warning
signals.

Assuming that unconscious bias distorts the auditor
function, more regulation increasing penalties for corruption
and punishing corrupt auditors does not seem to be the
appropriate way to solve the auditing problem. Instead, we
propose to explore whether cognitive skills, such as expertise,
may contribute to reduce the negative impact of conflicts of
interests faced by auditors. While novices rely on surface
knowledge-structures, experienced auditors use both surface
and deep knowledge structures which promote more accurate
decisions due to a better representation, understanding,
organization and aggregation of the extensive information
affecting their judgments and reporting choices (Chi, 2006).
Furthermore, expert knowledge is considered crucial in
complex audit tasks where frequency knowledge has been
found as a vital component of auditor’s expertise. We suggest
that auditors with previous experience and higher frequency
knowledge in going concern evaluations may be more
sensitive to the long-term consequences of their opinions (i.e.,
less prone to the discounting of information bias). Therefore,
expert auditors, rather than be seduced by the short-term
incentives (i.e., auditor dismissal), may offer a behavior less
affected by conflicts of interest in order to maintain their firm
reputation and avoid undesirable lawsuits cost: auditors’
expertise may lead them to look out for the interest of third
parties, the public, instead of looking out for the interest of
clients. These arguments lead us to our last hypothesis:

Hypotheses Development
Auditors have two strong incentives to report on the bankrupt
possibility of their clients. The first incentive refers to
auditors’ “reputation building” and its maintenance over time.
The debacle of Arthur Andersen is a perfect example of how
reputation loss may lead investors to distrust an auditing firm.
The second incentive to issue a going concern opinion is
related to auditors’ perception of their litigation exposure.
Audit firms are susceptible of being sued by financial
statement users as a result of a client’s unexpected
bankruptcy. Several studies provide empirical evidence
suggesting that most auditors are sensitive to litigations and
believe that the issuance of warning signal would offer some
protection in terms of potential lawsuits (Guiral, Gonzalo, &
Rodgers, 2007). However, auditors also face incentives that
may induce them to avoid the release of a warning signal
even in the case of a client with severe financial distress.
Auditors’ conflicts of interests may help explain why they are
so reluctant to issue going concern opinions. The so-called
“self-fulfilling prophecy effect” has been defined as the
auditor’s fear to precipitate client failure after the release of a
warning signal because of its impact on current and potential
investors, creditors, suppliers, and customers (Louwers et al.,
1999). Empirical research has found that warning signals
issued by auditors can hasten the demise of an already
financially distressed company, reducing a loan officer’s
willingness to grant a line of credit to that troubled firm, or
increasing the point spread that would be charged if that
company was granted a loan (Guiral et al., 2007). Another
underlying assumption is that auditors may fear to be

H3. Expert auditors will be less affected by unconscious reporting
behavior biases.

Method
Participants
Eighty partners and managers from two Spanish international
auditing firms (34 and 46 from each firm) participated in this
study during training sessions. The subjects’ average age was
35 years, with average experience of 15.7 years. We did not
find statistically significant differences in experience among
subjects of the two audit firms. On a Likert scale of 5 points

521

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

(where 1= never, 5= almost in every audit), auditors reported
a frequency of evaluations of clients with going concern
problems of 2.29.

Indicator

Task
Each participant judged the going concern status of a
fictitious company with severe financial distress. After
receiving background information about a hypothetical
client’s financial position, auditors were provided with four
pieces of financial evidence. First, they received two items
of negative financial evidence. Then, they processed another
two items of positive financial information. After each item
they were requested to estimate the company’s ability to
continue in existence. Subjects used a 21-point scale with
endpoints 0 and 100, where zero was “The Company will
not be able to continue in existence” and 100 was “The
Company will definitely able to continue in existence”.
Finally, they were asked to whether they would release a
going concern disclosure and indicate what type of opinion
they would issue. Further, at the end of the questionnaires
each participant was asked to identify each item as negative
or positive evidence as well as an evaluation of its
relevance. In this case, a Likert scale of 11 points was
employed, where 1 = totally irrelevant, and 11 = very
relevant. In order to capture auditors’ unintentional bias,
each participant was asked to assess two questions related to
the auditing conflicts of interests described in a previous
section of this paper. The responses to these questions were
measured using another Likert scale. To capture the
dilemma related to the so called “self-fulfilling prophecy
effect” we asked auditors to respond to the following
question: “Do you believe that the issuance of a going
concern opinion precipitates the bankruptcy of the client?”
The second question was related to the “warning signal”
dilemma, which relies on the professional responsibility to
provide warning signals to financial statement’s users. In
this regard, auditors answered to the following question:
“Do you believe that an on-time release of a going concern
opinion is essential for financial statement’s users’ decision
making?”. To avoid possible carry-over effects between
perceptions and decisions, we manipulated the order in
which these questions were provided to subjects. We did not
find statistically significant differences in responses among
the two groups.

Mean

Standar
d Deviation

Negative Evidence 1 (N1)

7.47

1.81

Negative Evidence 2 (N2)

8.25

1.79

Positive Evidence 1 (P1)

7.01

2.15

Positive Evidence 2 (P2)

6.33

2.31

Viability after N1 (JN1)

35.65

21.16

Viability after N2 (JN2)

28.37

19.43

Viability after P1 (JP1)

47.18

21.80

Viability after P2 (JP2)

51.81

23.80

Unqualify vs. Qualify (D1)

1.06

.243

Type of Audit Opinion (D2)

1.21

.544

Self-fulfilling effect perception (CI1)

5.68

2.41

Warning signal perception (CI2)

8.22

1.54

Years of Experience (E1)

15.70

5.99

Frequency of evaluations (E2)

2.29

.676

Measurement of Constructs
The latent variables (constructs) of our model were captured
using single and multi-items variables (measures) for
expertise, information processing, judgment, decision and
perception stages (see Figure 2). In our TP model the
information stage consists of two constructs: negative
evidence and positive evidence. Two formative indicators
measured negative evidence: auditors’ subjective evaluation
of the relevance of the first two pieces of negative
information (N1 and N2). While, auditors’ subjective
assessment of the two formative and positive items (P1 and
P2) was used to capture the positive evidence construct. Two
latent constructs formed the perception stage: self-fulfilling
prophecy and warning signals. Each of these construct were
measured by a single reflective indicator (CI1 and CI2,
respectively). We used four reflective indicators (JN1, JN2,
JP1, and JP2), i.e., auditors’ estimation of the client’s going
concern status after each item of evidence, to capture the
judgment latent construct. Another two reflective indicators
measured the decision stage: whether the auditor would
qualify the audit report (D1) and the type of the audit report
he/she would issue (D2). Finally, two reflective indicators
captured auditors’ expertise: years of auditing experience
(E1) and frequency of going concern evaluations (E2).
Expertise was introduced in the model as a moderator
variable (see Figure 2).

Results

Model equations
The structural equations for judgment and decision stages are
(see Figure 2):

Partial least squares (PLS) was used for the data analysis.
PLS can handle and test complex constructs with both
reflective and formative factors. With formative indicators,
the unobservables are assumed to be “effects” rather than
“causes”. In Figure 2, “ability to continue,” “audit report,”
“self-fulfilling prophecy,” “warning signals” and “expertise”
were modeled as latent constructs measured by reflective
indicators of our research model; whereas “negative
evidence” and “positive evidence” were measured by
formative factors. Table 1 summarizes descriptive statistics
for indicators.

η1 = β1 γ1 + β2 γ2 + β3 γ3 + β4 γ4 + β9χ1 + ε

η2 = β5γ3 + β6 γ4 + β7 η1 + β8 χ1 + ε

(1)
(2)

The equations for the role-played by expertise on
information and perceptions stages follow the same form:
γ1 = β11 χ1 + ε

522

(3)

γ2 = β10 χ1 + ε

γ3 = β12 χ1 + ε

γ4 = β13 χ1 + ε

also tests whether expertise may contribute to mitigate
conflicts of interests faced by auditors. Apparently, Table 1
shows that auditors gave more relevance to those items that
might arise doubts about client’s ability to survive (negative
evidence) in comparison with those supporting client’s
viability (positive evidence). On an 11-point scale, the mean
ratings were 7.86 for negative items and 6.66 for positive
information. Further, a t-test comparison indicated significant
differences between both types of evidence (t = 4.29; p = .00).
Thus, we might conclude that auditors exercised an
appropriate measure of suspicion or professional skepticism
based on the analytical behavior required by auditing
standards. However, a higher ranking of the negative
evidence (individually considered) does not necessary mean
that auditors were skeptical.
PLS simultaneous analysis allows us to interpret how
auditors integrated the financial evidence (positive and
negative) in their causal reasoning, which may also be driven
by their perceptions of conflicts of interests. Overall, our
results support that (i) auditors did not follow the analytical
pathway required by auditing standards (Information (I)
→Judgment (J) →Decision (D) in Figure 1) and (ii) that
auditors’ conflicts of interests had a significant impact in
their-decision making process. Indeed, auditors offered a
tendency to underestimate the negative evidence (β1) and give
more relevance to that information supporting the ability of
the client to continue in existence (β2 = .46, p < .01; R2 = .37)
which, in turns, lead them to release a less severe audit report
(R2 = .12). Thus, our results support previous findings that
auditors are reluctant to issue a going concern opinion.
Conflicts of interests, illustrated by the competing dilemma
among the self-fulfilling prophecy effect and the release of
early warning signals to investors, simultaneously and
significantly affected auditors reporting behavior. On the one
hand, auditors’ fear to provoke the failure of the client after
the issuance of a red flag seems to induce them to
underestimate the risk of bankruptcy (β3 = .17, p < .05). On
the contrary, auditors perception of their professional
responsibility of providing an on-time warning signal to
financial statement users led them to give more importance to
both the negative evidence (r3 = .41, p < .05) and the
possibility of client’ bankruptcy (β4 = -.30, p < .01). These
results provide support for both Hypothesis 1 and the TP
assumption that perception and information can be
interdependent in the decision making process. According
with our expectation, we did not find a direct impact of
conflicts of interests on decision choice. Auditors’ decision of
releasing a going concern opinion was not directly based on
the competing dilemma among the self-fulfilling prophecy
effect and the responsibility of providing early warning
signals. In this regard, the pathways from both self-fulfilling
prophecy and warning signals latent variables to the audit
report construct were insignificant (β5 and β6, respectively).
Taken together, this evidence supports Hypothesis 2 that
auditors’ intentional corruption is an exception and that they
may be unconscious of their reporting bias.

(4)
(5)
(6)

Equation 1 indicates that the γ1 value for the effect of the

negative information on η1 (ability to continue) after having
controlled in the equation for γ2 (positive information), γ3

(self-fulfilling prophecy effect), γ4 (warning signal), and χ1

(expertise) concepts. Equation 2 shows the γ3 value for the

self-fulfilling prophecy effect construct on η2 (audit report)

after having controlled for γ4 (warning signal), η1 (ability to
continue), and χ1 (expertise) constructs. Equations 3, 4, 5, and

6 indicate the potential mitigating effect of expertise on γ1
(negative information), γ2 (positive information), γ3 (selffulfilling prophecy effect), and γ4 (warning signal),
respectively. Finally, ε represents the residual error.
Measurement Validation
The measurement model evaluates the relationship between
indicators and latent constructs by assessing the reliability and
validity of the scales measures. Examining the loading of the
indicators on the corresponding construct assesses each
measure’s reliability. All measures have a loading level above
0.70. All loadings have the expected signs and are statically
significant at the 0.01 level. Further, all constructs present a
composite reliability above 0.70. Convergent and
discriminant validity is inferred when the PLS indicators (i)
load much higher on their hypothesized factor than on other
factors, and (ii) when the square root of each construct’s
Average Variance Extracted (ovc) is larger than its
correlations with other constructs. To test the first condition,
the CFA procedure in PLS was performed. A correlation
matrix showed that no indicator loads more highly on another
construct than it does on the latent construct it is intended to
measure. Convergent validity of a construct is measured by
the ratio of the variance of its indicators captured by the
construct to the total amount of variance (ovc). The total
amount of variance includes the variance due to measurement
error. As a rule of thumb, a ratio of less than 0.50 implies the
convergent validity assumption is violated because more
variance is explained by the error than the construct. In our
model, ovc ranges between 0.56 and 1.00, indicating
satisfactory convergent validity for the constructs. The low
and moderate average squared correlations among constructs
showed that our model also satisfies the condition for
discriminant validity.
The Structural Model
Our cognitive model predicts that auditors’ evaluation begins
with a mental integration of the financial information items
and its possible interaction with auditors’ perceptions, which
leads to the judgment stage (i.e., client’s ability to continue in
existence). On a final stage, both perception and judgment
lead to the final audit report decision. In addition, our model

523

improbable, new unexpected financial scandals in which
auditors are involved in could appear in the future. We also
contribute to previous research by testing whether auditors’
expertise may mitigate their reporting bias. We found that
those auditors with higher experience and frequency
knowledge in the going concern task were less seduced by
conflicts of interests. In sum, the main implication for our
research is that training auditors in a specific task domain
might prevent unexpected financial scandals. Finally, we
believe that our model can be useful to illustrate the impact of
conflicts of interests on the decision making process of other
professionals. Further research may explore how expertise
may contribute to reduce unintentional biases beyond the
accounting field, such as medicine, law, public policy,
investment banking, corporate social responsibility, and even
academic research.

Figure 2: TP cognitive model
Perception
CI1

Information

CI2

SelfFulfilling
Prophecy
γ3
r1

r3

β1

3

β4

r2

Warning
Signal
γ4

r4

β6

β11

Expertise
χ1

β10

β5

γ1

β9

β1

P1

Positive
Evidence

P2

γ2

E1

β12

β3

N2

Negative
Evidence

E2
β8

N1

Ability to
Continue
η1

β2

JN1

JN2

JP1

Audit
Report
η2

β7

JP2

Judgment

D1

D2

Decision

Acknowledgments

Finally, we test whether auditor expertise may be
considered a moderator variable of the negative implications
of the moral seduction theory. We found that auditors
possessing superior expertise in terms of higher experience
and frequency knowledge are simultaneously more sensitive
to their responsibility of providing early warning signals (β8 =
.29, p < .01) and less likelihood to rely on the argument of the
self-fulfilling prophecy (β9 = -.11, p < .05). Further, auditors
with higher expertise offered a higher tendency to release
going concern opinions (β13 = -.20, p < .05). These findings
seem to support Hypothesis 3. However, expertise also had a
significant impact on the information processing stage. In this
regard, our results seem to reflect auditors’ inherent tendency
to give more relevance to that evidence supporting the
potential ability of the client to continue in existence (β11 =
.36, p < .05) in comparison with the negative evidence (β10 =
.26, p < .05).

Financial support of the Ministry of Education and Culture of Spain (research
projects SEJ2007-62215/ECON/FEDER and 2006-14021) is appreciated.

References
Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Two approaches to the study of experts’
characteristics. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, &
R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of expertise and
expert performance. New York: Cambridge Press.
DeFond, M., Raghunandan, K., & Subramanyam, K. (2002). Do
non-audit service fees impair auditor independence? Evidence
from going concern audit opinions. Journal of Accounting
Research, 40, 1247-1274.
Guiral, A., Gonzalo, J. A., & Rodgers, W. (2007). Information
content and recency effect of the audit report in loan rating
decisions. Accounting & Finance, 47, 285-304.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice:
Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58, 697720.
Louwers, T. J., Messina, F. M., & Richard, M. D. (1999). The
auditor’s going-concern disclosure as a self-fulfilling prophecy: A
discrete-time survival analysis. Decision Science, 30, 805-824.
Moore, D. A., Tetlock, P. E., Tanlu, L., & Bazerman, M. H. (2006).
Conflicts of interest and the case of auditor independence: moral
seduction and strategic issue cycling. Academy of Management
Review, 31, 10-29.
Nelson, M. W. (2006). Ameliorating conflicts of interest in auditing:
Effects of recent reforms on auditors and their clients. Academy of
Management Review, 31, 30-42.
Rodgers, W. (1997). Throughput Modeling: Financial Information
Used By Decision Makers. JAI Press: Greenwich, CT.
Rodgers, W. (1999). The influences of conflicting information on
novices’ and loan officers’ actions. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 20, 123-145.
Rodgers, W. & Gago, S. (2001). A model capturing ethics and
executive compensation. Journal of Business Ethics, 48, 189-202.
Sloman, S. A. (2002). Two systems of reasoning. In D. Gilovich, D.
Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases. Cambridge
University Press: New York.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and
the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453-458.

Conclusions
Moore et al. (2006) have recently argued that the current
auditing system is fatally flawed. These authors suggest that
auditors are morally compromised by conflicts of interests.
This paper brings theoretical and empirical evidence that
supports this idea by analyzing simultaneously the ethical
dilemmas faced by auditors when evaluating their clients’
ability to survive. We developed a cognitive model that
integrates both intentional and deliberate bias reporting in
auditors’ decision making. Our results confirm the hypotheses
that auditors are unconsciously seduced by conflicts of
interests (i.e., self-fulfilling prophecy effect) that, in turns,
lead them to avoid the issuance of warning signals to
investors. Thus, our findings do not provide support that
current and further accounting reforms may overcome
conflicts of interests faced by the auditing profession. The
current auditing reforms, such as mandatory auditor rotation
and the prohibition on non-audit services are clearly
insufficient. Therefore, beyond the structural features of the
auditing profession, resistance of the auditing profession to
leave the current system looms as a major problem. Since a
dramatic change to the current system appears to be highly

524

