UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
ACT-R Tutorial

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/62z6b2kg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Taatgen, Niels A.
Van Rijn, Hedderik

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ACT-R Tutorial
Niels A. Taatgen (taatgen@cmu.edu)

Hedderik van Rijn (D.H.van.Rijn@rug.nl)

Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Av., Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen
Grote Kruisstraat 2/1, 9712 TS Groningen, Netherlands

ACT-R (Anderson, Bothell, Byrne, Douglass, Lebiere & Qin,
2004) is a cognitive theory and simulation system for
developing cognitive models. It assumes cognition emerges
through the interaction of a procedural memory of
productions with a declarative memory of chunks and
independent modules for external perception and actions.
Since its release in 1993, ACT-R has supported the
development of over 100 cognitive models, published in the
literature by many different researchers. These models cover
topics as diverse as driving behavior, implicit memory,
learning backgammon, metaphor processing, and emotion.
This tutorial will discuss the latest version of ACT-R, ACT-R
6.0, which is more interruptible, achieves greater across-task
parameter consistency, has better mechanisms of production
learning, and is more in correspondence with our knowledge
of brain functioning. The tutorial has no prerequisite
knowledge, and is intended to on the one hand give an
overview of the theory, and on the other hand offer some
direct demonstration of ACT-R models. Although half a day
is not sufficient to cover all material, it can whet the appetite
for and serve as a kick-start to the full ACT-R tutorial that is
available online at http://act-r.psy.cmu.edu/. This website also
provides the necessary software, and overview of researchers
using ACT-R, and it has a list of ACT-R publications (many
of them downloadable).
During the tutorial, following Taatgen, Lebiere and Anderson
(2006) four popular research paradigms within ACT-R will
be used as a vehicle both to explain the architecture and to
explain how ACT-R accounts for these phenomena.

Rule learning
Models in which new production rules are learned on the
basis of combination of old rules and substitution of
declarative knowledge.
Although these individual research paradigms have produced
interesting models by themselves, the full potential of the
architecture can only be seen when they work together in
models of complex cognition, which is the focus of a large
proportion of current ACT-R research.
In addition to the modeling paradigms we will discuss
imaging research that shows how components of the ACT-R
architecture can be mapped onto brain regions.

Instance learning
Learning by retrieving old experiences from memory, similar
to Logan’s instance theory.

Figure 1: Overview of the ACT-R architecture

References

Utility learning

Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., Qin, Y. (2004) An integrated theory of Mind.
Psychological Review, 111, 1036-1060. Available online:
http://act-r.psy.cmu.edu/papers/403/IntegratedTheory.pdf
Taatgen, N.A., Lebiere, C. & Anderson, J.R. (2006).
Modeling paradigms in ACT-R. In R. Sun (ed.), Cognition
and Multi-Agent Interaction: From Cognitive Modeling to
Social Simulation (pp. 29-52). Cambridge University Press.
Available online:
http://www.ai.rug.nl/~niels/publications/taatgenLebiereAnd
erson.pdf

Learning which of several available strategies is optimal by
keeping track of costs and probability of success.

Perceptual/Motor constrained processing
Models in which the main factor in explaining human
performance lies in the limitations of their perceptual and
motor systems.

17

