UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Advances in Modeling Human Category Learning with DIVA

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3m21f8nf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Kurtz, Kenneth J.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Advances in Modeling Human Category Learning with DIVA
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Binghamton University
Binghamton, NY, USA 13902-6000
Keywords: category learning, classification, neural networks,
autoencoder, computational models, selective attention, rules

be made based on the ability of each category channel to
accurately predict a single feature. This attention-like
mechanism is completely independent of the learning process,
but it allows the model to exploit its fast mastery of
diagnostic within-categories statistical properties. With this
design feature, DIVA yields impressive fits to a range of
category learning phenomena that were previously thought to
depend on attentionally-mediated similarity to reference
points or the use of hybrid/separate systems including an
explicit, independent rule-learning component. Further
discussion will address novel predictions and results
extending DIVA to the domains of inference learning,
unsupervised learning, classification of continuous-dimension
stimuli, and structured representations in learning and
comparison (e.g., Kurtz, 2005; Kurtz & Loewenstein, 2007;
Levering & Kurtz, 2006).

Theoretical background
The DIVA (Divergent Autoencoder) model of human
category learning (Kurtz, 2007) brings renewed vitality to a
set of compelling explanatory principles that had fallen out of
favor after failing to account for benchmark learning
phenomena like the relative ease of acquisition of elemental
category structures (Shepard, Hovland, & Jenkins, 1961).
Core principles that distinguish DIVA from other error-driven
adaptive network models like ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992)
and SUSTAIN (Love, Gureckis, & Medin, 2004) are: (1) a
learning mechanism based on abstraction/recoding of inputs,
as opposed to selective attention and association with fixed
item representations; (2) representing knowledge about
category instances in the connection weights, rather than in
localist internal nodes of a network; (3) learning and
classifying based on reconstructive success (goodness-of-fit)
using an auto-associative mechanism that preserves, distorts,
and infers features of the input in light of category
knowledge, as opposed to computing the match between the
input and reference points (exemplars, prototypes, rules).
The DIVA model incorporates these principles by treating
categories as coordinated statistical models – each category is
learned as a channel of an autoencoder network trained with
standard backpropagation. The feedforward network consists
of a set of nodes encoding the input features, a single set of
hidden nodes for recoding all inputs, and distinct (divergent)
sets of output nodes that generate a decoding or
reconstruction of the input features in light of each possible
category. The relative success of reconstruction on each
channel determines the probability of classification. This
learning process implements a modified form of principle
components analysis (PCA) in which the recoding weights
compactly encode the important variability in the training set
and the decoding weights yield a construal of the input
features in terms of each category. In sum, the system
assesses how well an input accords with the statistical model
underlying each category and interprets A/B classification as
follows: To what extent is it possible to make sense of the
available data as being the features of an A versus as being
the features of a B?

References
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22-44.
Kurtz, K.J. (2005). On knowing the category before knowing
the features. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Kurtz, K.J. (2005). Abstraction versus selective attention in
classification learning. Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kurtz, K.J. (2005). Re-representation in comparison: Building
an empirical case. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 17, 447-459.
Kurtz, K.J. (2007). The divergent autoencoder (DIVA) model
of category learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14,
560-576.
Kurtz, K.J., & Loewenstein, J. (2007). Converging on a new
role for analogy in problem solving and retrieval: When
two problems are better than one. Memory & Cognition,
35, 334-341.
Levering, K., & Kurtz, K.J. (2006). The influence of learning
to distinguish categories on graded structure. Proceedings
of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Love, B.C., Medin, D.L, & Gureckis, T.M (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Shepard, R.N., Hovland, C.L., & Jenkins, H.M. (1961).
Learning
and
memorization
of
classifications.
Psychological Monographs, 75 (13, Whole No. 517).

A new design principle and new findings
This presentation focuses on a new design feature, as well
as simulation results, that importantly extend the depth and
breadth of the DIVA account. Specifically, an additional
mechanism for generating classification responses based on
the reconstructive outputs has been developed. Rather than
assessing reconstructive success across all features, the use of
unidimensional evaluation allows classification decisions to

545

