UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Assessing the Structure of Verbal Protocols

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vq7726f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Todaro, Stacey A.
Magliano, Joseph P.
Millis, Keith K.
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Assessing the Structure of Verbal Protocols
Stacey A. Todaro (shaberk1@niu.edu)
Joseph P. Magliano (jmagliano@niu.edu)
Keith K. Millis (kmillis@niu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University
DeKalb, IL 60115 USA

Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Christopher A. Kurby (ckurby@artsci.wustl.edu)
Department of Psychology, Washington University
St. Louis, MO 63130 USA
Olson, Duffy, & Mack, 1984; Pressley & Afflerbach, 1995;
Trabasso & Magliano, 1996; Wolf & Goldman, 2005).
Procedurally, this requires readers to either verbally report, or
type whatever thoughts come to mind after reading sentence
(s) of a text. Thus, one commonly held assumption regarding
verbal protocols is they reveal what information from the
prior text of the passage and the reader’s world knowledge is
consciously available in working memory and ‘codeable’ in
language (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). Therefore, if a reader is
making a causal connection between the current sentence and
a prior one, evidence of it could be found in his or her verbal
protocol.
Because verbal protocols do not reflect a veridical
description of the processes per se, researchers must develop
qualitative coding schemes that can be used to classify the
inferential and strategic processes presumed to be present.
More frequently than not, this requires parsing a reader’s
utterance into clauses and then classifying each clause as
belonging to one of the categories specified by a particular
coding scheme without considering the overall structure of
the verbal protocol. By structure, we mean the preceding and
proceeding clauses.
Proponents of verbal protocol methodologies (Ericsson &
Simon, 1993; Pressley & Afflerbach, 1995) contend that the
structure of verbal protocols per se may be systematic and
meaningful of the covert mental processes involved in the
phenomena of interest. Unfortunately, in the context of
reading comprehension research, the structure of verbal
protocols is rarely considered. Consequently, much less is
known is about the structure of verbal protocols and how that
structure might be reflective of the conscious processes
involved in comprehension. Thus, the goal of this study was
to examine the structure of verbal protocols and in particular
to determine whether there was an identifiable sequence to
the inferential and strategic processes readers engage in when
constructing meaning from text.

Abstract
One approach that has been used to study processes that give rise
to comprehension is to have readers verbally report their
understanding during reading. The thoughts that readers produce
usually contain multiple clauses that convey different kinds of
processing strategies, such as paraphrasing, bridging, or
elaborations. The goal of this study was to examine the structure
of verbal protocols and to identify whether there was a sequence
to the information sources that comprised a given verbal report.
Participants produced think-aloud protocols while reading
scientific texts. With respect to whether there was an identifiable
sequence to the information contained in a verbal protocol, the
results indicated that participants tended to begin their protocols
with information from the current sentence before adding
information from world knowledge and the prior text. As
additional clauses were produced, there was a shift in focus from
the current sentence to elaborative information.

Introduction
It has been well established that to comprehend text, readers
must go well beyond the information explicit in it (e.g.,
Graesser, Millis, & Zwaan, 1997). This requires readers to
actively participate in the comprehension process by engaging
in inferential and strategic processes that serve to connect text
events to one another and to the reader’s general knowledge
about the world (Graesser & Kruez, 1993). These types of
processes presumably aid in the construction of coherent
mental representation of what the text is about, a fundamental
aspect of most theories of text comprehension (Gernsbacher,
1990; Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994; Kintsch, 1988; van
den Broek, Young, Tzeng, & Linderholm, 1999; van Dijk &
Kintsch, 1983).
One methodological approach that has been used to study
inferential and strategic processes that give rise to
comprehension is to have readers verbally report (i.e., thinkaloud, self-explain) their understanding as they proceed
through text (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989;
Coté & Goldman, 1999; Ericsson & Simon, 1993; Magliano
& Millis, 2003; Magliano, Trabasso, & Graesser, 1999;

Information Sources and Verbal Protocols
It has been well established that in order for inferential and
strategic processes to occur during reading, readers must be

607

able to access and have available in working memory
different information sources (e.g., Corbett & Chang, 1983;
McKoon & Ratcliff, 1980; O’Brien, Duffy, & Myers, 1986;
Trabasso & Maglaino, 1996). Once made available to
working memory, these different information sources can
subsequently be used to support the use of specific inferential
and strategic processes (Trabasso & Magliano, 1996). For
example, information from the current sentence can be used
to compute a paraphrase, in which the reader restates the
ideas contained in the current, focal sentence (i.e., the
sentence currently being thought about) using their own
words. Information from the prior text can be used to
establish causal coherence between the current, focal sentence
and the prior discourse, both locally and globally. Finally,
information from world knowledge can be used to generate
knowledge-based elaborations in which the reader
incorporates his/her general world knowledge to establish
explanatory coherence or to flesh-out the details of a situation
model.
There is considerable evidence to suggest that the extent to
which these inferential and strategic processes occur during
reading depends in part on the type of text that is read. For
example, Magliano and his colleagues have demonstrated that
knowledge-based elaborations tend to predominate in the
context of narrative comprehension (Trabasso & Magliano,
1996; Magliano et al., 1999), whereas paraphrasing tends to
predominate when comprehending difficult scientific text
(McNamara, 2004). Moreover, there is some evidence to
suggest that the presence of these inferential and strategic
processes tends to co-occur within a given verbal report. For
instance, McNamara (2004) reported that 84% of the verbal
protocols that contained a text-based explanation also
contained a paraphrase. This would be in contrast to when the
verbal protocols contained a knowledge-based elaboration, in
which case the co-occurrence of paraphrasing was less likely.
Thus, there is some evidence to suggest that readers may
coordinate their use of inferential and strategic processes
when verbally reporting their understanding.

laying down a foundation and then attaching incoming
information to the foundation, provided they are related. In
the context of a discourse strategy, the current sentence might
be thought as a foundation that the reader adds to by attaching
prior text, or elaborating upon it with world knowledge.
A third reason for this expectation comes from the givennew principle that is followed in the context of conversational
discourse (Clark & Haviland, 1997). Accordingly, speakers
first establish common ground (i.e., the given information)
before introducing new information into the discourse. With
respect to a discourse strategy during verbal reporting, we
conceptualize the given as the information most immediate in
working memory, namely the current sentence. The new
would consist of information from the prior text or world
knowledge that establishes how the current sentence is related
to the larger discourse context. We conceptualize this
information as "new" because it often involves inferences that
are not explicitly stated in the text. Although verbally
reporting one’s thoughts has been conceptualized as a
conversational discourse (Trabasso & Oezyuerek, 1997), we
make no claims that readers imagine themselves in a
conversation with an imaged participant. However, we do
believe that it is reasonable to assume that pragmatic
principles that guide conversational discourse may also guide
verbal reporting in the form of a discourse strategy.
With respect to readers adopting a discourse strategy, we
posit an Ordering hypothesis. According to this hypothesis,
readers will initiate their verbal protocols with content from
the current sentence before including information from the
prior text and world knowledge. Therefore, there should be a
shift in focus as readers describe their understanding with the
first clause of their verbal protocol primarily containing
information from the current sentence and later clauses
containing information from the prior text and world
knowledge.

Method
Participants

The Current Study

Sixty-four students who were enrolled in a critical thinking
course taught at Northern Illinois University volunteered to
participate in exchange for extra course credit.

The primary objective of this study was to examine the
structure of verbal protocols and in particular to determine
whether there was an identifiable sequencing among the
inferential and strategic processes readers use to construct
meaning from text. It was hypothesized that readers may
adopt a discourse strategy that would have implications on
when readers engage in these processes as a verbal protocol is
produced. For example, some researchers suggest that
integration and elaboration occurs only when the reader has
established an understanding of the current sentence
(McNamara, 2004). As such, readers might begin their
protocol with a paraphrase of the current sentence because
engaging in this type of processing strategy aids in sentence
understanding, thereby enabling the reader to integrate that
information into the larger discourse context.
Additional support for this expectation comes from
Gernsbacher's (1990) Structure Building Framework.
According to the framework, comprehension proceeds by

Materials
Four scientific texts were used in the current study. The topics
of the text were heart disease, the origin of coal, the
development of thunderstorms, and the food chain. These
texts were adopted from popular textbooks and popular
science books. Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level scores were
obtained to assess the appropriateness of each text using CohMetrix (McNamara, Louwerse, Cai, & Graesser, 2005). The
scores can range from 0-12 and are equivalent to a U.S.
grade-level. The Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level scores for hear
disease, the origin of coal, the development of thunderstorms,
and the food chain were 6.059, 9.184, 8.567, and 8.85,
respectively. Each text ranged between 20 and 34 sentences
in length (total N = 97). Because of time constraints, each

608

participant read only two of the four texts. Participants read
either origin of coal and heart disease, or development of
thunderstorms and food chain. Each participant was randomly
assigned to one of these two sets of texts and the order of the
two texts in each set was counterbalanced across participants.

among raters was acceptable (86%). Disagreements were
resolved through discussion.
Table 1. Example Verbal Protocols.

Procedure

Verbal
Protocol
1

Sources of
Information
Statement
There aren’t many babies
babies, born,
that are born with hearts that
hearts, work,
don’t work. However, they
ductus
may have ductus arteriosus
arteriosus,
or a foramen ovale that
foraman ovale,
doesn’t close properly after
close
birth.
babies, born,
2
Most babies do not have a
congenital
congenital disease when they
disease, have
are born.
3
Babies tend to be born with
babies, perfect
perfect hearts.
hearts, born
Note: plain text = current sentence, italics = prior text, and
bold = world knowledge

Participants were run individually in small rooms, each of
which was equipped with a workspace and a computer. The
procedure consisted of two phases. During the first phase,
participants read a short text about mitosis (N = 5). The text
was presented on a computer screen one sentence at a time.
After reading each sentence, the participants were instructed
to “report your understanding of the text in the context of
what you have read thus far.” The participants typed their
understanding into the computer. The purpose of phase one
was to familiarize participants with the task of producing
verbal protocols concurrently while reading. Phase two was
identical to that of phase one, except that participants read
two of the four experimental texts, as opposed to a short
practice text. In both phases of the experiment, Microsoft
Excel was used to display the texts and to collect the verbal
protocol data (which was recorded into an Excel spreadsheet).
Access to the Excel toolbars was removed so that participants
could only proceed by pressing the “next” button, which
appeared at the bottom of the screen. This button was
appeared after the participants typed their understanding into
a box that appeared near the bottom of the screen. Paragraph
formatting was maintained in the presentation of the texts so
that the texts looked natural to the participants. Participants
could use the scroll bar to re-read any portion of the text that
was not visible on the screen.

Results
In order to test whether readers adopt a discourse strategy
when verbally reporting their understanding during reading,
we first distinguished between those verbal protocols that
were one, two, and three or more clauses in length. For each
participant, we calculated the mean number of words that
were derived from the current sentence, prior text, and world
knowledge for each of the different clause lengths. One
participant failed to produce verbal protocols that were three
or more clauses in length and was excluded from the analysis.
The means were submitted to a 3 (source of information:
current sentence, prior text, world knowledge) X 3 (clause
length: one clause, two clauses, three or more clauses) mixed
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with source of information
and clause length as the within-participant factors. The results
from the analysis revealed a main effect for source of
information, F(2, 124) = 78.21, MSE = .08, p<.01. Post-hoc
analyses using Least Square Difference (LSD) revealed that
information from the current sentence (M = .54, SD = .17)
was produced more frequently than information from the
prior text (M = .18, SD = .07) and world knowledge (M = .28,
SD = .14). In addition, information from world knowledge
was produced more frequently than information from the
prior text. This main effect was qualified by a significant
source of information by clause length interaction, F(2, 124)
= 7.06, MSE = .01, p<.01. The nature of this interaction is
depicted in Figure 1.

Protocol Analysis
The verbal protocols that readers produced were first parsed
into clauses. A clause contained a main verb that expressed an
event, activity, or state and one or more arguments (e.g.,
nouns, adjectives, adverbs). Each verbal protocol was then
classified according to the number of clauses that were
present. There were three levels to this classification: one,
two, and three or more clauses. For each clause, two
independent raters (the first and second authors) identified the
source of information for the verb and argument (s). There
were three sources of information for which the verbs and
arguments could be derived: the current sentence, the prior
text, and the reader’s knowledge about the world. Table 1
provides example verbal protocols that were produced after
reading the sentence “Most babies are born with perfect
hearts” and how each of the verbs and arguments were coded.
Consider for example, verbal protocol statement 1. The words
ductus arteriosus and foramen oval, and close were coded as
world knowledge because they were not mentioned in the
discourse. The words babies and born were coded as current
sentence because both are mentioned in the current sentence.
Finally, the word work was coded as prior text because this
verb was present in earlier text sentences. Percent agreement

609

A more direct test of this hypothesis, however, would be to
assess the inclusion of information from the current sentence,
prior text, and world knowledge for only those protocols that
were three or more clauses in length. For each participant, we
calculated the proportion of constituents that were derived
from the current sentence, prior text, and world knowledge
for each of the different clause positions. The means were
then submitted to a 3 (source of information: current
sentence, prior text, world knowledge) X 3 (clause position:
first clause, second clause, third clause) mixed ANOVA with
clause position and source of information as the withinparticipant factors. The results from the analysis revealed a
significant main effect for source of information, F(2, 124) =
43.66, MSE = .10, p<.01. Post-hoc analyses (LSD) revealed
that information from the current sentence (M = .49, SD =
.17) was produced more than information from the prior text
(M = .18, SD = .13) and world knowledge (M = .33, SD =
.15). World knowledge, however, was produced more than
information from the prior text. This main effect was
qualified by a significant clause position by source of
information interaction, F(2, 124) = 38.16, MSE = .02, p<.01.
The nature of this interaction is depicted in Figure 2.

0.6

Mean Number of Words

0.5

Clause Length

0.4

One
Two

0.3

Three or More
0.2
0.1
0
Current Sentence

Prior Text

World Knowledge

Source of Information

Figure 1: Mean number of words from the current sentence,
prior text, and world knowledge as function of clause length.
Post-hoc (LSD) analyses revealed differences in the
production of these information sources both across and
within clause position. First, with respect to the pattern of
differences across clause length, there were no differences in
the production of information from the current sentence for
protocols that were one clause (M = .57, SD = .23) or two
clauses in length (M = .55, SD = .17). Three clause protocols,
however, contained a significantly less information from the
current sentence (M = .49, SD = .17) than both the one clause
and two clause protocols. Similarly, the production of
information from world knowledge did not differ for
protocols that were one (M = .26, SD = .19) and two clauses
in length (M = .27, SD = .15). Three or more clause protocols
did, however, contain significantly more information from
world knowledge (M = .33, SD = .15) than both the one
clause and two clause protocols. There were no differences in
the production of information from the prior text as a function
of clause length (all p’s > .05).
With respect to differences within clause length, one clause
protocols contained more information from the current
sentence (M = .57, SD = .23) than information from the prior
text (M = .18, SD = .11) and world knowledge (M = .26, SD =
.19). World knowledge, however, was produced more than
information from the prior text. Similarly, two clause
protocols contained more information from the current
sentence (M = .55, SD = .17) than information from the prior
text (M = .18, SD = .08) and world knowledge (M = .27, SD =
.14). World knowledge, however, was produced more than
information from the prior text. Finally, for protocols that
contained three or more clauses, current sentence information
(M = .49, SD = .17) was produced more than information
from the prior text (M = .18, SD = .13). Information from
world knowledge (M = .33, SD = .15) was produced more
than information from the prior text. There was, however, no
difference in the production of information from the current
sentence and world knowledge when the protocols were three
or more clauses in length. In sum, these data suggest that as
protocols get longer, readers shift their discourse focus away
from the current sentence and use world knowledge to
elaborate upon it.

Mean Number of Words

0.7
0.6

Information Source

0.5

Current Sentence

0.4

Prior Text

0.3

World Knowledge

0.2
0.1
0
First

Second

Third

Clause Position

Figure 2: Mean number of words produced from the current
sentence, prior text, and world knowledge as function of
clause position.
Post-hoc analyses (LSD) revealed that there were
differences in the use of information from the current
sentence, prior text, and world knowledge both across and
within clause position. With respect to the pattern of
differences across clause position, information from the
current sentence was produced more frequently in the first
clause (M = .61, SD = .19) than in both the second (M = .48,
SD = .22) and third clause (M = .38, SD = .19). Moreover,
information from the current sentence was produced more
frequently in the second clause position than in the third
clause position. This would be in contrast to the pattern of
difference observed for the production of information from
world knowledge across clause position. More specifically,
information from world knowledge was produced more
frequently when the clause was in the third position (M = .40,
SD = .19) than when the clause was in either the second (M =

610

.35, SD = .17) or first position (M = .24, SD = .16). Moreover,
information from world knowledge was produced more
frequently in the third clause position than in the first clause
position. It is important to note that although there were no
significant differences in the production of information from
the prior text for the first (M = .15, SD = .14), second (M =
.18, SD = .15) and third (M = .22, SD = .14) clauses, the
proportion of information from the text does increase slightly
as a function of clause position.
With respect to the pattern of differences within clause
position, clauses in the first position contained more
information from the current sentence (M = .61, SD = .19)
than information from the prior text (M = .15, SD = .14) and
world knowledge (M = .24, SD = .16). In addition,
information from world knowledge was produced more
frequently than information from the prior text. Similarly,
clauses that were in the second position contained more
information from the current sentence (M = .48, SD = .22)
than information from the prior text (M = .18, SD = .15) and
world knowledge (M = .35, SD = .17). In addition,
information from world knowledge was produced more than
information from the prior text. Finally, clauses that were in
the third position contained more information from the
current sentence (M = .38, SD = .19) than information from
the prior text (M = .22, SD = .14). In addition, information
from world knowledge (M = .40, SD = .19) occurred more
frequently than information from the prior text. There was,
however, no difference in the production of information from
the current sentence and world knowledge when the clauses
were in the third position (p > .05). In sum, these results
suggest that readers adopt a discourse strategy when verbally
reporting their thoughts. Accordingly, readers tended to
initiate their verbal protocols with information from the
current sentence and then add information from the prior text
and world knowledge in subsequent clauses.

first asking readers to paraphrase the sentence that was just
read (McNamara, 2004). A more speculative reason for the
ordering is that students follow a given-new strategy as they
supply verbal protocols.
Some researchers have claimed that thinking-aloud could
be conceptualized as a conversational discourse (Trabasso &
Oezyuerek, 1997). Consequently, one pragmatic principle
that would apply to the present study is the given-new
strategy (Clark & Haviland, 1997). According to this strategy,
speakers first establish common ground - the given
information - before introducing new information into the
discourse. In the context of reading, the reader would
implicitly encode the current sentence as constituting the
common ground (i.e., given) between him or herself and the
author. Consequently, the reader begins his or her
contribution with that information before adding new
information. The new information would be how information
from the current sentence can be integrated with prior text
and the reader’s general world knowledge. Obviously, future
research is needed to directly test whether the given-new
strategy or aspects of it operate when readers produce verbal
protocols.
Although the results of the present study suggest that there
may be an identifiable sequence as to when information from
the current sentence, prior text, and world knowledge is
produced over the course of a verbal protocol, it is important
to note that this ordering is independent of both text-based
and reader-based factors that could potentially influence this
sequencing. For example, Todaro, Magliano, Millis, Kurby,
& McNamara (2007) found that the inclusion of information
from the prior text depended on whether a given text sentence
afforded either a local or distal causal connection, whereas the
inclusion of information from world knowledge depended on
whether a text sentence contained information that overlapped
with a reader’s prior knowledge. As such, future research is
needed to examine how features of the text and characteristics
of the reader influence how readers coordinate their use of
inferential and strategic processes.
Nevertheless, the results of the present study may have
implications for computer-based reading intervention tools
that rely on the use of verbal protocols to teach and to identify
the use of specific reading strategies during reading (Gilliam,
Magliano, Millis, Levinstein, & Boonthum, 2007;
McNamara, Levinstein, & Boonthum; 2004; Millis,
Magliano, & Todaro, 2006). For example, McNamara and her
colleagues have developed iSTART (Interactive Strategy
Training for Active Reading and Thinking; McNamara et al.,
2004), which is a web-based computer tutor that uses
animated agents to teach student how to self-explain difficult
scientific texts to themselves. In the context of this tool,
students learn how to use a specific set of reading strategies
such as paraphrasing, comprehension monitoring, predicting,
elaborating, forming bridging inferences, and logic. The hope
is that students will use all of these strategies in concert so as
to improve comprehension. The results of the present study
suggest that this expectation might be more easily attained if
readers were instructed to first paraphrase the sentence they

Summary and Conclusions
Provided that verbal protocols can be used to reveal higherorder cognitive processes that give rise to comprehension, it is
important that researchers understand the constraints that
influence the production of verbal protocols during reading.
In the present study, we examined how readers use different
information sources, namely, the current sentence, prior text,
and world knowledge when constructing meaning from text.
With respect to the question regarding whether readers
adopt a discourse strategy when verbally reporting their
understanding during reading, we found strong evidence for
the Ordering hypothesis. This is an important and novel
contribution of this study, as it is the first study that we know
of to address the structural form of verbal protocols. As
predicted by the Ordering hypothesis, participants tended to
begin their protocols with information from the current
sentence before adding information from world knowledge
and the prior text. As additional clauses were produced, there
was a shift in focus from the current sentence to elaborative
information. These finding are consistent with the claim that
students self-explaining during reading can be promoted by

611

McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1980). Priming in item
recognition: The organization of propositions in memory
for text. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
19, 369-386.
McNamara, D.S. (2004). SERT: Self-Explanation Reading
Training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara, D.S., Levinstein, I.B., & Boothum, C. (2004).
iSTART: Interactive strategy training for active reading
and thinking. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 36, 222-233.
McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M., Cai, Z., & Graesser, A.
(2005, January 1). Coh-Metrix version 1.4. Retrieved May
25, 2006, from http//:cohmetrix.memphis.edu.
Millis, K.K., Magliano, J., & Todaro, S. (2006). Measuring
discourse-level processes with verbal protocols and latent
semantic analysis. Scientific Studies of Reading, 10, 225240.
O'Brien, E.J., Duffy, S.A., & Myers, J.L. (1986). Anaphoric
inferences during reading. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 12, 346-352.
Olson, G.M., Duffy, S.A., & Mack, R.L. (1984). Thinkingaloud as a method for studying real-time comprehension
processes. In D. Kieras & M. Just (Eds.), New methods in
the study of immediate processes in comprehension.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pressley, M., & Afflerbach., P. (1995). Verbal protocols of
reading: The nature of constructively responsive reading.
Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.
Todaro, S., Magliano, J.P., Millis, K.K., Kurby, C.A., &
McNamara, D.S. Assessing the Dynamic Nature of Text
Comprehension Using Verbal Protocols. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Trabasso, T., & Magliano, J.P. (1996). Conscious
understanding during comprehension. Discourse Processes,
21, 255-287.
Trabasso, T., & Oezyuerek, A. (1997). Communicating
evaluation in narrative understanding. In T. Givon (Ed.),
Conversation: Cognitive, communicative and social
perspectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
van den Broek, P., Tzeng, Y.M., & Linderholm, T. (1999).
The landscape model of reading: Inferences and the online
construction of a memory representation. In H. van
Oostendrop & S. Goldman (Eds.), The construction of
mental representations during reading (pp. 71-98).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
van Dijk, T.A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse
comprehension. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Wolfe, B.W., & Goldman, S.R. (2005). Relations between
adolescent’s text processing and reasoning. Cognition and
Instruction, 23, 467-502.

are currently reading before engaging in more strategic types
of processes such as forming bridging inferences and
elaborating. In other words, paraphrasing may provide a basis
for phrasing the complex language of a scientific text in terms
more familiar to a reader (McNamara, 2004), which should
facilitate the activation of relevant background knowledge
necessary for forming bridging inferences and elaborating.

References
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.N., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Clark, H., & Haviland, S.E. (1977). Comprehension and the
given-new contract. In R.O. Freedle (Ed.), Discourse
Processes: Advances in research and theory. Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Corbett, A.T., & Chang, F.R. (1983). Pronoun
disambiguation: Accessing potential antecedents. Memory
& Cognition, 11, 283-294.
Coté, N., & Goldman, S.R. (1999). Building representations
of informational text: Evidence from children’s think-aloud
protocols. In H. van Oostentroop & Susan S. Goldman
(Eds.), The construction of mental representations during
reading. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate, Inc.
Ericsson, K., & Simon, H. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal
reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Gilliam, S., Magliano, J.P., Millis, K. K., Levinstein, I., &
Boonthum, C. (2007). Assessing the format of the
presentation of text in developing a Reading Strategy
Assessment Tool (R-SAT). Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 39, 199-204.
Graesser, A.C., & Kreuz, R.J. (1993). A theory of inference
generation during text comprehension. Discourse
Processes, 16, 145-160.
Graesser, A.C., Millis, K.K., & Zwaan, R.A. (1997).
Discourse Comprehension. Annual Review of Psychology,
48, 163-189.
Graesser, A.C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Magliano, J.P., & Millis, K.M. (2003). Assessing reading
skill with a think-aloud procedure and latent semantic
analysis. Cognition & Instruction, 21, 251-283.
Magliano, J.P., Trabasso, T., & Graesser, A.C. (1999).
Strategic processing during comprehension. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 615- 629.

612

