UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attentional Allocation During Feedback: Eyetracking Adventures on the Other Side of the
Response

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66r3x539

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Watson, Marcus R.
Blair, Mark R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attentional Allocation During Feedback:
Eyetracking Adventures on the Other Side of the Response
Marcus R. Watson (marcusw@sfu.ca)

Department of Philosophy,
Simon Fraser University - 8888 University Drive
Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6. Canada

Mark R. Blair (mblair@sfu.ca)

Cognitive Science Program & Department of Psychology,
Simon Fraser University - 8888 University Drive
Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6. Canada
Abstract

feedback that pertains to aspects of the movement itself
(Wulf et al., 2002). Furthermore, it seems that giving sparse
feedback every few trials is more effective than giving
feedback every trial. Wulf et al. suggest that this is because
overuse of external feedback causes subjects to become
dependent on it and to ignore the internal feedback from
their own body.
In many paradigms, however, internal feedback is not
particularly useful, at least not initially, because participants
have no idea what constitutes satisfactory performance. In
these situations, external feedback on the accuracy of
responses is often crucial to learning. There have been a
number of neurophysiological studies on the role of
feedback in such cases, which typically focus on where and
how error signals influence neural connectivity. One
important recent finding is that neural components
associated with feedback may be coding differences
between outcomes and expectations, rather than errors per
se (Holroyd & Krigolson, 2007; Oliveira, McDonald, &
Goodman, 2007). Studies also include efforts to localize
error processing to specific brain regions for specific tasks
(e.g., Seger, 2007) .
Error signals and violations of expectancy are clearly
important, but there are other aspects to feedback. On
information integration categorization tasks, for example,
learning is hampered when feedback is not given on correct
trials (Ashby & O’Brien, 2007). Positive reinforcement,
then, can also be an important part of learning.
Another source of information during feedback is the
stimulus itself.
In many real-life situations and
experimental paradigms stimuli are visible during feedback,
and evidence shows that participants are doing something
with the stimuli during this time. Bourne, Guy, Dodd and
Justesen (1965) showed that participants in a categorization
task who were shown stimuli during feedback made fewer
errors than participants who were not. Furthermore, when
the length of the feedback phase was increased to 29
seconds (!) those participants who were shown the stimulus
during this time continued to improve their performance,
whereas the performance of other participants was actually
impaired. Bourne et al. suggest that these effects are due to
participants forgetting fewer aspects of a stimulus if it
remains in view during feedback, which prevents them from
accidentally forming hypotheses that are incompatible with
this stimulus.

We used an eye-tracker to investigate the allocation of overt
attention during feedback on a categorization task. Results
suggest several conclusions: (1) Participants spend a
significant amount of time attending to stimuli re-presented
during feedback, indicating that this re-presentation may play
an important role in learning. (2) Participants spend more
time attending to the stimulus during feedback on incorrect
trials than on correct trials, indicating that incorrect trials may
be more important than correct ones.
(3) Attentional
allocation to the re-presented stimulus during incorrect trials
is predictive of subjects’ ability to learn the task, even as few
as ten trials into the experiment. This study shows that
eyetracking studies of feedback are a promising new method
of investigating learning processes.
Keywords: feedback; error processing; learning;
categorization; eye-tracking

Introduction
When learning new skills it often helps to be told what
you are doing right and wrong. Some kinds of learning are
simply impossible without feedback (e.g., Ashby &
O’Brien, 2007), and in other cases unsupervised learning
can be slower and less successful than learning with
feedback (Wulf, McConnel, Gärtner & Schwarz, 2002).
Understanding how and why feedback works, then, is
crucial if we want to understand learning in general. This
goal has broad importance for educational theory, and also
for the development of efficient experimental paradigms
where more participants learn the assigned task.
Feedback has been studied in the context of sports and
motor skill learning (e.g., Wulf et al., 2002), human resource
management (e.g., Herold & Fedor, 2003), educational
instruction (e.g., Bangert-Drowns, Kulik, Kulik, & Morgan,
1991), language learning (e.g., Pashler, Cepeda, Wixted, &
Rohrer, 2005), categorization (e.g., Ashby et al., 2002), and
neuroscience (e.g., Holroyd & Krigolson, 2007; Seger, in
press).
A number of studies have compared the
effectiveness of different kinds of feedback. Because of the
wide variety of learning situations being investigated in
these studies it is not clear that their conclusions apply
across the board, but it is nevertheless worth briefly
considering some results.
In motor learning, feedback that draws attention to the
external results of a movement is more beneficial than

345

Halff (1975) found a similar effect to Bourne et al.
(1965), and further found similar effects of stimulus
presentation during feedback in a categorization experiment.
He also investigated whether these effects it was correlated
with participants' accuracies on each trial the trials they
were receiving feedback for. Participants who viewed the
stimulus during feedback only on correct trials did not learn
faster than those who did not view the stimulus during
feedback at all (unlike in Ashby & O’Brien 2007).
Participants who viewed the stimulus during feedback on
incorrect trials only, as well as those who viewed the
stimulus during every feedback phase regardless of
accuracy, had significantly higher learning rates, but these
rates were not significantly different from each other. Halff
concludes that participants test different hypotheses during
learning, that these are only modified after error, and that representing the stimulus during feedback aids in preserving
memory for the stimulus. Like Bourne et al. (1965), he
suggests that better memory for the stimulus allows for
improved efficiency of hypothesis revision.
The benefits of stimulus presentation during feedback do
not only apply to humans performing categorization tasks.
Strength and Zentall (1991) found that pigeons' learning
rates also improve when stimuli are re-presented during
error feedback on matching-to-sample and oddity-fromsample tasks. Martin and Zentall (2005) confirmed these
results and eliminated some other possible confounds. Both
studies conclude that pigeons benefit from the chance to
review the trial stimuli after errors. Neither investigated
whether similar effects result from viewing stimuli during
feedback to correct trials.
Bourne et al. (1965), Halff (1975), Strength and Zentall
(1991), and Martin and Zentall (2005) are the only works
we have been able to find that investigate the role of
stimulus re-presentation during feedback. It is somewhat
surprising that studies of re-presentation appear to be
published at a rate of less than once a decade, given how
ubiquitous it is in experimental work. Further investigation
is clearly warranted.
The present studies were intended to explore participants'
use of feedback in categorization tasks. We used a standard
categorization paradigm with consecutive trials of stimulusresponse-feedback sequences. Our primary interests were in
understanding how participants allocate their attention to
different aspects of feedback, how this changes throughout
learning, and what this might indicate that they are trying to
do with the information they access.
We used an eye-tracker to measure participants’ overt
attentional allocation, which allowed us to record its
development throughout feedback. This is an improvement
over the previous practice of inferring attentional allocation
based on participants’ responses, a method that is indirect
and gives no fine-grained temporal information. To our
knowledge, eyetrackers have not previously been used to
study attention during feedback processing. We use mean
total fixation durations to response feedback and to features
of the re-presented stimulus as our primary data. We will
investigate how these factors change throughout learning
and how they change during feedback on correct or
incorrect trials.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. Participants were 20 students at Simon Fraser
University who received course credit or pay for their
participation. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Two participants were excluded from the analysis for failing
to meet the learning criterion (described below).
Stimuli. The stimuli were designed to resemble microorganisms with three lobules (see Figure 1). Each lobule
contained a different type of feature, designed to resemble
an organelle. These features were presented in the same
location throughout the experiment for each subject. Each
feature had two subtly differing possible states, allowing for
a total of eight different combinations (see Figure 2).
Images were 25.4 cm in diameter, subtending approximately
19.2° of visual angle. Features subtended 1.5°-3.0° and were
located 9.2° apart. Variations of the micro-organism’s
background ensured that subjects would see a unique
stimulus on every trial.
Not all features were diagnostic of each category (see
Figure 2). Category A was defined solely by a particular
value of feature 1, Category B by values of features 1 and 2,
and Categories C and D were defined by particular values of
all three features. The location of each feature and its
mapping onto the category structure was counterbalanced to
the extent possible given the number of subjects.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of a series of trials in
which a stimulus was displayed, participants identified it as
belonging to one of the four categories, and response
feedback was given. During piloting we found that
participants more often fixated features that were nearest the
response buttons. To prevent this, response buttons were
not displayed during initial stimulus presentation. Trials
began with a fixation cross in the center of a black screen.
Subjects clicked on the fixation cross and the stimulus

Figure 1: A picture of the feedback screen. This
stimulus is an ‘A’, but the participant incorrectly
responded ‘B’.
346

appeared. Subjects viewed the stimulus until they were
ready to respond and then clicked the mouse button. The
stimulus disappeared and the four response buttons appeared
in the corners of the screen, randomly ordered. Once the
subject responded, the stimulus was re-presented along with
response feedback. On incorrect trials the button that the
subject pressed turned red, and on all trials the correct
response button turned green. Participants were free to view
feedback as long as they wished, and clicked the mouse
button to move on to the next trial.
The number of trials varied across subjects.
If
participants reached a learning criterion of 24 consecutive
errorless trials then the experiment continued for a further
72 trials. If they did not reach this criterion by 200 trials the
experiment ended.
A Tobii X50 eye tracker sampling at 50hz was used to
record gaze data. Fixations were identified using a modified
dispersion threshold algorithm and thresholds of 1° and
75ms fixation duration (Salvucci & Goldberg, 2000).

spend less time inspecting feedback in Stage 2 of learning
than in Stage 1. Participants also spent more time on
incorrect trials than on correct trials. This accords with the
common sense notion that people do not need to spend as
much time processing stimuli that they already know how to
categorize. Finally, participants spend more time fixating on
stimulus features than they do on response feedback. The
importance of stimulus processing is suggested by other
research (e.g., Bourne et al., 1965; Halff, 1975), and our
results confirm this: during feedback before criterion,
participants spend about 7 times as long fixating on stimulus
features as they do response buttons.
The three way interaction may be easiest to explain as an
effect in the processing of stimulus features. When
participants go from early learning (Stage 1) to late learning
(Stage 2), there is a larger drop in the amount of time spent
processing stimuli on correct trials than on incorrect trials.
This effect reflects the different roles that correct and
incorrect trials play in learning. Early on, when the
participant is still learning the relevant stimulus dimensions
and the values they can take, re-inspecting the stimuli may
be important on all trials, not just incorrect ones. As the
participant gets the feel of the task the focus may shift to
error-reduction and hypothesis testing and thus to an
emphasis on stimulus reprocessing during incorrect trials.
While the average time spent fixating to response buttons
during feedback does drop throughout the experiment, the
drop is roughly equal for both correct and incorrect trials.

Results and Discussion
We segregated the fixations to the feedback buttons and to
the stimulus features. We also split the pre-criterion trials in
half, reasoning that the beginning of the session may include
strategies that would change once participants became more
familiar with the task. Note that this means that the number
of trials in the analysis varies widely between participants.
We conducted a 2x2x2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) using
Stage (first half, last half), Trial Accuracy (correct,
incorrect) and Fixation Location (buttons, stimulus features)
as within-subjects variables and mean total fixation duration
as the dependent measure. Because this measure was nonnormal, we rank transformed the data before the analysis.
Results show main effect of accuracy, F(1,15) = 110.548,
p<.001, ηp2 = .881, MSE = 256.196; Location, F(1,15) =
467.680, p < .001, ηp2 = .969, MSE = 178.404 and Stage,
F(1,15) = 87.639, p < .001, ηp2 = .854, MSE = 109.241; an
Accuracy x Stage interaction, F(1,15) = 11.820, p < .01, ηp2
= .441, MSE = 98.991 all qualified by a significant 3-way
interaction, F(1,15) = 4.812, p < .05, ηp2 = .243, MSE =
68.224 a significant three-way interaction, F(1,17)=4.81,
p<.05 ηp2 = .24, MSE = 68.22. Results are similar to those
shown for Experiment 2 in Figure 3. Overall, participants

Experiment 2
We wanted to replicate the results of Experiment 1 and
investigate several new issues to extend our findings. We
ran a similar study, but altered the category structure (see
Figure 2) to confirm that our results were not due to some
peculiarity of the structure used in Experiment 1. We also
wanted to make the category structure more difficult in
order to produce a greater number of non-learners, which
would allow us to investigate differences between learners
and non-learners. We reasoned that the new structure would
be more difficult because each category is defined by a
combination of two feature values, unlike in Experiment 1
where Category A was defined by feature 1 alone (see
Figure 2). Finally, we removed feedback after the learning
criterion was reached to investigate self-supervised error
correction.

Method
Participants. Participants were 32 students at Simon Fraser
University who received course credit or pay for their
participation. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli & Procedure
The experiment was identical to Experiment 1 in all but
two respects. First, Categories A1 and A2 were defined by
particular values of features 1 and 2, categories B1 and B2
by values of features 1 and 3 (see Figure 2). Second, if the
learning criterion of 24 consecutive errorless trials was
reached, no feedback about response accuracy was given on
subsequent trials. The stimulus reappeared after response

Figure 2: Category structures for Experiment 1 (left)
and Experiment 2 (right). Features in gray are irrelevant.

347

5000

Results revealed that most of the results from Experiment 1
were replicated with the new category structure in
Experiment 2 (see Figure 3). Significant effects included
main effects of Accuracy, F(1,19) = 118.13, p < .001, ηp2 = .
86, MSE = 577.55; Location, F(1,19) = 307.73, p < .001, ηp2
= .94, MSE = 555.11; Stage, F(1,19) = 611.02, p < .01, ηp2
= .367, MSE = 716.81; the Accuracy x Stage interaction,
F(1,19) = 8.93, p < .01, ηp2 = .43, MSE = 216.28; the
Location x Stage interaction, F(1,19) = 14.13, p < .01, ηp2
= .426, MSE = 103.64; all qualified by a three-way
interaction, F(1,19) = 8.77, p < .01, ηp2 = .32, MSE = 48.16.
As in Experiment 1 the three-way interaction seems to stem
from the steeper drop in time spent processing stimulus
features on correct trials relative to incorrect trials as
participants moved from early learning to later learning.
Another of the motivations behind Experiment 2 was to
investigate differences between participants who were
successful in mastering the categories and those who were
not. Increasing the difficulty of the categories had the
desired effect: there were 18 learners and 14 non-learners.
All non-learners had completed exactly 200 trials, but
learners completed 72 trials more than it took them to reach
criterion, which varied across subjects. Any comparison
across groups such as these involves a measure of
arbitrariness, but we reasoned that the two groups would be
in the most qualitatively similar circumstances at the
beginning of learning.
We conducted a 2x2 mixed ANOVA on data from the first
ten trials only, using Learner (learner, non-learner) as the
between-subjects variable, Trial Accuracy (incorrect,
correct) as the within-subjects variable and mean total
fixation time to stimulus features as the dependent measure.
There were two subjects who did not make any correct
responses in the first ten trials, so we did a least-squares
regression substitution for this missing data. A mixed
ANOVA with the substituted data revealed a significant
accuracy x learner interaction effect, F(1,34) = 4.46, p < .05,
MSE = 1423507.97, ηp2 = .12.
As shown in Figure 4, though learners and non-learners
spend the same amount of time on correct trials, nonlearners spend only about 65% of the time that learners
spend inspecting the stimuli on incorrect trials, even in the
first 10 trials of the experiment. From the very start of the
experiment, then, learners were spending much more time
processing the stimuli during feedback on incorrect trials
than during feedback on correct trials, whereas non-learners
were not. This effect is robust enough to allow reasonably
accurate prediction of learning success from the first ten
trials alone, based on nothing more than fixations to
stimulus features during feedback to incorrect trials. 70% of
learners have mean fixation durations of over 1990 ms,
while 60% of non-learners are below this mark.
Finally, we investigated stimulus feature fixations after
learners had reached criterion in both experiments. We
found that very few errors are made post-criterion (range =
0 to 3), but that the mean time spent fixating on stimulus
features on those incorrect trials (M=997, SD=867) is
significantly longer (t=2.85, p<.05) than on correct trials (M
= 267 ms, SD = 266) in Experiment 1. In Experiment 2, this
effect was also significant (correct: M = 165, SD = 54;

Correct Trials

4500

Mean Total Fixation Duration (ms)

Incorrect Trials
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

Stage 1

Stage 2

Stage 1

Stage 2

5000

Mean Total Fixation Duration (ms)

4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

Figure 3: Mean total fixation duration of learners to
the feedback buttons (top panel), and the stimulus
features (bottom panel) from Experiment 2. Error bars
represent standard error.
selection, but the only feedback consisted of whatever
button the subject had pressed turning pink. Subjects were
explicitly informed that this did not relate to their accuracy.

Results and Discussion
The first analysis was a replication of the analysis of
Experiment 1. Using only the data from the 18 participants
who met the learning criterion of 24 consecutive error-free
trials, we conducted a 2x2x2 ANOVA with Stage (first half,
last half), Trial Accuracy (correct, incorrect) and Fixation
Location (buttons, stimulus features) as within-subjects
variables, again using log total fixation duration during the
feedback phase of each trial as the dependent variable.

348

degrading during feedback. The latter two possibilities are
consistent with Bourne et al. (1965) and Halff’s (1975)
explanations of their results.
Another interesting point is that the mean total fixation
time to the stimulus is larger on incorrect than on correct
trials. This ratio differed from early to late learning, such
that the relative importance of the stimulus on incorrect vs.
correct trials was greater in the later learning trials. This
suggests that feedback on incorrect trials is more important
to learning than feedback on correct trials, in accordance
with most previous work. However, during the initial stage
of Experiment 2 learners spend an average of almost two
seconds fixating on stimulus features during feedback to
correct trials. This suggests that, from the participant’s
perspective at least, this feedback was far from irrelevant,
particularly at the beginning of learning.
Finally, in Experiment 2, as we expected, many subjects
do not reach the learning criterion. Learning this task
appears to be strongly correlated with the amount of
attention paid to the stimulus during feedback on incorrect
trials. This effect is present throughout learning, even in as
few as ten trials.
The exact reason why some participants do not learn is
unclear. Individual differences in learning are, of course,
nothing new. Wide differences in learning success have been
documented in similar types of categorization tasks (e.g.,
Blair & Homa, 2001; 2005). More broadly the educational
instruction literature identifies differences in feedback
propensities (Herold & Fedor, 2003) and motivation/self
regulatory skills (Kanfer & Heggestad, 1997) that influence
learning. A flurry of recent studies suggest that differences
in error processing are identifiable at the neural level. Error
processing appears to be impaired in patients with
schizophrenia compared to healthy controls in behavioural
tasks (Prentice et al., 2007), and patients with schizophrenia
also show a decreased amplitude feedback negativity
(Morris et al., 2007). Similarly, there is evidence for a
reduced amplitude feedback negativity in the elderly
compared to younger controls (Eppinger, Kray, Mecklinger
& John, 2007). It is unclear at this early stage how any of
the neural, behavioural or dispositional variables might
relate to our finding of a heightened importance of error
trials in learners, but sorting out some of these individual
and group differences is obviously an important goal with
implications for many fields of research.
How well will our results generalize to other
categorization tasks? The categories used in the present
studies are complex and differ in several ways from the
rule-based and information integration categories that have
been previously studied (Ashby & O’Brien, 2007). First,
which features are relevant for categorization changes for
different categories. This elicits stimulus-dependent
attentional shifting from participants and means that
stimulus encoding is uneven across stimulus features and
categories (Blair, Watson, Maj & Walshe, 2007). It seems
likely that such categories encourage the kind of intensive
reviewing of stimuli during feedback that we find, perhaps
more so than categories with fewer dimensions or categories
for which all dimensions are equally important. Another
important factor may be the realism of the stimuli used in

5000

Learners

Mean Total Fixation Duration (ms)

Non-Learners
4000

3000

2000

1000

0

Correct Trials

Incorrect Trials

Figure 4: Mean total fixation durations to stimulus
features on the first 10 trials of Experiment 2.

incorrect: M=538, SD= 375; t=3.127, p<.05). These
differences in time spent on incorrect and correct trials in
Experiment 2 may be indicative of participants having
learned to generate their own error signal, as there is no
external feedback post-criterion, and so no way for
participants to know they have made an error. This effect
will have to be studied more carefully in future research.

General Discussion
The present studies take some first steps toward
understanding what participants do when they are
processing feedback in a categorization task. The use of
eyetracking allowed us to record aspects of stimulus
processing that have never before been investigated. There
were several findings of note.
First, during the feedback phase of our categorization
trials, participants spend more time looking at the stimulus
features than the feedback itself on both correct and
incorrect trials in all stages of the experiment. This result
suggests, in accordance with studies showing that this representation is beneficial to learning (e.g. Bourne et al.
1965; Halff,1975), that subjects find the re-presented
stimulus important.
What is it that further inspecting the stimulus does? There
are several non-exclusive plausible possibilities. It may
provide a further chance to associate the stimulus with the
correct category, since the only time that both the stimulus
and the correct category labels are on the screen
simultaneously is during the feedback stage. Also, it may
provide an opportunity to re-encode the stimulus, either to
correct for errors in the initial encoding, or to inspect areas
that were not well encoded initially. Alternatively, it may
simply prevent the initial encoding of the stimulus from

349

the present study. Simpler stimuli and simpler categories
may lead to less stimulus re-inspection.
Given the diversity of learning situations involving
different types of feedback, both in the laboratory and in the
real world, it would be optimistic to believe that our results
will generalize to all circumstances. Nevertheless, the
various analyses and general approach taken in the present
study hold promise for providing a solid set of data that will
improve our understanding of how feedback operates in
complex cognitive tasks. Further, we would be pleased if
these data encouraged more cognitive scientists to concern
themselves with what happens on the other side of the
response.

Halff, H. M. (1975). Stimulus presentation after successes
and errors in concept-identification. American Journal of
Psychology, 88, 421-430.
Herold, D. M. & Fedor, D.B. (2003) Individual differences
in feedback propensities and training performance.
Human Resource Management Review 13, 675 – 689.
Holroyd, C. B. & Krigolson, O. E. (2007). Reward
prediction error signals associated with a modified time
estimation task. Psychophysiology, 44, 913-917.
Kanfer, R. & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Motivational traits
and skills: A person-centered approach to work
motivation. Research in Organizational Behaviour, 19,
1-56.
Martin, T. I. & Zentall, T. R. (2005). Post-choice
information processing by pigeons. Animal Cognition, 8,
273-278.
Morris, S. E., Mann, M. C., Gold, J. M., & Holroyd, C. B.
(2007). ERPs following reward and nonreward in
schizophrenia outpatients. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33,
533-533.
Oliveira, F. T. P., McDonald, J. J., & Goodman, D. (2007).
Performance monitoring in the anterior Cingulate is not
all error related: Expectancy deviation and the
representation of action-outcome associations. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 1994-2004.
Pashler, H., Cepeda, N. J., Wixted, J. T., & Rohrer, D.
(2005). When does feedback facilitate learning of words.
Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning Memory
and Cognition, 31, 3-8.
Prentice, K. J., Robinson, B. M., & Gold, J. M. (2007).
Error processing in schizophrenia: The role of WM load.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 537-537.
Salvucci, D.D. & Goldberg, J.H. (2000). Identifying
fixations and saccades in eye-tracking protocols. In:
Proceedings of the Eye Tracking Research and
Applications Symposium 2000,71-78. NY: ACM Press.
Seger, C. (in press). How do the basal ganglia contribute to
categorization? Their roles in generalization, response
selection, and learning via feedback. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews.
Strength, V. & Zentall, T. R. (1991). Matching and oddity
learning in pigeons - Effects of penalty time for incorrect
responding. Animal Learning & Behavior, 19, 49-57.
Wulf, G., McConnel, N., Gärtner, M., & Schwarz, A.
(2002). Enhancing the Learning of Sport Skills Through
External-Focus Feedback. Journal of Motor Behavior, 34,
171-182.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by funding from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada, the Canadian
Foundation for Innovation, the British Columbia
Knowledge Development Fund, and Simon Fraser
University to MRB. We would like to acknowledge the
Cognitive Science Lab team, specifically: Bill Chen, Fil
Maj, Luvdeep Malhi, Kim Meier, Christine Gerson, Gordon
Pang, Jordan Shimell, Steve Smith, Calen Walshe, and Mike
Wood for aid in data collection, data analysis, and reviewing
the relevant literature.

References
Ashby, F. G., Maddox, W. T., & Bohil, C. J. (2002).
Observational versus feedback training in rule-based and
information-integration category learning. Memory &
Cognition, 30, 666-677.
Ashby, F. G. & O'Brien, J. B. (2007). The effects of positive
versus negative feedback on information-integration
category learning. Perception & Psychophysics, 69,
865-878.
Bangert-Drowns, R. L., Kulik, C.-L. C., Kulik, J. A., &
Morgan, M. (1991). The Instructional Efffect of Feedback
in Test-like Events. Review of Educational Research, 61,
213-238.
Blair, M. & Homa, D. (2001). Expanding the search for a
linear separability constraint on category learning.
Memory & Cognition, 29, 1153-1164.
Blair, M. & Homa, D. L. (2005). Integrating novel
dimensions to eliminate category exceptions: When more
is less. Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning
Memory and Cognition, 31, 258-271.
Blair, M., Watson, M., Maj, F., & Walshe, C. (2007)
Extremely Selective Attention: Eye-tracking Studies on
Dynamic Attentional Allocation to Stimulus Features.
Psychonomic Society Annual Meeting, Long Beach, CA.
Bourne, L. E., Guy, D. E., Dodd, D. H., & Justesen, D. R.
(1965). Concept-Identification - The effects of varying
length and informational components of the intertrial
interval. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69,
624-629.
Eppinger, B., Kray, J., Mecklinger, A., & John, O. (2007).
Age differences in task switching and response
monitoring: Evidence from ERPs. Biological Psychology,
75, 52-67.

350

