UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Relationality Be Distinguished from Abstractness in Noun Mutability?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8sd460zr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Gentner, Dedre
Asmuth, Jennifer A.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Relationality be Distinguished from Abstractness in Noun Mutability?
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Jennifer A. Asmuth (asmuth@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

psychological properties of these two kinds of concepts.
Nouns can often be categorized as entity or relational
according to whether they take arguments (To be an enemy,
you have to be an enemy of someone or something, but you
can be a person without further ado.) For relational nouns
like carnivore that don’t need arguments, Asmuth and
Gentner (2005) proposed the fetch test as a way of
distinguishing entity and relational categories: if you are
asked to find a member of the category, how do you know
one when you see it? For an entity category like wolf, you
need only consider the entity itself—its intrinsic properties
suffice to identify it. But for a relational category like
carnivore, intrinsic properties are not enough: you need to
verify its relations to other entities (namely, that it eats
animals). You can tell which items in the room are apples
just by looking at them, but you can’t tell which things are
gifts or weapons without knowing about their relations to
other entities.
Apart from the intrinsic interest of relational and entity
concepts, relational nouns are important in that they figure
strongly in adult discourse. Our informal ratings of the 100
highest frequency nouns in the British National Corpus
revealed that close to half were relational nouns. For
example, consider the following sentences:

Abstract
Previous studies have suggested that relational concepts are
more mutable—more prone to change meaning in context—
than entity concepts even when both relational and entity
concepts are denoted by nouns (Asmuth & Gentner, 2005;
Feist & Férez, 2007). However, relationality is a complex
dimension, and is highly correlated with other factors such as
imageability and abstractness. In the current research, we
compared the mutability of entity nouns and relational nouns
while controlling for imageability (as well as frequency).
People read these nouns in a given context and then had to
recognize them in either the same or different context. We
found that (1) participants showed greater recognition
sensitivity for entity nouns than for relational nouns; and (2)
recognition of relational nouns was more impaired by a
change in context than was recognition of entity nouns. We
conclude that the encoding of relational nouns is more
influenced by context than the encoding of entity nouns and
discuss parallels with encoding patterns for verbs and nouns.
Keywords:
sensitivity

relational

language;

mutability;

context

Introduction
Most psychological research on concepts has focused on
entity concepts, such as cat or tomato, which are defined by
common properties and belong to taxonomic hierarchies.
However, recently there has been increased interest in
relational concepts (Jones & Love, 2007; Feist & Férez,
2007; Gentner, 2005; Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Anggoro,
Gentner & Klibanoff, 2005; Barr & Caplan, 1987; Markman
& Stillwell, 2001). Relational categories are those whose
membership is determined by common relational structure
(such as extrinsic relations to other entities), rather than by
common properties (see Gentner & Kurtz, 2005). For
example, for X to be a carnivore, X must eat animals; for X
to be a bridge, X must connect two other points or entities.
The members of relational categories may share few or no
intrinsic properties: e.g., sharks, eagles, tigers, and spiders
are all carnivores. Relational categories thus contrast with
entity categories like bird, whose members share large
numbers of intrinsic properties.
Interestingly, both entity concepts and relational concepts
can be denoted by nouns (e.g., person versus enemy). This
makes them an apt arena in which to compare the

(1) This goal has priority until the performance
deadline has passed.
(2) The dog chased the ball across the field.
Sentences like (1)—which contains mostly relational
nouns—are more likely to occur in adult conversation than
are sentences like (2). To understand the importance of
relational nouns in our everyday discourse, try to express
the meaning of (1) without using relational nouns.
Relational nouns are similar to verbs and prepositions, in
that their meanings are centered around extrinsic relations
with other concepts1. Like verbs, relational nouns take an
1

The extent of this extrinsic structure varies across different types
of relational nouns. A distinction can be made between two kinds
of relational nouns: schema nouns, such as robbery, denote
relational systems and are defined by internal relational structure;
role nouns, such as thief, are defined by extrinsic relations to the
other entities in a relational schema (see Markman & Stillwell

863

argument (not always obligatorily) and assign a thematic
role. For example, barrier implies three arguments, not all
of which need be explicit: a figure, something that blocks
access, and a goal.
This greater syntactic complexity of relational nouns is
more akin to the behavior of verbs than of entity nouns. We
have suggested that one way to better understand
differences between entity nouns and relational nouns is to
consider some known contrasts between nouns and verbs.
Indeed, the following analogy can be a useful way to
generate predictions about relational nouns (Asmuth &
Gentner, 2005; Gentner & Kurtz, 2005):

the verbs than for the nouns; for example, asked to
paraphrase the above sentence, one participant wrote “The
small grey reptile lay on a rock and stared unblinkingly at
the sun.”
It seems likely that high mutability and poor memory are
causally related: If verbs are more mutable in context than
are nouns, then it follows that memory for verbs should be
more vulnerable to changes in semantic context (Gentner,
1981; Kersten & Earles, 2004). (For example, had a
memory task been administered in the Gentner & France
study, participants would probably have been better able to
remember lizard than worshipped.) Kersten and Earles
tested this connection between mutability and recognition.
In their experiment, participants were given a list of
intransitive sentences and asked to study either the nouns or
the verbs. In a later recognition list, memory for verbs was
significantly better when the verb was paired with the same
noun as at encoding. This effect of context was much
smaller for nouns.
In our earlier studies, we asked whether this pattern—
greater contextual mutability with concomitant lowering of
recognition accuracy—held in the comparison between
relational nouns and entity nouns (Asmuth & Gentner,
2005). The analogy with verbs would suggest that relational
nouns are more mutable than entity nouns. That is, the
interpretation of a relational noun would be more likely to
be influenced by the context in which it appears. In a
discussion about an essay, a relational noun like bridge
would be understood as a transition between ideas, whereas
if the topic moves to politics, bridge refers to a source of
compromise or agreement. An entity noun like truck,
however, will be relatively stable regardless of its context.
Our initial experiment looked at recognition sensitivity
for whole noun-noun phrases. Participants were asked to
interpret conceptual combinations made up of an entity
noun and a relational noun. On a subsequent recognition
test, participants were better able to recognize that a phrase
was ‘new’ when the entity noun was new than when the
relational noun was new. That is, they were more sensitive
to a change in the entity noun than to a change in the
relational noun. This is exactly what we would expect if a
relational noun is more likely to shift meaning between the
different contexts, whereas the meaning of an entity noun is
encoded more stably across different contexts. These results
provided support for our hypothesis concerning the greater
mutability of relational nouns.
The next step was to compare memory for entity and
relational nouns more directly, looking at recognition for
single words rather than phrases. As in the first experiment,
participants encoded conceptual combinations. At
recognition, they saw phrases with one word indicated as
the target word to be recognized. The target word could
appear in the same context or a different context. Once
again, participants showed greater recognition sensitivity for
entity nouns than for relational nouns. In addition, relational
nouns were more disadvantaged in different contexts
relative to same contexts than were entity nouns.

Relational nouns : Entity nouns : : Verbs : Nouns
Gentner (1981; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001) described a
set of interrelated processing distinctions between verbs and
nouns. Many of these contrasts apply also to relational
nouns versus entity nouns. For example, verbs are acquired
later than nouns in both first and second languages (Caselli
et al., 1995; Gentner, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001),
and the same appears to be true for relational nouns relative
to entity nouns. Developmentally, understanding the
meanings of relational nouns occurs rather late in
acquisition, as compared to children’s early grasp of the
meanings of entity nouns. Relational nouns such as uncle
are typically understood first as object reference terms (e.g.,
friendly man with a pipe) before evolving to a more
relational interpretation (Clark, 1973; Gentner, 2005;
Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Keil, 1989; Waxman & Hall,
1993).
The similarity between relational nouns and verbs can be
seen in other phenomena as well. Kurtz and Gentner (2001)
compared relational categories (named by relational nouns
such as shield and surprise) to relatively abstract entity
categories (like furniture and vegetable). Productivity and
response fluency were much higher for entity categories
than for relational categories. In addition, exemplars
generated for the entity categories were judged by
independent raters as much more similar to each other than
those generated for the relational categories.
In our previous research, (Asmuth & Gentner, 2005), we
asked whether we could extend two important differences
between nouns and verbs to entity nouns and relational
nouns: (1) memory: verbs are less likely to be accurately
remembered or recalled than nouns (Earles & Kersten,
2000; Gentner, 1982; Kersten & Earles, 2004;) and (2)
mutability: verbs are more context-sensitive and
semantically mutable than nouns (Gentner, 1982; Gentner &
France, 1988). By mutability we mean a word’s propensity
to take on a different encoding in different contexts. Gentner
and France (1988) compared nouns and verbs along this
dimension by asking participants to paraphrase semantically
strained intransitive sentences such as The lizard
worshipped. The results showed greater semantic change for
(2001) and Gentner & Kurtz (2005) for more detailed discussions
of these distinctions.

864

However, at this point an intriguing pattern began to
emerge: there appears to be a strong association between
relationality and abstractness. Of course, there are relational
words that are very concrete, such as father, and entity
words that are abstract, like idea. However, overall it is very
likely that a relational word will also be abstract. For
example, words like contribution, advice, and majority all
denote important relational categories that have very few
attributes available to the senses.
While this connection between abstractness and
relationality raises some fascinating theoretical issues
(might there be a link between our capacity for relational
thinking and our capacity for abstract thought?), on a
methodological level, it makes the results of the studies
more difficult to interpret. It has been well established that
imageability and concreteness influence recognition of
nouns (Morris & Reid, 1974; Gorman, 1961); if abstractness
and relationality are correlated, what seemed to be a
relationality mutability effect may in fact be due to
abstractness. This called for further scrutiny.
When we examined our stimuli set, we found striking
differences between the entity nouns and relational nouns
that might account for the reported effects. A comparison of
norms retrieved from the MRC2 database (Coltheart, 1981)
showed that the entity noun stimuli were reliably more
concrete than relational nouns, F(1,42) = 87.71, p < .01, as
well as more imageable, F(1,42) = 43.76, p < .01.
In order to isolate the effect of relationality alone on
mutability, we designed a set of relational and entity nouns
that were matched for concreteness/abstractness.

at test. We expected high hit rates for the original
combinations (HoldRold and HoldEold), since participants have
actually seen the phrase before. Likewise, HnewEnew and
HnewRnew combination should elicit a very low false alarm
rate since both words are entirely new.
Table 1. Example Relational Recognition Combinations
Encoding combination: marigold sister
Phrase at test Phrase type
marigold sister HoldRold old context
marigold victim HoldRnew old context
albatross sister HnewRold new context
albatross citizen HnewRnew new context

‘Yes’ response
Hit
False alarm
Hit
False alarm

The key predictions are as follows. If the encoding of
relational nouns is more influenced by context than that of
entity nouns, we should expect entity nouns to be more
stable across different contexts. That is, we expect
recognition sensitivity for relational nouns to be more
impaired by a new context than that of entity nouns. This is
because the meaning of the relational noun is more
dependent upon its context and is therefore more susceptible
to a shift in meaning between the different contexts. For
example, suppose a participant is given the entity noun item
marigold sister at encoding and instantiates it as “a small,
multi-petalled yellow flower that resembles a marigold.” If,
at recognition, the same participant sees the HoldRnew phrase
marigold signal at test and interprets it as “a bouquet of
cheap flowers indicating lukewarm romantic interest,” she
might feel a sense of recognition based on the common
concept of flower, thus she may be more likely to false
alarm to the phrase. In contrast, a participant who sees the
entity noun combination marigold palace at study may
interpret it as “a glowing, gold castle.” However, if she sees
the HoldEnew combination marigold magazine and interprets
it as “a publication about flowers”, it should be less similar
to her prior encoding of “gold castle” and therefore less
likely to trigger a false alarm.
Using A’ (a non-parametric analog to discriminability
measure d’) as the measure of sensitivity, we predict (1) that
A’ should be higher overall for entity nouns than for
relational nouns; (2) that A’ for relational nouns should be
lower in the different context than in the same; and (3) that
there should be an interaction between type of noun (entity
or relational) and recognition context (same or different).

Present Experiment
In our current study, we adapted the recognition paradigm
from Kersten and Earles’ (2004) investigation of noun and
verb recognition. The experiment had two parts. First,
participants saw a list of conceptual combinations consisting
of a host noun (H) paired with either an entity noun (E) or a
relational noun (R) (e.g., marigold sister) Host nouns
belonged to one of three categories: animal, plant, or
geological formation (e.g., meadow or geyser).
The participants were asked to think about what each
phrase might mean, and to rate how difficult it was to
understand. Later, a memory task tested their recognition of
the entity nouns and relational nouns in new and old
contexts. That is, participants saw entity and relational
nouns that were paired with either the same host noun as at
study or a different host noun. They were also presented
with novel entity and relational nouns that had not been in
the earlier ratings task.
For example, if a participant saw marigold sister during
the ratings task, she would see one of the phrases in Table 1
during the recognition test. (Only the first phrase is an
original phrase; the others are new.)
Previously seen nouns were always combined with novel
nouns except when they appeared in their original phrase.
That is, if both marigold sister and albatross citizen were
seen at encoding, then marigold citizen would never be seen

Participants
Two hundred and seventeen Northwestern University
undergraduates participated for either partial course credit or
monetary compensation.

Materials and Procedure
Materials. All relational nouns and entity nouns came from
the MRC database (Coltheart, 1981) and fell within the
frequency of 20-100, according to the Francis & Kucera
(1982) norms. Nouns that were also used frequently as verbs

865

overheard while passing through the dining hall and to rate
the difficulty of constructing an interpretation on a scale
from 1 to 7. The difficulty ratings of the conventional
conceptual combinations served as a manipulation check to
ensure that participants were paying attention to the rating
scale throughout the task. After rating the encoding phrases,
participants were given an unrelated filler task for 20
minutes, followed by the recognition test. At test,
participants saw 96 conceptual combinations with one word
in each pair indicated as the target to be recognized. Their
task was to say whether each word had been seen in the
original ratings task.
There were three independent variables: noun type (entity
or relational), recognition context (old or new), and host
noun list. Noun type and recognition context were
manipulated within participants, while host noun list was
manipulated within participants.

(e.g., alert) were excluded from the list. From this list we
selected nouns that our expert raters agreed were either
entity nouns or relational nouns (Asmuth & Gentner, in
preparation). The study materials consisted of 118
conceptual combination phrases: 96 experimental items,
formed by pairing a ‘host noun’ (an animal, plant, or
geological formation) with an entity or relational noun, and
22 filler items, 10 of which were conventional combinations
(e.g., carrot cake or foot traffic).
The recognition materials included four types of
conceptual combinations for each type of noun (entity and
relational): 12 original conceptual combinations seen during
the ratings task (HoldEold or HoldRold), 12 combinations of old
host nouns with new entity or relational nouns (HoldEnew or
HoldRnew), 12 combinations of new host nouns and old entity
or relational nouns (HnewEold or HnewRold), and 12 completely
new combinations (HnewEnew or HnewRnew). Thus, there were
96 total phrases at test: 48 for entity nouns and 48 for
relational nouns.
Our goal with entity and relational nouns in the
recognition test was to control for two factors that are
correlated with recall and recognition performance:
imageability and concreteness/abstractness. This proved
challenging, as relational nouns tend to be more abstract
than nouns denoting entities, decreasing the range of nouns
from which we could choose.
The imageability and concreteness ratings from the
MRC2 database (Coltheart, 1981) have a correlation of .85
for the nouns that were identified as relational by both
raters. Given the difficulty of controlling for multiple
factors, it made sense to use imageability as a proxy for
both. We constructed a list of entity and relational nouns,
ensuring that the distributions were as equivalent as possible
with respect to imageability. The imageability of entity
nouns (M = 458.80, SD = 69.73) did not differ from that of
relational nouns (M = 447.54, SD = 63.92), p>.20.
In addition, we also wanted to control for any effects that
the particular host noun—the noun with which the entity or
relational noun was paired in the conceptual combination—
might have on recognition. Therefore, we created two sets
of stimuli, such that host nouns that were paired with
relational nouns in one stimuli list were paired with entity
nouns in the other list. Thus, host noun pairing became a
between-subjects factor. For example, half the participants
would see the conceptual combinations sea barn and spider
outcome while the other half would be presented with sea
outcome and spider barn.
Finally, as in previous experiments, we controlled for the
frequency of the two types of nouns. Mean log frequency
was the same for entity nouns and relational nouns (2.63).
In this way we controlled for imageability (also our proxy
for concreteness/abstractness), frequency, and effects of
noun pairing.
Procedure. First, participants completed the computerbased ratings task for the 118 conceptual combinations. To
encourage naturalistic encoding, the participants were
instructed to interpret each phrase as if it had been

Results
Data from 2 of the 217 participants were excluded from
analysis because they answered ‘no’ to every item at test.
Two measures of recognition sensitivity were computed for
each participant: one for entity nouns and one for relational
nouns. To measure recognition sensitivity for targets in an
old context, we computed the proportion of hits to
previously encountered phrases and the proportion of false
alarms to new target nouns that were presented with a
familiar host noun (see Table 2). These proportions were
used to compute A’ for each participant, a measure of
recognition sensitivity that takes individual bias into
account, for old context phrases.
Likewise, to measure recognition sensitivity for targets in
a new context, we computed the proportion of hits to
previously encountered phrases and the proportion of false
alarms to new target nouns that were presented with a
familiar host noun (also in Table 2). These results were used
to compute A’ for the new context.
Table 2. Hits, False Alarms, and A’

same context
Hits
FA
A'
different context
Hits
FA
A'

Entity
mean
SD

Relational
mean SD

.75 (.17)
.33 (.17)
.78 (.13)

.69 (.18)
.34 (.19)
.75 (.14)

.50 (.21)
.21 (.15)
.72 (.16)

.43 (.18)
.26 (.16)
.64 (.16)

.
Since there was no main effect of host noun pairing, we
collapsed the two lists. The analysis revealed that, as
predicted, participants showed greater recognition
sensitivity for entity nouns (M = .75, SD = .15) than

866

noted that this pattern could follow from the greater
contextual mutability of verbs over nouns (Gentner, 1981;
Gentner & France, 1988). Our findings invite an analogous
conclusion for relational nouns as compared to entity nouns,
We believe this pattern may be the result of a shift in the
encoded features of the relational noun; even though the
defining extrinsic relations of the relational noun remain
constant, the context may constrain and filter the properties
of the relational noun. For example, barrier in the context of
career advancement may refer to education or experience,
while barrier in the context of athletic performance may be
limitations of strength or endurance. Because the meaning
of a relational noun depends largely on its external relations,
it is more likely to experience a shift in meaning in different
contexts than an entity noun defined by primarily intrinsic
relations.
These findings lend force to our starting analogy and
invite us to ask what other characteristics relational nouns
might share with verbs. Are they, like verbs, more variable
cross-linguistically or more difficult to translate than entity
nouns? Another extension might be to examine the
differences within relational nouns. Markman and Stilwell
(2001) discriminate between relational categories and rolegoverned categories. Similarly, Gentner and Kurtz (2005)
distinguish between relational schema categories that
convey a relational structure linking a set of arguments (e.g.,
robbery) and relational role categories, which convey one
specific argument of a schema (e.g., thief). The distinction
between these two categories of relational noun may enter
into the phenomena that characterize relational versus entity
nouns. For example, are relational schema nouns more or
less “verb-like” than relational role nouns? Another
question is whether relational nouns that are
morphologically derived from verbs (e.g., betrayal from the
verb betray or hindrance from hinder) differ from nonderived relational nouns such as friend, sister, or carnivore.
Finally, although we have shown that relational effects
such as mutability do not depend on greater abstractness, we
believe the strong association between abstractness and
relationality may indicate a connection between our ability
for relational thinking and our capacity for abstract thought.
For example, Zharikov and Gentner (2002) found that
metaphors emerge from the extension of concrete physical
concepts (e.g., the evolution of bridge from a concrete
structure connecting two points above ground to a relational
structure denoting a wide variety of connectors). Similarly,
abstract ideas may arise from the process of turning entity
concepts into relational concepts.
Finally, these results raise the question of whether many
of the abstractness effects reported in the literature are, in
fact, relationality effects. Perhaps it is not simply
abstractness that gives rise to poor memory for terms like
contract and proportion (relative to terms like giraffe and
tricycle), but the more relational nature of the former
categories that makes them difficult to grasp.

relational nouns (M = .70, SD = .16), F(1,214) = 38.67,
p<.01) across old and new contexts. Also as expected,
recognition sensitivity was higher for nouns seen in an old
context (M = .77, SD = .13) than in a new context (M = .68,
SD = .16), F(1,214) = 94.15, p<.01. However, our primary
interest was whether a new context would affect recognition
for entity and relational nouns differently. Indeed, there was
a reliable interaction of noun type and context, F(1,214) =
5.94, p<.05; recognition sensitivity for relational nouns in a
different context suffered far more than that for entity
nouns.
0.9

Entity

0.8

Relational

0.7
0.6
A'

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

same context

different context

Figure 1. Mean A’ for same and different contexts. Bars
indicate standard error.

Discussion
The results from this experiment support two related claims:
(1) that relational nouns are more mutable—that is, more
context sensitive—than entity nouns during encoding; and
(2) that recognition sensitivity for relational nouns is more
disadvantaged in a new context than is recognition
sensitivity for entity nouns. Importantly, this experiment
shows that the mutability of relational nouns does not
depend on accompanying characteristics such as
abstractness or imageability, but the core relational property
itself.
Our hypothesis is that when people interpret a conceptual
combination containing a relational noun, they tend to adapt
the relational noun to fit the noun with which it is paired.
While earlier studies (Asmuth & Gentner, 2005) have
shown a difference between recognition sensitivity for
entity nouns and for relational nouns, these studies did not
take into account important factors which might contribute
to the difference. By controlling for the abstractness of the
entity and relational nouns of interest and for the role played
by the host noun in the conceptual combination, we are
better able to isolate the effect that relationality alone has in
this phenomenon.
This pattern is markedly similar to that for nouns and
verbs reported by Kersten and Earles (2004), who found that
people were better able to recognize old nouns across
different verbs than old verbs across different nouns, and

867

Gentner, D. & Kurtz, K.J. (2005) In Ahn, W., Goldstone, R.
L., Love, B. C., Markman, A. B., & Wolff, P.
Categorization inside and outside of the lab: Festschrift
in Honor of Douglas L. Medin. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Interrelations in development. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Gerrig, R. J., & Murphy, G. L. (1992). Contextual
influences on the comprehension of complex concepts.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 7, 205-230.
Gorman, A. M. (1961). Recognition memory for nouns as a
function of abstractness and frequency. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 61, 23–29
Jones, M., & Love, B. C. (2007). Beyond common features:
The role of roles in determining similarity. Cognitive
Psychology, 55, 196-231.
Keil, F.C. 1989. Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press.
Kersten, A.W., & Earles, J.L. (2004). Semantic context
influences memory for verbs more than memory for
nouns. Memory & Cognition, 32, 198-211.
Kurtz, K.J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Kinds of kinds: Sources
of category coherence. Proceedings of the Twenty-third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 522527.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
Morris, P., & Reid, R. (1974). Imagery and recognition.
British Journal of Psychology, 65, 7–12.
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts.
Cognitive Science, 12, 529-562.
Waxman, S.R., & D.G. Hall. 1993. The development of a
linkage between count nouns and object categories:
evidence from fifteen- to twenty-month-old infants. Child
Development, 64, 1224-1241.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.
Zharikov, S., & Gentner, D. (2002). Why do metaphors
seem deeper than similes? Proceedings of the TwentyFourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the Language and Cognition Group at
Northwestern University.

References
Anggoro, F., Gentner, D., & Klibanoff, R. (2005). How to
go from nest to home: Children's learning of abstract
relational categories. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Asmuth, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Context sensitivity of
relational nouns. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Asmuth, J.A. & Gentner, D. (2008). Relationality is
different from abstractness. (in preparation).
Barr, R. A., & Caplan, L. J. (1987). Category
representations and their implications for category
structure. Memory & Cognition, 15, 397-418.
Caselli, M.C., Bates, E., Casadio, P., Fenson, J., Fenson, L.,
Sanderl, L., & Weir, J. (1995). A cross-linguistic study of
early lexical development. Cognitive Development, 10,
159-199.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What's in a word? On the child's
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E .
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition
of language. New York: Academic Press.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC PsycholinguisticDatabase.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497505.
Costello, F., & Keane, M. T. (2001). Testing two theories of
conceptual combination: Alignment versus diagnosticity
in the comprehension and production of combine
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 255-271.
Earles, J.L., & Kersten, A.W. (2000). Adult age differences
in memory for verbs and nouns. Aging, Neuropsychology,
and Cognition, 7, 130-139.
Feist, M.I., & Férez, P.C. (2007). The object-relation
continuum in language. Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Francis, W.N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
nouns and verbs. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161177.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.
Kuczaj (Ed.), Language development: Vol. 2. Language,
thought and culture. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. New York: Cambridge University Press
Gentner, D., & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutability
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns
and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M. K.

868

