UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorical Structure in Early Semantic Networks of Nouns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00j4p3bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Hills, Thomas T.
Maouene, Mounir
Maouene, Josita
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorical Structure in Early Semantic Networks of Nouns
Thomas Hills (thills@indiana.edu)

1

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN, 47405 USA

Mounir Maouene (mmaouen@ensat.ac.ma)
UFR : Artificial Intelligence and Bioinformatics, ENSAT, Tangier, Morocco

Josita Maouene (jcmaoune@indiana.edu) 1
Adam Sheya (aasheya@indiana.edu) 1
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu) 1
define different superordinate kinds. In particular, Rogers
and McClelland (2004) demonstrated how patterns of
coherent co-variation across features could create
superordinate categories. The idea of co-variation—of
systems of correlations in overlapping feature patterns—
provides one possible way to address the criticism that
feature correlations are too-unconstrained to explain human
category structure (e.g. Ahn, Kalish, Medin & Gelman,
1995).
Although previous studies have explored how featurecorrelations structure specific categories, no prior studies
have focused on how this structures the system of noun
categories children learn. The purpose of the present study
is to provide such a description. A descriptive study seems
pre-requisite to the examination of any claims about what
feature correlations—of themselves or in concert with other
processes—can do by way of creating children's category
knowledge. The present study specifically examined 130
nouns that are among the first nouns children learn and the
structure of the features (derived from adult feature
generation studies) associated with those categories. The
analyses concentrate on perceptual and functional features-features of things that should be evident in even young
children's experiences.
Perceptual and functional features are also of interest
because of several disputes of the possibly different roles
that the two kinds of features might play in category
organization. Perceptual features are typically defined as
static visual features such as color, shape, and part structure
(e.g., having legs or not); functional features typically
encompass roles (e.g., used to drink from), behaviors
(breathes or flies), and transient properties (e.g., can be
opened). There have been suggestions that different kinds
of categories differ in the relative importance of these two
kinds of features with perceptual features perhaps more
important for animals and functional features more
important for artifacts, although there is considerable
dispute (see De Renzi & Lucchelli, 1994; Komatsu 1992).
In the literature on cognitive development, the debate
centers around the relative importance of the two classes of

Abstract
Despite what we know about children’s ability to
categorize, it is not clear to what extent information in the
environment is capable of facilitating higher-order category
knowledge, nor to what extent different kinds of object
features play different kinds of roles. As a start we built a
network of 130 early-learned nouns with 1394 perceptual and
functional features as given by adult judgments. Then we
analyzed the basic structural properties of the network. These
revealed a small world structure and a high degree of feature
overlap in local clusters. To identify the local clusters, we
used a clique percolation algorithm to parse the network in
terms of the statistical properties of feature overlap. This
enabled us to identify clusters of items with a strong
resemblance to common categories, such as animals, foods,
and vehicles. Perceptual and functional features were found
to play different roles in the categorization, with functional
information being less redundant but more specific than
perceptual information.
Keywords: early semantic network, clusters, perceptual and
functional features, percolation algorithm, feature
correlations.

Theories of human category structure are often based on
feature-category correlations. Traditional theories of
categorization posited necessary and sufficient defining
features that determine category membership (reviewed in
Murphy, 2002), but other important theories posit
probabilistic feature correlations with category members
typically being similar across clusters of correlated
properties (Rosch et al., 1976). It is generally accepted that
people learn category-feature correlations (McRae, Cree,
Seidenberg & McNorman, 2005; Younger & Cohen, 1990)
and there is supporting evidence both from developmental
(Rakison & Poulin-Dubois, 2002) and category-specific
deficit studies (for example, Caramazza & Shelton, 1998;
Tyler, Moss, Durrant-Peatfield & Levy, 2002, but see
Warrington & Shallice, 1984).
Computational studies suggest further that the latent
structure available in a system of many categories with
many feature-category correlations may be sufficient to
161

New World) and taxonomic (e.g., is an animal). We used
only the perceptual and functional features because only
these types of features are likely to be directly experienced
by young children. Note that superordinate names, the
likely real-world correlates of the taxonomic features, are
not typically known by children younger than age three
years. One limitation of this approach (well-recognized in
the feature generation literature) is that the features
generated by adults exclude any pervasive and/or not easily
labeled properties (e.g. kinds of shapes or ubiquitous
behaviors such as “breathes”). However, adults do
consistently list features that are characteristic of things.
Thus, although the features generated by adults are likely to
be incomplete with respect to those available to learners, the
structure discernible from such imperfect data is nonetheless
likely to be informative about the coherent co-variations of
features among early noun categories.

features, with some suggesting a developmental trend from
more perceptual to more functional features in category
organization and others suggesting that functional features
trump perceptual features even early in category
development. (see, e.g., Mandler, 1992; Quinn and Eimas,
1996; Sheya and Smith, 2007).
In summary, the goal of this study is a description of the
coherence of the co-variation of the feature category
correlations that characterize the noun categories children
typically learn early, prior to the age of 3 years. Such a
description should enable fine-grained behavioral
predictions about, for example, children’s generalizations
from one category to another and about the early
organization of nascent superordinate categories. Such a
description should also be relevant to understanding the
kinds of learning mechanisms that might exploit the
available structure. To these ends, we examine the graph
theoretic properties of the system of pair-wise relations
among nouns as indicated by the numbers of shared features
that connect them. The choice of this approach is meant to
be atheoretic; that is, we seek simply to describe the
structure potentially available to some learning mechanism,
not to show that any such structure or generalization from
that structure can be learned. In the analyses, we will
compare the graph theoretic structure in the feature network
of these early-learned nouns to randomly connected
networks, to better understand how much and what kind of
structure is available to young learners.

The Structure of Early Noun-feature Correlations
The Full Network. A graph is a collection of nodes and a
collection of edges that connect pairs of nodes. In the
following analyses, the edges may be defined in terms of
differing numbers of shared features: for example, when w
(the feature threshold to define an edge) is 1, nouns are
connected by an edge if they share at least one feature and
when w is 3, nouns are connected by an edge if they share at
least 3 features. In all the analyses, the threshold w was
varied between 1 and 4. These different criteria for defining
edges (and the connectedness of any two nouns) yield a
series of networks.

The Categories and Their Features
Noun categories. The nouns were selected from the BatesMacArthur Communicative Developmental Inventory
(Fenson, Dale, Reznick & Bates, 1994), Toddler version.
This inventory contains at least 50% of children’s
productive vocabulary by 30 months. Our study used the
130 common nouns from this inventory for which there
were available feature norms from McRae et al., (2005).
These 130 nouns over-represent (with respect to the
inventory as a whole) animals (33 nouns, 25% of the subset
versus 15% of whole inventory) and under-represent food
(17 nouns, 13% of the subset versus 23% of the whole
inventory). Nonetheless, the sample includes a broad array
of nouns across several different superordinate categories.
The features. The features were taken from the feature
norms reported by MacRae et al. (2005). That study
collected feature norm for 541 concepts from a total of 725
adult participants with 30 participants providing features for
each concept. The participants in that study were given
each noun and 14 blank spaces to fill with features and were
prompted to provide physical properties (how it looks,
smells, sounds etc), functional properties or uses, internal
properties, and other pertinent facts. Cree and McRae
(2003) classified the generated features as perceptual (e.g.,
is red, has wheels), functional (e.g., used to eat food, gives
rides), encyclopedic (e.g., was imported to Europe from the

Figure 1: The noun graph. Edges represent (w = 2) two or
more shared features. Isolated nodes are not shown.

162

sets of k nodes that are all connected with one another
(maximal complete subgraphs). Two k-cliques are adjacent
if they share k–1 vertices and two k-cliques are k-cliqueconnected if they are connected by a sequence of adjacent kcliques. A k-clique percolation cluster is the union of all kcliques that are k-clique-connected to a particular k-clique.
For a given value of k, this method identifies all k-clique
percolation clusters, which are groups of objects that are
sufficiently well connected to create clusters of local
structure in the network.
Besides allowing for overlapping categories and using
local edge densities to identify communities of nouns, the
clique percolation method also allows for a principled
approach to identifying the cut-off threshold for a given
network that yields the most structural information (see
Palla, Barabasi, & Vicsek, 2007). We accomplish this by
increasing the value of k for each cut-off threshold, w, until
the second largest component is larger than half the size of
the largest component. This is because, for low values of k,
most nodes tend to be connected in one large clique
percolation cluster. However, as k is increased, the clique
percolation clusters separate as the method focuses in on
narrow regions of high connectivity. After adjusting k
upwards for each cut-off threshold, we then identify the
corresponding w and k that have the largest number of
percolation clusters. For the noun-feature network, the k
and w values that yield the most clusters are 3 and 3,
respectively. This yields a conservative estimate for
category membership, because only nouns with enough
local information to be included in a clique of size k = 3 will
be included in the output. Nouns lacking this connectedness
are not assigned to any cluster.
The largest number of clusters identified was 10 for k = 3
and w = 3 (see Appendix for clusters). These clusters
represent potential category structure and are somewhat
consistent with our adult expectations, at least in terms of
what they include. For example, there are categories
approximating what adults may define as food, vehicles,
non-flying animals, birds, clothing, furniture, and several
categories for artifacts. Comparing the adult-reported
taxonomic membership (see superscripts in the Appendix)
with the percolation clusters finds significant parallels.
Categories that are most clearly consistent with adult
taxonomic categories are those of animals, fruits, birds,
clothing, furniture, and vehicles. In all cases, some
members lie outside the taxonomic assignment of McRae et
al. (2005), some of which would likely be classified as
category members by most adults, while some of which
would not.
For example, AIRPLANE, BIKE, and
TRACTOR do not have ‘vehicle’ assignment according to
McRae et al. (2005), but few adults would probably argue
that they are not vehicles. Of perhaps equal interest is that
the feature clusters pick up ad hoc categories (Barsalou,
1983) such as a category of things for cutting, a soft-white
things category, and a category of things you might need to
rest and relax. The categories—defined only by the
connectedness of the nouns through shared features—

Small-world structure. Our first question was whether or
not our feature-based noun network contained sufficient
local structure to warrant further investigation. A common
method used to categorize the presence of local network
structure is small-world analyses. Watts and Strogatz (1998)
showed that many real world networks contain small-world
structure. Additionally Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005)
showed that several representations for adult semantic
networks contain small-world structure as well. Watts and
Strogatz (1998) found that the small-world structure in the
real world networks had a mean clustering coefficient much
larger than the one found in a random network of the same
number of nodes, edges, and average shortest path length.
The clustering coefficient of a node was calculated by
determining what proportion of a node’s closest neighbors
(nodes connected by an edge) were also connected to each
other by an edge. To get the clustering coefficient of the
whole network, the coefficient was averaged across all
nodes. Consequently, when the average shortest path length
of a network is low and the mean coefficient cluster is high
relative to the appropriate random network, the network is
said to contain small-world structure.
The feature-based network we present here has smallworld structure, which increases with increasing w. As w
increases from 1 to 4, the clustering coefficient increases
from 0.55 to 0.6, while the mean clustering coefficient of
500 random networks of the same size and density goes
from 0.29 to 0.02. The mean shortest path length varies
from 0 to 5 in both the observed and random networks, but
does so in a non-systematic way. In fact the mean shortest
path length decreases faster as a function of the feature
threshold w for the random network as compared to the
feature-based network. What this means is that the featurebased network has a more robust small world structure than
the random network or that it becomes more locally
structured as the feature requirement for edges increases.
Thus, comparing the mean coefficient cluster and the mean
shortest path length of both random networks and the
feature-based network helped us determine that there was
sufficient local structure to warrant an investigation into the
identity of the underlying clusters.
Cluster Analyses. Because we are interested in how the
coherent co-variations of features structure early noun
categories, we needed to employ a clustering technique
which did not force strict partition of noun clusters. In fact
this might be a more principled way to explore the semantic
knowledge that structures the flexible system of early noun
categories. For example, CHICKEN may belong in a
category with birds or other animals, but it may also share
certain features with members of the food category. Given
that particular goal, we used the clique percolation method
introduced by Palla, Derenyi, Farkas, and Vicsek (2005) that
does precisely that.
The clique percolation method identifies groups of
nodes of size k that are well-connected with one another. It
does this by identifying the presence of k-cliques, which are
163

functional network is 81, but only 10 for the perceptual
network. The difference between the observed clustering
coefficients and that for a random network of similar density
is higher for the functional network than for the perceptual
network, which is consistent with what we can visually
observe in Figures 2 and 3: the functional network has more
local structure than the perceptual network. However, even
the slightest increase in the cut-off threshold reduces the
functional network to a large number of isolates.
Meanwhile, the perceptual network maintains small-world
structure and involves the majority of the nodes in this
structure even if the requirement for noun-pair relatedness is
three or more perceptual features. There is a very clear
trade-off here. Perceptual information, partially because of
its abundance, is more redundant and can provide more
robust information about category inclusion, but this
information is not as discriminating of different categories
as is functional information.
A single functional
relationship is sufficient to define all category members that
are, for example, USED FOR TRANSPORTION; no single
perceptual feature contains that information.

constitute hypotheses about young children’s category
knowledge that can be tested in future behavioral studies.
In sum, the results suggest two main results. 1) Common
categories known by young children present highly
organized local structure in terms of shared features. This
local structure may constitute children’s early higher order
knowledge about different categorical kinds. 2) It also
shows that things belong to different partitions and that
these partitions are organized along coherent co-variations
of overlapping and co-occurring features.
The Functional and Perceptual Networks
To address the structural roles of perceptual and
functional features in the noun-feature network, we used the
perceptual and functional classifications assigned by McRae
et al. (2005). The noun-feature network contains 403
functional features (3.1 per noun) and 991 perceptual
features (7.6 per noun). The most common functional
features (in terms of the number of nouns with which they
are associated) are: is edible (20), used for transportation
(11), worn for warmth (8), hunted by people (6), used by
children (6), used for holding things (6). The most common
perceptual features are: made of metal (24), can be different
colors (22), has 4 legs (22), is large (21), is small (21)).
Functional and perceptual networks were generated by
creating networks that only used functional or only used
perceptual features. These networks therefore represent
different kinds of semantic information that could structure
the system of early noun categories in different ways.
Figures 2 and 3 present the functional and perceptual
networks, with w = 1 for the functional network and w = 2
for the perceptual network. At w = 1 the perceptual network
is one large component with no visible local structure.
As is apparent from Figures 2 and 3 (and the associated
threshold w), the perceptual network is far denser than the
functional network. On average, a node in the perceptual
network at the lowest cut-off threshold is connected to 27%
of the other nodes; the average node at the same cut-off
threshold in the functional network is only connected to 5%
of the other nodes. Perceptual information is therefore more
noisy and, in a category defining sense, less discriminating
than functional information.
The number of isolates is much higher for the functional
network than for the perceptual network. At a cut-off
threshold of w = 2, more than half of the nodes in the
functional network are unconnected to any other node. At
the same cut-off threshold, only 10 nodes in the perceptual
network are isolates. This indicates that perceptual noun
relationships tend to be more redundant than functional
relationships. Edge relationships in the functional network
are predominantly based on a single shared feature.
Both networks have small-world structure. With w
ranging from 1 to 4, the functional network clustering
coefficients go from 0.88 to 1. For the same w range, the
perceptual network clustering coefficients go from 0.54 to
0.62. However, at w = 2, the number of isolated nodes in the

Figure 2: The functional feature network (w = 1). Isolated
nodes are not shown.
Cluster Analyses. What local structure is present in the
perceptual and functional networks? The functional network
provides the most number of clusters (11) when k = 3 and w
= 1; for the perceptual network, the most clusters (9) are
separated out when k = 5 and w = 2. This is consistent with
the graph theoretic data showing that the functional network
has fewer isolates and greater local structure at its lowest
cut-off threshold, while the perceptual network loses only a
few nodes to isolates but gains substantial local structure—
compared with a random network of the same density—by
increasing w to 2.

164

(including possibly more feature overlap and more
exemplars), whereas functional categories can use very
limited information, but are constrained by the limited
availability of that information. Perhaps the right conclusion
will be that perceptual and functional features play
important but different roles in developing category
knowledge.
General Discussion
The capacity to create flexible categories from feature
correlations and overlap is a powerful tool for predicting
properties about the world. By taking a subset of nouns that
many children know at 30 months and combining these with
features reported to be characteristic of these things, we
were able to construct a network that represents a cognitive
hypothesis about how information is structured in early
semantic networks. Analyses of this network revealed that
it had small-world structure and that the local structure was
consistent with categories that are largely familiar as ad hoc
categories of practical utility.
Further analyses revealed that the functional and
perceptual features that made up the network played
different kinds of roles in structuring the network.
Functional features tended to play a more conservative role,
in most cases only including more traditional members of
standard adult categories. Perceptual features were more
redundant, with multiple features defining inclusions in a
specific cluster, but were also less discriminating, and
capable of producing clusters that adults do not typically
identify as categories (e.g., long-thin-things) but which
young children might.
This is a first encouraging step in understanding how
systems of category-feature correlations and overlap might
constitute category knowledge and a step that leads to
specific testable hypotheses. However the description given
here might well be distorted by the very limits of the tools
we used. There are a number of limitations in the use of the
adult-generated features. First, as McRae et al. (2005) point
out, they are linguistically based. Thus, potentially highly
relevant properties that are hard to describe in words (the
shape of cows versus horses, or the relative sizes of things)
may be missed. Second, generated features are likely to be
distorted by cognitive biases and for example, emphasize
distinguishing features at the basic level (e.g., has webbed
feet) over common features at the superordinate level (e.g.,
breathes). However, given that the feature norms do
represent an under-estimate of available features and are
unlikely to focus on shared categorical features, the
presence of categorical structure in the data is strong
evidence that feature-correlations in the environment are
sufficient to produce categorical inferences in children.

Figure 3: The perceptual feature network (w = 2). Isolated
nodes are not shown.
For the sake of brevity, we do not present the clique
percolation clusters here, but instead describe their relevant
properties. A close look at the different kinds of clusters
present in the two networks reveals some interesting
comparisons. First, the clusters in the functional category
are generally smaller, more conservative—there are fewer
odd members in any category—and tend to represent what
adults might call traditional categories (e.g., food, clothes,
vehicles).
The perceptual based clusters are less
conservative—containing numerous odd members—and are
more representative of ad hoc categories. For example, to
our best approximation, two of the perceptual clusters might
represent LONG THIN THINGS and THINGS THAT CAN
FLY. As above, comparing the clique percolation clusters
with the taxonomic information reported by adults in the
McRae study is not particularly helpful. For example,
TUNA is not labeled as food in the McRae study, but it is
clearly recognized as such in the functional clique
percolation clusters. As well, the functional clusters
recognize categories of THINGS TO RIDE IN OR ON, for
which there is no taxonomic category in McRae.
Nonetheless, the functional categories contain only food
items in food clusters, whereas the perceptual clusters
contain PEN and HOSE in with other fruits and vegetables,
and a larger mostly animal category, contains furniture
(having 4 legs) and BOX (is brown and can be large or
small, like MOOSE and SQUIRREL). Overall, functional
categories tend to be smaller (underestimating category
membership) and less sullied by near-members, whereas
perceptual categories are larger and over-estimate category
membership. Again, these data provide category specific
hypotheses through which to test different feature roles in
category membership.
Remembering that our most discriminating perceptual
clustering requires two features to create a relationship,
while the functional clusters require only one, one cognitive
interpretation is that categories based on perceptual features
should require more information to make comparisons

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NICHHD, grant RO1
HD028675.

165

Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Tyler, L. K., Moss, H. E., Durrant-Peatfield, M. R., & Levy,
J. P. (2000). Conceptual structure and the structure of
concepts: a distributed account of category-specific
deficits. Brain and Language 75(2), 195-231.
Warrington, E. K., & Shallice, T. (1984). Category specific
semantic impairments. Brain, 107, 829-854.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of small-world networks. Nature, 393, 440-442.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1990). Infants' detection of
correlation among feature categories. Child Development,
61(3), 614-620.

References
Ahn, W. K., Kalish, C. W., Medin, D. L., & Gelman, S. A.
(1995). The role of covariation versus mechanism
information in causal attribution. Cognition, 54, 299-352.
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11(3), 271-227.
Caramazza, A., & Shelton, J. R. (1998). Domain-specific
knowledge systems in the brain: The animate–inanimate
distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 1-34.
Cree, G. S., & McRae, K. (2003). Analyzing the factors
underlying the structure and computation of the meaning
of chipmunk, cherry, chisel, cheese, and cello (and many
other such concrete nouns). Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 132, 163-201.
De Renzi, E., & Lucchelli, F. (1994). Are semantic systems
separately represented in the brain? The case of living
category impairment. Cortex, 30, 3-25.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J., & Bates, E. (1993).
Variability in early communicative development.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59(5), v-173.
Komatsu, L. (1992). Recent views of conceptual structure.
Psychological Bulletin, 112(3), 500-526.
Mandler, J. M. (1992). How to build a baby II: conceptual
primitives. Psychological Review 99(4), 587-604.
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research
Methods, 37, 547-559.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Palla, G., Barabasi, A.-L., & Vicsek, T. (2007). Quantifying
social group evolution. Nature, 446(5), 664-667.
Palla, G., Derenyi, I., Farkas, I., & Vicsek, T. ( 2005).
Uncovering the overlapping community structure of
complex networks in nature and society. Nature, 435(9),
814-818.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D. (1996). Perceptual
organization and categorization in young infants. In C.
Rovee-Colier & L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy
research. Stanford CT: Ablex.
Rakison, D. H., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2002). You’ll go this
way and I’ll go that way. Developmental changes in
infants’ detection of correlations among static and
dynamic features in motion events. Child Development,
73, 682-699.
Rogers, T. T., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic
Cognition: A Parallel Distributed Processing Approach.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8(3), 382-439.
Sheya, A., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Perceptual features and
the development of conceptual knowledge. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 7(4), 455-476.

Appendix
Complete Noun-Feature Network Clique Percolation
Clusters
Superscripts provide the taxonomic category (if present) in
the McRae et al. (2005) norms. When the superscript is a
single letter (or letters), it is defined at its first appearance as
the most recent superscripted word starting with the same
letter (or letters). For example, f is FOOD.

0: breadfood cheesef lambanimal
1: balloon bench bowl broom brush bucket comb
cupdish dish forkutensil hosetube pen platedish sled
spoonutensil tray
2: door hammertool shovelt spoonu
3: forku knifeu scissorst
4: bearmammal,a catm,a,pet couchfurniture cowm,a deerm,a
dogm,a,p,carnivore donkeym,a elephantm,a froga, amphibian
horsea lamba lionm,a,carnivore,cat,predator moosem,a,herbivore
mousea,rodent pigm,a ponya,horse sheepm,a squirrelm,a
tigera,predator,cat,carnivore turtlea,pet,reptile,amphibian zebram,a,horse
5: bootsclothing coatcl dresscl jacketcl jeanscl pantscl scarfcl
shirtcl shoescl slipperscl sockscl sweatercl
6: applefruit bananafr beansvegetable cakedessert cheesefood
grapefr orangefr peasvegetable picklevegetable, food raisinfr
strawberryfr tunafish
7: bearmammal,a blackbirdbird,a chickenb,a duck b,a goose b,a
owl b,a penguin b,a rooster b,a turkey b,a
8: bedfurniture chairfu couchfu pillow slippercl sofafu
9: airplane bike busvehicle carv horsea motorcyclev
tractormachine train tricyclev,bike truckv

166

