UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Science and Education Research: Engaging Issues of Social Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0f05j41b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Solomon, Gregg
Gelman, Rochel
Medin, Doug
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Science and Education Research: Engaging Issues of Social Context
Moderator:
Gregg Solomon (gesolomo@nsf.gov)

Doug Medin (medin@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA.

Division of Research on Learning
Directorate for Education and Human Resources
National Science Foundation
Arlington, VA 22230 USA

Nancy Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

Rochel Gelman (rgelman@)ruccs.rutgers.edu)

Laura Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)

Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science
Rutgers University – New Brunswick
Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Keywords: education; social context, interdisciplinarity.

Megan Bang and Doug Medin

Education research as Cognitive Science

Cultural Perspectives on Science and on the Natural
World: A Relational View

When asked to justify the practical importance of their work,
cognitive scientists often discuss the direct implications it has
for education. Of course, those implications are real and they
are important. But frequently underlying such discussions is
an assumption that we in this symposium would seek to
challenge: that applying cognitive science to education is a
relatively straight-forward matter of little intellectual
consequence. As is evident in the talks that make up this
symposium, there is much heavy-lifting –theoretical,
methodological, and analytic –that remains to be done before
insights and finding from cognitive science can have the
kinds of practical impacts on education that is desired.
The moderator, a program director at NSF, notes how little
represented are cognitive scientists among those submitting
proposals to programs in the education directorate, or serving
on review panels, despite an explicit call for proposals from
cognitive scientists. Happily, the speakers at this symposium
are all exceptions, and as a result have influenced literatures
and communities (to say nothing of federal funding decisions)
outside of cognitive science proper. A theme running through
all of these talks is the importance of engaging issues about
the setting in which learning occurs. The speakers ask
questions about learning in non-majority cultures, in inner
city classrooms, in graduate laboratories, and in science
museums. In all cases, the findings provide ways for us to
examine, even re-examine, claims about the nature of
individual cognition in social contexts. In all cases, the
implications for educational practice are real and they are
important.

How do people conceptualize nature and the relation of
human beings to it? Recent research suggests that the answer
to this question varies dramatically across cultural groups and
that this variation has important cognitive and behavioral
consequences. Much the same may be said for cultural
perspectives on science. We report a series of observations on
cultural understandings of nature among Native-American
and European-American children and adults. We then link
these observations to perspectives and practices associated
with Indigenous and Western science. Finally, we describe
implications for community-based, culturally-based science
education, along with some evidence bearing on these
implications.

Rochel Gelman, Christine Massey, and
Kimberly Brenneman
Taking Developmental Cognitive Science to School:
Challenges of Conceptual Change for Everyone
There is national urgency to improve science teaching and
learning. Work in cognitive science suggests that such
improvement will require learners to master a coherent body
of scientific knowledge, including its language,
representational formats, and the “tools” for doing science.
We are studying the introduction, into inner-city preschools,
of an educational program designed to support such learning.
Preschool Pathways to Science (PrePS) embeds childsuitable science “lessons” into classroom activities. These
lessons are connected by central ideas including change, the
animate-inanimate distinction, form and function, and so on.
PrePS also introduces vocabulary tied to science content,
tools, and methods. These methods include observing,
predicting, and checking; comparing, contrasting, and
experimentation; and documenting findings in charts, graphs,

529

mechanisms. Research also indicates that children are poor at
designing informative experiments. Nonetheless, children
understand a remarkable amount about the causal structure of
the world by age five. Here I suggest some processes that
might support such rapid and accurate causal learning. In
particular, I suggest that children, like scientists, assess the
causal structure of events by jointly integrating the statistical
evidence they observe with their prior causal beliefs. I also
suggest that they systematically engage in more exploration
when the interpretation of evidence is uncertain, thereby
tending to isolate relevant variables and spontaneously
generating informative evidence. Finally, I suggest that the
same processes that support rapid, accurate induction from
minimal data also make children's (and adults') causal beliefs
resistant to potential counter-evidence.

and science journals. We find that teachers adopt ways to
develop children’s understanding of these science practices
relatively easily. It has been much more difficult to teach inservice teachers about the notion of an organized knowledge
domain and to make clear that planning activities that cohere
around a common central concept supports student learning in
specific ways. Could this be because we are asking teachers
to engage in conceptual change about appropriate material to
offer the preschooler’s constructivist mind? This challenge
has required us to modify our own thinking about the
materials and supports we offer teachers. Our experiences
taking cognitive science to preschool have also highlighted
issues about appropriate research designs for making progress
on the educational front.

Nancy Nersessian and Wendy Newstetter

Acknowledgments

Learners in complex settings: Cognitive
partnerships on the benchtop

The work described in this symposium was supported by the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources at the
National Science Foundation: RG, KB, and CM (ROLE
0529579), DM and MB (ROLE 0529650; REESE 0749576),
NN and WN (ROLE 0106773; ROLE 0411825; REESE
0703378), LS (CAREER 0744213), and GS (IR/D).

Scientific research laboratories, recently, have been sites
for observational and ethnographic studies of cognition.
However, they have largely not served as for the study of
situated learning. Our six-year investigation of cognitive and
learning practices in three bio-science and -engineering
research labs shows them to be ideal sites for studying
learning at all levels, ranging from undergraduate through to
laboratory director. Our mixed-method approach uses
ethnographic and cognitive-historical analysis and is
imprinted with an environmental perspective which from the
start looks at individual cognitive development as it intersects
with the socio-cultural environment and the relevant history
of the lab. Here we discuss the interrelations of three practices
we have found to be useful to distinguish in characterizing the
learning processes: the cognitive, the investigative, and the
interactional practices. Cognitive practices give rise to and
interact with investigative practices, which in turn are enacted
through interactional practices, which support and sustain
both. We focus on these practices surrounding the
technological devices created by the lab members, which
drive research and learning, specifically on “cognitive
partnerships” learners form with lab members and artifacts.

References
Bang, M., Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (2007). Cultural mosaics
and mental models of nature. Proceedings of the National
Academies of Science, 104, 13868-13874.
Gelman, R., & Brenneman, K. (2004). Science learning
pathways for young children. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 19, 150-158.
Massey, C. & Roth, Z. (2004). Science for developing minds
series: A science curriculum for kindergarten and first
grade. Philadelphia: Edventures
Nersessian, N.J. (2006). The cognitive-cultural systems of the
research laboratory. Organization Studies, 27, 125-145.
Newstetter, W., Kurz-Milcke, E., & Nersessian, N.J. (2007).
Cognitive
partnerships
on
the
bench
tops.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Sciences, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schulz, L. E., & Bonawitz, E. B. (in press). Serious fun:
Preschoolers play more when evidence is confounded.
Developmental Psychology.
Smith, C. L., Solomon, G. E. A., & Carey, S. (2005). Never
getting to zero: Elementary school students’ understanding
of the infinite divisibility of number and matter. Cognitive
Psychology, 51, 101-140.

Laura Schulz
Naive Physics/Savvy Science: Causal learning in
very young children ... and the rest of us
Considerable research suggests that children (and adults) have
an impoverished understanding of particular physical

530

