UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
CogSci 2008 30th Anniversary Symposia
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82t311b5
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)
Authors
Anderson, John R.
McClelland, James L.
Smith, Linda B.
et al.
Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                                              30th Anniversary Symposia:
                   Cognitive Science: The Past 30 Years and the Next 30 Years
                                              Organizer: Lawrence W. Barsalou
The 2008 Conference in Washington DC represents the                   Symposium II: Trajectories of Cognitive Science
30th anniversary of the seminal conference at UC San                       Disciplines
Diego in 1979. In recognition, the Society is sponsoring
                                                                           Dedre Gentner (Psychology)
back-to-back symposia that address the trajectory of
Cognitive Science from its inception through the present                   Kenneth D. Forbus (Artificial Intelligence)
into the future. The first symposium will address the
                                                                           William Bechtel (Philosophy)
trajectories of major perspectives in Cognitive Science;
the second will address the trajectories of major                          Elissa L. Newport (Linguistics)
disciplines. Each speaker will be asked to address:
                                                                           Douglas L. Medin (Anthropology)
      1. What was your perspective/discipline like at the
            time of the 1979 conference?
                                                                Other perspectives and disciplines not listed explicitly are
      2. How has the perspective/discipline changed over        likely to be addressed, such as neuroscience, education,
            the past 30 years to what it is today?              application, formal models, etc. Each speaker will
                                                                present for 15 minutes, followed by a 3 minute question
      3. How do you foresee the perspective/discipline
                                                                period.
            changing in the next 30 years?
                                                                Discussions about where cognitive science is going are
The speakers in the two symposia are as follows, with the
                                                                important to hold periodically. We hope that these
perspectives and disciplines addressed in parentheses:
                                                                symposia stimulate thought and discussion about the
                                                                future, and that they produce positive influence on future
      Symposium I: Trajectories of Cognitive Science
                                                                research in the community. We encourage the audience
            Perspectives
                                                                to contribute their thoughts during the question periods
            John R. Anderson (Cognitive Architectures)          and in discussion after the symposia.
            James L. McClelland (Emergentist                    The 1979 conference program appears on the following
                 Approaches)                                    pages.
            Linda B. Smith (Developmental Systems)
            Edwin Hutchins (Cognitive Ecology)
            Lawrence W. Barsalou (Grounded Cognition)
                                                            643

