UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison Then Computation: A Model of Independent Causal Efficacy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98t8c0nd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Goedert, Kelly M.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison Then Computation: A Model of Independent Causal Efficacy
Kelly M. Goedert (goederke@shu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Seton Hall University, 400 South Orange Ave.
South Orange, NJ 07079 USA
alternative cause constant) and then contrast how often she
experienced symptom relief after exercising with how often
she experienced symptom relief when she failed to exercise.
These frequencies are represented in third column of Table
1. Formally, this contrast is the calculation of ΔP, the
change in the probability of the outcome. ΔP is calculated as
the difference between the probability of the outcome given
the presence of the target cause [P(O|T)] and the probability
of the outcome given the absence of the target cause
[P(O|~T)]. In this instance, the calculation is performed
controlling for the occurrence of the light therapy and thus
is a conditional ΔP. Calculating this conditional ΔP yields
0/6 – 0/18 or 0. Thus, controlling for light therapy, exercise
is not associated with a change in SAD symptoms. Were we
to calculate the unconditional ΔP for exercise, we would
disregard the light therapy and consider only the presence or
absence of exercise (as represented in the row marginals).
Evidence indicates, however, that individuals do not use
unconditional contingencies (Spellman, 1996b).

Abstract
This paper introduces the Comparison Then Computation
(CTC) model, which describes how individuals assess the
causal efficacy of a target event when simultaneously learning
of multiple potential causes of the same outcome. The CTC is
a two step model that entails an initial comparison between
the probability of an outcome given the target alone and that
given the joint occurrence of the target and other explicitly
represented alternatives. The first step determines the
computation to be performed in the second step. This
computation heavily weights sufficiency information over
necessity information. Two experiments testing novel
predictions of the CTC model favored that model over causal
power (Cheng, 1997) and weighted averaging (White, 2008).
Strengths and weaknesses of the CTC model will be
discussed.
Keywords: causal inference; cue competition; contingency
learning; covariation.

Introduction
The ability to detect which events in the environment occur
together and to make accurate inferences regarding the
causes of events from that covariation information are
essential for an individual’s survival and well-being.
Everyday causal inference is, however, burdened by
covariation information from multiple competing causes. If
a patient with Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD)
experiences improved mood on a given winter day, is it
because she used her intensive light therapy or because she
went jogging?
How then do individuals determine the efficacy of a target
cause in producing an outcome when there are multiple
potential causes of that outcome? Here I present a new
model of how individuals make this determination: the
Comparison Then Computation (CTC) model. First,
however, I review the explanation that has garnered the
most attention to date.
The current favored explanation is that individuals
calculate an estimate of causal efficacy over a subset of
events in which alternative causes are held constant – that
is, they conditionalize their estimates on the constant
presence or constant absence of an alternative cause (Cheng
& Novick, 1992; Cheng, 1997; Spellman, 1996a). In
particular, when evaluating the generative strength of a
candidate cause it is assumed that individuals prefer to
derive their estimate from a focal set in which alternative
causes of the outcome are absent (Cheng, 1997; Cheng,
Park, Yarlas, & Holyoak, 1996). For example, in
determining the effectiveness of exercise on relief of SAD
symptoms, the aforementioned patient could focus on those
days that she did not use the light therapy (i.e., hold the

Table 1: Illustrative contingency table with hypothetical
event frequencies.
Exercise
Present
Absent

Light Therapy
Present
Absent
18/18
0/6
6/6
0/18

Marginals
18/24
6/24

Note: Cell ratios are the number of times the outcome occurred
over the number of times that combination of candidate causes
occurred.

The explanation that individuals base their estimates of
causal effectiveness on a focal set of events in which
alternative causes are absent has received support from its
ability to account for some forms of cue competition. In
particular this conditionalization account predicts cue
competition when potential causes do not occur
independently of one another (Shanks, et al. 1996;
Spellman, 1996a). The frequencies in Table 1 illustrate this
case. Exercise and light therapy are more often
simultaneously present or absent than they are uniquely
present or absent and calculation of the conditional ΔP for
exercise yields a lower estimate of causal effectiveness than
calculation of its unconditional ΔP.
Conditionalization, however, fails to account for all forms
of cue competition. Even in cases in which two causes occur
independently of one another, individuals reduce their
effectiveness judgments of a target cause that is moderately
contingent with the outcome when it is learned about in the
presence of highly contingent alternative (e.g., Busemeyer,
173

Table 3: Summary of the Comparison Then Computation
(CTC) model.

Myung, & McDaniel, 1993; Baker et al., 1993; Goedert,
Harsch, & Spellman, 2005; Goedert & Spellman, 2005).
This effect is not predicted by the conditionalization
account.
An additional drawback of the conditionalization / focal
set account is that it discards information relevant to the
assessment of causal efficacy when there are multiple
possible causes explicitly under consideration. Here, I
present the CTC model of independent causal influence.
This new model predicts cue competition regardless of the
relation between the potential causes. Furthermore, the
model highlights the information to be gained from the
consideration of events in which alternative causes are
present.

Step 1: Comparison
(a) If P(O|TA) ≤ P(O|T~A) then perform computation 1.
(b) If P(O|TA) > P(O|T~A) then perform computation 2.
Step 2: Computation
(1) CE = P(O|T~A) – (.4)*[P(O|~T~A)]
(2) CE = P(O|T~A) – (.2)*[P(O|~TA)] – (.2)*[P(O|~T~A)]
Note: P = probability; O = outcome; T = target; A = Alternative; ~
indicates absence.

The Comparison Table 4 depicts the possible results of the
initial comparison and the information gained given the
result. In the initial comparison, if the outcome is less likely
to occur when both the target and alternative are present
than when the target alone is present, it suggests the
alternative is a preventive cause of the outcome. If the
outcome is equally likely in the two situations (row 2 of
Table 4), it suggests that either the target is the sole cause of
the outcome or there is another cause of the outcome, which
may be the explicitly represented alternative or an
unobserved cause. Finally, if the outcome is more likely to
occur when both the target and alternative [P(O|TA)] are
present than with the target alone [P(O|T~A)], it suggests
the alternative is a generative cause of the outcome.

Comparison Then Computation (CTC) Model
CTC is a descriptive model of causal inference from
covariation information for situations in which multiple
potential causes of an outcome are explicitly under
consideration. Table 2 depicts a generic contingency table
for the multiple cause case. In this table and elsewhere in
this paper, P refers to observed probability, O to outcome, T
to target cause, and A to alternative cause. When there are
two potential causes of a common outcome we can obtain
the probability of the outcome in each of four cases: the
joint occurrence of the target and alternative [P(O|TA)], the
presence of the target, but absence of the alternative
[P(O|T~A)], the absence of the target, but presence of the
alternative [P(O|~TA)], and the joint absence of the target
and alternative [P(O|~T~A)].

Table 4: Possible results and information gained from
Step 1 comparison.
Result
P(O|TA) < P(O|T~A)

Table 2: Generic contingency table for the multiple cause
case.
Target
Present
Absent

P(O|TA) = P(O|T~A)

Alternative
Present
Absent
P(O|TA)
P(O|T~A)
P(O|~TA)
P(O|~T~A)

P(O|TA) > P(O|T~A)

Information Gained
alternative preventive
either target, alternative or
unobserved generative
alternative generative

Note: P = probability; O = outcome; T = target; A = Alternative; ~
indicates absence.

Note: P = probability; O = outcome; T = target; A = Alternative; ~
indicates absence.

According to the model, knowing the nature of alternative
causes is essential for determining which events will be
useful in estimating causal efficacy. If the alternative is a
preventive cause, then when evaluating the efficacy of the
target it would be desirable for the reasoner to exclude
cases in which the alternative was present, because in those
cases the alternative may mask the efficacy of the target.
Therefore, given a preventive alternative (result a in Table
3), the focal set of events chosen for computation are those
in which the alternative cause is absent and the
computational choice is a weighted conditional ΔP
(calculation 1 in Table 3).
The same set of focal events and computation are
performed when P(O|TA) is equal to P(O|T~A). This case
suggests that only one generative cause is at work. Thus, if
the target is causal, there are no other generative causes
present. As such, the calculation task is simplified to include
only those cases in which alternative causes are absent.

According to the CTC model, to assess the independent
causal efficacy of the target one performs a two-step
process: a comparison and then a computation (see Table 3).
In the first step, a comparison between the probability of the
outcome given the target alone [P(O|T~A)] and the
probability of the outcome given the joint occurrence of the
target and alternative [P(O|TA)] determines the nature of
other explicitly represented candidate causes and thus
determines the relevant information for and the form of
computation to be performed in the second step of the
process. The computation in the second step determines the
causal efficacy (CE) and nature of the target cause. CE
values greater than zero indicate the target is a generative
cause of the outcome. Those less than zero indicate it is a
preventive cause; those at zero indicate it is not causal.

174

Hence, the weighted conditional ΔP is calculated
(calculation 1 in Table 3).
In the preventive and sole generative cause cases, the
focal set of events used for the computation of causal
efficacy does not differ from that favored in previous
accounts: the focal set is the set of events in which
alternative causes are absent (Cheng, 1997; Cheng et al,
1996). The CTC model diverges from previous accounts
when the result of the initial comparison suggests that the
alternative is a generative cause of the outcome (result b in
Table 3). In this case, the reasoner weighs the evidence that
uniquely confirms the efficacy of the target [P(O|T~A)]
against all of the evidence that disconfirms the efficacy of
the target [P(O|~TA) and P(O|~T~A)] by performing
calculation 2 in Table 3. The choice of events to include in
this calculation is Bayesian in nature in that evidence
favoring the alternative as a generative cause is counted
against the efficacy of the target. This property will be
elaborated in the next section.

cause [P(O|~TA)] is also subtracted from the evidence
favoring the target. In this way, cue competition is built into
the CTC model. While the causal support model of Griffiths
and Tenenbaum (2005) assesses the causal structure of
events, causal power (Cheng, 1997) is a Bayesian estimate
of causal strength, or a parameterization, of that structure.
Notably, the CTC model described here predicts cue
competition in situations not predicted by causal power.
Causal power is assumed to be calculated over the set of
events in which alternative causes are absent (Cheng, 1997).
As described earlier, this choice of focal set leads to cue
competition when causes are correlated, but it fails to
predict cue competition when causes are independent. The
CTC model predicts cue competition regardless of the
relation between the causes. In particular, when the
alternative is generative, the CTC model takes unique
evidence favoring the target as a cause and subtracts from
that all evidence against the target.

The Computation In both calculations depicted in Table 3,
evidence reflecting whether the target cause is sufficient to
produce the outcome (i.e., the probability of the outcome
given the target alone) is given an implicit weight of 1.0.
This sufficiency evidence is weighted more heavily than
evidence reflecting whether the target is necessary to
produce the outcome (i.e., the probability of the outcome in
the absence of the target), which is given a weight of 0.4.
When the alternative is a generative cause of the outcome,
this weight is distributed equally over the target absent
events in which the alternative is present [P(O|~TA)] and
those in which it is absent [P(O|~T~A)].
The choice of the 1.0 and 0.4 weights for the sufficiency
and necessity information in the current model was guided
by a review of studies that have derived how individuals
weight the cells of the contingency table in the case of a
single candidate cause. In the single cause case cells C and
D (i.e., evidence regarding necessity) are weighted on
average a little less than half that of cells A and B (i.e.,
evidence regarding sufficiency; Kao & Wasserman, 1993;
Mandel & Lehman, 1998; Perales & Shanks, 2008). As
such, the choice of the weight for the necessity information
in the current calculations is a little less than half the weight
given to the sufficiency information.
In causal support (Griffiths & Tenenbuam, 2005), a
Bayesian model of causal inference, the likelihood that a
particular candidate cause is responsible for producing the
outcome is determined by weighing the evidence in favor of
that cause against evidence favoring other causes of the
same outcome. Although the CTC model does not perform
an explicit Bayesian analysis, the model captures this
property of the Bayesian model in calculation 2 of Table 3.
When the initial comparison reveals that the alternative
cause is generative, not only is the probability of the
outcome given the absence of both causes [P(O|~T~A)]
subtracted from the unique evidence favoring the target
[P(O|T~A)], but the unique evidence favoring the alternative

CTC predicts forms of cue competition not accounted for by
conditionalization (e.g., Baker et al., 1993; Goedert &
Spellman, 2005). For example, Goedert and Spellman’s
Experiment 1 consisted of two conditions in which two
potential causes occurred independently of one another: a
moderately contingent target was paired with either a
strongly contingent or non-contingent alternative. In a third
condition, the occurrence of the target and alternative causes
covaried. In that experiment, as predicted by the
conditionalization account, participants rated the target less
causal in the covarying condition than in the independent,
strong-alternative condition. However, they also rated the
target as less causal in the strong-alternative condition than
in the non-contingent alternative condition – an effect not
predicted by conditionalization. Conversely, the CTC model
yields estimates of causal efficacy consistent with the
ordering of participants’ ratings across the three conditions:
CE is .33 in the non-contingent alternative condition, .19 in
the strong-alternative condition, and -.24 in the covarying
condition.
CTC also accounts for the finding that participants
sometimes give negative ratings to an event whose
conditional ΔP is 0, and thus, whose causal power is 0. For
example, across three conditions in Spellman’s (1996b)
Experiment 2 participants gave negative ratings to a target
whose conditional ΔP was 0. The CTC model, however,
predicts this pattern of negative ratings across the three
conditions (CE = -.25 in each).

Extant Evidence Accounted for by CTC

Experiments Testing Novel Predictions of CTC
Two novel predictions of the CTC model were tested here.
Experiment 1 tested the hypothesis that when the alternative
cause is generative, both the probability of the outcome
given the alternative only [P(O|~TA)] and the probability of
the outcome given the joint absence of the target and
alternative [P(O|~T~A)] count against the causal efficacy of
the target. Experiment 2 tested the hypothesis that the form
175

Applying this calculation to the probabilities in Table 5
yields the CTC predictions in the third column of Table 6.
The CTC model predicts that participants will rate the target
the same in conditions 2 and 3, but these will be less than
the ratings given in condition 1. This prediction differs from
the causal power (CP; Cheng, 1997) and weighted
averaging (WA; White, 2008) predictions, which are also
depicted in Table 6.

of computation applied to learned covariation information
depends on the relation between the proportion of times the
outcome occurs given only the target event [P(O|T~A)] and
the proportion of times the outcome occurs given the joint
presence of the target and the alternative [P(O|TA)]. In both
experiments the predictions of the CTC model were
compared to the predictions of the causal power model
(Cheng, 1997) and the recently proposed weighted
averaging model (White, 2008).

Table 5: Conditions compared in Experiment 1.

General Method
Thirty six participants completed seven conditions designed
to test two sets of hypotheses, described separately as
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. Testing in groups of up to
20, participants worked through a booklet containing the
seven experimental conditions, which appeared in different
random orders for different participants. The cover story,
adapted from Spellman (1996b), directed participants to
imagine that they worked as a chemical engineer for DOW
chemicals and that they were attempting to discover new
chemicals that could be sold either as fertilizers or as weed
killers. Each page of the experiment booklet summarized the
results of a single study simultaneously assessing the effects
of two chemicals in plant blooming. For example, in one
condition participants read the following:

Con

P(O|TA)

P(O|T~A)

P(O|~TA)

P(O|~T~A)

(1)
(2)
(3)

1.0
1.0
1.0

.5
.5
.5

0
.5
0

0
0
.5

Table 6: Model predictions and results for Experiment 1.
Con

CP

WA

CTC

(1)
(2)
(3)

.5
.5
0

.65
.70
.51

.50
.40
.40

Ratings (SE)

59.2a (3.2)
48.9b (4.5)
53.2b (3.0)

Results and Discussion Participants’ ratings of the target
are depicted in the far right column of Table 6. Conditions
denoted with different superscripts differed significantly
from each other. I performed one set of planned Helmert
contrasts to test the predictions of the CTC model. The first
contrast compared condition 1 to combined conditions 2 and
3. The second contrast compared condition 2 to condition 3.
This set of comparisons confirmed the predictions of the
CTC, but not the other, models. Condition 1 differed from
conditions 2 and 3, F(1, 35) = 6.13, p < .05, which did not
differ from each other, F(1, 35) = 1.07, p = .31.

80 plants were assigned to one of the following four
treatment conditions:
20 received both 2ZY and UT62. 10 of these bloomed.
20 received only 2ZY. 10 of these bloomed.
20 received only UT62. None of these bloomed.
20 received neither chemical. 10 of these bloomed.
After reading the summary information, participants
judged the effectiveness of each of the causes on a scale
from -100 to +100, with -100 indicating that the chemical
completely prevents plant blooming and +100 indicating
that the chemical completely causes plant blooming.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 tested the hypothesis that the computation
chosen in step 2 depends on the result of the initial
comparison between P(O|T~A) and P(O|TA). In both
Experiment 2a and 2b the probability of the outcome given
the joint presence of the target and alternative was
manipulated [P(O|TA)] while all other probabilities were
held constant. In Experiment 2a the base rate probability of
the outcome given the absence of the target and alternative
was .5; whereas, in Experiment 2b this probability was 0.
Table 7 depicts the probabilities across conditions in
Experiments 2a and 2b.
In condition 1 of Experiments 2a and 2b, P(O|TA) is less
than P(O|T~A); therefore, computation 1 from Table 3 is
applied to these probabilities. In condition 2 of Experiments
2a and 2b, P(O|TA) and P(O|T~A) are equal; therefore,
computation 1 is again applied. Finally, in condition 3 of
Experiments 2a and 2b, P(O|TA) is greater than P(O|T~A)
and thus, computation 2 is applied. Applying these
computations to the probabilities depicted in Table 7 yields
the CTC model predictions depicted in the third column of
Table 8. In Experiment 2a, the CTC model predicts that

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 compared three conditions in which there was
a generative alternative cause and the confirming evidence
for the target was held constant while the disconfirming
evidence for the target varied. These conditions are depicted
in Table 5. In the first condition (1), the outcome never
occurred when the target was absent [P(O|~TA) = 0 and
P(O|~T~A) = 0]. In the second condition (2), the outcome
never occurred when the target and alternative were jointly
absent [P(O|~T~A) = 0], but occurred half of the time when
the alternative alone was present [P(O|~TA) = .5]. In the
third condition (3), the outcome never occurred when the
alternative alone was present [P(O|~TA) = 0], but occurred
half of the time when the target and alternative were jointly
absent [P(O|~T~A)]. For all three conditions, step 1 of the
CTC model reveals that the alternative is a generative cause
and causal efficacy is computed using calculation 2 from
Table 3.
176

13.54, p < .01 and conditions 1 and 2 did not differ
significantly from each other, F(1, 35) = 1.77, p = .19.

participants will rate the target the same in conditions 1 and
2, but that their ratings in these conditions will be less than
that in condition 3. Notably, the CTC model predicts that
the ratings will be reliably greater than 0. These predictions
differ from those of the causal power (CP; Cheng, 1997)
and weighted averaging (WA; White, 2008) models, which
are also depicted in Table 8.

Experiment 2b Results and Discussion A within-groups
MANOVA with condition as a factor revealed no reliable
effect, F(2, 34) = 1.10, p = .34. Hence, in Experiment 2b,
despite differences in the probability of the outcome given
the joint occurrence of the target and alternative causes,
participants rated the cause similarly and in a manner
commensurate with the CTC model predictions.

Table 7: Conditions compared in Experiments 2a and 2b.
Experiment 2a
Con

P(O|T~A)

P(O|~TA)

P(O|~T~A)

(1)
0
(2)
.5
(3)
1.0
Experiment 2b

P(O|TA)

.5
.5
.5

0
0
0

.5
.5
.5

Con

P(O|TA)

P(O|T~A)

P(O|~TA)

P(O|~T~A)

(1)
(2)
(3)

0
.5
1.0

.5
.5
.5

0
0
0

0
0
0

Discussion
In the current paper I introduced and provided evidence for
the Comparison Then Computation (CTC) model, which
describes how individuals assess the causal efficacy of a
target event when simultaneously learning of multiple
potential causes of the same outcome. The previously
favored account of this process – the hypothesis that
individuals choose focal sets in which alternative causes are
absent (Cheng, 1997; Cheng et al., 1996) – failed to account
for cue competition effects that occur when individuals
learn about two candidate causes whose occurrence is
uncorrelated (Goedert & Spellman, 2005). Additionally, this
focal set account discarded information relevant to the
assessment of the causal efficacy of the target.
The new CTC model predicts cue competition regardless
of the relation between the occurrence of the two candidate
causes and thus accounts for extant demonstrations of cue
competition effects (e.g., Baker et al., 1993; Goedert &
Spellman, 2005; Price & Yates, 1993; Spellman, 1996b).
Furthermore, the model assumes a special, initial role for
information from events in which two candidate causes are
jointly present. Computation of causal efficacy, however,
focuses on the unique evidence for the target cause. Two
experiments demonstrated the unique ability of the CTC
model to account for patterns of causal judgment when the
relation between P(O|TA) and P(O|T~A) is systematically
varied (Experiments 2a and 2b) and when the form of
disconfirming evidence is systematically varied (Experiment
1).

In Experiment 2b, both the CTC model and the causal
power model predict that participants will rate the target
similarly in all three conditions. Assessing performance
across this set of conditions is important, however, because
it can rule out the possibility that any differences observed
in Experiment 2a are due solely to changes in P(O|TA)
rather than to differences in the choice of computation
applied. In Experiment 2a, the same computation leads to
different estimates of causal efficacy, but in Experiment 2b
different computations lead to the same estimates of causal
efficacy.
Table 8: Model predictions and results for Experiments 2a
and 2b.
Experiment 2a
CP

WA

(1) 0
.03
(2) 0
.29
(3) 0
.51
Experiment 2b
(1)
(2)
(3)

CTC

Ratings (SE)

.30
.30
.40

27.6a (5.4)
33.9a (4.0)
48.9b (4.5)

CP

WA

CTC

Ratings (SE)

.50
.50
.50

.14
.42
.65

.50
.50
.50

52.5 (3.3)
55.9a (3.5)
59.1a (3.2)

Limitations There are several limitations of the CTC
model. One limitation is that it assumes the reasoner has
acquired all of the covariation information. Therefore, the
model fails to account for learning phenomena such as order
effects (Dennis & Ahn, 2001). A second limitation is that it
fails to account for observed dissociations in forms of cue
competition (Goedert et al., 2005). Finally, the model fails
to account for some important phenomena known to
influence causal judgment in the single cause case: sample
size and outcome density. Individuals’ causal judgments
may increase as sample size increases (White, 2002).
Likewise, individuals’ causal judgments increase as the
overall probability of the outcome increases (i.e., the
outcome density effect; Lober & Shanks, 2000).
The failure of the model to account for these latter effects
is driven by the fact that computations in the model are

a

Experiment 2a Results and Discussion Participants’
causal effectiveness ratings appear in the far right column of
Table 8. Conditions denoted with different subscripts
differed significantly from each other. As in Experiment 1, I
performed a set of planned Helmert contrasts to test the
predictions of the CTC model. The first contrast compared
condition 3 to combined conditions 1 and 2; the second
contrast compared condition 1 to condition 2. This set of
comparisons confirmed the predictions of the CTC model.
Condition 3 differed from conditions 1 and 2, F(1, 35) =

177

Dennis, M. & Ahn, W-K. (2001). Primacy in causal strength
judgments: The effect of initial evidence for generative
versus inhibitory relationships. Memory & Cognition, 29,
152-164.
Goedert, K. M., Harsch, J., & Spellman, B. A. (2005).
Discounting and conditionalization: Dissociable cognitive
processes in human causal inference. Psychological
Science, 16, 590-595.
Goedert, K. M., & Spellman, B. A. (2005). Non-normative
discounting: There is more to cue interaction effects than
controlling for alternative causes. Learning & Behavior,
33, 197-210.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Kao, S., & Wasserman, E. A. (1993). Assessment of an
information integration account of contingency judgment
with examination of subjective cell importance and
method of information presentation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 19, 1363-1386.
Lober, K., & Shanks, D. (2000). Is causal induction based
on causal power? Critique of Cheng (1997).
Psychological Review, 107, 195-212.
Mandel, D. R., & Lehman, D. R. (1998). Integration of
contingency information in judgments of cause,
covariation, and probability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 269-285.
Perales, J. C. & Shanks, D. R. (2007). Models of
covariation-based causal judgment: A review and
synthesis. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14, 577-596.
Price, P. C., & Yates, J. F.
(1993).
Judgmental
overshadowing: Further evidence of cue interaction in
contingency judgment. Memory & Cognition, 21, 561572.
Shanks, D R., Lopez, F. J., Darby, R. J., & Dickinson, A.
(1996). Distinguishing associative and probabilistic
contrast theories of human contingency judgment. In D.
R. Shanks, K. J. Holyoak, & D. L. Medin (Eds.), The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Causal Learning
(Vol. 34, pp. 167-206). San Diego: Academic Press.
Spellman, B. A. (1996a). Conditionalizing causality. In D.
R. Shanks, K. J. Holyoak, & D. L. Medin (Eds.), The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Causal Learning
(Vol. 34, pp. 167-206). San Diego: Academic Press.
Spellman, B. A. (1996b). Acting as intuitive scientists:
Contingency judgments are made while controlling for
alternative potential causes. Psychological Science, 7,
337-342.
White, P. A. (2002). Perceiving a strong causal relation in a
weak contingency: Further investigation of the evidential
evaluation model of causal judgment. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 97-114.
White, P. A. (2008). Accounting for occurrences: A new
view of the use of contingency information in causal
judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 204-218.

carried out on probabilities rather than on event frequencies.
A recent review of causal inference in the single cause case
highlighted the superiority of models based on weighted
frequencies over those based on probabilities in accounting
for these effects (Perales & Shanks, 2007). Indeed, a recent
model of causal inference in the multiple cause case, the
weighted averaging model of White (2008), is based on
event frequencies and accounts for sample size and outcome
density effects. That model fails, however, to account for
patterns of causal judgment observed in the current set of
experiments in which sample size was held constant.
Future versions of the CTC model may be able to account
for sample size and outcome density by adjusting the
computation performed in step 2. This adjustment should be
possible while retaining the essential characteristics of the
model: the initial comparison step, the heavy weighting of
sufficiency information, and the inclusion of all
disconfirming evidence when the alternative is a generative
cause of the outcome.
Conclusion In sum, the Comparison then Computation
(CTC) model captures some important aspects of human
causal inference when there are multiple explicitly
represented causes of the same outcome. Additionally, the
model makes novel predictions regarding how individuals
will use the probability of the outcome given the joint
occurrence of a target and alternative cause and how
individuals use disconfirming evidence when evaluating a
target cause in the presence of a generative alternative.

Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank Stephanie Cox for assistance
with data collection and entry.

References
Baker, A. G., Mercier, P., Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Frank, R.,
& Pan, M. (1993). Selective associations and causality
judgments: Presence of a strong causal factor may reduce
judgments of a weaker one. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 19, 414432.
Busemeyer, J.R., Myung, J., & McDaniel, M.A. (1993).
Cue competition effects: Empirical tests of adaptive
network learning models. Psychological Science, 4, 190195.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1992). Covariation in
natural causal induction. Psychological Review, 99, 365382.
Cheng, P. W., Park, J., Yarlas, A. S., & Holyoak, K. J.
(1996). A causal-power theory of focal sets. In D. R.
Shanks, K. J. Holyoak, & D. L. Medin (Eds.), The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Causal Learning
(Vol. 34, pp. 313-355). San Diego: Academic Press.

178

