UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Modeling of Spoken Language Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84r8659m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Strauss, Ted J.
Mirman, Daniel
Magnuson, James S.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Modeling of Spoken Language Processing: A hands-on tutorial
Ted J. Strauss (ted.strauss@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, New School for Social Research

Daniel Mirman (daniel.mirman@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut and Haskins Laboratories

James S. Magnuson (james.magnuson@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut and Haskins Laboratories
Computational models provide a means for concretely
specifying theoretical assumptions, and examining their
complex interactions via simulation. Ideally, models help
explain existing data and provide novel predictions that guide
further research. In this tutorial, we will cover principles of
conducting simulations, and assessing model success and
failure. We will use the domain of spoken language
processing for our examples. Models have been particularly
useful in the domains of speech perception and spoken word
recognition, where theories and the signal are both complex.
The TRACE model (McClelland & Elman, 1986) has the
greatest breadth and depth of any model in those domains,
and despite well-known shortcomings, continues to be used
productively (e.g., to model time course data from eye
movements). It also has much in common with other models
characterized by activation-competition dynamics (e.g.,
Shortlist [Norris, 1994]). This makes TRACE ideal for
introducing principles of computational modeling of spoken
language processing.
Participants will learn skills for carrying out computational
modeling of speech perception with TRACE. Novices will be
introduced to principles and practical aspects of using models,
and can expect to leave the tutorial prepared to begin
modeling their own data. Experienced modelers will add new
techniques to their repertoires. Participants will simulate
speech experiments and link results to human data using the
recently developed jTRACE modeling software (Strauss et
al., 2007).

Figure 1: A screenshot of jTRACE.
course data, using a detailed example (the time-course of
word frequency effects reported by Dahan, et al., 2001).
The discussion of model interpretation will focus on
specifying links between materials, task constraints, and
measures used with human subjects and computational
models. Understanding these connections is vital in gauging
the success or failure of a simulation, and we will discuss
diagnosing model successes and failures as attributable to
four levels of analysis: theoretical, implementational,
parametric, and linking hypotheses. At the end of the tutorial,
participants will work in small groups on a modeling project
applying the techniques learned during the tutorial. One-onone modeling consultations will be available.

Prerequisites

1. Modeling speech perception with jTRACE

No modeling experience is necessary. If possible, bring a
laptop and install the free modeling tools in advance (from
http://magnuson.psy.uconn.edu/jtrace).

We will begin with a review of theories and models of speech
perception, emphasizing the symbiosis of behavioral and
modeling techniques, with particular focus on TRACE. We
will then introduce features of jTRACE, including simulation
visualizations, parameters, graphing, and archival features.
Participants will learn by replicating classic TRACE
simulations. Studies of increasing complexity will highlight
elements of good modeling research and common pitfalls to
avoid.

References
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2001).
Time course of frequency effects in spoken-word
recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive
Psychology, 42, 317-367.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 1-86.
Norris, D. (1994). Shortlist: A connectionist model of
continuous speech recognition. Cognition, 52, 189-234.
Strauss, T. J., Harris, H. D., & Magnuson, J. S. (2007).
jTRACE: A reimplementation and extension of the
TRACE model of speech perception and spoken word
recognition. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 39, 19-30.

2. Linking model to behavior
We will cover techniques for sophisticated modeling projects,
including scripting large batches of simulations, designing
lexicons and stimuli, decision rules, and exploring model
parameters. We cover methods for linking continuous output
from a computational model to common tasks such as
priming, naming, and lexical decision, and then turn to time

19

