UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Decoupling of Intuitions and Performance in the Use of Complex Visual Displays

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hv9x7xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Hegarty, Mary
Smallman, Harvey S.
Stull, Andrew T.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Decoupling of Intuitions and Performance in the Use of Complex Visual Displays

1

Mary Hegarty1 (hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Harvey S. Smallman2 (smallman@pacific-science.com)
Andrew T. Stull1 (stull@psych.ucsb.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
2
Pacific Science and Engineering Group, San Diego, CA 92121, USA
Worryingly, past research suggests that users often have
poor intuitions about what makes effective graphical
displays (Smallman & St. John, 2005). In particular, users
have misplaced faith in realistic representations and their
ability to extract information from them–they mistake
familiarity for effectiveness. Smallman and St. John term
this misplaced faith Naïve Realism. For example, Navy
users prefer spatially realistic 3D icons of ships and planes
on their displays but these features lead to slow, error-prone
identification. Similarly, users predict they will need high
fidelity realistic 3D displays to lay routes across terrain
when they actually perform the task better with lower
fidelity displays that unmask the valleys and other avenues
through the terrain necessary to successfully perform the
task (Smallman, Cook, Manes, & Cowen, 2007).
Meteorology offers a rich domain in which to study these
issues. Forecasters use weather maps for a variety of tasks,
including reconciling model data with observations,
generating forecasts for different client needs, and issuing
warnings of severe weather events. The displays that they
use while performing these tasks typically show a variety of
different meteorological variables (pressure, wind,
temperature, etc.) superimposed on the map. Existing
display systems give forecasters a great deal of flexibility
and tailorability in terms of what variables are shown
(Hoffman, Detweiler, Conway, & Lipton, 1993). Given the
flexibility they have, how well do users tailor their displays
to best show the information they need?
In a recent naturalistic observation of twenty one Navy
weather forecasters (Smallman & Hegarty, 2007), we found
that when performing a forecasting task, participants
accessed weather maps that were more complex than they
needed, displaying variables that were extraneous to their
task. This effect was exacerbated with forecasters of lower
spatial ability. That is, low-spatial forecasters put more
extraneous variables in their displays and their forecasts
were somewhat less accurate.
In his cognitive analysis of principles of graphics design,
Kosslyn (1989) states as a cardinal rule that “no more or
less information should be provided than is needed by the
user:” (p. 211). Tufte (1983) also cautions against including
extraneous information in visual displays, calling this
information “chartjunk”. In adding extraneous variables to
their displays, these meteorologists are violating a basic
principle of effective graphics. The question we ask here is
to what extent these extraneous weather map variables
actually impair performance.
In a preliminary laboratory study on this question
Canham, Hegarty, and Smallman (2007) had participants

Abstract
Interactive display systems give users flexibility to tailor
visual displays to different tasks and situations. But this
flexibility can only be beneficial if users have metaknowledge of the types of displays that are effective for
different purposes. In previous studies with both Navy
forecasters and undergraduate students, we found that users
often prefer maps that display extraneous variables, especially
those that add realism to the display, even when they are taskirrelevant. In the current study, we tested undergraduate
students on a simple read-off and comparison task with
weather maps and measured the effect of these extraneous
variables on accuracy, response times, eye fixations, and
intuitions about display effectiveness. Extraneous realism
slowed response time and lead to more eye fixations on both
task-relevant and task-irrelevant regions of the displays. In
spite of these decrements in performance, and the fact that
realism added no task-relevant information, about a third of
participants persisted in favoring these realistic displays over
non-realistic maps.
Keywords: Visual Displays, Naïve Realism, Eye Fixations.

Introduction
Research on comprehension and reasoning with visual
displays has made it clear that the effectiveness of a visual
display depends on the task to be performed with that
display (Bertin, 1983; Cheng, 2002; Larkin & Simon, 1987;
Shah, Freedman & Vekiri, 2005). The same task may be
performed more or less efficiently with different types of
displays, and a display that is effective for one task may not
be useful for another.
Given the task-dependent nature of display effectiveness,
how can cognitive scientists and designers best support
information processing with visual displays? One traditional
human factors approach is to analyze the information needs
and tasks to be accomplished by particular users and design
displays that best support these tasks. This is a good
approach for bounded task domains with stable information
needs over time. But for users who perform many diverse
tasks with different information demands, this may not be
feasible.
An alternative solution for less stable domains is to give
the user control over parameters of the display, so that he or
she can customize displays at will. However, it is important
to realize that this solution puts the burden of the design
process on the user. When users are allowed to customize
their own displays, effective performance relies more on
their knowledge and intuitions about which displays are
most effective for different tasks.
881

irrelevant realism produces salient areas outside the relevant
areas that capture users’ attention.
To examine these possibilities, we monitored participants’
eye fixations while they performed an attribute comparison
task. If irrelevant variables in the regions to be compared
mask the relevant variables, so that they are simply harder
to see, time in the regions to be compared should increase.
Additional time for the realistic maps might be due to longer
fixations, more fixations, or both. If users have to sample
from a wider area on realistic maps or the extraneous
variables distract users’ attention from the task relevant
regions, then we should observe more fixations and time
spent fixating regions of the display outside the relevant
regions.

perform simple comparison tasks with weather maps that
displayed different numbers of extraneous variables. The
extraneous variables were either off-task meteorological
variables (e.g., adding temperature information to a display
when the only variable to be compared was pressure) or
realism (completely task-irrelevant terrain features and state
boundaries). We also measured participants’ intuitions about
displays by asking them to choose from among several
possibilities, the map that they would prefer to use when
comparing weather variables in different regions of the map.
Performance was very accurate (over 95%). However, as
Figure 1 shows adding realism to weather maps added over
half a second to average response times, and as the number
of displayed meteorological variables increased, time to
answer questions increased significantly. In spite of these
decrements in performance, fully a third of participant
responses were in favor of showing realistic over nonrealistic maps. Clutter from just one extraneous variable
penalized performance, yet participants harbored misplaced
faith in realistic representation.

Method
Participants
Twenty-six students at the University of California, Santa
Barbara participated in the study, in return for either course
credit or payment.

Response time (sec)

7.5
7
Pressure

6.5
6
5.5
5

Wind

Materials

Temperature

Maps. We created weather maps that depicted one of
three weather variables on a map of the North American
continent. The variables were surface temperature (depicted
by color scale), surface air pressure (depicted by isobar
contours), and surface wind (depicted by arrows of different
sizes, such that the direction of the arrow indicated wind
direction, and the size indicated wind speed). The coding
schemes used were quite conventional. The maps were
created using ArcGIS, based on data obtained from the
national weather archive regarding the actual weather
conditions on 12 different dates in the last 5 years. We
created realistic and non-realistic versions of each weather
map. For the realistic maps, the weather variables were
superimposed on a map showing the surface topography of
the North American continent and ocean floor (in light
achromatic shaded relief), and the state and national
boundaries (as dark lines). The non-realistic maps showed
these variables on a map displaying only the shorelines of
the North American continent (see Figure 2).

4.5
4
1

2

3

Without Realism

1

2

3

With Realism

Num ber of Displayed Variables

Figure 1. Mean response times observed by Canham,
Hegarty, and Smallman (2007) (error bars show SEMs).
In the present study, we further investigate why
individuals prefer realistic over non-realistic maps. In our
previous study (Canham et al, 2007) participants were asked
which of the maps they would prefer to use to perform a
task. It is possible that their responses to this question were
based on aesthetics rather than intuitions about their
performance efficiency. We addressed this concern in the
present study by asking an additional question that focused
more on efficiency (“with which map would you perform
fastest?”). If participants were responding on the basis of
aesthetics in the previous study, they should be less likely to
choose maps with extraneous realism when asked this
efficiency question.
We also considered alternative accounts of how
extraneous realism on a map affects performance on our
weather comparison task. One possibility is that it takes
more time to encode the relevant weather variables on these
maps, because these variables are masked by the irrelevant
realism or because encoding of the irrelevant information
clutters the mental representation and has to be suppressed.
Another possibility is that irrelevant realism on a map
produces more eye fixations outside the task-relevant areas,
for example, because users have to sample from a wider
area to see the relevant patterns in the data, or because the

Intuition Trials. There were 18 intuition trials in the
experiment. On each trial, participants were shown eight
maps and were asked which map they would choose if they
had to compare different points on the map in terms of a
single meteorological variable (pressure, temperature or
wind). On half of the trials they were asked to choose which
map they would prefer to use to accomplish the task (see the
example in Figure 2). On the other half they were asked
with which of the eight displayed maps they would answer
fastest. For example the set of maps shown in Figure 2
might be accompanied by the question “If you had to
compare the wind direction at different areas of the map,
with which map would you answer fastest”.

882

No Realism

Realism

Figure 3. Examples of comparison trials showing a nonrealistic and a realistic map

Procedure
There were four phases in the experiment. First,
participants were familiarized with the graphical
conventions of the maps (the use of color to show
temperature, isobar lines to show pressure, etc). Second they
completed the 18 intuition trials. Third, the eyetracker was
calibrated and they completed the 36 comparison trials
while their eyes were tracked. Finally, participants
completed the 18 intuition trials again.

Figure 2. Example of a preference trial.
Comparison Trials. On each trial of the comparison
task, participants were shown a single weather map with
three locations marked with the letter A and the numbers
1 and 2, respectively (see sample trials in Figure 3). The
region marked A was always located within the borders
of the United States. The task was to choose which of the
two numbered regions (1 or 2) was either most similar or
most different to the region marked A with respect to a
single meteorological variable (pressure differential,
wind direction, or temperature). A line of text above the
map on each trial indicated whether participants were to
choose the region that was most similar or most different,
and indicated which weather variable was to be
considered for that trial. This phase of the experiment
had a 3 (meteorological variable to be compared) X 2
(realism) within participants design with 6 trials in each
condition of the design for a total of 36 trials. Figure 3
shows examples of non realistic and realistic trials in the
comparison phase in which the variable to be compared
was pressure.

Results
Intuition Trials
In the intuition trials, the optimal map choice (in terms of
minimizing visual clutter) is the map that showed only the
meteorological variable asked about and no extraneous
realism. We categorized participants’ map choices as (a)
optimal if they chose this map, (b) “extraneous realism” if
they chose the map showing the correct meteorological
variable plus realism, (c) “extraneous weather information”
if they chose a non-realistic map with additional
meteorological variables and (d) “extraneous weather
variables plus realism” if they chose a map that added both
additional meteorological variable(s) and realism.
Table 1. Mean percentage of times that map types were
chosen before and after performing the comparison task.
______________________________________________
Prefer?
Fastest?
Before After Before After
Optimal Map
(Chance: 12.5%)
56.5
73.9
60.4
83.5

Apparatus
Eye movements were monitored by an SMI EyeLink
head mounted eye tracking system which sampled
participants’ eye fixations at a rate of 250 Hertz. The
aggregation software was set to detect saccades with an
amplitude of 0.05 degrees or greater, an acceleration
threshold of 9,500 degrees/second2 and a velocity
threshold of 30 degrees /second. Participants viewed
images presented on a computer monitor while resting
their chins on a chin rest, set 30 inches from a 15 by 11.5
viewing screen (21.7 by 28.1 degrees of viewing angle).
The resolution of the screen was 800 by 600, with a
refresh rate of 75 Hertz.

Extraneous Realism
(Chance: 12.5%)
Extraneous Weather
Variables
(Chance: 37.5%)
Extraneous Weather
Vars. + Realism
(Chance: 37.5%)

883

34.3

26.5

33.5

16.1

3.5

0.9

4.8

1.7

5.7

1.0

5.0

1.0

Table 1 shows the mean percentage of times that
participants chose the different categories of maps and (in
parentheses) the percentage of times they would have
chosen these categories by chance had they picked
randomly. Maps with extraneous variables were chosen
almost one third of the time and participants frequently
chose the map with the correct meteorological information
but with extraneous realism. One sample t-tests comparing
observed to chance values indicated that participants were
significantly more likely than chance to choose both the
optimal map (p <.001 in all cases), and the map that showed
the optimal variables with a realistic rendering (p < .05 in all
cases). They were much less likely than chance to choose
maps with extraneous meteorological information (p < .001
in all cases).
Participants were more likely to choose the optimal map
after performing the comparison task compared to before,
F(1, 25) = 8.04, p = .009, ηp2 = .24. They were marginally
more likely to chose the optimal map when they were asked
the efficiency question (with which map would you answer
fastest?) than when asked the preference question (which
map would you prefer to use?), F(1, 25) = 3.76, p=.06, ηp2 =
.13, suggesting that they based their answers to these two
questions on somewhat different criteria (such as aesthetics
versus efficiency).

Response time was also affected by the meteorological
variable to be compared, F(2, 50) = 11.37, p < .001, ηp² =
.31, with questions about pressure taking longest (M = 5.01
sec SD = 0.99) followed by wind (M = 4.91 sec, SD = 1.34)
and temperature (M = 4.34 sec, SD = 1.15). The interaction
between realism and the meteorological variable to be
compared was not significant, F(2, 50) = 2.07, p = .14.
Eye Fixations. Figure 5 shows the fixations made by all
26 participants while solving a pressure question without
(top) and with (bottom) realism. To analyze the eye
fixations, we defined areas of interest on the maps
corresponding to the three regions to be compared (labeled
A, 1, and 2) and the text specifying the comparison to be
made. Each of the 3 areas to be compared had a diameter of
90 pixels or about 3.2 degrees of visual angle and
corresponded to 1.3% of the area of the display. The text
(above the map, specifying the comparison to be made) was
a rectangular area of 100 by 60 pixels and took up 7.5% of
the screen. We derived three types of measures from the eye
fixation data; total fixation duration (the sum of the
durations of all fixations) on each area of interest, the
number of fixations in each area of interest and the average
length of fixations. Total fixation duration was highly
correlated with number of fixations and showed the same
pattern, so we only report number of fixations here.

Comparison Task
Accuracy on the comparison task was high (Mean
Proportion Correct = .91, SD = 0.05), so our analyses
instead focused on response times and eye fixations.
Individual trials with response times of more than 3
standard deviations from the mean (2.9% of trials) were not
included in these analyses.
6

Response time (sec)

5.5

Pressure
Wind

5

Temperature
4.5
4
3.5
3
Without Realism

With Realism

Figure 4. Mean response times for the comparison trials.
(Error bars show standard errors)
Response Times. Figure 4 shows the mean response
times for the different conditions in our design. There was a
significant effect of realism on response time, F(1, 25) =
24.58, p < .001, ηp² = .50, with responses taking about a half
a second longer on average on the realistic maps (4.97
seconds, SD = 1.17) than on the non-realistic maps (4.54
seconds, SD = 1.03), similar in magnitude to the “realism
cost” in the earlier Canham et al. (2007) study.

Figure 5. Plots of the fixations of all 26 participants during
a pressure trial with a realistic and a non-realistic map.

884

regions to be compared. These were fixated more often on
realistic trials than on non-realistic trials, F(1, 25) = 6.66, p
< .05, ηp² = .21. This result is illustrated by the example in
Figure 5 which shows that whereas most fixations were
clustered around the three regions to be compared, the
fixations were more dispersed in the case of the more
realistic map and there were more fixations in between the
areas of interest. The number of fixations on “other regions”
was also affected by the variable to be compared, F(2, 50) =
3.65, p < .05, ηp² = .31.

The eye fixation analyses indicated that the longer
response times with realistic maps reflected both longer
fixations, and a greater number of fixations on realistic
maps compared to non-realistic maps. Average fixation
length increased from 223 msec. (SD = 27.6) for trials
without realism to 233 msec. (SD = 27.6) on trials with
realism (F(1, 25) = 19.66, p < .001, ηp² = .44).
Table 2 reports the average number of fixations in each of
the areas of interest and on “other” areas of the display, that
is, fixations that fell outside the regions marked A, 1, 2 or
the text. The number of fixations on the region marked A
was affected by the variable to be compared (F(2, 50) =
13.10, p < .001, ηp² = .34 and there was a significant
interaction of the variable to be compared with realism, F(2,
50) = 13.10, p < .001, ηp² = .34. Analysis of simple effects
indicated that participants fixated this region more often for
the realistic trials compared to the non-realistic trials when
the variable to be compared was pressure.
The number of fixations on the combined regions marked
1 and 2 (which the participants had to compare to A)
showed a main effect of realism. Participants fixated these
regions more often on realistic trials than on non-realistic
trials, F(1, 25) = 4.38, p < .001, ηp² = .15. The variable to be
compared (temperature, pressure, wind) also affected
fixations to these regions (F(2, 50) = 14.27, p < .001, ηp² =
.36. Fixations on the text were unaffected by realism,
although this variable was also influenced by the variable to
be compared, F(2, 50) = 11.16, p < .001, ηp² = .31.

Discussion
The results of this experiment are consistent with our
earlier research on intuitions and performance with weather
maps by Navy meteorologists and undergraduate students
(Smallman & Hegarty, 2007; Canham, et al., 2007). About
one third of participants chose realistic maps over nonrealistic maps, in spite of the fact that adding realism to the
maps slowed their response times by about half a second on
a simple read-off and comparison task. In addition, new data
provided by eye fixations in this experiment revealed that
when viewing realistic maps, participants made longer
fixations, more fixations in the regions to be compared, and
more fixations outside these regions.
The patterns of eye fixations allow us to speculate how
the extra clutter imposed by realism on a map affects
performance. Eye fixations were more dispersed around the
regions to be compared on realistic maps than on the
simpler non-realistic maps, suggesting that participants may
need to sample from a wider area on these maps to encode
the relevant patterns. Participants also had to re-fixate the
relevant areas more often on realistic maps, suggesting that
they may have had difficulty retaining information in
working memory about the weather patterns on these maps.
For example, if users tried to retain and compare visual
images of regions of the maps, it is likely that the
extraneous visual information on realistic maps overloaded
working memory. Finally, participants’ fixations were
somewhat longer on realistic maps, suggesting that it may
have taken more time to see the relevant information when
it was partially masked by extraneous variables (cf. van
Diepen & d’Ydewalle, 2003) .
While several theorists have made prescriptions for the
construction of effective graphics, (Bertin, 1983; Kosslyn,
1989; Tufte, 1983) there has been little empirical validation
of these principles. Our research provides new evidence for
the basic principle that graphics should not provide more
information than is needed by the user. Our finding that task
performance is slowed by the addition of irrelevant
variables to maps is also consistent with research showing
that speed of visual search on maps is related to the amount
visual clutter (Rosenholtz, Li, & Nakano, 2007). Similarly,
Lohse (1993) found that the best predictor of response time
to extract information from graphs was the number of nontarget distractor objects in the task- relevant regions of the
graph. It is clear that extraneous information in visual
displays can hurt performance.

Table 2. Mean Number of fixations in the different regions
of interest as a function of trial type (SD in parentheses).
_________________________________________
Area of Interest
A
1&2 Text
Other
_________________________________________
Temperature
3.24
4.03
3.87
3.91
No Realism
(1.11) (1.50) (1.42) (1.84)
Temperature
+ Realism

3.36
(1.38)

4.22
(1.74)

3.55
(1.53)

4.48
(2.31)

Pressure
No Realism

3.59
(1.10)

4.47
(1.49)

4.13
(1.44)

4.39
(2.10)

Pressure
+ Realism

4.14
(1.10)

5.01
(1.32)

4.44
(1.47)

4.74
(2.19)

Wind
No Realism

4.28
(1.44)

5.01
(1.60)

3.41
(1.04)

3.47
(2.02)

Wind
4.04
5.16
3.56
3.96
+ Realism
(1.48) (1.87) (1.15 (2.38)
_________________________________________
Finally, there was a main effect of realism on the number
of fixations made to “other regions,” that is, outside the

885

Despite the performance decrement from the extraneous
information that they provided, participants preferred
realistic maps over non-realistic maps about one third of the
time. Our research validates Smallman and St. John’s
(2005) work on Naïve Realism and extends it to the
meteorology domain. Furthermore, it shows that
participants’ choice of realism does not just reflect aesthetic
preferences, as there was only a small increase in choice of
the optimal map when participant were asked a question that
focused on efficiency rather than preference. More
positively, it shows that participants’ choice of the optimal
map increased after performing the comparison trials,
suggesting that participants had some metacognitive
awareness of the added difficulty produced by the realistic
maps and learned to distinguish somewhat between maps
that they might prefer and those with which they performed
more efficiently.
The fact that some participants still choose realistic maps,
even after experiencing the performance decrements with
these maps, suggests that display designers should be
cautious in giving users the ability to customize their own
information displays. It has long been widely appreciated in
the human factors domain that users’ intuitions and
performance can decorrelate (e.g., Andre & Wickens, 1995).
But what our work highlights is just how systematic and
predictable can be the metacognitive lapses responsible,
predictable enough to begin to accommodate in display
design. Alternative approaches might be to recommend
display designs for different tasks, or to explicitly teach
users principles of effective graphical displays. Without
some kind of guidance, however, our research suggests
users’ intuitions may lead to graphical display
configurations that actually impair their performance.
Of course, this research is limited in that we examined
performance of naïve students in a simple read-off and
comparison task. It is important to examine how display
clutter affects performance in more complex naturalistic
decision tasks. In current research we are examining how
extraneous display information affects performance in
inference tasks, for example situations in which participants
have to predict future weather conditions based on
knowledge of meteorological principles. We are also
examining how display clutter affects performance of more
expert individuals, to examine the extent to which expertise
moderates the effects of clutter, if at all.

References
Andre, A. D., & Wickens, C. D. (1995). When users want
what's NOT best for them. Ergonomics in Design, 3, 1014.
Bertin, J. (1983). Semiology of Graphics (translated by
William J. Berg). Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Canham, M., Hegarty, M., & Smallman, H. (2007). Using
complex visual displays: When users want more than is
good for them. Proceedings of the Eighth International
Naturalistic Decision Making conference, Pacific Grove,
CA, June 1st -4th.
Cheng, P. C. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
Principles for complex representational systems.
Cognitive Science, 26, 685-736.
Hoffman, R., Detweiler, M., Conway, J., & Lipton, K.
(1993). Some Considerations in Using Color in
Meteorological Displays. Weather and Forecasting, 8,
505-518.
Larkin, J., & Simon, H. (1987).Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Lohse, G. L. (1993). A cognitive model for understanding
graphical perception. Human Computer Interaction, 8,
353-388.
Kosslyn (1989). Understanding charts & graphs. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 185-226.
Rosenholtz, R., Li, Y., & Nakano, L. (2007). Measuring
visual clutter. Journal of Vision, 7, 1-22.
Smallman, H. S., Cook, M. B., Manes, D. I., & Cowen, M.
B. (2007). Naïve realism in terrain appreciation. In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society (pp. 1317 - 1321).
Baltimore, MD, October 1st-5th.
Smallman, H. S., & Hegarty, M. (2007). Expertise, spatial
ability and intuition in the use of complex displays. In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Conference of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society (pp.200-204), Baltimore,
MD, October 1st-5th.
Smallman, H. S., & St. John, M. (2005). Naïve realism:
Misplaced faith in realistic displays. Ergonomics in
Design, 13, 14-19.
Shah, P., Freedman, E. G., & Vekiri, I. (2005). The
comprehension of quantitative information in graphical
displays. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.) The Cambridge
Handbook of Visual Spatial Thinking. Cambridge
University Press, New York, NY.
Tufte, E. T. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
van Diepen, P. M. J., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003). Early
peripheral and foveal processing in fixations during scene
perception. Visual Cognition, 10, 79-100.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ryan Najima for help with running the
experiment and Jerry Tietz for technical support. This
research is funded by a grant from the Office of Naval
Research.

886

