UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Discovering the Conceptual Primitives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/29k7r0zx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Aziz-Zadeh, Lisa
Casasanto, Daniel
Feldman, Jerome
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Discovering the Conceptual Primitives
Lisa Aziz-Zadeh (lazizzad@usc.edu)
University of Southern California, Department of Occupational Science
Daniel Casasanto (casasan@stanford.edu)
Stanford University, Department of Psychology
Jerome Feldman (feldman@icsi.berkeley.edu)
University of California at Berkeley & International Computer Science Institute
Rebecca Saxe (saxe@mit.edu)
MIT, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Leonard Talmy (talmy@buffalo.edu)
State University of New York at Buffalo, Department of Linguistics
Keywords: conceptual primitive; development; linguistics;
neuroscience; experiment; unified cognitive science

Putative Conceptual Primitives
Concepts that seem to be (nearly) linguistically universal are
good candidates for the conceptual primitives. One
immediate goal is to make an organized collection of such
potential primitives and then try to design experiments to
test which of these proposed primitives is always realized
and therefore available as a basis for language (learning).
There are many direct cases involving body parts,
actions, desires, experiences, etc. There are several studies
that indicate that the neural representation of words and
concepts concerning direct bodily experiences are based (at
least in part) on the circuits that carry out the underlying
action, emotion, perception, etc. There remain open
scientific questions about exactly how these primitives (e.g.,
emotions) are encoded, but that is not the current concern.
However, there are also a large number of other potential
conceptual primitives to explore and some fairly new
experimental techniques that can help determine if a concept
is primitive in our sense. Obviously enough, any concept
that is learned is embodied somehow. The question is
whether there is detectable neural encoding of mechanisms
that help organize concepts and thus provide a basis for
language and thought. Several developmentalists and
linguists have suggested such possible conceptual
primitives, but there does not seem to be any systematic
collection of these suggestions. There should be.

Summary
We believe that Cognitive Science is now in a position to
discover the neural basis for many of the conceptual
primitives underlying language and thought. The main
concern is conceptual mechanisms that have neural
realization that does not depend on language and culture.
These concepts (the primitives) are good candidates for a
catalog of potential foundations of meaning. This multidisciplinary, bi-coastal Symposium will explore the current
prospects for postulating and then experimentally
investigating such conceptual primitives. The five panelists
are a developmentalist (R. Saxe), a linguist (L. Talmy), a
neuroscientist (L. Aziz-Zadeh) and a psycholinguist (D.
Casasanto), and an AI researcher (J. Feldman) all of whom
work extensively on the subject.

Introduction
This is not about some question of "innateness". We have
known for decades that there is continual interplay between
genetic and experiential (including cultural) factors starting
from gestation and continuing throughout life. Strikingly,
the basic neural wiring of prefrontal cortex is not complete
until well past puberty. So it might seem to be a mistake to
study fixed neural representations instead of developmental
processes. But there do seem to be milestones of normal
development and understanding these intermediate states
appears to be essential. In particular, the development of
language plays a crucial role in human experience and we
may be on the threshold of determining the neural substrate
of some of the pre-linguistic conceptual primitives involved.
Of course, we should not expect every individual and
culture to use exactly the same primitives (universality), but
there should be enough commonality for an empirically
grounded theory of language use and acquisition.

Some Initial Examples
As we mentioned, many conceptual primitives are linked
directly to body parts, actions, experiences, mental states
etc. There is already excellent work in several fields aimed
at better understanding these. Much of the work on more
abstract cognitive primitives has come from linguists and
developmentalists. We list some examples of the kinds of
postulated conceptual primitives that may be suitable for
multi-disciplinary investigation.

27

also respond to food, conspecifics, shelter, etc. In some
cases there are detailed analyses linking single unit
recordings to postulated primitives of conceptual thought.
There is also some suggestive work on the neural
encoding and localization of spatial prepositions, time
concepts, etc. Physical properties and affordances are also
clearly encoded for action, although this does not seem to be
studied as much. So, we can probably establish the neural
reality of a primitive conceptual system with entities,
actions and events. It would have ontological categories
with associated features, affordances, and actions and these
can be linked to social groups and to emotions. This is a lot
and science will be significantly advanced when all this gets
worked out in detail. But something like this protoconceptual system is present in (at least) all mammals and
they are also quite flexible in how they learn and behave
Now for the hard part. People can also formulate and
communicate complex relationships among concepts,
displaced from the present situation. The big question is:
What conceptual mechanisms support the rich
compositionality of human thought? A number of the ideas
in the list above are candidates for playing a central role, but
essentially nothing is known about how these notions are
neurally encoded, or even if they are the right primitives.
There are now experimental techniques that can test the
neural connection in many cases. These include infancy
studies, psycholinguistic experiments, and various kinds of
imaging. Between them the panelists have considerable
expertise in all these disciplines. The Symposium will try to
assess the current prospects for using converging evidence
to identify plausible conceptual primitives and to suggest
specific problems of the greatest promise.
The plan for the Symposium is as follows. The panelists
will communicate in advance to refine the set of potential
primitives presented above. The panel discussion will start
with Len Talmy describing some of the most important
proposed primitives and the linguistic evidence for them.
The other panelists will then discuss the prospects for
experimental investigation, focusing on the most
challenging feasible cases. Lisa Aziz-Zadeh will present
neuroimaging data for concepts related to actions, faces and
places. Rebecca Saxe will discuss evidence for conceptual
primitives for intentions and propositional attitudes. Daniel
Casasanto will discuss how the study of cross-linguistic and
cross-cultural cognitive differences can inform the search
for universal conceptual primitives. Jerry Feldman will
discuss computational modeling and the role of cognitive
primitives in a Unified Cognitive Science.

Physical World
day/ night; near/ far
physical properties - solid, etc.
affordances
Ontological categories,
event/ thing, animate/ inanimate, people, place
basic categories; sub/super types, prototypes
features of ontological types
Image Schemas, etc.
parameters of spatial cognition
action schemas - x-schemas, controller
goals, force-dynamics (including causation)
parameters of parts & boundaries
time
Social World
young/ mature/ old
authority, approval, help
value & reciprocity & exchange & obligation
theory of mind; perception and intention
Communication
speaker/ hearer, direct/ indirect
true/ false
question, command, etc.
Grammaticalized concepts
person, gender, age, agent, speaker, aspect
possession, mass/count, reflexives, instrument
Primal scenes/ event types – transitive, etc.
Mental Operations
learning
matching, binding
mental spaces; mappings
simulation, displacement
General Logic
connectives, numbers, distributions
similarity, inference, uncertainty
part/ whole; scales, magnitude
binding, variables, indefinites, generalization

The Known and the Unknown
There is actually quite a lot known about the neural basis for
many of the concepts listed above. For example, at least part
of the representation of concrete nouns is associated with
the temporal pole. There is good reason to be confident that
major ontological categories are primitive because animals

References
http://ecgweb.pbwiki.com/DCP

28

