UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Division of Labor between Semantics and Phonology in Normal and Disordered Reading
Development Across Languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4932r3ns

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Yang, Jiafeng
McCandliss, Bruce D.
Shu, Hua
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Division of Labor between Semantics and Phonology in Normal
and Disordered Reading Development across Languages
Jianfeng Yang (jiy2002@med.cornell.edu)1
Hua Shu (shuh@bnu.edu.cn)2
1

2

Bruce D. McCandliss (bdm2001@med.cornell.edu) 1
Jason D. Zevin (jdz2001@med.cornell.edu)1

Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY 10021, USA
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, CHINA
mappings from spelling to sound are dominant, with
multiple grain sizes, including single letters, cluster of
letters corresponding to single phonemes (graphemes) and
larger units (e.g., rimes) contributing to spelling-to-sound
mappings, sometimes in conflicting ways. For Chinese
characters, in contrast, the mapping from spelling to sound
is syllable-based, such that the pronunciation of a whole
character is probabilistically determined by its phonetic
component. This difference in grain size drives a difference
in the degree of arbitrariness between the two writing
systems: In English spelling, even a very strange word such
as YACHT has some predictability (i.e. the Y, A, and T is
assigned pronunciations common in other contexts). In
Chinese, however, the space of possible pronunciations
given an unfamiliar character is unconstrained.
Differences in the statistical regularity of writing systems
have important consequences for the development of reading
skill. One is a marked difference in speed of learning to read
across languages: There is strong evidence that learning to
read a regular alphabetic orthography is easier than learning
to read irregular orthographies (Seymour, Aro, & Erskine,
2003). The average English child can read 3000-5000 words
after first grade (White, Grave& Slater, 1990) whereas
Chinese children after first grade can typically read only 667
characters (Xing, Shu, Li, 2004).
A second consequence of orthographic depth on reading
development concerns the division of labor between directand semantically-mediated spelling-to-sound (Harm &
Seidenberg, 2004), i.e., the differential impact of semantics
on word reading across writing systems. In a “shallow”
orthography, pronunciations can easily be computed directly
from spelling, resulting in a relatively limited role for
semantics in reading aloud (Raman & Baluch, 2001). In
relatively “deep” languages, such as English, semantic
knowledge plays a role, particularly in the reading of words
whose spellings are highly atypical (Strain, Patterson, &
Seidenberg, 1995). Because Chinese is deeper still than
English, the role of semantic processing in reading aloud is
greater and much more widespread, with the result that the
contribution of semantics to the development of Chinese
reading is particularly important.
Over the course of development, this difference in the
division of labor means that distinct pre-literate language
skills will contribute differentially to reading success across
writing systems. The relative contribution of “phonological
awareness” -- i.e., the ability to categorize and manipulate

Abstract
In order to study how statistical patterns in different languages
can shape the division of labor in the reading system, we
trained two models with the same basic architecture and
learning parameters: One was trained to read Chinese, the
other English. In Simulation 1, we examined the role of
semantics in the early development of reading by comparing
results from training with and without input from semantics.
Semantic input had relatively modest effects for learning to
read English, mainly improving performance on exception
words. In Chinese, the influence of semantics was much
greater and much more widespread: all types of words were
learned more quickly, although the benefit was still greater for
words with atypical spelling-to-sound correspondences. In
Simulation 2, we simulate the effect of developmental deficits
in phonological and semantic processing on the development
of reading. Consistent with data concerning individual
differences in reading skill, phonological deficits had a much
greater impact on English, whereas semantic deficits had a
more serious impact on learning to read Chinese. The results
demonstrate that differences in the division of labor among
readers of different writing systems can be explained in terms
of the statistical properties of the writing systems and their
interaction with generic associative learning mechanisms.
Keywords:
modeling

Reading;

development;

computational

In previous studies, we have examined how a modeling
framework developed to explain a variety of phenomena in
the translation from spelling to sound in English could be
extended to explain similar phenomena in Chinese. Those
studies demonstrated that the same basic architecture and
learning rules appropriate to English could model the
acquisition and use of reading skill in Chinese, and simulate
both effects that are directly analogous to English
(consistency) and effects that are specific to Chinese
(phonetic radical regularity) (Yang, Zevin, Shu,
McCandliss& Li, 2006). In the current study, we pursue this
further by asking whether two models with the same
functional architecture (aside from language-specific
orthographic and phonological representations) can capture
differences between the two languages in the division of
labor between direct and semantically-mediated translation
from spelling to sound.
Chinese and English differ in the relative statistical
regularity of spelling-to-sound mappings. The distinction
comprises differences in both the grain size (Ziegler &
Goswami, 2006) and degree of arbitrariness of mappings
between the writing systems. In English, sub-syllabic

445

individual speech sounds -- and “morphological awareness,”
– the ability to process the meanings of words as
componential – depends on orthographic depth. For example,
in transparent scripts such as Arabic, only phonological
awareness predicts word reading (Saiegh-Haddad & Geva,
2007). Morphological awareness has only a weak influence
on reading in shallower orthographies (McBride-Chang et
al., 2005). In Chinese, however, morphological awareness is
a much stronger predictor of reading success (Shu,
McBride-Chang, Wu, & Liu, 2006), although phonological
awareness also appears to play some role (Shu, Peng&
McBride-Chang, 2008).
The differential contribution of meta-linguistic awareness
measures may indicate specific contributions from more
basic cognitive processes to reading, which would help
account for the different patterns of reading disorder
observed across languages. Developmental dyslexics in
shallow orthographies tend to present with slow reading,
comprehension difficulties and particular difficulty reading
non-words (Lindgren, Renzi, & Richman, 1985). In deeper
orthographies, such as English, there is some evidence for
subtypes of developmental dyslexia: “phonological
dyslexics” who have specific difficulty with decoding and
“surface dyslexics” who have specific difficulty with
atypically spelled words, but relatively spared performance
on regular words and non-words (Manis, Seidenberg et al.,
1996). These subtypes are often explained as resulting from
distinct pre-existing deficits: in semantic processing for the
developmental delay/surface dyslexics and phonological
processing for the phonological dyslexics.
In English, children with developmental surface dyslexia
are remarkably similar to reading-level matched controls
(Manis et al., 1996). Their specific difficulty reading words
with unusual spelling to sound correspondences, may be
associated with semantic deficits (Plaut, McClelland,
Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996). In Chinese, the influence of
semantic deficits is much more serious: Poor semantic
processing leads to difficulties with all words, even those
with more typical spelling to sound correspondences,
although reading of atypically spelled words does suffer
relatively more (Shu, Meng, Chen, Luan, & Cao, 2005).
In contrast, developmental phonological dyslexia is
associated with deficits in phonological processing. In English,
phonological dyslexics present with a reading impairment that
is most pronounced for non-words, but, in milder cases, can
leave exception word reading more or less intact (Castles &
Coltheart, 1993). In Chinese, the pattern is again quite different:
Children with phonological deficits are impaired relative to
age-matched controls on reading of all words, but the
impairment is greater for words with typical spelling-to-sound
correspondences, with the result that phonological dyslexics do
not show the typical advantage for regular-consistent over
irregular-inconsistent words (Shu, et al., 2005).
Thus, in both typical and disordered development, the
division of labor between phonological and semantic
processing in reading differs sharply between English and

446

Chinese. Broadly speaking, phonological processing is more
critical for English, and semantic processing is more critical
for Chinese. This is likely driven by differences in the
computational demands of the two languages. Whereas
alphabetic scripts place a premium on skills related to the
direct translation from spelling to sound at the sub-syllabic
level, logographic scripts embody a much coarser-grained
and more arbitrary set of spelling-to-sound mappings. The
current simulations explore how these differences in the
properties of writing systems can drive developmental
differences in the organization of the reading system, given
the same basic functional architecture.

Simulation 1: the Role of Semantics in
Normal Reading
Architecture
The same basic architecture was used for two models: One
for Chinese and one for English. Each model had an
orthographic input layer designed to represent the spellings
of words in each writing system, fully connected to a hidden
layer of 100 hidden units, which was in turn fully connected
to a phonological output layer designed to represent the
pronunciations of words in that language. The phonological
output layer was fully connected both directly to itself and to
50 “cleanup” units, permitting the formation of attractor
states, following Harm & Seidenberg (1999).
The English representations of orthography and
phonology were adapted from the scheme of Harm &
Seidenberg (2004): 101 units were used to represent 10 slots
of letters in the orthographic layer and 200 units were used
for 8 slots to represent phonemes in phonological layer. The
Chinese orthographic representation consisted of 270 units
based on a linguistic description of Chinese orthography
including radicals, number of strokes and radical position
(Xing et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2006). 92 units were used to
code each Chinese syllable, which includes five slots: one
onset slot, three rime slots, and a fifth slot for tone.
A semantic input layer was also included; semantic
patterns were random-bit sequences designed to capture only
the most abstract characteristics of word meanings (Plaut,
1997). 3000 semantic exemplars clustered into 120
categories over 200 semantic features were created and 2881
patterns were assigned randomly to the words in English
training corpus. A subset of 2689 patterns from the English
training patterns were selected and randomly assigned to
Chinese characters. While this has the disadvantage of not
providing a realistic representation of the similarity of the
meanings of words within a language, it has the advantage
of permitting us to use the same semantic patterns for both
languages, thus allowing a direct investigation of the role of
spelling-to-sound granularity and arbitrariness on the
division of labor. The semantic input layer was connected to
the output layer via 100 hidden units. For each language, the
model was run 10 times with no semantic input (hereafter,
the orthography to phonology or OP simulation) and 3 times

with the semantic input included (hereafter the
orthography/semantics to phonology or OSP simulation).
Each run of the model used a different random seed; results
are reported from the averages of all runs.

Figure 1: Model architecture

Training
Following Harm & Seidenberg (1999), we first pre-trained
the phonological attractor net to an error threshold of 0.01),
and the final weights (120K in Chinese and 300K in English
model) of phonological attractor net were embedded in the
reading model. To avoid “catastrophic interference”,
interleaved training (Hetherington & Seidenberg, 1989) on
phonological and reading was adopted. Training mixed 10%
“listening” trials, on which only the phonological attractor
was trained, with 90% “reading” trials, on which the whole
model was trained. A learning rate of 0.005 and momentum
of 0.9 were used. Online learning was used with the
continuous
recurrent
back-propagation
algorithm
(Pearlmutter, 1995). Each word was selected according to
the training probability transformed via square root
compression.
The Chinese training corpus of 2689 characters consisted
of 2390 characters from a set of naming norms (Liu, Shu, &
Li, 2007) and plus 299 additional items from phonetic
families represented in the testing materials. Frequency
estimates was taken from the Modern Chinese Frequency
Dictionary (Wang, 1986). The English training corpus
consisted of 2,881 monosyllabic words assigned frequencies
taken from the Marcus, Santorini, and Marcinkiewicz (1993)
norms, which are based on 43 million tokens from the Wall
Street Journal.

Testing
Naming accuracy and sum squared error (SSE) were
computed to test the model’s performance. Accuracy was
determined by applying a winner-take-all scoring system:
for each slot on the output layer, we determined which
phoneme was closest to the pattern on the output at the final
time tick and reported this as the model’s pronunciation.
SSE, a stand-in for response latency, was computed from
the model’s output at the 11th time tick by adding together
the square of the difference between the model’s
phonological output for each unit and the target output.

447

Results
Following Harm & Seidenberg (1999), the English model
was tested after 1.5M trials. The Chinese model was
tested at 2.5M trials to match overall accuracy. Training
without semantic (OP) input resulted in a high level of
accuracy on the trained items for both languages (98% in
English, 89% in Chinese).
To investigate whether the same architecture could
provide an account of basic phenomena in adult reading
for both languages, we tested the frequency by
consistency interaction using benchmark stimuli from two
studies: one of Chinese, the other of English. In both
languages, the typical pattern of results reveals
interacting effects of regularity/consistency, such that
irregular-inconsistent (I-I) words are named more slowly
that regular-consistent (RC) words, with a much larger
effect of regularity for low-frequency, relative to
high-frequency words.
For the English model, 144 monosyllablic words were
tested from previous empirical (Taraban & McClelland,
1987) and modeling (Plaut, et al., 1996) research. Overall
accuracy was 96.81%. Sum squared error results
replicated significant main effects on response latency of
frequency, F (1,138) =8.09, Mse=.25, P<.01, and
regularity/consistency, F (2,138) =3.92, Mse=.12, P<.05,
as well as the interaction between them, F (2,138) =2.71,
Mse=.08, P=.07. The regularity/consistency effect was
significant only for low frequency items, F (2,139) =6.25,
Mse=.20, P<.01, not for high frequency items, F<1.
The Chinese model was tested on 120 characters used
in previous modeling and naming experiment (Yang et al.,
2006). Overall accuracy was 92.67%. The model
replicated main effect of frequency F (1,114) =36.63,
Mse=5.91, p<0.01 and of regularity/consistency, F (2,114)
=3.50, Mse=0.56, P<0.05 and the interaction between
them, F <1. The regularity/consistency effect was
significant only for low frequency items F (2,115) =5.57,
Mse=1.18, P<0.01, no difference was found for high
frequency items, F<1.
The inclusion of semantic input during training had
very different effects on learning trajectories between the
two languages. As shown in Figure 2, the inclusion of
semantic input had a relatively limited impact on learning
spelling-to-sound in English, with a modest increase in
the speed of acquisition overall (98% for OP and 99%
for OSP after 1.5M trials), and a small benefit for
irregular/inconsistent (I-I) items (88% for OP and 100%
for OSP). In contrast, for Chinese, the inclusion of
semantics improved the speed and accuracy of learning
for all item types (88% for OP and 99% for OSP after
2.5M trials). There was a large effect of the inclusion of
semantic input on performance for I-I items (77% for OP
and 100% for OSP), and a somewhat smaller, but
significant impact on R-C items (91% for OSP and 100%
for OSP).

Results
When comparing the impact of phonological and semantic
deficits between English and Chinese, clear qualitative
differences in the division of labor for disordered reading
we observed between the two languages.
The phonological deficit (P-) had a much stronger effect
on English reading than Chinese. Non-words reading was
severely impaired for English model (after 1.5M trials,
accuracy for naming of non-words from Glushko, 1979,
Experiment 1, 80% for OSP and 22% for P-), whereas word
reading ability was acquired more slowly than the intact
English model, and was moderately impaired for regular
(83%) and exception words (74%)(See Figure 3). In
contrast, although the Chinese P- model learned more
slowly than the unimpaired model, it achieved near-perfect
word reading accuracy at the end of training (97% for R-C
and 90% for exceptions, contrast to 100% for both in OSP).

Figure 2: Semantic contributions to regular and exception
words across languages

Discussion
The results demonstrate that differences in the role of
semantics in learning to read can be simulated as the result
of differences in the computational demands of learning to
read English and Chinese in the context of the same
functional architecture. This provides an account of the
differential role of pre-existing skills in phonological and
semantic processing in predicting individual differences in
typical reading development. Simulation 2 extends this
approach to consider the impact of pre-existing deficits in
phonological and semantic processing for the two writing
systems.

Figure 3: Deficits by language and stimulus type

Simulation 2: Developmental Impairments and
Division of Labor
Methods
To study differences between languages on the emergence
of the phonological dyslexia and surface dyslexia symptoms
over the course of literal acquisition, pre-literature deficits
in either semantic or phonological processing were
simulated in the model using weight decay. Phonological
deficits (P-) were simulated by applying weight decay to all
connections between the orthographic input and
phonological output layer, via the hidden units. Semantic
deficits (S-) were simulated with analogous decay on the
connections between semantics and phonology. Although
there are arguments for implementing phonological deficits
as impairment to the output attractor network (Harm &
Seidenberg, 1999), this current approach permits us to
observe the influence of the same type and intensity of
“damage” on each pathway. Three levels of weight decay
were used: 1 x 10-4, 5 x 10-5 and 1 x 10-5. Aside from the
application of weight decay during training on reading trials,
architecture and training were identical to the OSP model in
Simulation 1. Results are the average from all three levels
of decay.

448

Introduction of a semantic deficit impaired reading for all
words in the Chinese model, with a stronger effect on
irregular/inconsistent items than on regular/consistent items
(95% for R-C and 83% for I-I in S-, in contrast to 100% for
both conditions in OSP). In contrast, the English S- model
learned all words somewhat more slowly than the control
OSP model, but eventually acquired quite normal
performance on R-C items, with a specific impairment on
I-I items reflecting a pattern of developmental surface
dyslexia.
We now turn to a simulation of three specific cases of
developmental dyslexia in Chinese reported by Shu et al.
(2005). They reported one case of surface dyslexia associated
with specific deficits in morphological awareness tasks and
spared performance in phonological awareness tasks. We
simulated this child (a 9 year-old boy) by selecting a point in
training at which the S- model had similar overall accuracy to
the child (approximately 45%), at 440k training trials. At this
level of overall performance, the S- model’s ability to read
words was influenced by stimulus regularity (46.7% accuracy
for regular items vs. 26% for irregular, x2=2.81, P=0.08),
which roughly matches the performance of the children with
semantic deficits who exhibited symptoms of surface
dyslexia on the same items (53% and 37% for regular and
exception items, respectively).

provide both a general computational account of how
differences in orthographic depth influence reading
development, and a novel, specific account of
developmental dyslexia in Chinese.
Simulation 1 compared models with and without
semantic input to demonstrate that the relatively opaque
mapping from spelling to sound in Chinese drives a much
stronger reliance on semantics than English. Simulation 2
compared the influence of pre-existing deficits in
phonology and semantics between languages, and the
pattern of results was generally consistent with
cross-linguistic studies of dyslexia: Phonological deficits
have a greater influence on reading in English, specifically
resulting in poor non-word reading accompanied by general
impairment to word reading, whereas semantic deficits
result in a deficit essentially limited to exception words. In
contrast, for Chinese constitutive deficits in semantic
processing had a widespread impact on word reading,
which was greater than the influence of phonological
deficits.
Finally, we presented simulations of three cases of
developmental dyslexia in Chinese. In each simulation,
there was independent motivation to implement the core
deficit in a particular subsystem. One child had frank
difficulties with morphological processing, but relatively
normal phonological awareness. His data were simulated by
implementing a deficit in the semantics-to-phonology
pathway throughout development and matching the model's
overall performance to the patient's. Conversely, two other
subjects who showed frank phonological awareness
difficulties in the absence of morphological processing
deficits were simulated by implementing the same type of
deficit on the direct mapping from spelling to sound. In
both cases, the pattern of reading disability was correctly
predicted by the model.
Although the model provides an initial account of the
division of labor in two languages, it has some limitations
that should be addressed in future studies. One unique
aspect of Chinese not simulated here is the fact that
spelling-to-meaning correspondences are quasi-regular in
the same way that spelling-to-sound correspondences are.
Because the current model uses random bit semantics, and
simulates semantics as an input representation rather than
computing meaning from print, it cannot address this
phenomenon and furthermore may be underestimating the
role of semantic processing in learning to read Chinese. An
important step in future modeling will be the inclusion of
more realistic feature-based semantics (although this makes
it difficult to match items across languages) and using a full
"triangle" architecture with orthography as an input and
semantics and phonology as output layers trained in an
interleaved fashion (e.g., Harm& Seidenberg, 2004).
Another limitation of the model is the scale of the effect
of phonological impairment on English reading. The
phonological impairment results in extremely poor
non-word performance in English, and also has a much

Figure 4 Simulation for cases of children with
developmental dyslexia reading Chinese
We used the same matching technique to simulate two
cases of developmental phonological dyslexia – children
who scored poorly on measures of phonological awareness,
but within normal range for morphological awareness. The
younger child (J, 10y8m) had equal difficulty with regular
(46%) and exception words (50%). After 440K trails of
training, when the accuracy of the model matched the
child’s, it exhibited a similar pattern (58% for regular and
60% for irregular). The older child (Q, 12y2m) also did not
show a regularity effect (71% for regular and 73% for
irregular), which was simulated by the model (76% for
regular and 81% for irregular) trained for 960K trails.

Discussion
Simulation 2 explored the impact of core deficits in
phonological and semantic processing for reading in
English and Chinese. The model provides insight into how
dyslexia can take on different forms in the two languages.
In English, mappings from spelling to sound are much more
efficient than mappings from spelling to meaning, with the
result that deficits that impact the translation from spelling
to sound are much more serious than deficits that impact
meaning to sound. In Chinese, on the other hand,
spelling-to-sound mappings are more arbitrary, resulting in
greater reliance on semantic input under normal
circumstances, and a much greater impact of semantic
deficits on reading aloud in general. Despite these
differences, for both languages, the impact of deficits in
direct translation from spelling to sound is greater for
regular/consistent words and the impact of deficits in
meaning-to-sound
translation
is
greater
for
irregular/inconsistent items.

General Discussion
We presented a series of simulations that apply the same
functional architecture and learning rules to reading
Chinese and English. This permitted us to investigate how
the division of labor (Harm & Seidenberg, 2004) between
semantics and phonology is driven by the computational
demands of a particular writing system. The simulations
449

greater effect on word reading than is typically seen in
developmental phonological dyslexia. The influence of
phonological deficits on Chinese, while still somewhat
smaller than the influence of semantic deficits, is also likely
to be overestimated. This may be a result of the decision we
made to make the phonological and semantic lesions more
equivalent by applying decay to the weights connecting the
inputs to the outputs via the hidden layer. Harm &
Seidenberg (1999) abandoned this approach to simulating
phonological dyslexia on both practical and theoretical
grounds. Practically, they observed the same extreme
deficits we did on non-word reading. Theoretically, they
argued that the deficits observed in phonological dyslexia
were more in line with constitutive deficit in the formation
of attractors. Future simulations will simulate phonological
deficits on the output following Harm & Seidenberg (1999).

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by Natural Science
Foundation (China) grants 60534080 and 30470574 (HS),
NSF REC 0337765 (BDM).

Reference
Castles, A., & Coltheart, M. (1993). Varieties of
developmental dyslexia. Cognition, 47(2), 149-180.
Glushko, R. J. (1979). The organization and activation of
orthographic knowledge in reading aloud. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 5(4), 674-691.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology,
Reading Acquisition, and Dyslexia: Insights From
Connectionist Models. Psychological Review, 106(3),
491-528.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Computing the
Meanings of Words in Reading: Cooperative Division of
Labor Between Visual and Phonological Processes.
Psychological Review, 111(3), 662-720.
Hetherington P., and Seidenberg M. (1989), Is there
'catastrophic interference' in connectionist networks?
In Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, p26-33, Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ, 1989.
Lindgren, S. D., Renzi, E. d., & Richman, L. C. (1985).
Cross-National Comparisons of Developmental Dyslexia
in Italy and the United States. Child Development, 56(6),
1404-1417.
Liu, Y., Shu, H., & Li, P. (2007). Word naming and
psycholinguistic norms: Chinese. Behavior Research
Methods, 39(2), 192-198.
Marcus, M., Santorini, B., & Marcinkiewicz, M. A. (1993).
Building a large annotated corpus of English: The Penn
Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19, 313-330.
Manis, F. R., Seidenberg, M. S., Doi, L. M.,
McBride-Chang, C., & Petersen, A. (1996). On the bases
of two subtypes of development dyslexia. Cognition,
58(2), 157-195.
McBride-Chang, C., Cho, J.-R., Liu, H., Wagner, R. K., Shu,
H., Zhou, A., et al. (2005). Changing models across

450

cultures: Associations of phonological awareness and
morphological structure awareness with vocabulary and
word recognition in second graders from Beijing, Hong
Kong, Korea, and the United States. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 92(2), 140-160.
Pearlmutter, B. A. (1995). Gradient Calculations for
Dynamic Recurrent Neural Networks: A Survey. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 6(5), 1212-1228.
Plaut, D. C. (1997). Structure and function in the lexical
system: Insights from distributed models of word reading
and lexical decision. Language and Cognitive Processes,
12, 767-808.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., &
Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding Normal and
Impaired Word Reading: Computational Principles in
Quasi-Regular Domains. Psychological Review, 103(1),
56-115.
Raman, I., & Baluch, B. (2001). Semantic Effects as a
Function of Reading Skill in Word Naming of a
Transparent Orthography. Reading and Writing: An
Interdisciplinary Journal, 14(7-8), 599-614.
Saiegh-Haddad, E., & Geva, E. (2007). Morphological
awareness, phonological awareness, and reading in
English–Arabic bilingual children. Reading and Writing.
Seymour, P. H. K., Aro, M., & Erskine, J. M. (2003).
Foundation literacy acquisition in European
orthographies. British Journal of Psychology, 94,
143-174.
Shu, H., McBride-Chang, C., Wu, S., & Liu, H. (2006).
Understanding Chinese Developmental Dyslexia:
Morphological Awareness as a Core Cognitive Construct.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1), 122-133.
Shu, H., Meng, X., Chen, X., Luan, H., & Cao, F. (2005).
The subtypes of developmental dyslexia in Chinese:
evidence from three cases Dyslexia, 11(4), 311-329.
Shu, H., Peng, H., & McBride-Chang, C. (2008).
Phonological awareness in young Chinese children.
Developmental Science, 11(1), 171-181.
Strain, E., Patterson, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1995).
Semantic Effects in Single-Word Naming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21(5), 1140-1154.
Taraban, R., & McClelland, J. L. (1987). Conspiracy effects
in word pronunciation. Journal of Memory and Language,
26(6), 608-631.
Yang, J., Zevin, J. D., Shu, H., McCandliss, B. D., & Li, P.
(2006). A "Triangle" Model of Chinese Reading. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, p912-917, Mahwah, NJ.
Ziegler, J. C., & Goswami, U. (2006). Becoming literate in
different languages: similar problems, different solutions.
Developmental Science, 9(5), 429-436.
Wang, H. (1986). Modern Chinese frequency dictionary.
Beijing: Beijing, Language Institute Press.
White, T. G., Graves, M. F., Slater, W. H. (1990). Growth of
reading vocabulary in diverse elementary schools:
Decoding and word meaning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82(2), 281-290.
Xing, H., Shu, H., Li, P. (2004). The Acquisition of Chinese
Characters: Corpus Analyses and Connectionist
Simulations. Journal of Cognitive Science, 5(1), 1-49.

