UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do English and Mandarin Speakers Think Differently About Time?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wb8p0nb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do English and Mandarin Speakers Think Differently About Time?
Lera Boroditsky (lera@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall, Bldg. 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
bounded events, unidirectional change, etc.) appear to be
universal across cultures and languages.
However, there are many aspects of our concept of time
that are not observable in the world. For example, does time
move horizontally or vertically? Does it move forward or
back, left or right, up or down? Does it move past us, or do
we move through it? All of these aspects are left unspecified
in our experience with the world. They are however,
specified in our language —most often through spatial
metaphors.
Across languages, people use spatial metaphors to talk
about time. Whether they are looking forward to a brighter
tomorrow, proposing theories ahead of their time, or falling
behind schedule, they rely on terms from the domain of
space to talk about time (Clark, 1973; Lehrer, 1990;
Traugott, 1978). Those aspects of time that are not
constrained by our physical experience with time are free to
vary across languages and our conceptions of them may be
shaped by the way we choose to talk about them. This
article focuses on one such aspect of time and examines
whether different ways of talking about time lead to
different ways of thinking about it.

Abstract
Do the languages we speak shape the ways we think?
Boroditsky, (2001) demonstrated that speakers of English and
Mandarin think differently about time. This work has recently
been brought into question (January & Kako, 2007; Chen,
2007). Here I present new evidence that again demonstrates a
difference between English and Mandarin speakers’
construals of time. Both languages use horizontal and vertical
spatial language to talk about time. For example, in English
we might say that the best is ahead of us, or we may move a
meeting up. In English, vertical metaphors are relatively
infrequent and horizontal metaphors predominate. In
Mandarin, both horizontal and vertical metaphors are
frequent. Importantly, vertical metaphors are much more
frequent in Mandarin than they are in English. The new
evidence once again suggests that Mandarin speakers don’t
just talk about time vertically more frequently than do English
speakers, they also think about time vertically more
frequently than do English speakers.
Keywords: Language and Thought, Space, Time, Metaphor,
Mandarin

Introduction
Time is a topic of central importance in our culture.
According to the latest Oxford dictionary, the word “time”
is the most frequently used noun in English, with other
temporal words like “year” and “day” also placing in the top
10. How does our understanding of the domain of time
develop?
What are the ingredients of our mental
representations of time?
Certainly some elements of time are apparent in our
experience with the world. From experience, we might be
able to learn that each moment in time only happens once,
that we can only be in one place at one time, that we can
never go back, and that many aspects of our experience are
not permanent (i.e., faculty meetings are not everlasting, but
rather begin and end at certain times). In other words, our
experience dictates that time is a phenomenon in which we,
the observer, experience continuous unidirectional change
that may be marked by appearance and disappearance of
objects and events. These aspects of conceptual time should
be universal across cultures and languages. Indeed, this
appears to be the case. In order to capture the sequential
order of events, time is generally conceived as a onedimensional, directional entity. Across languages, the spatial
terms imported to talk about time are also one-dimensional,
directional terms such as ahead/ behind or up / down rather
than multidimensional or symmetric terms such as narrow/
wide or left / right (Clark, 1973; Traugott, 1978). Aspects of
time that are extractable from world experience (temporally

Time in English
In English, we predominantly use front / back terms to
talk about time. We can talk about the good times ahead of
us or the hardships behind us. We can move meetings
forward, push deadlines back, and eat dessert before we are
done with our vegetables. On the whole, the terms used to
order events are the same as those used to describe
asymmetric horizontal spatial relations (e.g., ‘‘he took three
steps forward’’ or ‘‘the dumpster is behind the store’’).

Time in Mandarin Chinese
In Mandarin, front / back spatial metaphors for time are
also common (Scott, 1989). Mandarin speakers use the
spatial morphemes qian (‘‘front’’) and hou (‘‘back’’) to talk
about time. What makes Mandarin interesting for present
purposes is that Mandarin speakers also systematically use
vertical metaphors to talk about time (Scott, 1989). The
spatial morphemes shang (‘‘up’’) and xia (‘‘down’’) are
frequently used to talk about the order of events, weeks,
months, semesters, and more. Earlier events are said to be
shang or ‘‘up,’’ and later events are said to be xia or
‘‘down.’’
Although in English vertical spatial terms can also be
used to talk about time (e.g., ‘‘hand down knowledge from
generation to generation’’ or ‘‘the meeting was coming
up’’), these uses are not nearly as common or systematic as

427

Subjects were primed with horizontal or vertical spatial
arrangements presented on a computer monitor and were
then timed as they answered a question about time.
This priming paradigm was developed to answer two
separate questions. First, do people automatically make use
of spatial representations when thinking about time? And
second, do the spatial representations that people construct
differ across languages?
Since Boroditsky (2001), many other studies using a wide
array of paradigms have found that people indeed
automatically create spatial representations for thinking
about time (e.g., Torralbo et al, 2006; Gevers et al, 2003;
Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2007; Casasanto & Lozano, 2006).
This allows us to set this first question aside and focus on
the second question: do speakers of different languages
construct different spatial representations of time?
Some answers to this second question have also come in
in the affirmative (Tversky et al, 1991; Nunez & Sweetser,
2006; Boroditsky & Gaby, 2006; Casasanto et al, 2004;
Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2007). For example, Nunez &
Sweetser (2006) have found that the Ayamara arrange time
so that the past is in front of them and the future is behind
them. Other studies have found that culturo-linguistic
factors like writing direction affect how people spatialize
time, with Hebrew and Arabic speakers for example tending
to arrange time from right to left rather than left to right as
do English speakers (Tversky et al, 1991; Fuhrman &
Boroditsky, 2007). Speakers of Kuuk Thaayorre – an
Australian Aboriginal language that relies primarily on
absolute frames of reference for talking about space - have
been found to lay out time from East to West (rather than
left to right for English speakers for example) (Boroditsky
& Gaby, 2006).
This brings us back to the question of English and
Mandarin speakers and whether or not they indeed construct
different spatial representations for thinking about time.
The studies reported in this paper make use of a simple new
paradigm to get at this question. This paradigm improves
on several aspects of the paradigm used in Boroditsky
(2001).
In this new set of studies an experimenter stands next to a
participant, points to a spot in space directly in front of the
participant and says (for example) “If I tell you that this here
is TODAY, where would you put YESTERDAY? And
where would you put TOMORROW?” One advantage of
this paradigm is that participants are able to point anywhere
around them in 3-dimensional space. This improves on the
original paradigm in which the two horizontal dimensions
(left to right and front to back) were collapsed together on
the 2-dimensional computer monitor.
Another advantage of the new paradigm is that it allows
us to measure not just the axis on which time is laid out
(e.g., is there preference for horizontal versus vertical) but
also the direction (e.g., is the future placed further up or
further down?).
To preview, results from this new paradigm support the
original conclusion: English and Mandarin speakers think

is the use of shang and xia in Mandarin (Chun, 1997a,
1997b; Scott, 1989). The closest English counterparts to the
Mandarin uses of shang and xia are the terms next
(following) / last (previous) and earlier / later.
In summary, both Mandarin and English speakers use
horizontal terms to talk about time. In addition, Mandarin
speakers commonly use the vertical terms shang and xia.

The critical difference between English and
Mandarin
The critical difference between English and Mandarin
descriptions of time for present purposes is that Mandarin
speakers use vertical metaphors more often than do English
speakers.
This claim has sometimes been misunderstood or
misrepresented in the literature. The claim is not that
Mandarin speakers only talk about time vertically, nor that
Mandarin speakers talk about time vertically more often
than they talk about time horizontally. The critical
difference between Mandarin and English being described
here is that Mandarin speakers talk about time vertically
more often than English speakers do. Figure 1 shows
typical proportions of horizontal and vertical metaphors
reported in corpus studies of English and Mandarin time
metaphors (e.g., Chen, 2007).

Figure 1. Proportions of vertical and horizontal spatial
metaphors typically reported in corpus studies of English
and Mandarin time metaphors (e.g., Chen, 2007)

Do patterns in language predict patterns in thought?
If Mandarin speakers talk about time vertically more often
than do English speakers, does this mean that they also think
about time vertically more often than do English speakers?
Previous work on this question has come up with some
contradictory answers (Boroditsky, 2001; January & Kako,
2007; Chen, 2007). I will discuss these studies in detail in a
separate paper. For the purpose of this paper let us note that
all three of these studies have relied on the same paradigm.

428

important to consider whether differences between English
and Mandarin speakers may have stemmed from differences
in writing direction. Mandarin was traditionally written in
vertical columns from right to left, but is now more
commonly written as English, horizontally from left to right
(with important regional variation).
To be able to measure effects of writing direction all
Mandarin speakers tested in California filled out a detailed
language background questionnaire after completing the
study. The questionnaire included questions about the kinds
of Mandarin scripts participants were familiar with
(traditional, simplified, pinyin, etc), and how often they read
text laid out in different orientations (vertically from right to
left, horizontally from left to right, etc).
Analyses of
participants’ reading patterns showed that reading direction
alone cannot explain these cross-linguistic differences.
Mandarin speakers who reported only reading text written
horizontally from left to right (as English), were still seven
times more likely to arrange time vertically than were
English speakers (35% vs 5% vertical arrangements
respectively).

about time differently. Mandarin speakers talk about time
vertically more than English speakers do, and Mandarin
speakers also think about time vertically more often than
English speakers do.

Study Description
Participants
57 native Mandarin speakers and 13 native English speakers
participated in this study. Of the Mandarin speakers, 15
were residing in Taiwan and tested in Mandarin, 33 were
residing in California and tested in Mandarin, and an
additional 9 were residing in California and tested in
English.
The experimenters conducting the study in
Mandarin were native speakers of Mandarin.

Procedure & Materials
All participants were tested on the same three questions
about time. An experimenter stood next to the participant,
pointed to a spot in space directly in front of the participant
and said (for example) “If I tell you that this here is
TODAY, where would you put YESTERDAY?” The
experimenter waited for the participant to point and then
asked “And where would you put TOMORROW?” Three
sets of durations were tested with each participant. In
addition to Yesterday/Today/Tomorrow, participants were
also asked to locate Breakfast and Dinner with respect to
Lunch, and September and October with respect to August.
The central time point was always mentioned first (e.g.,
today), followed by the earlier time point (yesterday), and
then the later time point (tomorrow). No spatial language
was used to describe the time points in either English or
Mandarin (e.g, participants were not asked which is the “up
month” or the “down month” in Mandarin).

Results
The results are shown in Figure 2. Overall, Mandarin
speakers were more than 8 times more likely to lay out time
vertically than were English speakers, t(68)=3.87, p<.0005.
Across the three temporal durations tested, English speakers
produced horizontal arrangements 95% of the time, and
vertical arrangements only 5% of the time. In contrast,
Mandarin speakers tested on the same stimuli produced
vertical arrangements 42% of the time. This was true even
though no vertical spatial language was used in the
Mandarin testing stimuli. Even when tested entirely in
English, Mandarin-English bilinguals produced vertical
arrangements 37% of the time.
The proportions of vertical and horizontal points found in
this study correspond well with patterns found in language.
For example, recent analyses of Mandarin corpora reveal
that around 40% of time descriptions in Mandarin contain
vertical metaphors (Chen, 2007).
Because writing direction has been shown to be an
important factor in shaping people’s representations of time
(Tversky et al, 1991; Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2007), it was

Figure 2: Patterns of spatial layouts of time in the 4
groups tested in this study. The charts show proportions of
vertical and horizontal layouts produced by subjects.

429

Other interesting hints emerged in comparing the way that
English and Mandarin speakers pointed in the front/back
axis. English speakers always placed later or future events
further in front (away from the body). Mandarin speakers
showed this pattern 58% of the time, but the other 42% of
the time they showed the opposite pattern, placing earlier or
past events in front. It is possible this reversal stems from
the Mandarin use of “front” in phrases like “front year”
which means “two years ago.”
A more detailed look at English and Mandarin speakers’
representations of time revealed several new differences.
Understanding the extent and origins of these differences is
the subject of further research.

Discussion
The distributional statistics of vertical and horizontal
metaphors for time differ between English and Mandarin.
These distributional statistics appear to be absorbed by
speakers of English and Mandarin into their representations
of time. Mandarin speakers talk about time vertically more
often than English speakers do, and in these studies,
Mandarin speakers appear eight times more likely to
construct vertical representations of time than are English
speakers.
Beyond establishing these cross-linguistic differences,
many interesting questions remain. For example, showing
that Mandarin and English speakers differ in this task does
not establish that patterns in language (or more specifically
patterns in metaphors) per se cause these differences. The
lives and cultural experiences of English and Mandarin
speakers differ in an infinite number of other ways beyond
differences in language. How can we tell if differences in
language per se can cause these kinds of differences in
thinking?
One way to approach this question is to artificially change
the distributional patterns in people’s language environment
and see if this causes a corresponding change in thinking.
In Boroditsky (2001), English speakers were trained to
speak about time vertically (for example saying that
Monday was above Tuesday, and Thursday was below
Wednesday). This training was meant to introduce a
temporary shift in the relative frequencies of vertical and
horizontal metaphors for English speakers, making vertical
metaphors locally more frequent. Indeed after this vertical
language training, English speakers’ performance shifted to
more closely resemble that of Mandarin speakers. These
results suggested that experience with language per se can
and does shape people’s mental representations.
It would certainly be possible to do the same kind of
training with English speakers in this new pointing
paradigm. However, any shifts in performance in this kind
of explicit task are unlikely to be convincing. This
unfortunately is one disadvantage of this new paradigm.
We are in the process of developing more implicit measures
that would be more suitable to this design.
On the other hand, one advantage of the pointing design is
that it allows us to take a closer look at the spatial
representations English and Mandarin speakers construct for
time. These yield some interesting new answers. For
example, while the assumption in Boroditsky (2001) was
that English speakers’ horizontal representations of time are
in the front/back axis, the data from the pointing task
suggests that the left/right dimension is more dominant for
English speakers. These data are consistent with a growing
body of work showing a dominant left/right horizontal
organization of time in English (Tversky et al, 1991; Gevers
et al, 2003, Torralbo et al 2006; Fuhrman & Boroditsky,
2007; Casasanto & Lozano, 2006). Understanding the
complementary contributions of patterns in metaphor and
patterns in writing direction and other cultural artifacts is
the subject of further research.

Conclusions
This paper presented new evidence showing that English
and Mandarin speakers differ in their representations of
time. When asked to locate events in the 3-dimensional
space around their body, English speakers arranged the
events in the horizontal plane 95% of the time. Mandarin
speakers on the other hand produced vertical arrangements
42% of the time. That is, Mandarin speakers were eight
times more likely to produce a vertical arrangement for time
than were English speakers. The pattern of results was
similar whether Mandarin speakers were tested in Taiwan or
in California. Even when tested entirely in English,
Mandarin speakers produced vertical arrangements 37% of
the time. Further, differences in writing direction cannot
alone explain these cross-linguistic differences in
performance.
Mandarin speakers who only read
horizontally left to right (as English) were still seven times
more likely to arrange time vertically than were English
speakers. These differences in people’s time representations
were predicted by patterns in language.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Eva Chen, Gloria Fang, Heidi Jiang, and
Daniel Casasanto for help with stimulus fine-tuning and
data collection. This work was funded by an NSF CAREER
award to the author.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1 – 28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L, & Gaby, A. (2006). East of Tuesday:
Representing time in absolute space. Proceedings of the
28th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Vancouver, Canada.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Time in the Mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition. DOI:
0.1016/j.cognition.2007.03.004.

430

Gevers, W., Reynvoet, B. & Fias, W. (2003). The mental
representation of ordinal sequences is spatially organized.
Cognition, 87, B87-B95.
January, D., & Kako, E. (2007). Re-evaluating Evidence
for the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis: Response to
Boroditsky (2001). Cognition, 104, 417-426.
Lehrer, A. (1990). Polysemy, conventionality, and the
structure of the lexicon. Cognitive Linguistics, 1, 207–
246.
Núñez, R.E., & Sweeser, E. (2006). With the Future Behind
Them: Convergent Evidence From Aymara Language and
Gesture in the Crosslinguistic Comparison of Spatial
Construals of Time, Cognitive Science, 30(3), 401-450.
Scott, A. (1989). The vertical dimension and time in
Mandarin. Australian Journal of Linguistics, 9, 295– 314.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupianez, Juan (2006).
Flexible Conceptual Projection of Time Onto Spatial
Frames of Reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 745–757.
Traugott, E. (1978). On the expression of spatiotemporal
relations in language. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals
of human language: Word structure (Vol. 3, pp. 369–
400). Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. & Winter, A. (1991).
Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.

Casasanto, D.J, & Lozano, S.C. (2006). Metaphor in the
Mind and Hands. Proceedings of 28th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Vancouver, BC.
Casasanto, D., Boroditsky, L., Phillips, W., Greene, J.,
Goswami, S., Bocanegra-Thiel, S., Santiago-Diaz, I.,
Fotokopoulu, O., Pita, R., Gil, D. (2004). How deep are
effects of language on thought? Time estimation in
speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish.
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 575-580). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chen, J.Y. (2007). Do Chinese and English Speakers Think
about Time Differently? Failure of Replicating
Boroditsky (2001). Cognition, v104 n2 p427-436.
Chun, L. (1997a). A cognitive approach to UP metaphors in
English and Chinese: What do they reveal about the
English mind and the Chinese mind? In Research degree
progress report for Hong Kong Polytechnic University
(pp. 125 – 140).
Chun, L. (1997b). Conceptualizing the world through spatial
metaphors: An analysis of UP / DOWN vs. SHANG/ XIA
metaphors. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clark, H. (1973). Space, time semantics, and the child. In T.
E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Mental time-lines
follow writing direction: Comparing English and Hebrew
speakers. Proceedings of 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Nashville, TN.

431

