UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Social Information Influence Sentence Processing?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8dc2t2gf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Casasanto, Laura Staum

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Social Information Influence Sentence Processing?
Laura Staum Casasanto (lstaum@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Margaret Jacks Hall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
influences whether listeners choose the emotional or the
neutral meaning of a pair of homophones (e.g., flower/flour)
(Nygaard and Lunders 2002).
ERP evidence indicates that pragmatic information is also
available to listeners when they comprehend language (Van
Berkum et al. 2008). Hearing a child say a phrase like I just
quit smoking or a man saying I’m pregnant induces an ERP
component indicating surprise, suggesting that listeners are
considering the plausibility of an utterance given inferences
they have made about the speaker during sentence
comprehension.
People, then, use information about the scene, the
speaker, and other parts of the context to understand
language. But what about social information? Do listeners
use their knowledge of how different types of people tend to
talk to make predictions about what kinds of language a
speaker will produce?
Sociolinguistic variation is the variable production of
linguistic material that is conditioned by social factors, such
as the age, gender, ethnicity, or social class of a speaker
(among many other factors). This social information about
speakers is also part of the context of any linguistic
interaction, and like the other aspects of context mentioned
above, it is highly predictive of linguistic behavior.
Since its inception, the study of sociolinguistic variation
has been primarily the study of sociolinguistically
conditioned variable production (Labov, 1966, 1972;
Rickford, 1987). The variationist project has been
documenting and describing the way different groups of
people produce language, studying the factors that condition
variation at all levels of linguistic description, from
phonetics to discourse patterns. More recently,
sociolinguists have begun to analyze the social hierarchies
and relationships that underpin this variable production
(Eckert, 1989). However, very little is known about the
comprehension of this variable linguistic behavior - what do
listeners do with the structure that exists in socially
conditioned variable production? If this information is
somehow monitored, do listeners use the knowledge they
accumulate?
One study of the effects of the sociolinguistic variable
ING (e.g. walkin’ vs. walking) on listeners’ attitudes
suggests that listeners do make use of linguistic variation to
make judgments about speakers. In the matched guise
paradigm (Lambert, Hodgson, Gardner and Fillenbaum,
1960), only the critical feature is manipulated between
speech samples, which are then evaluated by naïve listeners.
Manipulating the realization of the final nasals in ING
influenced listeners’ judgments about the person who used it
– the alveolar nasal (n) makes speech sound more casual

Abstract
Does knowledge of sociolinguistic variation influence how
we perceive and understand speech coming from different
kinds of people? A series of experiments investigated whether
listeners have knowledge about t/d deletion, a sociolinguistic
variable, and, if so, whether this knowledge influences their
language comprehension. Experiment 1 investigated listeners’
knowledge of the social correlates of t/d deletion. Experiment
2 investigated whether social information listeners gather
from the non-linguistic context is used in formulating
expectations about sentence meanings. Results indicate that
listeners have implicit knowledge about t/d deletion, and they
use this information in resolving ambiguity, suggesting that
social information is a part of language understanding, and
should be included in models of language processing.
Keywords: Sentence processing; sociolinguistics.

Introduction
What kinds of information do listeners use to understand
language? The simplest assumption might be that they use
information from the speech stream. But despite the fact that
understanding spontaneous speech is something that people
are remarkably good at, the information in the speech
stream sometimes does not seem to be adequate for the task.
Many other types of information from the non-linguistic
context are predictive of linguistic information, however,
and various types of non-linguistic information have been
shown to influence sentence processing.
One of the earliest examples of non-linguistic information
affecting language comprehension is the McGurk effect
(McGurk and MacDonald 1976), in which getting
articulatory information from the way a speaker’s mouth
moves that conflicts with the acoustic information in the
speech stream causes listeners to believe they have heard an
intermediate sound. For example, watching a video of a
person saying the syllable [ga] while listening to the person
saying the syllable [ba] results in the percept of having
heard the syllable [da], which is intermediate between [ga]
and [ba] in place of articulation.
The referential context of an utterance can also influence
how listeners interpret it. The existence of “competitor”
items in the context (for example, a frog on a napkin and a
frog that is not on a napkin) changes whether syntactically
ambiguous material (Put the frog on the napkin…) is
interpreted as a modifier of a potential referent (telling you
which frog) or as a potential goal location for an action
(telling you where to put the frog) (Tanenhaus et al., 1995;
Trueswell , Sekerina, Hill, and Logrup, 1999).
Affective information has also been shown to have an
impact on ambiguity resolution. Emotional tone of voice
799

continuum from an aspirated t with a strong release burst to
a completely deleted t which leaves few signs that it ever
existed in the acoustic signal. Although fine-grained levels
of t/d deletion have been shown to be socially meaningful
(Podesva, 2006), the standard taxonomy of consonant
cluster reduction distinguishes only between two variants:
the deleted and non-deleted variants. It is these two
categories of consonant realization that have been studied
extensively from the perspective of production, and so that
is the distinction I consider in the experiments presented in
this paper.
Consonant cluster reduction is also conditioned by many
stylistic and social factors, and this conditioning has been
studied extensively in a variety of social groups. The
deleted variant is less formal than the non-deleted variant,
younger people use the deleted variant more than older
people do, men use the deleted variant more than women
do, and African Americans use the deleted variant more
than Anglo Americans do (Wolfram, 1969). Because
ethnicity is a very robust conditioning factor, and because it
is possible to manipulate the purported ethnicity of a
speaker by showing pictures, it is the relationship between
ethnicity and consonant cluster reduction that I examine.
Experiment 1 investigates whether listeners have implicit
knowledge of the relationship between ethnicity and t/d
deletion in American English. Experiment 2 determines
whether listeners make use of this knowledge to resolve
ambiguity.

and less educated/intelligent, while the velar nasal (ng)
makes speakers sound more formal and more
educated/intelligent (Campbell-Kibler, 2006). Listeners use
the realization of ING to make attitude judgments about
speakers, and they have both explicit and implicit beliefs
about who uses this variable and what it means about them.
But what about the other way around – do people use
information about speakers to make judgments about
speech?
Listeners do use information about speakers in making
metalinguistic judgments. Strand (2000) showed that seeing
a picture of a man or a woman affects how people
categorize ambiguous stimuli between sibilants s and esh
and between the back vowels in hood and hud, and more
stereotypical men and women elicit stronger effects than
less stereotypical men and women. Because these variables
are associated with gender through vocal tract
characteristics, it is unclear to what extent the effect relates
to sociolinguistic knowledge. The social meaning of
fricative frequency and back vowel formant frequencies is
not something well-understood. - we don’t know to what
extent speakers use them as sociolinguistic resources or how
variation in these domains is structured.
More importantly, because phone categorization is not a
part of normal language comprehension, Strand’s (2000)
study leaves open the question of whether people use
information about speakers when they’re not making an
overt metalinguistic judgment, but actually trying to
understand a speaker in real time. Is social information one
of the clues listeners use when figuring out the puzzle of
spontaneous speech?

Experiment 1: Attitudes
Experiment 1 was designed to determine whether listeners
associate deleted final stops more with African Americans
than with white speakers, as the distribution in the input
would predict (if listeners are keeping track of the input in
some way). If listeners have knowledge about the
distribution of the variants with respect to ethnicity, then it
will be possible to find out if they use this information in
processing language.

The Variable
The ideal sociolinguistic variable for a study of language
comprehension is one that has been well-studied from the
point of view of production. Consonant cluster reduction
(a.k.a. t/d deletion) is a phonetic variable in English in
which final coronal stops in consonant clusters may be
deleted in some environments. This variable makes a good
test case because “…over the past thirty-five years, this
phenomenon has been studied in more detail than probably
any other variable phonological phenomenon” (Coetzee,
2004).
In addition, consonant cluster reduction has a very
convenient property, which is that the deletion can
sometimes cause ambiguity between two words. For
example, the word mast produced without its final
consonant becomes ambiguous with the word mass. This
situation provides a good opportunity to see the effects of
contextual information on the resolution of this ambiguity.
This reduction is conditioned by several aspects of the
linguistic environment, including features of the segment
before the stop (as in last night vs. hard night), features of
the segment following the stop (fast car vs. fast action), and
the morphological status of the stop (past resolution vs.
passed resolution) (Labov et al., 1968; Fasold, 1972). The
possible realizations of the final consonant vary along a

Methods
Participants 111 native English-speaking Stanford
University undergraduates received course credit for their
participation in this study.
Materials 24 sentences were constructed so that each
included a word with a consonant cluster that could be
subject to t/d deletion (e.g. mast, least, wind). These words
were all in phonological environments that promote
consonant cluster reduction. In half of the sentences, this
word was presented with its normal orthography (Fig. 1A).
In the other half of the sentences, this word appeared with
its final stop replaced by an apostrophe (Fig. 1B).
Each questionnaire contained 6 items written in normal
orthography and 6 written with an apostrophe, and an equal
number of fillers, half of which contained another
nonstandardism (such as coffee spelled cawfee). Pictures of
800

potential speakers were taken from a database of university
ID photos, and included the shoulders and head of collegeaged individuals, on a white or neutral background (Fig. 1).
Four black and four white individuals were selected.

deleted sentences, with normal orthography, to the African
American (t(1,109)=4.86, p<.001) (Fig. 2, above). These
deleted sentences were significantly more likely to be
attributed to African Americans than the other nonstandardisms (t(1,52)=1.97, p=.03), indicating that
participants’ responses to the t/d deletion sentences was
not simply a reflection of a general belief that
nonstandardisms are more likely to be said by African
Americans.

Experiment 2: Ambiguity
Experiment 1 showed that in this population, listeners have
at least implicit knowledge that speaker ethnicity is
correlated with t/d deletion. However, this experiment does
not tell us whether listeners make use of this knowledge
when they are engaged in the process of language
comprehension. Experiment 2 investigates this question
using pairs of sentences that when spoken aloud are
temporarily ambiguous between two interpretations – one in
which the crucial word had a final coronal stop that was
deleted (e.g. mas[t]), and another in which it never had a
final stop (e.g. mass):

Figure 1: In Experiment 1, participants saw a pair of faces
along with either the A or the B version of each sentence.

1. The (mas[t]/mass) probably lasted…

Proportion black responses

Procedure Participants were asked to try to imagine what
these sentences would sound like in their mind’s ear and
then circle the picture in the pair above the sentence of the
person they think is more likely to have said the sentence.
Each sentence had one black and one white picture above it.
Using written stimuli allows this experiment to address the
influence of t/d deletion without the influence of auditory
cues. I did not expect participants’ knowledge of the
relationship between t/d deletion and ethnicity to be
conscious. Thus, participants were not made aware that
consonant cluster reduction or ethnicity were of interest.

If listeners use their knowledge of sociolinguistic variation
when they understand sentences, then they will be more
likely to predict a consonant cluster reduction when they
believe the speaker is black than when he is white. Thus,
they should reach the mast interpretation, which involves
inferring a deleted stop, faster when they believe the speaker
is black than when they believe he is white. By contrast,
they will reach the mass interpretation, which involves
rejecting the alternative with a deleted stop, faster when
they believe the speaker is white than when they believe he
is black.

0.7
0.6

Methods

0.5

Participants 40 American native English speakers from the
Stanford University community participated in this study in
exchange for payment.

0.4
0.3

Materials 24 pairs of sentences were constructed which
were identical for the first few words (the section underlined
in 2a and 2b below) except for a critical word (italicized),
which was identical except for the presence or absence of a
stop at the end of a final consonant cluster:

0.2
0.1
0

deleted

non-deleted

2a. The mast probably lasted through the storm.
2b. The mass probably lasted an hour on Sunday.

Figure 2: Experiment 1 results: proportion of black faces
selected as speaker for deleted vs. non-deleted tokens.

Results and Discussion

These nearly identical sections would be ambiguous
when spoken aloud if a speaker used the deleted variant
of a word like mast. The pairs of sentences, however, are
all disambiguated by the endings of the sentences, which

Participants attributed 60% of the “deleted” sentences,
represented with apostrophes, to the African American
person pictured, but they attributed only 42% of the non801

Participants’ job was to assess whether the ending
created a sensible sentence in combination with the
beginning they had heard, and response times were
measured from the time the continuation appeared on the
screen.

are much more consistent with one of the interpretations
of the beginning than the other. For example, through the
storm is much more consistent with the mast
interpretation of the beginning, and an hour on Sunday is
much more consistent with the mass interpretation of the
beginning.
24 filler pairs were created that also contained an
ambiguity that was resolved later in the sentences:

Results and Discussion
As predicted, participants responded faster to the
continuation that was compatible with the word that has
an underlying t (the mast interpretation) when they saw a
black face, but they responded faster to the continuation
that was compatible with the word that had no underlying
t (the mass interpretation) when they saw a white face
(F1(1,39)=5.64, p=.02, F2(1,23)=9.23, p=.006) (Fig. 3,
below).

3a. They saw her duck under the fence.
3b. They saw her duck swimming away with the
ducklings.
None of these ambiguities were related to t/d deletion. In
addition, 48 unambiguous filler sentences were
constructed of similar length and complexity. Each item
was recorded once by a black speaker, and once by a white
speaker. The actual ethnicity of the speaker was
counterbalanced across items, so that the pairing of voice
and face was equally felicitous across conditions, on
average.
The speaker pictures from Experiment 1 were used for
the crucial trials and one third of the fillers (4 black males
and 4 white males), while 8 females of various ethnicities
were displayed with the other two thirds of the fillers.
Within each subject, each face was paired with only one
voice, to maximize the plausibility of the premise that the
pictures represented the speakers.

Reaction Time (ms)

2600

black face

white face

2500
2400
2300
2200
2100

Procedure Participants were instructed to listen to a short
sound clip while looking at a picture of a face, which they
were told represented the speaker of the clip. They heard
the ambiguous portion of one of the sentence pairs, which
contained no final stops. Sound files were excerpted from
a recording of the version of the sentence that never
contained t/d (e.g. the mass version), so that there are no
cues in the speech stream indicating the presence of a
deleted stop.
Participants then saw one of the sentence endings appear
below the picture of the speaker. For example, in one trial,
participants heard:

2000

deleted

non-deleted

Figure 3: Experiment 2 results, reaction time in
milliseconds.
These results seem to support the hypothesis that listeners
make use of information about sociolinguistic variation in
language processing. However, the two sentences in each
pair differ in a lot more ways than just whether or not they
contained an instance of t/d deletion. For these results to
indicate that ethnicity information is used to make
predictions about t/d deletion, it’s important to rule out the
possibility that the effect is due to other differences in the
continuations that make them more associated with one
ethnicity or the other.
To rule out this alternative interpretation, I conducted a
norming experiment on written versions of the sentence
pairs used in Experiment 2.
In 58 subjects, there was no significant difference
between the two lists (t(1,57)=1.05, p=.29) (Fig. 3, below).
In addition, the slight numerical difference between them is
in the opposite direction from the difference that would be
needed to account for the results of Experiment 2 without
appealing to pronunciation differences. Thus, general
differences in meaning, lexical items, etc. cannot account
for these results.

4. The [mas] probably lasted
After this clip, one of the following endings appeared on the
screen:
5a. …through the storm.
5b. …an hour on Sunday
In half the cases participants saw a continuation that
made sense if the ambiguous word had no final stop (e.g.
an hour on Sunday, which makes sense if the word was
mass), and in the other half of cases they saw the other
continuation, which made sense if the ambiguous word
did have a final stop that had been deleted (e.g. through
the storm, which makes sense if the word was mast).
802

Proportion black responses

There does not seem to be any reason, then, to posit a
different representational scheme for the two types of
knowledge. However, just as the social information alone is
not sufficient to produce the effects discussed above,
knowledge of co-occurrence between social characteristics
and linguistic behavior is also not sufficient – both
probabilistic knowledge about co-occurrences and social
information about the speaker must be present for listeners
to make inferences about speaker behavior. The
characteristics of this information, rather than knowledge
about how it might relate to language, differ between the
case of phonemes and the case of ethnicity.
The results of Experiment 1 addressed the issue of
knowledge – listeners have acquired, though through what
means is still unknown, implicit knowledge of the
relationship between ethnicity and likelihood of t/d deletion.
This, however, is not sufficient to determine that the social
characteristics of speakers will influence language
comprehension. Listeners would also need to have access to
and interpret social information about the speaker in real
time, while they are using many other kinds of information,
in order for this knowledge to be of any use to them in
comprehension.
The results of Experiment 2 indicate that they in fact do
this. When social information about the speaker is available
to listeners, they integrate this information with information
from the speech stream and use their sociolinguistic
knowledge about probabilistic relationships between social
information and language to understand language.
This suggests that information that is not represented
linguistically
can
be
integrated
into
language
comprehension, as long as listeners have probabilistic
knowledge that coordinates this type of information with
linguistic representations.

0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

non-t

t

Figure 4: Proportion of black faces selected as the speaker
for non-t words (e.g. mass) and t words (e.g. mast).

General Discussion and Conclusions
The field of psycholinguistics has been discovering more
and more kinds of information that people use during
sentence processing. Some of these types of information
are clearly internal to language and others external to it.
Others, however, are less clearly definable: for example,
referential context can be interpreted as a property of the
world or as a property of the discourse, making it difficult
to classify as linguistic knowledge or extralinguistic
knowledge.
Knowledge of sociolinguistic variation is similarly
difficult to classify, because it is both social and linguistic
in nature. The age, gender, social class, or ethnicity of a
speaker is not traditionally considered to be part of the
linguistic system, which makes it tempting to locate
sociolinguistic knowledge outside of language. Yet,
knowledge of social characteristics alone does not give
rise to the effect observed in the above experiments. The
social characteristics are only meaningful and predictive in
combination with their relationships to linguistic behavior.
While these characteristics do constitute extralinguistic
information in the input, the stored knowledge listeners
must draw on, accumulated over a lifetime of linguistic
experience, is best described as linguistic. Just as listeners
might predict that t/d deletion is more likely before a
consonant than before a vowel, they are predicting that it is
more likely from a black speaker than from a white
speaker. The similarity of these predictive processes
makes it unsatisfying to classify the socially based
phenomenon as stemming from outside the language
system. The reasoning behind both these observations is
parallel, and it is possible that the way listeners acquire the
knowledge about phonological and social conditioning of
this variable could be very similar – both generalizations,
that following consonants make t/d deletion more likely
and that black speakers delete more often, could be learned
via tracking statistics about co-occurrence.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Daniel Casasanto, Herb Clark, Penelope Eckert,
John Rickford, Meghan Sumner, and Arnold Zwicky for
helpful discussion. This research was supported in part by
NSF Grant #BCS-0720054 and by a Mellon Dissertation
Year Fellowship to the author.

References
Campbell-Kibler, K. (2005). Listener perceptions of
sociolinguistic variables: The case of (ING). Doctoral
dissertation, Department of Linguistics, Stanford
University.
Coetzee, A. (2004). What it Means to be a Loser: NonOptimal Candidates in Optimality Theory. Doctoral
dissertation, Department of Linguistics, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Eckert, P. 1989. Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and
identity in the high school. New York: Teachers College
Press.

803

Rickford, J. R. (1987). Dimensions of a Creole Continuum.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Strand, E. (1999). Uncovering the roles of gender
stereotypes in speech perception. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology 18. Special Issue: Attitudes,
Perception, and Linguistic Features. Lesley Milroy and
Dennis R. Preston, Guest Eds.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., and
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268. 1632-1634.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., and Logrip, M. L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: studying on-line
sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73. 89134.
Van Berkum, J.J.A., Van den Brink, D., Tesink, C., Kos, M.
and Hagoort, P. (2008). The neural integration of speaker
and message. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
Wolfram, W. (1969). A sociolinguistic description of
Detroit Negro speech. Washington, DC: Center for
Applied Linguistics.

Fasold, R. (1972). Tense marking in Black English: A
linguistic and social analysis. Arlington, Va: Center for
Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W., Cohen, P., Robins, C., and Lewis, J. (1968). A
study of the non-standard English fo Negro and Puerto
Rican speakers in New York City. Final report,
Cooperative Research Project 3288. Vols. I and II.
Labov, W. (1966). The Social Stratification of English in
New York City. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied
Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the Inner City. Philadelphia:
U. of Pennsylvania Press.
Lambert, W.E., Hodgson, R. C., Gardner, R. C., and
Fillenbaum, S. (1960). Evaluational reactions to spoken
language. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
60. 44-51.
McGurk, H. and McDonald, J. (1976). Hearing lips and
seeing voices. Nature, 264. 746-748.
Nygaard, L and Lunders, E. (2002). Resolution of lexical
ambiguity by emotional tone of voice. Memory and
Cognition, 30, 583-593.
Podesva, R. (2006). Phonetic Detail in Sociolinguistic
Variation: Its Linguistic Significance and Role in the
Construction of Social Meaning. Doctoral Dissertation,
Department of Linguistics, Stanford University.

804

