UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effect of Global Context on Homophone Ambiguity Resolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9v2608w7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Mirman, Daniel
Magnuson, James S.
Strauss, Ted J.
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effect of Global Context on Homophone Ambiguity Resolution
Daniel Mirman (daniel.mirman@uconn.edu)
James S. Magnuson (james.magnuson@uconn.edu)
Ted J. Strauss (ted.strauss@uconn.edu)
James A. Dixon (james.dixon@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut
406 Babbidge Rd., Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA
recognition: resolving the ambiguity that arises when a word
has multiple meanings.
A few studies have examined contexts that are less local.
Paragraph context effects on homophone ambiguity
resolution parallel the effects of sentence context (Kambe,
Rayner, & Duffy, 2001) and passage titles help readers to
resolve word-level ambiguities (Wiley & Rayner, 2000).
These studies examine larger-scale contexts, but the
contexts under investigation are, as in other studies, local
and linguistic. That is, they can be described in terms of
word-to-word semantic relations or syntactic constraints.
Visual world paradigm eye-tracking studies have provided
some evidence of non-linguistic context effects by showing
that visual information can influence resolution of syntactic
referential ambiguities (Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton,
Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995). We extended this approach to
study the effects of global (experiment-level rather than
trial-level) contexts on resolving ambiguity between
meanings of a single word. Examining global, non-linguistic
context effects on word processing is a step toward situating
language processing in the broad scope of cognitive
processing.
Context effects are a natural case for examining
interactions between language and other cognitive processes
because context effects are common in many non-linguistic
domains, from vision (e.g., Bar, 2004) to motor action
planning (Cooper, Schwartz, Yule, & Shallice, 2005).
Domain-general views of context effects such as graded
interactive constraint satisfaction (McClelland, 1993) and
Bayesian inference (Geisler & Diehl, 2003) predict that nonlinguistic contexts should influence word processing.
One way that global non-linguistic context can influence
language processing is through attention. Previous work on
attention and language processing suggested that attention
works by damping activation of dis-attended representations
(Mirman, McClelland, Holt, & Magnuson, 2008). Following
this view of attention, we predict that global context will
damp activation of the contextually inappropriate meanings
of ambiguous words. To test this prediction we used the
visual world eye-tracking paradigm (Allopenna, Magnuson,
& Tanenhaus, 1998; Tanenhaus et al., 1995), which
provides a very sensitive measure of activation of individual
words and concepts during spoken word recognition.
In a typical visual world experiment, participants see
several objects on a display, and hear an instruction to click
on one of the objects. An eye-tracker records eye
movements, which are closely time-locked to fine-grained
details of the spoken instruction. Recent studies using this

Abstract
Effects of context are pervasive throughout perceptual and
cognitive processing domains. Many studies have shown
context effects in language processing, but these studies have
mostly focused on local, linguistic contexts. As a step toward
situating language processing in the broad scope of cognitive
processing, we investigated the effect of a global, nonlinguistic context on homophone ambiguity resolution. The
context was implicitly induced by using only highly
imageable target words. This context was predicted to shift
attention away from non-imageable meanings, thus reducing
activation of non-imageable meanings and consequently
reducing ambiguity between meanings. We tracked eye
movements as subjects heard spoken words and selected a
matching picture from four displayed items. Results were
consistent with the predictions: response times were faster for
homophones with only one contextually appropriate meaning
than homophones with two contextually appropriate
meanings (reflecting reduced ambiguity) and participants
were less likely to fixate semantic associates of contextually
inappropriate meanings than contextually appropriate
meanings (reflecting reduced activation of non-imageable
meanings). These results suggest that global, non-linguistic
contexts influence language processing by shifting attention
away from contextually inappropriate meanings.
Keywords: homophones; ambiguity resolution; context
effects; attention; eye-tracking; interactive processing.

Introduction
Effects of context are ubiquitous throughout language
processing, typically speeding recognition and ambiguity
resolution. Two major cases are that recognition of speech
sounds is influenced by lexical context (McClelland,
Mirman, & Holt, 2006) and recognition of words is
influenced by sentence context (Gorfein, 2001). In general,
the contexts that have been studied have two features in
common. First, the contexts are local in the sense that the
context immediately surrounds the target sound or word and
changes from trial to trial (i.e., there is a new word or
sentence context on each trial). Second, the contexts are
linguistic in the sense that the knowledge and mechanisms
involved in processing the context words or sentences are
the same as those involved in processing the target sounds
or words and resolving ambiguities. This leaves open the
possibility that language processing is functionally isolated
from other cognitive processing. To test this possibility, we
examined whether a global (experiment-level), nonlinguistic context can influence a critical aspect of word
663

semantic similarity to the non-target meaning of the
stimulus word). For example, for the homophone deck
(both-meanings-appropriate), the target image was a deck of
cards and the competitor image was a boat; for the
homophone bark (one-meaning-appropriate), the target
image was tree bark and the competitor image was a dog.
The unambiguous condition was used to provide a baseline
of semantic competition effects in which the associate is
related to a word that is favored both contextually (i.e., it is
an imageable noun) and visually (i.e., it is in the display), so
the competitor image was a semantic associate of the target
word (e.g., for acorn, the target image was an acorn and the
competitor image was a squirrel). The homophones were all
balanced (i.e., both meanings were approximately equally
frequent) and the words in all three conditions were matched
on length, frequency, and association strength to the
competitor image (all t(15)<1.0, all p>0.3, see Table 1). In
addition to the 48 critical trials there were 28 filler trials on
which an unambiguous word was presented and there were
no related images on the screen.
All stimuli were produced by a female native speaker of
American English in a sound-attenuated room and digitized
at 44 kHz. The individual words were edited to eliminate
silence at the beginning and end of the sound file.

paradigm have shown that listeners fixate images
corresponding to concepts that are semantically associated
with the target word more than unrelated distractor images
(Huettig & Altmann, 2005; Yee & Sedivy, 2006). This
pattern is similar to semantic priming, but the paradigm
provides much greater sensitivity and time course
information (see Allopenna et al., 1998, for discussion).
The visual world paradigm also provides a global context
that may influence semantic ambiguity resolution. In a
typical visual world study, all targets are highly imageable
nouns (though see e.g., Griffin & Bock, 2000, for studies
using scenes that allow verbs to be used). Thus, on a visual
world trial, a word such as deck is ambiguous because it
could refer to two meanings that could appear in the study
(a deck of cards or the deck of a boat), but a word such as
bark is, in the extreme, unambiguous because it refers to
only one possible target (the tree part, since the dog
behavior meaning is not sufficiently imageable to be a
possible target). Thus, the paradigm naturally induces an
implicit expectation that only imageable nouns will be
encountered. This manipulation is similar to attentional
manipulations based on proportion of nonwords, which
influence listeners' expectations that spoken items will be
words or nonwords in an experiment-wise rather than trialwise fashion (Mirman, McClelland et al., 2008; Monsell,
Patterson, Graham, Hughes, & Milroy, 1992).
The present experiment tests the hypothesis that global
context affects homophone ambiguity resolution by shifting
attention away from contextually inappropriate meanings
and thus reducing their activation. To test this hypothesis we
compare processing of homophones for which both
meanings are contextually appropriate to homophones that
have only one contextually appropriate meaning. The
hypothesis makes two specific predictions regarding this
comparison. First, reduced activation of contextually
inappropriate meanings will reduce competition between
meanings for one-meaning-appropriate homophones, thus
target meaning activation will be faster for these
homophones than for those with two contextually
appropriate meanings (reflected in response times and target
fixation curves). Second, reduced activation of contextually
inappropriate meanings will reduce activation of their
semantic associates, thus there will be reduced fixation of
semantic associates of non-target meanings of one-meaningappropriate homophones compared to fixation of semantic
associates of non-target meanings of both-meaningsappropriate homophones.

Table 1. Mean (standard deviations in parentheses)
properties of stimuli. Both refers to both-meaningsappropriate homophones (e.g., deck), One refers to onemeaning-appropriate homophones (e.g., bark), Unambig.
refers to unambiguous words (e.g., acorn).
Property
Word Frequency
No. Syllables
No. Phonemes
Duration (ms)
Association

Both
16.1 (25.0)
1.25 (0.4)
3.88 (0.81)
588.3 (106)
0.109 (0.08)

One
18.7 (21.5)
1.25 (0.6)
3.88 (1.1)
607.0 (81.7)
0.137 (0.2)

Unambig.
17.9 (25.3)
1.38 (0.5)
3.75 (1.2)
603.4 (78.0)
0.158 (0.18)

Procedure. On each trial, participants saw four images on a
17" screen. Each image was presented near one of the
screen corners, 15% of the screen size away from the
horizontal and vertical edge of the screen; images had a
maximum size of 200 x 200 pixels and screen resolution
was set to 1024 x 768. Gaze position and duration were
recorded using an ASL 6000 remote eye-tracker. Each trial
began with a 500 ms preview of the four images. The
preview was intended to reveal visual salience differences
between images and diminish their effects on the data of
interest. At the end of the preview period the target word
was presented through headphones and participants had to
click on the image corresponding to the target word. The
experiment began with 12 practice trials on which feedback
was presented. On each critical trial, the display of four
images contained a target (e.g., a deck or a piece of bark), a
semantic competitor (e.g., a boat or a dog) and two
distractors, which were phonologically and semantically
unrelated to the target and each other (e.g., a head of lettuce
and a bowl of soup). Three items were removed from each
of the ambiguous conditions due to low accuracy and/or

Experiment
Methods
Materials. There were three types of critical words (16
words in each condition): both-meanings-appropriate
homophones, one-meaning-appropriate homophones, and
unambiguous words. For each target homophone word, a
semantic associate (Nelson, McEvoy, & Schreiber, 2004) of
the non-target meaning was selected to serve as a semantic
competitor (that is, to compete for fixation on the basis of
664

unequal visual salience between target, competitor, and
distractor images.
To control for possible differences in visual salience of
the images, a control version was conducted in which the
same pictures were presented in the same conditions but
target and distractor images were pseudo-randomly reassigned such that there would be no predicted semantic
competition. That is, each picture occurred in the same
condition, but the target-distractor pairs were scrambled so
that on each trial there were no semantic associates present
in the display. In this case the term competitor refers to
visual salience competition rather than semantic
competition.

ambiguous words with only one contextually appropriate
meaning. This pattern held regardless of whether a semantic
associate of the non-target meaning was present in the
display. These results suggest a high degree of competition
between meanings for the both-meanings-appropriate
homophones and reduced, but not eliminated, competition
between meanings for the one-meaning-appropriate
homophones. Of particular interest is the difference between
the two types of homophones, which suggests that there was
more competition when both meanings were consistent with
the context than when only one meaning was consistent
with the context. In addition, the finding that responses to
one-meaning-appropriate homophones were slower than to
unambiguous words suggests that contextually inappropriate
meanings became active and competed with the target
meaning, indicating a graded effect of context. That is, the
context of the visual world paradigm damped activation of
non-imageable meanings relative to imageable meanings,
but did not completely eliminate contextually inappropriate
meanings from becoming active. The eye-tracking data
provide converging evidence for this interpretation.

Participants. Forty undergraduate students at the
University of Connecticut participated for course credit, 20
in the semantic associate matched version and 20 in
semantic associate scrambled control version. Six
participants were excluded due to problems with eyetracking (4 associate matched, 2 control).

Results
Response time. The response time and accuracy data are
shown in Figure 1 (only correct response trials were
included in the response time and eye-tracking analyses).
The top panel of Figure 1 shows that there were clear
differences in response time across the word conditions
(Associate matched: F1(2,30)=30.2, p<0.001, F2(2,39)=5.6,
p<0.01; Associate scrambled: F1(2,34)=73.7, p<0.001,
F2(2,39)=8.6, p<0.01). Pairwise comparisons revealed that
response times for each condition were different from each
other condition (Associate matched: all t>2.2, all p<0.05,
except the contrast between the two types of ambiguous
words; Associate scrambled: all t>2.5, all p<0.05, except the
contrast between the one appropriate meaning homophones
and the unambiguous words).

Eye-tracking data analysis. To analyze the time course of
fixations we used growth curve analysis using orthogonal
polynomials (Mirman, Dixon, & Magnuson, 2008). Fixation
curves were modeled by fourth-order polynomials in order
to capture the 3 inflection points of the curve and included
individual subject effects on each of the polynomial time
factors. Growth curve analysis is part of a family of
multilevel modeling techniques in which condition effects
can be evaluated based on their effects on parameters of the
fixation
curve. Orthogonal polynomials produce
independent time terms, so effects on different aspects of
curve shape can be considered independently. In particular,
the intercept term captures overall curve height, the linear
term captures the overall slope of the curve, and the
quadratic term captures the steepness of the rise and fall of
the curve around a central inflection point. Because fixation
proportions tend to rise and fall more or less symmetrically
in a typical visual world paradigm experiment, differences
in fixation time course have the biggest influence on the
quadratic component of the fixation curve (see Mirman,
Dixon, & Magnuson, 2008, for further discussion of
interpretation of model terms).
In the interests of brevity, we discuss only the effect of
critical terms on the quadratic component. Condition effects
were evaluated based on the extent to which they improve
model fit; that is, the change in deviance (ΔD) due to adding
the condition parameter to the model. One standard measure
of deviance is -2LL (minus 2 times the log-likelihood). This
measure is distributed as chi-square, with degrees of
freedom equal to the number of parameters added. When
there are more than 2 categorical conditions, one condition
serves as the baseline and an individual term is estimated for
each of the other conditions (thus the degrees of freedom are
one less than the number of conditions). Individual
conditions can be compared to the baseline by standard
significance tests on the parameter estimates.

Figure 1. Behavioral data. Top panel shows response times,
bottom panel shows accuracy. Error bars reflect 1SE.
Participants were slowest to find the matching picture for
ambiguous words with two contextually appropriate words,
fastest for unambiguous words, and intermediate for
665

Figure 2. Observed and model fit proportion of fixations to target images for unambiguous words (Unambig.; x's, gray line),
homophones with only one contextually appropriate meaning (One; white squares, dashed line), and homophones with two
contextually appropriate meanings (Both; black diamonds, solid line). Left panel shows data from semantic associate
matched version, right panel shows data from semantic associate scrambled control version. Error bars reflect 1SE.
row of Figure 3. As in priming experiments, we assume that
activation of a semantic associate is an index of activation
of a particular meaning. Non-negligible activation of a
particular meaning should be reflected by a greater
proportion of fixations to a semantic associate of that
meaning than an unrelated image. Our unambiguous
condition (Figure 3, top right panel) replicates previous
findings of semantic competition (Huettig & Altmann,
2005, Yee & Sedivy, 2006): there are more fixations to a
semantic associate (Competitor) image than an unrelated
image. The both-meanings-appropriate homophones (top
left panel) show the same semantic competition pattern, but
the one-meaning-appropriate homophones (top middle
panel) show weak, if any, semantic competition.
There was a significant word-by-image condition
interaction effect on the quadratic term (ΔD=52.6,
p<0.0001), indicating that the competitor-vs-unrelated
contrast differed across the word conditions. Evaluation of
the parameter estimates revealed that, relative to unrelated
images, participants were approximately equally likely to
fixate semantic associates of unambiguous target words and
semantic associates of non-target contextually appropriate
meanings (B = -0.019, t(1260)=0.605, n.s.), but they were
less likely to fixate semantic associates of non-target
contextually inappropriate meanings (B = -0.208, t(1260) =
6.47, p<0.0001). That is, there was little difference in
semantic competition between the both-meaningsappropriate and unambiguous conditions and large
differences in semantic competition between the bothmeanings-appropriate
and
one-meaning-appropriate
conditions. Put simply, semantic associates of contextually
appropriate meanings were fixated more than semantic
associates of contextually inappropriate meaning, indicating
that contextually appropriate meanings were activated more
than contextually inappropriate meanings.

Target fixation. The average fixation proportions over time
to the target image and model fits are plotted in Figure 2.
Consistent with the response time data, the time course of
fixation was fastest for the unambiguous targets, somewhat
slower for the one-meaning-appropriate homophones, and
slowest for both-meanings-appropriate homophones. There
was a significant effect of word condition (e.g., differences
between
both-meanings-appropriate,
one-meaningappropriate, and unambiguous words) on the quadratic term
when the competitor was a semantic associate (ΔD=46.3,
p<0.0001) and when the semantic associates were
scrambled such that there was no semantic associate in the
display (ΔD=138.4, p<0.0001). Comparison of the
parameter estimates confirmed that the fixation time course
for unambiguous words was significantly different from the
time course for both-meanings-appropriate homophones
(Semantic associate matched: B = -0.229, t(600)=6.13,
p<0.0001; Semantic associate scrambled: B = -0.370,
t(676)=12.05, p<0.0001), and one-meaning-appropriate
homophones (Semantic associate matched: B = -0.193,
t(600)=5.66, p<0.0001; Semantic associate scrambled: B = 0.128, t(676)=4.65, p<0.0001). The difference between the
types of homophones was reliable when the semantic
associates were scrambled (B = -0.242, t(676)=7.87,
p<0.0001), but did not reach significance when they were
matched (B = -0.036, t(600) = 0.96, n.s.). This general
pattern is consistent with previous studies showing that
ambiguity slows word recognition and converges with the
response time data to suggest that participants were slower
to activate the target meanings of homophones when both
meanings were contextually appropriate compared to when
only one was appropriate.
Semantic competition. Fixation proportions and model fits
for the semantic competitor and unrelated images for the
semantic associate matched version are plotted in the top
666

Figure 3. Observed and model fit proportion of fixations to competitor images (black circles, solid line) and unrelated images
(white triangles, dashed line). Both refers to both-meanings-appropriate homophones, One refers to one-meaning-appropriate
homophones, Unambig. refers to unambiguous words. Top row shows data from semantic associate matched version, bottom
row shows data from semantic associate scrambled control version. Error bars reflect 1SE.
competitors, particularly for the unambiguous words and
both-meanings-appropriate homophones. This suggests that
the semantic competition effects found in the semantic
associate matched version had to overcome a slight visual
bias to look at unrelated distractor images.

To examine whether contextually inappropriate meanings
became active at all, we restricted the semantic competition
analysis just to the one-meaning-appropriate homophones.
This test addresses the question of whether the pragmatic
constraint under investigation can completely eliminate
contextually inappropriate meanings from activation. There
was a significant effect of semantic relatedness on the
quadratic term (ΔD=14.3, p<0.0001), reflecting a difference
in the time course of fixation of semantic associates relative
to unrelated distractors. These results indicate that the nontarget, contextually inappropriate meanings did become
partially active, leading to a somewhat greater fixation of
their semantic associates relative to the unrelated baseline.
Fixation proportions and model fits for the semantic
competitor and unrelated images for the control version are
plotted in the bottom row of Figure 3. Visually, it is clear
that random re-assignment of images eliminated the
competition effect (i.e., there is no difference between
competitor and unrelated image fixation proportions) for all
word conditions, indicating that the results of the semantic
associate matched version cannot be attributed to visual
salience differences. There was a small bias favoring the
unrelated distractors (ΔD=8.3, p<0.01; all B's>0, opposite to
the pattern when the competitor was a semantic associate).
That is, participants were slightly more likely to fixate the
unrelated distractors than the visual salience (scrambled)

Discussion and Conclusions
We examined the impact of global, non-linguistic context
on the activation of contextually appropriate and
contextually inappropriate meanings. Participants heard
frequency balanced homophones that either had two
contextually appropriate meanings or only one contextually
appropriate meaning. The prediction was that if the context
influences ambiguity resolution, then the non-target
meaning of both-meanings-appropriate homophones should
be more active than the non-target meaning of one-meaningappropriate homophones because the former is contextually
favored but the latter is not. Consistent with this prediction,
the response time and target fixation data suggest that there
was much more competition for the both-meaningsappropriate homophones than one-meaning-appropriate
homophones. Semantic competition data provided
converging evidence that there was greater activation of
non-target contextually appropriate meanings than nontarget contextually inappropriate meanings. Evidence of
modest semantic competition in the one-meaning667

Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 27(3),
379-402.
Gorfein, D. S. (2001). On the consequences of meaning
selection: Perspectives on resolving lexical ambiguity.
Washington, DC, US: American Psychological
Association.
Griffin, Z. M., & Bock, K. (2000). What the eyes say about
speaking. Psychological Science, 11(4), 274-279.
Huettig, F., & Altmann, G. T. M. (2005). Word meaning
and the control of eye fixation: Semantic competitor
effects and the visual world paradigm. Cognition, 96(1),
B23-B32.
Kambe, G., Rayner, K., & Duffy, S. A. (2001). Global
context effects on processing lexically ambiguous words:
Evidence from eye fixations. Memory & Cognition, 29(2),
363-372.
McClelland, J. L. (1993). Toward a theory of information
processing in graded, random, interactive networks. In D.
E. Meyer & S. Kornblum (Eds.), Attention & performance
xiv: Synergies in experimental psychology, artificial
intelligence and cognitive neuroscience (pp. 655-688).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McClelland, J. L., Mirman, D., & Holt, L. L. (2006). Are
there interactive processes in speech perception? Trends
In Cognitive Sciences, 10(8), 363-369.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J. A., & Magnuson, J. S. (2008a).
Statistical and computational models of the visual world
paradigm: Growth curves and individual differences.
Journal of Memory and Language,
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.1011.1006.
Mirman, D., McClelland, J. L., Holt, L. L., & Magnuson, J.
S. (2008b). Effects of attention on the strength of lexical
influences on speech perception: Behavioral experiments
and computational mechanisms. Cognitive Science, 32(2),
398-417.
Monsell, S., Patterson, K. E., Graham, A., Hughes, C. H., &
Milroy, R. (1992). Lexical and sublexical translation of
spelling to sound: Strategic anticipation of lexical status.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 18(3), 452-467.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (2004).
The university of south florida free association, rhyme,
and word fragment norms. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments & Computers, 36(3), 402-407.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268(5217), 632-634.
Wiley, J., & Rayner, K. (2000). Effects of titles on the
processing of text and lexically ambiguous words:
Evidence from eye movements. Memory & Cognition,
28(6), 1011-1021.
Yee, E., & Sedivy, J. C. (2006). Eye movements to pictures
reveal transient semantic activation during spoken word
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(1), 1-14.

appropriate condition suggested that this contextual effect
was graded – contextually inappropriate meanings did
become partially active, but not as active as contextually
appropriate meanings.
Previous studies of homophone ambiguity resolution have
generally focused on local, linguistic contexts. This allowed
the possibility that contextual constraints might be limited to
cases where there are direct syntactic or semantic
connections between context and targets. By using a global,
non-linguistic context we have shown the domain-general
nature of context effects on ambiguity resolution. Indeed,
ambiguity resolution is a key issue in many perceptual and
cognitive domains, from object recognition to speech
perception, and context effects are pervasive in those
domains as well (Bar, 2004; McClelland, et al., 2006). The
present demonstration of effects of global, non-linguistic
context on homophone ambiguity resolution suggests
domain-general mechanisms of contextual influences.
Attention is one domain-general mechanism that is
consistent with the present results. On this view,
participants' attention was partially shifted away from nonimageable concepts, which did not occur as targets. This
shift in attention would have the consequence of reducing
activation of non-imageable concepts (Mirman, McClelland,
et al., 2008). The reduced activation of non-target meanings
reduced ambiguity, thus speeding the resolution process and
yielding the observed faster response times for onemeaning-appropriate homophones than both-meaningsappropriate homophones. In addition, the reduced activation
caused less activation of semantic associates, thus yielding
the observed reduced fixation of semantic associates for
one-meaning-appropriate homophones. In sum, the present
results support a domain-general view of context effects and
language processing in which all aspects of the context
influence homophone ambiguity resolution and global
contexts influence processing by shifting attention away
from contextually inappropriate meanings.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by National Institutes of
Health grants DC005765 to JSM, F32HD052364 to DM,
and HD001994 and HD40353 to Haskins Labs.

References
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(1998). Tracking the time course of spoken word
recognition using eye movements: Evidence for
continuous mapping models. Journal of Memory &
Language, 38(4), 419-439.
Bar, M. (2004). Visual objects in context. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 5(8), 617-629.
Cooper, R. P., Schwartz, M. F., Yule, P., & Shallice, T.
(2005). The simulation of action disorganization in
complex activities of daily living. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 22(8), 959-1004.
Geisler, W. S., & Diehl, R. L. (2003). A Bayesian approach
to the evolution of perceptual and cognitive systems.

668

