UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence for Generalized Cognitive Search Processes at Multiple Levels in a Hierarchical
Problem Solving Task
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7518v9nz
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)
Authors
HIlls, Thomas T.
Goldstone, Robert L.
Todd, Peter M.
Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

          Evidence for Generalized Cognitive Search Processes at Multiple Levels
                                   in a Hierarchical Problem Solving Task
                 Thomas T. Hills (thomas.hills@unibas.ch), Robert L. Goldstone, Peter M. Todd
                             Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. Tenth Street
                                                Bloomington, IN, 47405 USA
                           Abstract                                  To discover whether the effect of the spatial resource
                                                                  distribution prime also influenced other levels of search in
   People may use similar search processes for a variety of
                                                                  the lexical task, we analyzed how sequential search
cognitive tasks. The theoretical basis for these generalized
                                                                  decisions were made within letter sets (see Figure 1). We
cognitive search processes rests on molecular and
                                                                  first modeled sequential search in a set via competing
psychophysical evidence for shared processes in cognitive
                                                                  multiple cognitive hypotheses about how words were
search across domains—e.g., visual search, problem
                                                                  formed (e.g., edit distance) starting from the letter set or
solving, spatial search, and decision making. To investigate
                                                                  from previous solutions. We found the best fit to the data
the extent of generalized cognitive search processes in a
                                                                  when subjects were assumed to use prior solutions as
single task, we studied how subjects’ experiences in 2-D
                                                                  starting points for subsequent explorations.
spatial search influenced their search strategies in a
                                                                     Using this finding, we examined how the two spatial
subsequent lexical problem-solving task (sequential
                                                                  treatment conditions (correlated/clumpy or not) influenced
SCRABBLE) involving hierarchical levels of decision
                                                                  search within the lexical problem space. Subjects who
making. These levels included when to leave a letter set
                                                                  experienced spatially correlated resource distributions had
(patch) and what strategies to use when looking for
                                                                  less similarity between word solutions than subjects who
subsequent words within a letter set.
                                                                  experienced uncorrelated distributions. However, this was
   When the spatial resource discovery required search (i.e.,
                                                                  not the case when subjects only had to harvest (not search
resources were not visible until subjects moved the icon
                                                                  for) resources from the spatial display. We constructed a
over them), subjects took longer to leave letter sets if they
                                                                  model of working memory search using a single parameter
had previously experienced spatially-correlated (versus
                                                                  change between treatment groups to explain both letter set
uncorrelated) resource distributions, replicating a previous
                                                                  leaving times and inter-item similarity. The model posits
finding. However, when resources were visible, requiring
                                                                  that subjects can leave a letter set at any time, but also
simply harvesting rather than search, lexical patch leaving
                                                                  switch from the letter set to work with the previous solution
times were unaffected, suggesting that generalized cognitive
                                                                  at a rate related to the same parameter.
search processes were primed via hypothesis-driven
exploration in the spatial search phase.
                                                                                             References
                                                                  Hills, T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of goal-
                                                                     directed cognition. Cognitive Science, 30, 3-41.
                                                                  Hills, T., Brockie, P. J., Maricq, A. V. (2004) Dopamine and
                                                                     glutamate control area-restricted search behavior in
                                                                     Caenorhabditis elegans. Journal of Neuroscience 24(5),
                                                                     1217-1225.
                                                                  Hills,T., Todd, P.M., & Goldstone, R.L. (2007) Implications
                                                                     for cognition from the evolution of animal foraging.
                                                                     Human Behavior and Evolution Society 19th Annual
                                                                     Meeting. Winner of postdoctoral competition.
                                                                  Hills, T., Todd, P.M., & Goldstone, R.L. (2007). Priming
                                                                     and conservation between spatial and cognitive search. In
                                                                     D.S. McNamara & J.G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
                                                                     29th Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 359-364).
                                                                     Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
                                                                  Hills, T., Todd, P.M., & Goldstone, R.L. (In press). Search
                                                                     in internal and external spaces: evidence for generalized
   Figure 1. Observed solution transitions for subjects              cognitive search processes. Psychological Science.
entering sequential solutions for the letter set BLNTAO.          Hutchinson, J.M.C., Wilke, A., & Todd, P.M. (In press)
Arrows point to subsequent solutions; width corresponds to           Patch leaving in humans: can a generalist adapt its rules to
frequency of that transition. Dot size represents number of          dispersal of items across patches? Animal Behavior.
subjects who started with that solution.
                                                              843

