UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experience with a Computer Word-Entry Method in Processing Chinese Characters by Fluent
Typists

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2s84m9t0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Chen, Jenn-Yeu
Chuang, Chun-Yu

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experience with a Computer Word-Entry Method in Processing Chinese Characters
by Fluent Typists
Jenn-Yeu Chen (psyjyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Institute of Cognitive Science, National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road
Tainan 701, TAIWAN

Chun-Yu Chuang (chunyu0118@gmail.com)
Institute of Cognitive Science, National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road
Tainan 701, TAIWAN

Chalmers, 1998). Appreciating the active role of the
environment in driving cognitive processes, the authors
proposed that the human mind and the environment form a
coupled system with continuous two-way interactions
between the two.
The report of the Flynn effect also helped to change the
picture. Flynn (1984) observed that the absolute scores on
widely used tests of abstract reasoning have increased in
North America and Europe since World War II. This effect
is essentially worldwide with average scores on intelligence
tests rising for the better part of a century (Flynn, 1987).
The rate of gain amounts to three IQ points per decade, and
it is even higher on certain specialized measures. The basis
for these large gains remains unknown. Possibilities include
a genuine increase in intelligence, greater sophistication
about tests, better nutrition, more schooling, altered childrearing practices, and most importantly here, the
technology-driven changes of culture. With respect to the
last possibility, Neisser (1997) suggested that the highly
visual environment (e.g., television, video games,
computers, picture puzzles, and mazes) may play a
fundamental role in the increase in IQ scores. If intelligence
is viewed as a set of cognitive skills (Hunt, 1995),
technology-driven changes of our modern culture have
probably induced changes in some aspects of human
cognition.
Neisser’s hypothesis has been tested recently. A
behavioral study by Green and Bavelier (2003) showed that
action video-game playing enhanced the capacity of visual
attention and its spatial distribution in the habitual players,
as well as enhanced their task-switching abilities and
decreased attentional blinks (failure to notice an event when
it appears in a very rapid sequence of other events). Other
behavioral studies have also reported similar effects in
visual search (Castel, Pratt, & Drummond, 2005) and eyehand motor coordination (Griffith, Voloschin, Gibb, &
Bailey, 1983). The genetic studies by Lahn and colleagues
(Evans, Gilbert, Mekel-Bobrov, Vallender, Anderson, VaezAzizi, Tishkoff, Hudson, & Lahn, 2005; Mekel-Bobrov,
Gilbert, Evans, Vallender, Anderson, Hudson, Tishkoff, &
Lahn, 2005) showed that the genes regulating and
determining the brain size in humans (microcephalin and
ASPM) have continued to evolve since they were first
noticed. These genes have spread across the human

Abstract
A 2003 study by Green and Bavelier showed that action
video-game playing modified the visual selective attention of
habitual players. Here we tested whether processing of
Chinese characters became more phonologically or
orthographically oriented depending on whether participants
were experienced typing with the phonology-based (zhuyin)
or the orthography-based (cangje) word-entry method. In Exp.
1, 38 cangje and 40 zhuyin users typed a short text on a
computer using the word-entry method they had experienced.
Every keystroke was recorded and typing errors were
categorized. In Exp. 2, 25 cangje and 25 zhuyin users had to
circle all characters which contained a predesignated radical
when they read a short passage. In Exp. 3, 25 cangje and 20
zhuyin users heard pairs of syllables and had to decide
whether the two syllables in a pair shared the same onset
consonant in one block of trials or the same rhyme in another
block of trials. Analysis showed participants with extensive
experience using phonology-based typing displayed more
phonologically related typing errors, better sensitivity to the
onset and rhyme of a syllable, but poorer sensitivity to the
radical of a character. Participants with extensive experience
using orthography-based typing displayed opposite results.
Although the general cognitive system might be similar in the
two groups of participants, the specific configuration of the
system can vary to meet the demand of a particular design of
the artifactual environment.
Keywords: human artifacts, cognition, Chinese characters,
computer word entry.

Introduction
One striking difference between human and nonhuman
species is that humans typically live in an artifactual
environment they create. This means that when survival
requires adaptation to the environment, humans adapt to a
very different environment than nonhumans. How the
artifacts we create affect our cognition is an important issue
which has not been significantly addressed. Norman (1991,
pp. 17-18) once remarked, “Despite the enormous impact of
artifacts upon human cognition, most of our scientific
understanding is of the unaided mind: of memory, attention,
perception, action, and thought, unaided by external devices.
There is little understanding of the information processing
roles played by artifacts and how they interact with the
information processing activities of their users”.
This picture has begun to change in recent years with the
advocacy of the ‘extended mind’ hypothesis (Clark and
487

population and increased in frequency at a rate that cannot
be explained by a neutral drift. These researchers noted that
‘the age of [these genes] and their geographic distribution
across Eurasia roughly coincide with two important events
in the cultural evolution of Eurasia—namely, the emergence
and spread of domestication from the Middle East ~10,000
years ago and the rapid increase in population associated
with the development of cities and written language 5000 to
6000 years ago around the Middle East’ (Mekel-Bobrov, et
al., 2005, p. 1722). Lahn suspected that ‘these alleles may
have provided an adaptive advantage in some brain related
function’ (reported in Balter, 2005, p. 1662). Together,
these studies suggest that the artifactual environments which
form the core of human cultures may select for structural
and functional changes in cognition.
The present study assessed Neisser’s hypothesis by
testing whether using different computer word-entry
methods in Chinese might change the users’ sensitivity to
different aspects of the language. In typing Chinese, two
types of word entry methods are common. The zhuyin
method is phonology based. The users key in the
phonological contents of a character, which consist of the
initial consonant, the medial vowel if there is one, the rhyme,
and the tone. For the character ‘zhuo’ (桌), these include
four keystrokes: /zh/, /u/, /o/, and 1 for the first tone. The
users must possess the right phonological knowledge of a
character to enter it on the computer. The cangje method is
orthographically based. With this method, the requirements
are very different. Each character is decomposed into a few
radicals. To type a character requires keying in the radicals
in a specified sequence (卜, 日, 木 for桌). The users must
possess a fluent memory of the component radicals of each
Chinese character to type with this method. As the methods
show, one requires the users to maintain a correct memory
representation of the sounds of a character and retrieve them
when typing, while the other requires the representation and
processing of the character’s orthography. The question is
whether the differential demands of the two methods result
in differential sensitivity for the habitual users to the
phonological and orthographic aspects of the characters. A
reasonable prediction is that the zhuyin users tend to be
more sensitive to the phonological aspect of the character,
while the cangje users the orthographic aspect. This
prediction was tested in three different experiments.
In Exp. 1, participants typed a short text on a computer
using the word-entry method with which they were
experienced. Every keystroke was recorded, and typing
errors were categorized. It was hypothesized that the typing
errors of the zhuyin users would be primarily phonological
(i.e., errors that were homophonous to the targets), whereas
those of the cangje users would be mainly orthographic (i.e.,
errors that resembled the targets in visual form). In Exp. 2,
participants had to circle all characters which contained a
predesignated radical when they read a short passage. It was
hypothesized that the zhuyin users tended to miss more
targets than the cangje users. In Exp. 3, participants heard
pairs of syllables and had to decide whether the two
488

syllables of a pair shared the same onset consonant on one
block of trials or the same rhyme on another block of trials.
It was hypothesized that the cangje users tended to respond
slower than the zhuyin users.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we gave the cangje and the zhuyin users
a typing test and recorded the errors they made. Because the
cangje users processed the characters in the orthographic
mode, whereas the zhuyin users processed the characters in
the phonological mode, we predicted that the cangje users
should make more orthographically related errors while the
zhuyin users should make more phonologically related
errors.

Method
Participants
Participants were undergraduate and graduate students
recruited from National Chung Cheng University and
National Cheng Kung University. Their ages ranged from
18 to 24 years. Informed consent was obtained from each
participant, who was paid 100 Taiwan dollars for their
participation in an experiment that lasted about half an hour.
There were 38 cangje dominant users and 40 zhuyin
dominant users. The two groups of participants were
matched for their typing speeds, which were on the average
60 characters per minute and were classified at between the
advanced and the professional level according to the
criterion of the Techficiency Quotient Certification of the
Computer Skills Foundation, Taiwan.
Procedure
The experiment was conducted on an IBM-compatible
personal computer with a Pentium 4 2.4G microprocessor
and a 17-in. LCD monitor. The participants were asked to
type a short text (492 characters long) using the word-entry
method with which they were most fluent. Every keystroke
was recorded by HyperCam, a computer program that
captures the action from the Windows screen and saves it to
AVI (Audio-Video Interleaved) movie file 1 .

Results and Discussion
The errors the participants made were categorized into
seven categories. Table 1 presents the mean number of
errors in each category made by the cangjie and the zhuyin
users. The results of the nonparametric median tests
revealed a significant difference between groups for each
category except ‘other’. Of special interest to the purpose of
the study, the zhuyin users made significantly more
phonologically related errors while the cangje users made
significantly more orthographically related errors (see row 1
and 2 of Table 1). The zhuyin users also made significantly
more phonologically and orthographically related errors
than the cangje users (row 3). Also of interest is the finding
1

http://www.hyperionics.com/hc/

that the cangje users tended to miss a character, while the
zhuyin users tended to add or substitute for a character.
Overall, the cangje users made a greater number of typing
errors than the zhuyin users, but the difference was not
significant.
The results of this experiment indicate clearly that the
kind of errors made in typing is constrained by the mode of
processing in typing. The cangje users typed in the
orthographic mode; therefore, their errors were primarily of
the orthographic type. The zhuyin users typed in the
phonological mode; therefore, their errors were primarily of
the phonological type. The different modes of processing,
once having become habitual, likely lead to additional
processing consequences, which were tested further in
Experiments 2 and 3.

most one. The participants went through the passage only
once, without looking back at the early portion of the story.
They were asked five questions at the end of the task which
assessed their comprehension of the passage. Except for
four participants who answered one question wrong, all
participants answered all the questions correctly, indicating
comprehension was perfect.

Results and Discussion
The zhuyin users missed significantly more targets than the
cangje users (48% vs 42%, t48 = 1.69, p < .05, one-tailed), a
processing consequence that naturally followed from their
habitual mode of processing.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 examined the processing consequence that
might be in favor of the zhuyin users. An onset and rhyme
matching task was adopted, in which the participants heard
two words and had to decide if they shared the same onset
consonant, the same rhyme or neither. Because this task
demanded the processing of phonological detail and the
zhuyin users habitually paid attention to such detail, they
would be faster in making the decision than the cangjie
users.

Table 1: Mean number of errors in each category made by
the cangjie and the zhuyin users, and the results of the
nonparametric median tests between groups.

cangjie

zhuyin

p<

phonologically related

0.05

2.3

.0001

orthographically related
phonologically and
orthographically related
omission

1.39

0.03

.0001

0.32

0.6

.0094

5.29

1.28

.0001

addition

0.03

0.53

.0025

substitution

0.26

0.93

.0005

other

0.08

0

.1442

overall

7.42

5.65

.2813

Error Category

Method
Participants
There were 25 changjie users and 20 zhuyin users, matched
on their typing speed. Some of the changjie users also
participated in Experiments 1 and 2.
Procedure
The participants listened to pairs of Chinese syllables, and
were asked to judge for each pair if the syllables shared the
same onset consonant or the same rhyme. The syllables
were spoken by one of the authors, recorded, digitized, and
played back via a pair of loudspeakers connected to the
computer. There were a total of 160 pairs for consonant
comparisons and 160 pairs for rhyme comparisons. Half of
the pairs were positive (e.g., bao1 and bi2; the numbers
indicate the tones), and the other half were negative (e.g.,
dao1 and bi2). The participants performed onset
comparisons and rhyme comparisons in separate blocks, and
the order of the two subtasks was counterbalanced across
the participants. The experiment was programmed in
DMDX (Forster and Forster, 2003). Response times were
measured in milliseconds from the presentation of the
second character of a pair to the participants’ keypress.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, we asked the cangje and the zhuyin users
to search for a predesignated radical in characters while they
read a passage. Because the cangje users habitually paid
attention to the orthographic detail of a character, they
would be more likely to find the radical than the zhuyin
users who habitually ignored the orthographic detail.

Method
Participants
Participants came from the same pool as that of Experiment
1. There were 25 changjie users and 25 zhuyin users,
matched on their typing speed. Some of the changjie users
also participated in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion

Procedure
The participants were asked to circle all characters which
contained a predesignated radical (日) when they read a
passage (1236 characters long). The passage was printed
horizontally from left to right on A4-size paper. There were
50 target characters in total, with each line containing at

The cangje users responded significantly more slowly than
the zhuyin users [onset: 770 ms vs 680 ms, t43 = 2.5, p < .02
and rhyme: 758 ms vs 646 ms, t43 = 2.7, p < .02]. Error rates
were comparable for the two types of users: 8.5% vs 9.1%
for the cangje and the zhuyin users on the onset task, and
3.4% vs. 3.8% on the rhyme task (ps > .05). Again, the
489

result reflected a processing consequence that followed from
the specific task demand and the habitual modes of
processing of the two groups of participants.

processing, it is foreseeable that handwriting might become
secondary in the future. When penless Chinese becomes
reality, the way Chinese users represent and access Chinese
characters and words mentally is likely also to change. This,
in turn, will have a dramatic effect on learning and reading
Chinese scripts. In fact, Xu 2 is currently experimenting on a
computer-assisted program of teaching American students
to learn Chinese characters without having them write the
characters. The Penless Chinese Program is an ideal testing
ground for examining whether and how Chinese characters
might be represented and accessed differently by the
students of the program.
Artifacts are diverse, but they fall in two broad categories
of material and symbolic (Tomasello, 1999). Pen and paper,
video games, and computer word entry involve material
artifacts. Language and writing systems are symbolic
artifacts; so are mathematics and logic. For Norman (1991),
all of these are regarded as cognitive artifacts. According to
Norman, ‘a cognitive artifact is an artificial device designed
to maintain, display, or operate upon information in order to
serve a representational function’ (p. 17).
Researchers from different but related fields such as
philosophy, linguistics, and cognitive psychology have in
fact been asking the questions of whether and how cognition
might be modified or “reconfigured” through long-time
interactions with the artifacts. The much debated SapirWhorf hypothesis (i.e., the language one speaks affects the
way one conceptualizes the world) is a prime example of
such an endeavor. The discussion of how literacy might
change cognition and the brain organization is another
(Eskritt, Lee, & Donald, 2001; Ostrosky-Solís, García, &
Pérez, 2004). Even the argument for language-dependent
processing (i.e., the architecture and processing mechanism
of the presumed innate and universal language faculty vary
according to the design characteristics of the particular
language a speaker acquires), espoused by many
psycholinguists (cf. Cutler, 1997; Chen, Chen, & Dell, 2002;
Chen & Dell, 2006), may be regarded as addressing the
same general issue. Finally, the recent advance of the
concept of ‘extended mind’ (Clark & Chalmers, 1998) or
‘situated cognition’ (Clancey, 1997) is precisely speaking
the same issue too. However, the focus of many of these
endeavors is on the symbolic artifacts. Whether and how the
material artifacts might affect cognition is an issue in need
of serious and systematic investigation with greater effort
from cognitive scientists.

General Discussion
Results from the three experiments indicated that different
computer word-entry methods seem to modify the way a
Chinese character was processed by the fluent typists. The
phonology based typing resulted in more phonologically
related typing errors, better sensitivity to the onset and
rhyme of a syllable, but a poorer sensitivity to the radical of
a character. The orthography-based typing led to the
opposite consequences. The results suggest that long-term
experience with a particular type of artifact can lead to
cognitive changes.
One objection that may be raised against our
interpretation is that our results demonstrated only
correlation but not causation since we did not manipulate
word-entry method. It is possible that our cangjie typists
were more orthographically oriented, to begin with, while
our zhuyin typists were more phonologically oriented. The
different orientations led them to adopt different word-entry
methods. This possibility is hard to assess and cannot be
ruled out. We can only note that there are far more zhuyin
users than cangjie users in Taiwan, simply because every
child has learned the zhuyinfuhao (a pinyin-equivalent
pronunciation system) in grade schools, which makes zhuyin
typing fairly easy. In contrast, cangjie is a totally different
‘spelling’ system that requires separate learning outside of
classrooms and much additional memorization effort. None
of our zhuyin typists can type the cangjie way. But all of our
cangjie typists can type with the zhuyin method, though
very slowly.
Although our results can be interpreted as merely
demonstrating an effect of learning or transfer from the
conventional view, the interpretation may be limited in
scope and perspective. Learning, by this view, is often
accompanied by an intentionally designed target with an
intended effect. It is explicit in nature. For example, people
may learn arithmetic so that they can do addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division. Yet, much of the
learning which occurs is incidental and unplanned (implicit
in nature). Some may even be undesired. In other words,
much of learning is related to the artifacts that surround us.
Understanding and appreciating the effect of such learning
requires a different view of learning than the conventional
one. Although the conventional view does include the
possibility that the brain and one’s cognitive thinking that
support learning can change, it misses a good part of
learning and the massive effect of such learning on human
brain and cognition. The artifactual view, which emphasizes
incidental and unplanned learning, offers a more useful
account of the results obtained in the present study. It also
captures probably the most important aspect of learning.
The effects of computers (as human artifacts) on human
cognition cannot be overstated as technological innovations
increase. With the changing reliance on computer word

Acknowledgments
The work reported here was supported by Grant NSC-932752-H-006-001-PAE awarded to J.-Y. Chen by the
National Science Council of Taiwan, Republic of China.

References
2
Xu, P. (2004) Penless Chinese language learning: a computerassisted approach. Retrieved from http://www.penlesschinese.org/.

490

Balter, M. (2005). Are human brains still evolving? Brain
genes show signs of selection. Science, 309, 1662-1663.
Castel, A. D., Pratt, J., & Drummond, E. (2005). The effects
of action video game experience on the time course of
inhibition of return and the efficiency of visual search.
Acta Psychologica, 119, 217-230.
Chen, J.-Y., Chen, T.-M., & Dell, G. S. (2002). Word-form
encoding in Mandarin Chinese as assessed by the implicit
priming task. Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 751781.
Chen, J.-Y., & Dell, G. S. (2006). Word-form encoding in
Chinese speech production. In P. Li, L. H. Tan, E. Bates,
& O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), Handbook of East Asian
psycholinguistics. Vol. 1: Chinese (pp. 165-174).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition: On human
knowledge and computer representations. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. J. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.
Cutler, A. (1997). The comparative perspective on spokenlanguage processing. Speech Communication, 21, 3-15.
Eskritt, M., Lee, K., & Donald, M. (2001). The influence of
symbolic literacy on memory: testing Plato’s hypothesis.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 39-50.
Evans, P. D., Gilbert, S. J., Mekel-Bobrov, N., Vallender, E.
J., Anderson, J. R., Vaez-Azizi, L. M., Tishkoff, S. A.,
Hudson, R. R., & Lahn, B. T. (2005). Microcephalin, a
gene regulating brain size, continues to evolve adaptively
in humans. Science, 309,1717-1720.
Flynn, J. R. (1984). The mean IQ of Americans: massive
gains 1932 to 1978. Psychological Bulletin, 95, 29-51.

491

Flynn, J. R. (1987). Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: what IQ
tests really measure. Psychological Bulletin, 101,171191.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior,
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35, 116124.
Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video game
modifies visual attention. Nature, 423, 534-537.
Griffith, J. L., Voloschin, P., Gibb, G. D., & Bailey, J. R.
(1983). Differences in eye-hand motor coordination of
video-game users and non-users. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 57, 155-158.
Hunt, E. (1995). The role of intelligence in modern society.
American Scientist, 83, 356-368.
Mekel-Bobrov, N., Gilbert, S. L., Evans, P. D., Vallender, E.
J., Anderson, J. R., Hudson, R. R., Tishkoff, S. A., &
Lahn, B. T. (2005). Ongoing adaptive evolution of ASPM,
a brain size determinant in Homo sapiens. Science, 309,
1720-1722.
Neisser, U. (1997). Rising scores on intelligence tests.
American Scientist, 85, 440-447.
Norman, D. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. M. Carroll
(Ed.), Designing interaction (pp. 17-38). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Ostrosky-Solís, F., García, M. A., & Pérez, M. (2004). Can
learning to read and write change the brain organization?
An electrophysiological study. International Journal of
Psychology, 39, 27-35.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

