UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Factors Influencing the Interpretation of Noun-Noun Compounds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8tk284bk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Maguire, Phil
Maguire, Rebecca
Cater, Arthur W.S.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Factors Influencing the Interpretation of Noun-Noun Compounds
Phil Maguire (pmaguire@cs.nuim.ie)
Department of Computer Science, NUI Maynooth
Co.Kildare, Ireland

Rebecca Maguire (rebecca.maguire@dbs.ie)
Department of Psychology, Dublin Business School
34/35 South William Street, Dublin 2, Ireland

Arthur W.S. Cater (arthur.cater@ucd.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics,
University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland

and Shoben’s (1997) Competition Among Relations In
Nominals (CARIN) theory focuses primarily on the relation
linking the constituent nouns in a combination. This theory
maintains that there is a fixed, relatively small taxonomy of
standard relations that can be used to link the modifier and
head noun concepts. One of the most notable aspects of the
CARIN theory is its proposed mechanism for how
constituent nouns affect relation availability. Gagné and
Shoben (1997) contend that a noun’s influence on relation
availability is not a function of that noun’s conceptual
content; rather, its influence is a function of how that noun
has been experienced in previous combinations. In other
words, “people possess distributional knowledge about how
often particular relations are used” (p. 74) and this
knowledge affects the ease with which two constituents are
combined. For example, Gagné and Shoben propose that
mountain goat should be easier to interpret than mountain
magazine by virtue of the fact that mountain is more
frequently used with the <located> relation than it is with
the <made of> relation. Here, mountain goat can be
described as having a high modifier relation frequency
while mountain magazine can be described as having a low
modifier relation frequency. Thus, according to the CARIN
theory, relation frequency should be positively correlated
with ease of interpretation.
In a speeded sensibility task, Gagné and Shoben (1997)
found that differences in ease of interpretation (response
time and accuracy) were associated with differences in
modifier relation frequency but not with differences in head
relation frequency. This they interpreted as evidence that
people store distributional knowledge for modifiers but not
for heads. Accordingly, the CARIN theory provides an
account of conceptual combination which views the
influence of the modifier as being separate and independent
to that of the head noun. The structure of Gagné and
Shoben’s model implies that the influence exerted by a
modifier should remain constant across every situation.
This seems surprising as one would expect the
significance of a modifier to vary depending on the head
with which it is paired. Other theories of conceptual
combination have proposed that the influence of both
constituents is a joint interactive one. For example, Estes

Abstract
The Competition Among Relation in Nominals theory (Gagné
& Shoben, 1997) asserts that the relation frequency of the
modifying noun is the primary determinant of ease of
interpretation for noun-noun compounds. It also assumes that
the influence of this variable is independent of the head noun.
However, we suggest that both constituents exert an influence
and that this influence depends on the pairing of nouns as well
as the context. We present an experiment that investigates if
the influence of the modifier’s relation frequency is fixed or
whether it is affected by the head noun. Our results reveal that
modifier relation frequency per se is not an accurate predictor
of ease of interpretation: low modifier relation frequency
combinations were easily interpreted in cases where the
modifier’s general bias was overruled by the semantics of the
head noun. As a result, we suggest that models predicting
ease of interpretation must take into account the interaction of
both constituents. The implications for models of conceptual
combination are discussed.
Keywords: Conceptual combination; noun-noun compounds;
CARIN theory; modifier primacy; context.

Introduction
The combination of two words is a technique commonly
adopted by speakers in order to refer to novel concepts and
ideas (e.g. penguin film, handbag dog). Although people
have a well developed means of understanding these novel
compounds, the associated comprehension process is not
trivial, requiring many levels of understanding.
Accordingly, the study of conceptual combination is
important, both because it is intimately associated with the
generativity and comprehension of natural language and
because it is important for understanding how people
represent concepts. In English, a language in which
compounding is particularly productive, combinations
consist of a modifier noun followed by a head noun.
Usually, the head noun denotes the main category while the
modifier implies a relevant subcategory or a modification of
that set’s typical members. In this way, a kitchen chair is
interpreted as a particular type of chair, and more precisely
as the type that is located in kitchens.
In order to understand a combination, people have to be
able to relate the two concepts in a meaningful way. Gagné

167

knowledge is activated in a context-appropriate manner is
supported by converging evidence from numerous studies
(cf. Barsalou, 2005).
If the significance of a noun varies depending on how it is
used, then the influence of that noun cannot be modeled by
averaging its influence over a wide variety of different
combinations. Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) variable of
relation frequency reflects the association between a noun
and a relation as averaged over every combination in which
that noun has been previously encountered. Consequently,
the CARIN model does not allow for any interactional
influence between the modifier and head nouns. If the
interactional hypothesis is correct, then relation frequency
cannot provide an accurate reflection of relation availability.

and Glucksberg (2000) point out that feather luggage can be
interpreted as light luggage because feathers have the salient
property of being light and luggage has weight as a relevant
dimension. On the other hand, the use of the modifier
feather in a combination such as feather storage is unlikely
to have the same effect since storage does not have weight
as a relevant dimension. If the significance of the modifier
depends on how it is used, then its influence on the
interpretative process will not be a constant one.
Maguire and Cater (2005) demonstrated that the relation
bias of the head noun can be shown to exert a significant
effect once the influence of the modifier is properly
controlled. For example, turnip soup was interpreted more
quickly and more reliably than turnip field because the head
noun soup is more strongly suggestive of the <has> relation
than field. This finding suggests that the relation bias of
both constituents can influence the interpretation process.
An important question is therefore whether the influence of
both constituents is constant and independent or
interactional and context-sensitive.

Rationale
The following experiment investigates whether the
influence of the modifier and head is an interactional one.
Specifically, it examines whether the influence of Gagné
and Shoben’s (1997) variable of modifier relation frequency
is affected by the head noun. If people are sensitive to the
interaction of noun properties, then modifier relation
frequency should only be associated with differences in ease
of interpretation in cases where the head does not affect the
influence of the modifier. In other words, a low relation
frequency modifier should only increase interpretation
difficulty when the properties of the head fail to rule out
inappropriate relations of higher availability.
Gagné and Shoben showed that combinations involving a
modifier such as chocolate are more difficult to interpret
when they use relations other than <made of> (e.g.
chocolate factory). Since most combinations involving the
chocolate modifier use this relation (e.g. chocolate cake,
chocolate bar, chocolate biscuit etc.) then it seems intuitive
that people should be predisposed to selecting it based on
their prior experience. However, our hypothesis is that
subjective relation availability reflects the interaction of
modifier and head properties. In the example chocolate
factory, the head is an artifact. Since artifacts have a
constitution, the head noun factory fails to preclude the use
of the <made of> relation suggested by the modifier
chocolate. However, for a combination such as chocolate
taste, the head is an intangible abstract entity and therefore
cannot have a constitution. This rules out the possibility of
the <made of> relation: combinations of type [substance –
attribute] are never interpreted in this way. If people are
aware that the head noun taste rules out the bias of the
modifier chocolate, as our interactional hypothesis predicts,
then the ease of interpretation should be unaffected:
chocolate taste should be no more difficult to interpret than
chocolate cake or chocolate bar. It might even be easier to
interpret, given the strong constraints on the range of
interpretation. The following experiment examines whether
the association between modifier relation frequency and
ease of interpretation observed by Gagné and Shoben (1997)
is affected by the potential of the head to overrule the
modifier’s bias.

Interactional Influence
In their analysis of noun compounds in the British National
Corpus, Maguire, Wisniewski and Storms (2007) found that
different permutations of head and modifier types were
strongly associated with particular relations. For example,
[animal-body part] (e.g. chicken feathers) combinations
predominantly used the <Modifier has Head> relation
whereas [animal-food] (e.g. chicken pie) combinations
predominantly used the <Head contains Modifier> relation.
The influence of a modifier of type [animal] therefore
strongly depended on the nature of the head. A measure
averaging the relation incidence of such modifiers over a
varied set of combinations (e.g. relation frequency) would
not preserve this kind of information. Based on their
findings, Maguire et al. (2007) suggested that people are
sensitive to the interaction of both concepts and use this
knowledge to ‘home in’ on the correct interpretation (e.g.
knowing that patterns such as [substance-artifact] are
associated with the <made of> relation). This implies that
relation availability is best modeled by taking into account
the interactional influence of both constituents as opposed to
treating them separately.
A study by Maguire, Maguire and Cater (2007) supported
the idea that people are aware of the interactional influence
of the modifier and head. They found that combinations like
frog tail which matched a productive modifier-head
category (e.g. <animal-body part>) took longer to reject as
implausible than combinations like daffodil tail, which did
not match a productive category. Participants responded to
the productivity of the overall modifier-head category rather
than the productivity of either constituent in isolation.
Maguire et al. (2007) suggested that knowledge about a
concept is activated according to the situation in which it is
used. In the case of noun-noun compounds, each constituent
should exert a strong influence on the way the opposite
constituent is interpreted. The idea that conceptual

168

then that one relation was the only high frequency relation.
If not, the relation with the next highest frequency relation
was added to the high frequency group, until the selected
relations accounted for 60% or more of the sensible
combinations for that modifier. All other relations were
considered low frequency. Forcibly pairing an arbitrary set
of modifiers and heads is unlikely to result in a
representative sample (cf. Storms & Wisniewski, 2005).
Furthermore, the use of a precise 60% dichotomization
threshold is unreliable as, theoretically, an infinitesimal
variation in the frequency of a relation can make the
difference between that relation being categorized as high or
low frequency (cf. Maguire, Devereux, Costello & Cater,
2007). Using Gagné and Shoben’s paradigm, any relation
with a frequency up to 40% can potentially be classified as
low frequency while relations with frequencies as low as 3%
can be classified as high frequency. In order for the
distinction to be meaningful, high frequency relations
should be as frequent as possible and low frequency
relations should be as rare as possible.
To avoid these problems and obtain a reliable sample of
high and low modifier frequency combinations, we made
use of the technique used by Maguire and Cater (2005). In
order to ensure appropriately biased modifiers, we selected
20 modifier nouns which met the criterion that a 100combination sample of the British National Corpus (BNC)
contained at least 60 combinations involving a single most
common relation for that head. Our high modifier frequency
combinations involved the dominant relation for that
modifier while the low frequency combinations used
another relation. In this way, we ensured that the H
combinations had modifiers that were suggestive of a
particular relation and that the LC and LU combinations
used relations that contradicted this bias, having a
substantially lower modifier relation frequency.
All three conditions were controlled for a range of factors
with the potential to influence ease of interpretation, namely
word length, frequency, plausibility and familiarity. The
length of the head nouns did not differ reliably between
conditions using a repeated measures ANOVA, F(2, 38) =
.26, p = .77; nor did the syllable length, F(2, 38) = .39, p =
.68. As a measurement of head frequency, we used the log
of the total number of occurrences of a noun within the
BNC. This variable did not differ significantly between
conditions, F(2, 38) = 1.08, p = .35. As in previous
experiments, we controlled for the factors of plausibility and
familiarity by obtaining the log of the Google frequency for
each of our combinations. This measure did not differ
reliably between conditions, F(2, 38) = .09, p = .91.

Experiment
Although Gagné and Shoben (1997) observed a weak
association between ease of interpretation and historical
combination use, this may simply reflect part of a much
stronger association reflecting the interactional influence of
both constituents. Investigating this hypothesis, we
examined the extent to which people are aware of how a
modifier’s bias is affected by the nature of the head noun.
We conducted a speeded sensibility task with two
conditions involving combinations with a low modifier
relation frequency. In one of these conditions, the basic
ontology of the head ruled out the high modifier frequency
relation (Low Constrained or LC condition, e.g. mountain
height) while in the other, it did not (the Low Unconstrained
or LU condition, e.g. mountain magazine). In addition, we
included a further condition where the same modifier was
used with a high frequency relation (High or H condition,
e.g. mountain goat). Thus, the L and H refer to the modifier
relation frequency while the C and U labels describe
whether the incorrect high frequency modifier relation was
ruled out by the head or not.
The CARIN theory asserts that the modifier’s relation
frequency is directly correlated with ease of interpretation
while that of the head noun has no effect. Regarding our
experiment, this theory predicts that the H combinations
should be the easiest to interpret and that there should be no
difference between the LC and LU conditions since both
involve equally low frequency modifier relations. In
contrast, we propose that it is the interaction of both
constituents which is of relevance. Accordingly, we predict
that the LU combinations will be more difficult to interpret
than the LC combinations, since the misleading bias of the
modifier in the LC condition is effectively mitigated by the
properties of the head. In addition, we do not predict a
difference between the H and LC combinations: only the
unconstrained LU combinations should be associated with
an increase in difficulty.

Method
Participants Twenty-four first year undergraduate students
from University College Dublin participated in the
experiment for partial course credit. All were native English
speakers.
Materials We generated a set of twenty combinations for
each of the three conditions LC, LU and H. The twenty
modifiers in each condition were repeated in order to
facilitate a repeated measures design (e.g. leather smell,
leather needle, leather saddle). In order to determine high
and low frequency relations, Gagné and Shoben (1997)
paired a set of 91 modifiers with 91 heads and classified the
relations for the sensible combinations that emerged. The
high frequency relations for any given modifier denoted
those relations with the highest relative frequencies for that
modifier. This group was determined by first identifying the
highest frequency relation. If that relation accounted for
60% or more of the sensible combinations for that modifier,

Design A within-participants design was used for the
experimental manipulation of condition. Each participant
saw the same set of 120 stimuli, comprising the three
conditions of 20 items each and 60 nonsensical filler items.
Procedure The procedure for this experiment was similar to
that used by Gagné and Shoben (1997). Participants sat in

169

F2(1, 19) = 20.85, p < .001, MSe = 21.53. We also found a
significant difference between the H and LU conditions,
F1(1, 23) = 35.08, p < .001, MSe = 3.52; F2(1, 19) = 6.21, p
= .02, MSe = 23.86. Finally, there was a significant
difference between the H and LC conditions, but in the
opposite direction to that predicted by the CARIN theory,
with the low modifier frequency combinations being judged
most accurately, F1(1, 23) = 34.74, p < .001, MSe = 1.95;
F2(1, 19) = 7.90, p = .01, MSe = 10.28.
In sum, the LC combinations were verified more quickly
and more accurately than the LU combinations. Because
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) CARIN theory assumes that the
influence of a modifier is constant, it is unable to account
for this finding. In addition, the LC combinations proved no
more challenging for participants than the H combinations
and were actually interpreted more accurately. This
contradicts the CARIN theory’s premise that low modifier
relation frequency combinations should always be more
difficult to interpret. Clearly, a modifier’s typical
association with a particular relation is only of relevance
when that bias is not contradicted by the head. For example,
although chocolate as a modifier usually suggests the
<made of> relation, this bias is redundant in the case of
chocolate taste since combinations of the type [substance –
attribute] are more generally associated with the <has>
relation. As a result, chocolate taste (LC) was interpreted
more quickly than chocolate factory (LU) and indeed more
quickly than chocolate rabbit (H). These findings support
the idea that people respond to the interaction of noun
properties in generating an interpretation. The results are
also compatible with the statistical patterns in relation
diagnosticity observed by Maguire, Wisniewski and Storms
(2007). In other words, the information that people bring to
bear in the interpretation process accurately reflects the
probability of a relation.
Only two participants (8%) correctly judged leather
needle as a genuine combination, whereas twenty (83%)
were able to judge that leather smell was sensible.
Presumably, in the former case most participants were
interpreting the combination as a needle made out of leather
and dismissing the phrase as nonsensical. This can be
explained by the fact that leather is strongly biased towards
the <made of> relation. However, an additional fact (which
the CARIN theory fails to accommodate) is that leather is
only diagnostic of this relation when the head is an artifact.
Those combinations involving leather and the <made of>
relation are generally of the form [leather – artifact], as only
artifacts are associated with a constitution. Our results
demonstrate that people are sensitive to this additional
information and are not simply guided by an aggregate
measure of how a noun has been used in all previous
combinations. Most participants in our experiment
interpreted leather needle as a needle made of leather and
judged it as nonsense because needles are artifacts and
artifacts can be made out of a material. However, they did
not interpret leather smell as a smell made out of leather
because they were aware that a smell is not solid. The fact

front of a computer screen and placed the index finger of
their left hand on the F key of the computer keyboard and
the index finger of their right hand on the J key. They were
informed that a series of noun-noun compounds would be
displayed on the screen for which they would have to make
sensibility judgments, pressing J for sense and F for
nonsense. Emphasis was placed on the fact that participants
should only press F if the combination was truly
incomprehensible. Each trial was separated by a blank
screen lasting for one second. The combination then
appeared in the middle of the screen and participants had to
make a decision by pressing the appropriate key.
Participants were initially given a short practice session
where feedback was given regarding their judgments. The
aim of this practice session was to familiarize them with the
process of making quick sensibility judgments and also to
set a reliable threshold for sensibility. Without such a
measure, participants would have been liable to disregard
unusual but potentially sensible combinations as nonsense.
After completing the practice session, participants were
instructed that they were now beginning the experiment.
The stimuli were then presented in a random order.

Results and Discussion
A total of 4.8% of the data were omitted from the analysis in
calculating mean response times. Those responses deemed
unreasonably fast (< 400ms, 0.3%) or unreasonably slow (>
4000, 3.5%) were excluded. Furthermore, any remaining
response times which were more than three standard
deviations outside each participant’s mean for that condition
were also excluded. This eliminated a further 1.0% of trials.
The mean response times were 1423, 1485 and 1379 ms
for the H, LU and LC conditions respectively while the
mean accuracy rates were .83, .66 and .93. We conducted a
series of repeated measure ANOVAs in order to examine
the differences between conditions using both participants
and items as random factors. We found a significant
difference in response time by participants but not by items,
F1(2, 46) = 4.83, p = .01, MSe = 17005.88; F2(2, 38) = 1.62,
p = .21, MSe = 37253.07. Subsequently, we conducted
pairwise comparisons between conditions by participants
using Bonferroni adjustments. As predicted, there was a
significant difference between the LC and LU conditions
by-participant, although not by-item, F1(1, 23) = 13.44, p <
.01, MSe = 12169.48; F2(1, 19) = 3.57, p = .07, MSe =
33686.54. There was no significant difference between the
H and LC conditions, F1(1, 23) = 1.58, p = .22, MSe =
20265.13; F2(1, 19) = .66, p = .43, MSe = 34913.22 or
between the H and LU conditions, F1(1, 23) = 2.74, p = .11,
MSe = 18583.05; F2(1, 19) = .88, p = .36, MSe = 43159.45.
The accuracy ratings proved to be particularly revealing.
Here, there was a significant effect both by participant and
by items, F1(2, 46) = 60.00, p < .001, MSe = 3.14; F2(2, 38)
= 12.19, p < .001, MSe = 18.55. Again, we conducted
pairwise comparisons between the various conditions. As
predicted, there was a significant difference between the LC
and LU conditions, F1(1, 23) = 94.64, p < .001, MSe = 3.93;

170

significant influence exerted by the head may have been
because their study did not examine the influence of each
constituent separately but instead varied both factors at the
same time. Consequently, the head’s influence may have
been swamped by that of the modifier. When other factors
were properly controlled for, Maguire and Cater (2005)
demonstrated a significant influence of the head noun’s
relation bias. It may be the case that Gagné and Shoben’s
materials were better suited to detecting a modifier
influence than a head influence. For example, Maguire,
Wisniewski and Storms (2007) found that substance, time
and location modifiers are all extremely biased towards one
particular relation. This bias is unaffected when the head is
an artifact, making combinations of this type more difficult
to interpret when the biased relation is inappropriate (e.g.
paper equipment, wood money, chocolate plant). As it
happens, 11 of Gagné and Shoben’s 19 LH combinations
were of this form. In contrast, head nouns rarely exhibit a
bias towards one particular relation that is maintained for a
wide range of different modifiers. For example, Maguire
and Cater (2005) found that soup as a head noun is biased
towards the <made of> relation, but only when the modifier
is a food substance. Similarly, pain is biased towards the
<located> relation, but only when the modifier is a body
part. In contrast to the majority of their modifiers, few of
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) head nouns exhibit a consistent
bias1. For example, although Gagné and Shoben determined
that the head noun bird tends to be used with the <located>
relation, it is unlikely to suggest this relation in the context
of chocolate bird since animals are not usually located in
substances. Similarly, although toy might be frequently
associated with the <made of> relation overall2, it is
certainly not suggestive of this relation in the context of
cooking toy, since objects cannot be made of activities. In
light of this, we suggest that the reason Gagné and Shoben
observed a modifier primacy effect was because the
modifiers used in their study were less susceptible to the
interactional influence of the opposite constituent. The
current study clearly indicates that the head noun exerts an
influence, and that the nature of this influence depends on
the modifier.
Although we have concentrated on the influence exerted
by a combination’s constituent nouns, the surrounding
context is also likely to play an important role in relation
selection. For example, if one were to use the combination
plastic box while holding aloft a cardboard box full of
pieces of plastic, this would no doubt enhance the
availability of the <contains> relation, while at the same
time strongly mitigating the likelihood of the <made of>
relation. In order to examine the potential influence of
sentential context on relation selection, we conducted a brief

that the modifier leather is biased towards the <made of>
relation is not relevant for the interpretation of the
combination leather smell.

General Discussion
Various probabilistic models of human language
comprehension have been proposed in the past, based on the
idea that probabilistic information about words, phrases and
other linguistic structure is represented in the minds of
language users and plays a role in language comprehension.
Event-related brain potential recordings have shown that
readers can use the words in a sentence to estimate relative
likelihood for upcoming words (cf. DeLong, Urbach &
Kutas, 2005). This suggests that prior experience, as well as
something akin to frequency distributions, might be a factor
in human language processing. Indeed, our results have
vindicated certain aspects of the CARIN theory in that
combinations using low modifier frequency relations were
more difficult to interpret in cases where the head did not
overrule the modifier’s misleading bias.
Although Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) approach has some
merit, we believe that their theory in its current state is
overly simplistic. We propose a more realistic model with
several key differences. Firstly, Gagné and Shoben claimed
that people store separate modifier relation frequency
distributions for every single modifier. This seems
unnecessary, as the influence of a modifier is often closely
related to its properties (e.g. one can infer that mountain
prefers the <located> relation based on the fact that it refers
to a place). The BNC corpus study by Maguire, Wisniewski
and Storms (2007) revealed that nouns of the same type tend
to combine in very similar ways. It therefore appears
unlikely that people would fail to exploit such predictable
patterns. For example, the knowledge that time periods tend
to combine using the <during> relation is not information
that needs to be learned and stored separately with every
time period modifier.
We suggest that people’s knowledge about how
combinations should be interpreted is mostly centered on
noun properties. Specific information relating to one noun
in particular is only likely to be maintained when that noun
is extremely frequent or its use deviates considerably from
the norm (e.g. mammoth is often used as a modifier to
indicate large size, as in mammoth sandwich; this use is not
shared by similar nouns like whale and thus a large
sandwich is unlikely to be described as a whale sandwich).
Importantly, any knowledge regarding noun use in
combination is likely to reflect how a noun interacts with
other nouns, as opposed to being represented by a crude
aggregate measure.

Modifier Primacy
Although the modifier may represent a more predictive
measure of the appropriate relation, the key finding of our
experiment is that both constituents must be taken into
account rather than being considered individually. The
reason that Gagné and Shoben (1997) failed to detect a

1

The only exceptions are book and magazine for which a large variety of
modifier types can act as a subject matter
2
Wisniewski and Storms (2005) and Maguire, Devereux, Costello and
Cater (2007) identified several potential sources of inaccuracy associated
with the technique used by Gagné and Shoben (1997) to obtain these
statistics

171

may prove more successful in modeling the interpretation of
noun-noun combinations.

experiment. In total, 40 participants were recruited. Half
were presented with the phrase “…a mountain x” while the
other half were presented with the extract “John was going
on a hike. He went down to his local hardware store to buy
some mountain x”. Both groups were told that the extract
had been lifted from a written source and that the final word
had been replaced with the x symbol. They were allowed
three guesses as to what that word might be. Each of the
participants’ responses was ascribed to one of Gagné and
Shoben’s relations, allowing a relation frequency to be
determined for the modifier mountain in each of the two
scenarios.
For the combinations generated in the context-free
condition, the relation with the highest frequency was
<located> with 45%, followed by the <for> relation with
19%. In contrast, every single combination generated in the
context condition involved the <for> relation. This finding
indicates that people are sensitive to the way in which
sentential context affects relation likelihood, again
contradicting Gagné and Shoben’s assumption that the
influence of relation frequency can be modeled
independently of any other factors. In light of this, we
propose that relation availability is likely to reflect a
complex interaction of statistical inferences based on the
modifier, the head and the associated context. Although
Gagné and Spalding (2004) demonstrated that the
association between modifier relation frequency and ease of
interpretation persists in context, this does not preclude nor
account for the interactional influence of context, just in the
same way that Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) observation of a
modifier influence does not preclude nor account for the
interactional influence of the head noun.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (2005). Situated conceptualization. In H.
Cohen & C. Lefebvre (Eds.), Handbook of Categorization
in Cognitive Science (pp. 619-650). St. Louis: Elsevier.
Delong, K.A., Urbach, T.P. & Kutas, M. (2005).
Probabilistic word pre-activation during language
comprehension inferred from electrical brain activity.
Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1117-1121.
Estes, Z., & Glucksberg, S. (2000). Interactive property
attribution in concept combination. Memory & Cognition,
28, 28-34.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Gagné C. L. & Spalding T. L. (2004). Effect of discourse
context and modifier relation frequency on conceptual.
combination. Journal of Memory and Language, 50(4),
444-455.
Maguire, P. & Cater, A. (2005). Turnip soup: Head noun
influence in the comprehension of novel compounds.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Maguire, P., Devereux, B., Costello, F. & Cater, A. (2007).
A re-analysis of the CARIN theory of conceptual
combination. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 33, 811-821.
Maguire, P., Maguire, R., & Cater, A. (2007). In Search of
the Frog’s Tail: Investigating the Time Course of
Conceptual Knowledge Activation. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Maguire, P., Wisniewski, E.J. & Storms, G. (2007). A
corpus analysis of conceptual combination. Proceedings
of the Twenty-Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Storms, G. and Wisniewski, E. J. (2005). Does the order of
head noun and modifier explain response times in
conceptual combination? Memory and Cognition, 33(5),
852-861.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Murphy, G. L. (2005). Frequency of
relation type as a determinant of conceptual combination:
a reanalysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 31, 169-174

Conclusion
We believe that the CARIN theory is too simplistic in its
current form to represent a realistic model of conceptual
combination. For one, there is little evidence to suggest that
storing one basic statistical distribution per modifier is the
best way to encapsulate experiential knowledge. We have
demonstrated that the head noun exerts an influence on
interpretation and that this influence is dependent on the
nature of the modifier. Furthermore, we have provided
evidence that sentential context can have an interactional
influence. These findings suggest that the knowledge that
people bring to bear in interpreting a combination is far
more complex than the CARIN model allows.
The ability of the CARIN model to account for
differences in the ease of interpretation of combinations is
quite poor (Gagné & Shoben report a correlation of 0.44
between the model output and response time). This may be
due to the fact that the model includes only a single factor,
namely an aggregated statistical relation frequency
pertaining to the modifier. Our study has demonstrated that
other factors affect interpretation and that these factors are
interactional and context-specific. A more comprehensive
model that takes into account these alternative influences

172

