UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fast-Mapping and Reorganization: Development of Verb Meanings as a System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1500g1wh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Saji, Noburo
Saalbach, Henrik
Imai, Mutsumi
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fast-mapping and Reorganization: Development of Verb Meanings as a System
Noburo Saji (nons@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Graduate school of Media and Governance, Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, 5322 Endo, Kanagawa, Japan

Henrik Saalbach(henrik.saalbach@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland

Mutsumi Imai(imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, Japan

Yupin Zhang(michelle1368@hotmail.com)
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China

Hua Shu (ShuhHua@bnu.edu.ch)
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China

Hiroyuki Okada (hokada@eng.tamagawa.ac.jp)
College of Engineering, Tamagawa University, Machida, Japan
word is initially mapped to a meaning. For theories of
lexical development, understanding how reorganizations of
word meanings occur is as important as understanding how
fast-mapping takes place. Yet, much of the mechanism of
the reorganization process of word meanings has been left
unspecified. For example, how does under- or overextension of a word last?; how long does it take for
children’s word meaning representation to converge with
that of adults?; what causes modification of the meaning of
a word, and how does it take place?
An important force behind the reorganization of the
meaning of a word is the learning of a new word closely
related to the previously learned word (Clark, 1987). For
example, children often originally use the word “doggy” too
broadly to refer to other small, four-legged animals such as
cats, sheep, etc.; when they learn the words for those
animals, overextension errors stop.
In this light, to
understand how reorganization of word meanings takes
place, it is important to examine how a change in the word
meaning representation of one word affects the word
meaning representation of neighboring words in the same
semantic domain by looking at children’s understanding the
meanings of word in the same domain as a whole. To our
knowledge, there is only one study that systematically
examined how meanings of words belonging to the same
semantic domain change developmentally. Ameel, Malt &
Stroms (in press) studied how children aged 5 to 14 years
and adults named various kinds of containers. They
documented that the children’s patterns of word uses
progressed to the adult patterns only gradually through the
addition of new words and reorganization of existing
categories. Furthermore, these authors identified both overextension and under-extension across different words in the
domain: some words were initially used more broadly by
children than by adults, while other words were used more
narrowly.
The purpose of the present research was two-fold. First,
extending Ameel et al. (in press), we wished to document
how young children’s meanings of verbs for common
actions evolve with development. Specifically, we examined
the developmental trajectory of children’s lexical
knowledge of 13 verbs denoting carrying and holding events

Abstract
This paper explores the process through which children sort
out relations among verbs belonging to the same semantic
domain. For this purpose, we studied how Chinese 3-, 5-, 7year-olds and adults apply various carry/hold verbs to videos
depicting 13 different carrying/holding actions. Results show
that the degree of convergence between children's verb use
and that of adults' are very different for different verb.
Furthermore, when convergence with adult meaning was
adopted as the index of whether “children have acquired the
word meaning”, the key predictor of “acquisition” was the
degree of semantic overlap with verbs belonging to the same
semantic domain, while word frequency was the key predictor
which contributed the most for verbs that children produced
frequently. These results underscore the importance of
examining the mechanism of reorganization of word meaning
to obtain a full picture of lexical development.
Keywords: Word meaning representation, Lexical
development, Semantic reorganization

Introduction
In the past decades, much effort has been devoted to the
problem of how young children break the barrier of
mapping words onto the world at the initial stages of lexical
development. Although the ability to fast-map is an amazing
accomplishment and an extremely important first-step for
building up the lexicon, what children achieve by fastmapping is often over-estimated: The success of fastmapping by no means implies that children have acquired
adult-like, full meanings of words. In fact, researchers have
documented that children’s word meaning representations
go through changes. Most well-known changes are those
from under-extension, cases in which children construe
word meanings too narrowly and use words for very limited
referents (e.g., using “dog” only for particular type of dog),
and over-extension, cases in which children use words too
broadly (e.g., using “dog” for all small four-legged
animals). Some researchers have also noted cases where
children initially use verbs “correctly” for some time,
followed by a period in which children start making errors
(Bowerman, 1982).
Thus, for many words, word meaning continues to grow
and often goes through a reorganization process after the
35

Table 1: Stimuli videos.

in Chinese as well as their knowledge of the semantic
domain as a whole. Second, we wished to identify factors
influencing the ease of learning word meanings. Here, our
research is unique in that we employed multiple criteria for
determining how well children “know” a given verb.
One of the key questions in the literature regards which
factors determine the ease (or difficulty) of learning of
words. Some researchers have emphasized conceptual or
semantic factors (e.g., Gentner, 1982; Imai, Haryu & Okada,
2005), while others have emphasized frequency in the input
(Tardif, 1996, Li et al, 2007). However, what does it mean
to say that a child “knows” the meaning of a word? How
should “ease of learning” be defined?
Concerning the first issue, researchers have commonly
stated that the meaning of a given word is “known” or even
“acquired” when a child produced the word correctly in one
context. Likewise, when researchers discuss the ease of
word learning, they tend to consider early-produced words
as easy to learn. However, as discussed above, correct use
in limited contexts does not guarantee that a child is able to
apply a word in the way adults do in other contexts
(cf.Bowerman, 1982;Imai et al., 2005). It is thus
theoretically important to clarify whether words entering a
child’s vocabulary early converge to adult-like meaning
representations early as well, and whether the factors
influencing early entrance into the vocabulary are the same
as the factors influencing early attainment of full, adult-like
meaning representation. We thus not only used the time a
verb appeared in the vocabulary but also the depth of
children’s knowledge about the meaning of the verb as
indexes of word acquisition.
As the target of investigation, we chose the semantic
domain of carrying and holding (C&H) verbs in Chinese.
While the English verbs “carry” and “hold” differ with
respect to whether or not the person holding the object is
moving, the Chinese verbs do not distinguish actions in this
respect; instead they distinguish the manner in which an
object is being carried or held. There are more than 20
words in this semantic domain in Chinese. (See Table.1 for
examples). For example, carrying/holding an object on
one’s head is denoted by “ding,” while holding/carrying an
object on one’s shoulder is “kang.” An advantage of
studying verbs in this semantic domain is that actions
denoted by these verbs are all perceptually visible and
concrete, which allows us to show the actions in videos in
order to elicit verbs. Furthermore, because these actions are
activities children observe every day, they should be very
familiar to them.
Yet, the semantics of this domain is very complex, and
learners of Chinese have to learn how the domain is
organized and which semantic space each verb is mapped to,
figuring out the boundaries of many semantic categories.
Thus, it is extremely interesting to examine how children
learn to divide the C&H actions they observe everyday into
a complex system of lexical categories from early stages of
lexical development through adulthood.

Verb

Action

Bao
Bei
Ding
Duan

C&H an obj. in both arms
C&H an obj. on the back
C&H an obj. on the top of head
C&H an obj. by hand, keeping the
obj. horizontally
C&H an obj. under one arm
C&H an obj. by lifting the obj over
the head
C&H an obj. on the shoulder
C&H an obj., hanging it on the
shoulder
C&H an obj., dangling it with one
hand
C&H an obj. with one hand
C&H an obj. cautiously in both
hands
C&H an obj., dangling it around the
arm
C&H an obj. in the palm(s)

jia
Ju
Kang
Kua
Lin
Na
peng
Ti
Tuo

Word
Frequency1
138
135
98
81
58
97
52
14
27
595
48
446
71

Experiment
Overview
We first selected 13 verbs in the domain of C&H actions
and prepared two video clips for each verb, one showing a
carrying action (the actor is moving with an object) and the
other showing a holding action (the actor is holding an
object without moving) both in the manner denoted by the
verb. Chinese-speaking children of three age groups (3-, 5-,
and 7-olds) and three groups of adult Chinese speakers
(university undergraduates, mothers of 2-year-olds, and
mothers of 5-year-olds) were asked to describe each action
in the video. Mothers were included in the study to see
whether they would use verbs differently when talking to
their children and when talking to adults. In addition,
comprehension data were collected from a different group
of adult participants. Production data shows how speakers
differentially use verbs in the domain. In other words,
production data reflects participants’ judgment about the
most appropriate verb for a given action. Comprehension
data, on the other hand, shows us if adults would accept the
use of a verb for a given action, even though they would
prefer a different verb themselves. This information is also
useful for determining the extension of the verb’s boundary
as well as for knowing the degree of overlap between two
neighboring verbs.

1

The frequency count for each verb was taken from the corpus
of Frequency Dictionary of Modern Chinese (Beijing Language
Institute, 1986; 1200000 words). Cases where the character was
used as a morpheme of other words were excluded in the
frequency count.

36

task, only the thirteen video clips representing carrying
(moving) actions used in the production task were used here.
Participants saw an exhaustive combination of all videos
and verbs (i.e. each video appeared with each verb) in
random order. In each trial, they were asked to judge
whether or not the verb could refer to the action shown in
the video. Thus there was a total of 169 trials (each of the
13 videos combined with each of the 13verbs).

The data were analyzed in 5 respects: (1) how many verb
types were produced across 26 videos in each age group (2)
to what degree the pattern of children’s use of verbs
converges with that of adults, and how it develops with age;
(3) whether care-takers use verbs differently when talking to
young children than when talking to older children or to
adults (e.g., over-use of particular verbs and under-use
others), and whether young children’s over-extension of
some verbs reflects the pattern of care-taker’s special verb
use to young children; (4) what verbs are learned “more
easily” than others; and (5) what factors affect the ease of
verb learning.

Analyses and Results
1. How many verb types did children and adults
produced across 26 carrying/holding actions?

Method

The most commonly used measure for vocabulary growth is
the number of words children produce. For example, CDI
(Communicative Development Inventories) asks care-takers
to check which words children produce, without asking
whether they always use the word correctly. We thus
counted up the number of verb types each individual
produced across the 26 videos. Adults on average produced
11.2 different verb types. The mean-produced verb types
for children were 7.25, 6.25, and 8.57 for 3-, 5- and 7-yearolds, respectively. The means of verb types were not
different among the three child groups, all ps >.1, Bonferoni
corrected, but it differed significantly between each of the
child groups and the adult group, all ps<.01.

Production Task
Participants. A total of 78 native Mandarin speaking
children and adults participated in this study. Production
data was collected from 16 3-year olds, 20 5-year olds, 21 7year olds, and 21 adults. Comprehension data was
additionally collected from 21 adults. Children were
recruited from several preschools and primary schools in
Beijing, China. Adult subjects were undergraduates at
Beijing Normal University. Fifteen mothers of 2-year-olds
and 15 mothers of 5-year-olds, parents of children enrolled
in a preschool affiliated with the Beijing Normal University,
also participated.
Stimuli. A set of 26 videos showing C&H actions was
prepared. We first selected 13 representative verbs in the
domain that Chinese speakers use in everyday situations
when referring to C&H activities. Two video clips for each
verb were prepared, one showing a carrying action and the
other showing a holding action. Each event was video-taped
with a female agent carrying and holding a familiar and
typical object for the action denoted by the verb.

2. How does children’s use of the verbs converge
with the adult pattern?
Matrix preparation. Response matrices were created for
each age group. For the production task, we tallied the
numbers of verbs produced by the participants for each
video in each age group. In each matrix, there were 26 rows
which corresponded to 26 videos. When the participant
produced a verb other than the 13 verbs we targeted, a new
column was added, and the number of participants
producing that verb was tallied in the cell.
We first checked whether participants in each age group
used the same verb for the corresponding pair of carrying
(moving) and holding (non-moving) actions. The correlation
was high for all age groups (3year-olds: .71; 5-yearolds: .84 ; 7-year-olds: .84; adults: .94), indicating that
Chinese speaking children and adults used the same verb for
the same manner, regardless of whether the actions were
moving or non-moving. We thus aggregated the responses
for the moving and non-moving actions of the same manner
2
to simplify further quantitative analyses .
For the comprehension task, we used a 13X13 matrix
representing the proportion of “Yes” responses for each
combination of the 13 videos and 13 verbs. The production
data indicate how participants differentially apply verbs to
C&H actions. The comprehension data reflect the extension
of the boundary of each verb in the domain.

Procedure. The videos were presented on a computer
screen in random order. In the production task for
undergraduates, a sentence “She is X-ing the thing (“Ta
[she] shenme [what] zhe [-ing] yi ge [a/one] dongxi
[thing]?”) was presented with each video, and the
participant was asked what X would be. The sentence was
presented to children orally by a native Chinese speaker and
they were asked to name the verb which best referred to the
action. Mothers of 2- or 5-year-olds saw the videos together
with their children and were asked to describe each video
for their child.
Comprehension task
Participants. 27 adult native speakers of Chinese, all
undergraduate students at Beijing Normal University who
had not been tested in the production participated.
Stimuli and procedure. Because the number of trials
would be prohibitively large if we used all 26 videos and
also because participants’ response was virtually the same
across the carrying and the holding videos in the production

2

We also conducted analyses separately for the carrying and
holding actions, but the pattern of the results was very similar for
all age groups.

37

Entropy is often used as an index for the degree of
dispersion of the response for categorical variables. If
responses are concentrated around one or small number of
categories, then the Entropy value is low, and if responses
are widely dispersed across different categories, Entropy is
3
high . Figure2 shows the Entropy value for the eight verbs
which were produced by at least 10 individuals in each age
4
group .
Entropy values were lower in adults’ production than in
children’s production for all of the eight verbs except for
“ding”, for which the values for the child groups were as
low as that for the adult group. The fact that Entropy values
were lower in adults than in children suggests that the range
of actions each verb applied to was more restricted for
adults, while children tended to apply each verb to a much
broader range of actions. However, the Entropy values
differed substantially across different verbs within each age
group. For example, the Entropy values for “na” (‘to carry
or hold in one hand’) were much higher in the three child
groups than in the adult group. This is because children
applied “na” much broadly, using the word for actions that
the adults would use different, more specific verbs. In
contrast, the Entropy value for the “ding” (‘to carry/hold on
the top head’) video was near 0 for all age groups,
suggesting that even children of the youngest group only
used this verb for the two videos shot for the “ding” action.
Taken together, the results of the analysis using Entropy
suggest that young children tended to apply one verb for
various actions, while adults tended to use a specific verb
for a specific event with a high level of agreement. On the
whole, children between 3- and 7-year-old of age were still
in the process of sorting out how the semantic domain was
divided and how each semantic category is mapped to each
verb. In so doing, the timing of convergence to adult-like
use does not occur evenly across the different verbs. Some
verbs (e.g., “ding”) converged to the adult pattern almost
from the beginning. In contrast, the range of application of
“na” gradually narrowed with development, as children
learned more specific verbs and sorted out the boundary
between “na” and other more specific verbs before
eventually using “na” as adults do.
Based on the above observations, it appears that two
inherent properties of words may be important factors in the
“ease” of word leaning, especially when we consider the
degree of convergence between child use and adult use as
the index for the “ease” of acquisition. One is whether a
given word has overlapping boundaries with other
neighboring words. For example, “ding” is easy to
distinguish from other carry events, because no other
Chinese verb of this domain refers to an action in which the
head supports the object. In contrast, the boundary of “na”
overlaps with several other verbs that also refer to actions

Results. In order to see the degree of convergence between
children’s pattern of verb use and that of adults
(undergraduates), the production matrices from each age
group was compared to the adult’s matrix. Following the
algorithm proposed by Ameel et al. (in press), we calculated
correlations for all pairs of the videos within each age group
(i.e. the number of verbs produced for each video), which
resulted in matrices of 78 correlation values (for each age
group). Using the first-order correlation matrices, we further
calculated the correlation between each child group and the
adult group. This second-order correlation should indicate
the degree of convergence between the two (each child
group and the adult group). Figure 1 shows the correlation
among the age groups. The correlation between 3-year-olds
and adults was as low as .29. Convergence with the adult
pattern increases linearly from 3 to 7 years (5year-olds: .46 ;
7-year-olds: .59). However, even 7-year olds are not quite
adult-like in their use of the verbs in this domain.

M others of 2years
M others of 5years

de
rg
ra
du
at
e
Un

7y
ea
rs
-o
ld

U ndergraduate

5y
ea
rs
-o
ld

3y
ea
rs
-o
ld

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Figure 1: Correlation between children and adults

3. Did care-takers use carrying/holding verbs
differently when talking to young children and
when talking to adults?
Why was young children’s pattern of verb use so different
from the adult pattern? Perhaps care-takes intuitively think
that using so many different verbs is cognitively too
demanding for young children, and hence use only a small
number of verbs broadly. In other words, children’s pattern
of verb use may directly reflect care-takers’ pattern of verb
use. This possibility, however, was not supported: use of
the verbs by the mothers of 2-year-olds was no different
from the mothers of 5-year-olds (r=.87), nor was it different
from the undergraduates (r=.82)

4. How do verbs differ in the degree to which
children’s meanings converge with adults’?
We next turn to the question of how verbs within the
semantic domain differ from each other with respect to ease
of acquisition. In Analysis 2, we examined the degree of
convergence of the pattern of verb use in the whole domain.
However, it is likely that the degree of convergence with the
adult pattern differs across verbs and these cross-verb
differences may provide insights into the question of what
factors affect the acquisition of verb meaning. For this
purpose, we adopted Entropy (H) as a quantitative index of
how broadly a given verb refers to events. The notion of

3

P ( H ) = − ∑ P ( A) log p ( A)
A∈Ω

4

The remaining verbs were not included in the analysis because
the Entropy measure is not reliable when the frequency is too low.

38

verb as a predictor in the regression model (See Table 1 for
the frequency count examined and footnote 2 for the source
of the count).
As the index of “ease of learning,” we used two different
measures. The first measure was how frequently children
used each verb, assuming that the verbs children used most
frequently were the verbs children feel most familiar with
and feel comfortable in using. The second measure was
the degree of convergence with the adults’ use for each
verb, assuming that verbs children used like adults were
learned more easily than those for which the children’s
pattern of use diverged from that of adults. Six regression
models were thus carried out: three models (one for each
children’s age group) using produced frequency as the
dependent measure and three models using the degree of
convergence as the dependent measure.

with one hand, though the manner in which the hand holds
the object is different (e.g., “ti”, “tuo”, “lin”). As a
consequence, children may frequently overextend “na” to
actions for which adults would use the corresponding
manner-specific verbs. A second inherent property of the
word may be the range of instances adults accepted as
referents. For example, although adult Chinese speakers
tended to use the verb “na” only for what we assumed to be
the “na” actions, the comprehension data indicated that
adults would accept actions denoted by other hand-holding
actions such as “ti” and “ling” as referents of “na”. The
reverse direction was not observed: adults did not accept
“ti” or “ling” for the “na” actions nearly as willingly,
suggesting that “na” has broader range of applicability than
other, more specific verbs in the domain. In the next
analysis, we examined if these observations could be
quantitatively supported.

Results of the model using Produced frequency as the
dependent measure.
The model fit with the three variables was significant for all
2
three ages, (3 years: R =.83, F (3,9) = 14.9; 5 years:
R 2 =.82, F (3,9) = 14.1; 7 years: R 2 =.86, F (3,9) = 18.4, all
ps<.001). The word frequency (in the adult corpus) made
the strongest contribution among the three for all three age
groups (3 years: β = .70, 5 years: β = .63, 7-years: β = .58,
all ps < .005), suggesting that the verbs young child tend to
use frequently are the ones they hear most frequently. The
β -values for verb coverage as well as for boundary overlap
in 5-years’ and 7-years’ models were also significant (Verb
Coverage: 5 years: β =.40, p < .05 ; 7 years: β = .46, p <
.05; Boundary Overlap: 5-years: β = -.46, p < .05, 7-years:
β = -.54, p < .005) but not in 3-year-olds’ model..

4
bao

3.5
3

bei

2.5

ding

2

duan
ju

1.5

kang

1

na

0.5

ti

0
3years

5years

7years

adults

Figure2: Entropy values

5. What factor(s) best explain the ease of learning
verbs？
Measures representing “ease of learning”. In our final
analysis, we used regression analyses to test whether the
two semantic properties of the verbs—the degree of
boundary overlap with neighboring words and the range of
applicability— affect how “easily” children learn verbs. To
quantify these values, we used adult comprehension data, as
we wanted to focus on which verbs could be potentially
applied to a given action rather what the speakers would
consider as the “best” verb. To represent the degree of
boundary overlap, we calculated the Entropy value for each
action. If various verbs are accepted for a given action by
adults, it means in addition to the verb originally taken to
represent the action, other verbs are also allowed to name
the action. Hence, the verb is assumed to have high degree
of boundary overlap with other verbs. On the other hand, if
only one verb is accepted for the action across different
participants, the verb has a low degree of boundary overlap
with other verbs. To quantitatively represent the second
predictor, the verb coverage, the Entropy value was
obtained for each verb. Here, if the given verb was accepted
for many different actions, i.e., the verb covers a wide range
of action instances, the Entropy for the verb is high. In
addition to that, it has been noted that word frequency is an
important predictor for how early a word enters children’s
vocabulary (e.g., Li et al, 2007). However, it is not known
how word frequency is related to full, adult-like acquisition
of word meanings. We thus included the frequency of the

Results of the model using the degree of convergence to
the adults’ use as the dependent variable.
The model fit was not quite as good as for the production
2
frequency models (3-years: R = .60, F (3,9) = 4.5 , p <
2
2
.05; 5-years: R = .51, F (3,9) = 3.1, ns; 7-years: R = .41,
F (3,9) = 2.1 , ns) The β -value for the degree of boundary
overlap was significant for all ages (3 years: β = -.63 , 5
years: β = -.75, 7 years: β = -.69 , all ps < .05). The negative
direction of the β -values indicates that the higher the degree
of boundary overlap was, the lower the degree of
convergence in children’s use of verbs with that of adults.
The β -value for verb coverage was non-significant
throughout the three age groups. Interestingly, β values of
corpus frequency decreased with age (3-year-olds: β = .48,
p = .07; 5-year-olds: β =.08, ns; 7-year-olds: β = -.03, ns),
suggesting that the role of the frequency of the verb in adult
usage (in the corpus) decreases with development.

Discussion
In the semantic domain of Chinese carry-and-hold verbs, the
semantic space is carved up very finely with respect to the
manner in which an object is held. Some verbs cover a
39

word and its meaning is certainly one level of knowing, but
full acquisition of word meanings require sorting out
boundaries between neighboring words and understanding
relations among words, which takes a long time and a lot of
experience (see also Ameel et al. in press).
The finding that corpus input, verb coverage, and
boundary overlap contributed differently in predicting the
ease of learning when different criteria for “ease” were used
should also caution researchers against the casual discussion
of factors affecting the “ease” of learning without specifying
the criteria for determining the “ease.” Most interestingly,
when production frequency was used as the measure, corpus
frequency was the strongest contributor, but when “ease”
was defined as the degree of convergence with adults’ use, it
no longer mattered. In fact, our results showed that “na,”
which enters Chinese children’s vocabulary very early and
is produced most frequently, converged with the adults’
pattern least closely.
It could be that adult-like
representation is acquired latest for a broadly overused
(hence most frequently used) word, presumably because the
full representation is attained only after the child has learned
more specific, appropriate words in the neighborhood, and
sorted out the boundaries with those words.
All in all, this research underscores the importance of
systematic investigation of words belonging to the same
domain as a whole, examining how word meanings in the
domain develop within a connected system rather than
examining each word separately, to capture lexical
development in its full scope.

broad space, while others cover only a narrow space, and
there are overlapping boundaries between some verbs.Our
research provides insights into how children learn to divide
the domain into lexical categories and map each verb onto
appropriate semantic space. The number of verbs 3-olds
produced across 13 actions corresponding to 13 verbs was
no different from that produced by 5- or 7-year-olds.
However, the degree of convergence with the adults’ pattern
increased linearly with development. This suggests that at
3-years of age, children already “know” quite a few verbs in
this domain, but their understanding of the meanings of
these verbs is very rough. They have the word forms in
memory, but they only have coarse representations of their
meanings, and there is a long way to go to attain adult-like
representation of these verbs.
We tested the possibility that care-takers may give
simplified input to young children, overusing some broad
verbs in situations where adults talking to adults would use
other, more specific verbs. However, it was not the case.
The pattern of verb use by mothers of 2-year-olds when
talking to their children was virtually the same as that by
mothers of 5-year-olds or by undergraduates. Thus, the
tendency to overextend broad-coverage verbs such as “na”
or “bao” can’t be due to simplified input by care-takers.
We then examined the pattern of use separately for each
verb to see which verbs children and adults use more
broadly and which verbs narrowly, and for which verbs
children’s use converges with that of adults most closely,
using the Entropy value as a quantitative index. Entropy
values for all but one verb decreased with development,
reflecting the fact that adults used verbs differentially for
each action, while children used most verbs much more
widely than adults did. This tendency was seen most
strongly with “na,” which showed highest Entropy in adults.
In contrast, Entropy values for the child groups were just as
low as for adults in the use of “ding,” the verb denoting
carrying-or-holding an object on the head.
We suspected that two factors inherent to verbs—verb
coverage and boundary overlap—may affect the “ease” of
learning, especially when we define “ease” as the degree of
convergence with adults’ use of the verb together with word
frequency. It turned out that in all three child groups, the
factor that significantly contributed to the degree of
convergence was boundary overlap.
Thus having a
boundary that is not overlapping with other verbs in the
domain contributes to the “ease” of learning most strongly.
However, when we examined the role of the three factors
using the frequency of verb use, word frequency was the
strongest predictor.
Our results provide important insights for theories of
lexical development. Most importantly, they caution us
against casual use of the common expression “word
meaning acquisition” or “children know words”, with simple
reliance on the CDI or corpus data in limited contexts as the
index for “word acquisition.” When researchers state “the
child knows a word,” it should be made explicit what level
of knowledge is being discussed. Initial mapping between a

References
Ameel, E., Malt, B.C., and Storms, G. (in press). Object
naming and later lexical development: From baby bottle
to beer bottle. Journal of Memory and Language.
Bowerman, M.(1982). Reorganizational processes in lexical
and syntactic development. In E. Wanner & L.R.
Gleitman (Eds.), Language acquisition: The state of the
art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark ， Eve V. (1987) "The Principle of Contrast ： A
Constraint of Language Acquisition," Mechanisms of
Language Acquisition, ed. by Brian MacWhinney, 1-33,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S. A.
Kuczaj(Ed.), Language development, vol. 2. Language,
thought, and culture. Hillsdale, N.J. : L. Erlbaum
Associates. 301-334.
Imai, M., Haryu, E., & Okada, H. (2005). Mapping novel
nouns and verbs onto dynamic action events: Are verb
meanings easier to learn than noun meanings for Japanese
children? Child Development, 76, 340-355.
Li, P., Zhao, X., & MacWhinney, B. (2007). Dynamic selforganization and early lexical development in children.
Cognitive Science, 31, 1-32.
Tardif, T. Z. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before
verbs: evidence from Mandarin speakers' early
vocabularies. Developmental Psychology 32, 492-504.
40

