UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From Reduction Back to Higher Levels

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8zn5q0j8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Bechtel, William
Abrahamsen, Adele

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From Reduction Back to Higher Levels
William Bechtel (bechtel@mechanism.ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy-0119, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093-0119 USA

Adele Abrahamsen (aabrahamsen@ucsd.edu)
Center for Research in Language-0526, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093-0526 USA
into a more comprehensive account that considers processes
at the higher levels that were initially left behind in the reductionistic quest. To trace both the downwards and upwards trajectories in specific cases, we examine two reductionistic research programs targeting behavioral phenomena.
In both cases the reductionistic pursuit has been highly successful—an enormous amount has been learned about the
genes and biochemical processes involved. But this success
has been very local, and itself points to the need to integrate
what has been learned into higher-level accounts.
One of these cases involves research on memory consolidation, a phenomenon identified and studied by psychologists beginning in the late 19th century, but investigated primarily at the molecular level since the 1970s. The other
case, circadian rhythms, also began with behavioral studies
(by evolutionary and behavioral biologists), with pursuit of
the molecular level added more recently. Molecular biologists working in these domains make use of others’ ongoing
investigations at higher levels. This suggests that investigation of the neural processes underlying more prototypically
cognitive domains likewise will require complementation by
higher-level inquiries such as those pursued by cognitive
scientists. On this view, reductionism is not a threat to replace cognitive accounts; instead, it leads to new information that can enrich and improve those accounts.
The contrasting view of reduction, in which lower-level
accounts supplant higher-level ones, is anchored in a 20th
century philosophy of science that emphasizes laws as the
explanatory engine. From this perspective, if laws existed
that completely characterized how lower-level entities behaved in all contexts, it is hard to see what a higher-level
account could add (Kim, 1998). But it is unclear what these
laws would be like, since current laws in physics only characterize the behavior of physical objects in highly idealized
contexts in which they are isolated from other factors that
usually impinge on them (Cartwright, 1999). The applicability of law-based accounts to the biological and cognitive
sciences is dubious as well, since explanations in these sciences seldom invoke laws. Rather, they most frequently take
the form of identifying the mechanism responsible for a
given phenomenon. Philosophers focused on these sciences
have recently articulated a new mechanistic philosophy of
science that is especially appropriate to these sciences
(Bechtel, 2008; Bechtel & Richardson, 1993; Machamer,
Darden, & Craver, 2000; Thagard, 2006).
From the mechanistic perspective, to explain a phenomenon is to explicate the mechanism responsible for it. In each

Abstract
In the context of mechanistic explanation, reductionistic research pursues a decomposition of complex systems into their
component parts and operations. Using research on circadian
rhythms and memory consolidation as exemplars, we consider
the gains to be made by finding genes and proteins that figure
in mechanisms underlying behavioral phenomena. However,
we also show that such research is insufficient to explain the
initial phenomenon. Accordingly, researchers have increasingly recognized the need to consider higher-level organization and integration with other systems. This illustrates a
common need to complement reductionistic inquiry with investigations at higher levels and identifies a trajectory
whereby cognitive science can embrace molecular neuroscience without surrendering its own contributions.
Keywords: reduction, mechanistic explanation, memory consolidation, circadian rhythms.

Introduction
The rise of cognitive neuroscience offers both opportunities
and challenges to cognitive scientists. In addition to neuroimaging and other new tools for linking cognitive processes
to brain regions, it opens a potential conduit to the thriving
fields of cell and molecular neuroscience. What should cognitive scientists make of this? To many it brings the threatening prospect of accounts of human behavior in terms of
genetic and biochemical processes, leaving little room for
cognitive scientists’ theoretical and computational models.
This is, in fact, how reductionistic research is often portrayed by both its advocates and critics (see papers in
Schouten & Looren de Jong, 2007). The goal of reduction is
seen as completely explaining the phenomenon of interest at
the lowest possible level (e.g., in terms of genes and biochemistry), thereby supplanting and rendering superfluous
the kinds of accounts typically offered by cognitive scientists or even those of systems neuroscientists (Bickle,
2003). That is, if one can account for and predict all that
happens in terms of the lowest-level parts and operations,
there is no need for any additional account at a higher level.
A researcher invoking psychological processes, for example, is trying to explain what has already been explained.
The psychological narrative is at best epiphenomenal (that
is, psychological processes result from the lower-level processes and have no causal efficacy of their own).
We will argue that this seriously misrepresents reductionist research, which even when most successful does not provide a complete account of the phenomenon of original interest. It uncovers crucial components, but these must be fit
559

studies in the 1880s establishing time courses for learning
and forgetting nonsense syllables. Later researchers adapted
his methods for further exploration of these phenomena and
discovery of related ones. Müller and Pilzecker, using their
new technique of paired associate learning, in 1900 found
evidence for rehearsal and posited that it helped consolidate
the linkage between items within each pair. McDougall and
Burnham applied Müller and Pilzecker’s work towards explaining what Burnham (1903) called retroactive amnesia,
the loss of memory for the period immediately preceding
shock or injury. This was taken as evidence for a process of
memory consolidation that extended across time.

research area considered to date, this has been achieved by
decomposing the mechanism into its parts and operations
and showing how these are organized such that the whole
mechanism, in appropriate contexts, produces the phenomenon of interest. Whereas the law-based perspective on explanation regards laws at higher levels as derived from those
at lower levels, thereby denying them any autonomous function, the mechanistic account attends to the manner in which
lower-level processes are organized into higher-level systems which then engage other systems. Scientific inquiry at
these higher levels contributes equally with inquiry at lower
levels in providing a full mechanistic explanation.
One of the intriguing features of mechanistic research is
that even while a reductionistic decomposition is still being
pursued, the need for a return to high-level inquiries often
becomes obvious, prompting researchers to turn some of
their attention to the organization of the components and
how the whole mechanism functions within a wider context.
In the following sections we characterize the typical trajectory in mechanistic research, in which scientists begin by
delineating and exploring a phenomenon of interest, then
seek to uncover the responsible mechanism by decomposing
it into parts and operations (sometimes iteratively), specify
which parts perform which operations, and then progressively ascend back up to higher levels (again, sometimes
iteratively). We will illustrate both the path down to the
molecular parts of a mechanism and the path back up to the
system first with recent research on circadian rhythms (in
which the behavioral phenomena are relatively circumscribed) and then with research on memory consolidation
(in which the behavioral phenomena are more complex, but
also more familiar to cognitive scientists).

The Path Down to Parts and Operations
The quest to understand the mechanism responsible for a
given phenomenon requires decomposing the responsible
system. Decomposition typically comes in two flavors:
structural (identifying component parts) and functional (differentiating component operations). Such research requires
development of techniques that can segregate the parts and
reveal the operations. Moreover, as we shall illustrate for
both circadian rhythms and memory consolidation, decomposition is often pursued iteratively as investigators tease
apart the brain areas, neurons, and ultimately genes and proteins that figure in the phenomenon to be explained.
Circadian rhythms. Circadian researchers were quick to
embark on their downwards path. Within a decade of the
recognition in 1960 that organisms keep time endogenously,
the responsible mechanisms had begun to be characterized
at the intercellular (brain area) level and also the intracellular (genetic and molecular) level. Specifically, lesion studies
in the early 1970s pinpointed the locus of the primary
clock—the central oscillator—in mammals as the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a bilateral cluster of neurons in the
anterior hypothalamus just above the optic chiasm.
Identification of components at the molecular level was
first achieved in Drosophila (fruit flies), not mammals. By
using mutagens to produce flies with altered and absent circadian rhythms, Konopka and Benzer (1971) identified the
first “clock gene,” period (per). It was easily linked to basic
component operations: like other genes, per functions as a
template for the production of proteins, with per mRNA as
mediator in a complex process of protein synthesis that
churns out molecules of PER. Once per was cloned in the
1980s, it could be shown that concentrations of both per
mRNA and PER rise and fall on an approximately 24-hour
cycle. By the 1990s a mammalian homolog—soon recognized to involve three genes, not one—was identified in
mice and humans: Per1, Per2, and Per3. (Note: it is customary to write gene names in italics, with the first letter in
lowercase for Drosophila and in upper case for mammals,
and corresponding protein names in uppercase Roman. Both
typically are abbreviated to three letters.)
This was not sufficient to explain how PER cycles. By the
mid-1990s the search for more of the clockworks led to the
discovery of a host of other clock genes and proteins (the
most important shown in Figure 2 below).

Delineation and Exploration of the Phenomena
Inquiry typically begins with the discovery and systematic
characterization of one or more related phenomena of interest, often followed by decades of exploration in which the
account becomes both broader (additional tasks, species,
organs, and related phenomena) and more refined (additional detail, corrections, and incorporation of variations).
Circadian rhythms. Observations that living systems perform different activities at different periods of day have
been made for centuries, but in the 20th century Pittendrigh
(1960) demonstrated that this behavior was often controlled
by processes internal to the organism. The phenomenon of
circadian rhythms was thus delineated in terms of activity
with an approximately 24-hour cycle due to an endogenous
“clock.” Researchers have further explored this phenomenon by uncovering the diversity of life forms in which various activities exhibit circadian cycles, notably cyanobacteria, various fungi (Neurospora) and plants (Arabidopsis),
and numerous insects, birds, and mammals. Other researchers have focused on the range of activities exhibiting circadian cycles, identifying not only a number of observable
behaviors but also physiological and cognitive functions.
Memory consolidation. Delineation of the phenomenon of
memory consolidation is rooted in Ebbinghaus’ pioneering

560

plemented by an upward path in which researchers focus on
how the components they differentiated are organized into
larger systems.
One of the first steps is to identify the complex temporal
organization, often involving feedback loops, that links the
lowest-level operations into well-orchestrated networks.
Spatial organization of component parts is often relevant as
well, and a full account will clarify how these are linked.
Aspects of organization often are anticipated and sometimes
even guide the search for the lowest-level components, but
characterizing organization is conceptually distinct from
identifying parts and operations. Until they have an understanding of the spatial and temporal organization, researchers find themselves in the same situation as someone who
has taken apart a wristwatch, has all the parts laid out on the
table, and has no idea how to put it back together. Here we
provide a glimpse of how the upwards path was pursued in
each of the two fields.
Circadian rhythms. Beyond identifying many, but probably not all of the clock components and reactions they engaged in, researchers sought to understand how these could
maintain a reliable 24-hour cycle. The early work focused
just on per and its protein PER. In Drosophila, it was found
that concentrations of PER increase in the cytoplasm several
hours after the increase in per mRNA, and that PER’s subsequent transport back into the nucleus occurs just before
per mRNA levels begin to decline. Harden, Hall, and Rosbash (1990) proposed that PER, once in the nucleus, might
somehow inhibit per transcription and that this loop between per and its protein constituted the core clock mechanism, as illustrated in Figure 1.

Memory consolidation. The downwards path towards a
mechanistic, reductive explanation of the phenomenon of
memory consolidation was similar in many respects. Neurosurgeon William Scoville focused attention on the role of
the hippocampus when he resectioned it to control epilepsy
in the patient HM in the mid-1960s, with the result that HM
was no longer able to encode new episodic memories. Notably, HM’s pattern of retrograde amnesia for events in the
months prior to surgery suggested that a temporally extended memory consolidation process played a crucial role.
Understanding of component mechanisms developed later
(and is still ongoing). Donald Hebb is credited with the influential idea that encoding memories involves changes at
the neuronal level such that (as later expressed) “neurons
that fire together wire together.” This would require the
generation of new proteins, and Agranoff, Davis, and Brink
(1966) provided evidence by showing that administering a
protein synthesis inhibitor eliminated learning. Lømo and
Bliss (1973) showed enduring changes in the responsiveness
of cells in the dentate gyrus area of the hippocampus in rabbits following stimulation sufficient to get the cell to fire, a
phenomenon at the level of the neuron that came to be
known as long-term potentiation (LTP). Though their research had not been directed at studying memory (Craver,
2003), they interpreted the results as suggesting an encoding
mechanism.
Researchers quickly took a further downward step to seek
out the intracellular processes underlying LTP, which many
assumed involved changes in the post-synaptic cell when it
produced an action potential following stimulation. They
found a host of biochemical constituents which underwent
such changes. First, the neurotransmitter glutamate was
shown to excite neurons exhibiting LTP. Next, there are two
types of receptors in the cell membrane to which glutamate
can bind, AMPA and NMDA. AMPA receptors gate the
flow of sodium ions (Na+) into the cell and subsequent outflow of potassium ions (K+), while NMDA receptors admit
calcium ions (Ca++) when the cell produces an action potential. Within the cell are numerous enzymes (e.g.,
calmodulin) and kinases, including calcium/calmodulindependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), protein kinase C
(PKC), protein kinase A (PKA) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Researchers also identified specific
genes and the molecules that activate their transcription,
such as cAMP response element binding protein (CREB).

Fig 1: Feedback loop: PER inhibits own synthesis

This key feedback loop provided a core to which other
component parts and operations of the overall mechanism
could be attached; Figure 2 shows the most important. In
particular, CKIε phosphorylates the newly formed PER,
marking it for degradation, until sufficient CRY is created to
form a particular kind of compound with PER (the
PER:CRY dimer). This then protects PER from immediate
degradation, enabling its transport into the nucleus. There it
acts upon the CLK:BMAL1 dimer so as to stop it from activating the transcription of Per and Cry. When CLK:BLAL1
is not acted on by PER:CRY, it binds to the E-box promoter, not only on the Per and Cry genes but also the RevErbα gene. REV-ERBα participates in a second feedback
loop by inhibiting the transcript of Bmal1, thereby reducing
the availability of the CLK:BMAL1 dimer that is available
to activate Per and Cry transcription. All these parts and

Upward Path 1: Organization
For both circadian rhythms and memory consolidation, the
quest to identify parts and operations that figure in the generation of a behavioral phenomenon led researchers first to
brain areas and then to the molecular level of genes and
proteins. In both cases, they enjoyed great success in identifying a host of components within one of the subcomponents of one of the major components of the overall system.
In the process, the research seems to have left behind the
behavioral level at which the phenomena were initially identified. But in both cases the downward path has been com-

561

operations form an integrated system, and it is this system,
not the constituents in isolation, that maintains the cycle.

Upward Path 2: Higher-Level Systems
We have seen that researchers focusing on either circadian
rhythms or memory consolidation found that the operations
carried out within cells by the lowest-level parts of interest
(genes and proteins) are organized into complex networks of
activity. In the process they begin to appreciate, if only
schematically, how such organized systems of components
give rise to the phenomenon of interest. But researchers
often find that two-level explanations of this kind are still
incomplete. The network of genes and proteins itself interacts as a whole with other systems, and understanding these
interactions is often a catalyst to moving to yet higher levels
of organization, eventually reaching the whole behaving
system from which the inquiry was launched.
Circadian rhythms. Research on circadian rhythms has
clearly ascended from the initial focus on intracellular
mechanisms to higher-level ones, both within the SCN and
between the SCN and other organs of the body. We consider
first intercellular organization within the SCN. In each
hemisphere there are approximately 10,000 interconnected
SCN neurons. Do the interconnections contribute to the
timekeeping ability of the SCN? By culturing dispersed
SCN cells on microelectrode arrays, Welsh, Logothetis,
Meister, and Reppert (1995) demonstrated that the rhythms
maintained by individual SCN cells, even when still interconnected, vary substantially (SD 1.2 hours). Further research has indicated that each cell is precise in its own distinctive cycle, and yet all SCN cells are entrained daily by
light signals (i.e., they are reset and therefore momentarily
consistent with each other). In between entrainment events,
and in contexts in which entrainment is blocked, the overall
output from the SCN more closely approximates 24 hours
than does the output of individual cells. That is, an (approximately) 24-hour clock is an emergent property of the
interconnected SCN network.
Recent research has pointed to a relationship between the
SCN and the rest of the organism that is at least as complex.
The initial guiding assumption involved a simple sequential
organization: the SCN’s input pathway received entrainment
signals from photoreceptors (and possibly temperature or
other receptors), and the SCN in turn sent cycle-regulating
signals along its output pathways to other systems. Hence,
the circadian oscillations observed in locomotive, digestive,
and other physiological systems were credited to a centralized oscillator in the SCN. When evidence later emerged for
the existence of peripheral oscillators in these systems, they
were characterized as slave oscillators dependent on the
SCN’s master clock to maintain their rhythmicity. But this
simple feedforward picture (the left-to-right sequence in
Figure 4) now appears to be false; there is evidence of feedback both from the central oscillator to the entrainment
process and from the peripheral systems to the central oscillator (curved arrows in Figure 4).

Figure 2: A simplified diagram of the mammalian
circadian oscillator
Memory consolidation. A similar process, whereby researchers identified networks of activity involving the lowest-level components, can be seen in research on memory
consolidation. The various components involved in LTP—
neurotransmitters, receptor molecules, ions, enzymes, etc.—
are organized in three different loops, each of which generates increases in the influx of Na+ into the cell via the
AMPA receptors, thereby resulting in a greater depolarization of the cell when glutamate is again released (Figure 3).
The most immediate loop involves the Ca++ admitted once
glutamate binds with the NMDA receptor binding to CaM.
This complex in turn binds to its specific kinase CaMKII,
which then phosphorylates an AMPA receptor. The result is
a change in the configuration of the AMPA receptor that
allows a greater influx of Na+ and, consequently, greater
depolarization. In a second loop, CaMKII figures in moving
into the membrane additional AMPA receptors that were
already created but being held in reserve. These additional
functioning AMPA receptors increase the capacity to admit
Na+ and so promote more effect depolarization of the cell. A
third loop involves the synthesis of new dendritic spines
with their own AMPA receptors. This process utilizes another of the kinases, MARK, which phosphorylates gene
transcription factors such as CREB. Few details are known
about this process, such as where the resulting mRNAs are
utilized to synthesize proteins.

Figure 3: Simplified diagram of three LTP loops

562

Starting from the entorhinal cortex (EC), two pathways lead
to the CA3, one direct and one mediated by the dentate
gyrus (DG). The connectivity pattern in the DG ensures that
only a few cells fire in response to a given input, thereby
separating signals. In contrast, the CA3 cells have many
recurrent projections back onto themselves, enhancing their
ability to generate a similar overall response to a range of
similar inputs. Both kinds of processing contribute to the
input to CA1, the area in which LTP has been most studied.
Moreover, the CA1 cells send a signal back to the EC,
which has broad connections to other areas of cortex. Since
the anterograde amnesia resulting from destruction of the
hippocampus is time-delimited, leaving older memories
intact, it is assumed that long-term episodic memories are
ultimately stored in cortex. The output pathways from CA1
through EC to cerebral cortex have been proposed to figure
in the ability of the hippocampus to train cells in the cerebral cortex that ultimately store the memories (McClelland,
McNaughton, & O'Reilly, 1995). Thus, memory consolidation involves causal relations between brain regions, not just
LTP within a region.
Other research also points to the importance of relating
the cell and molecular research on LTP to the system level.
It has often been assumed that memory consolidation involves a one-time process of changing connections between
cells. Yet, animal learning studies in the 1960s produced
extensive evidence that after learned behavior was elicited,
it had to be reconsolidated or it was subject to disruption by
electroshock or other treatment that impairs learning (Lewis,
Bregman, & Mahan, 1972). These results were largely ignored by researchers investigating LTP until Sara (2000)
encountered the phenomenon while investigating the effects
of a NMDA receptor antagonist on rats performing a welllearned maze task. The rats later showed amnesia for the
task, indicating that the same consolidation processes required in initial learning were required to keep the memory
after recall. Much of the subsequent research has focused on
protein synthesis inhibitors, as suggested by the role of protein synthesis in LTP. But what is important for our purposes is that frequently different parts of the brain than the
hippocampus are crucial for reconsolidation of memories
(Taubenfeld, Milekic, Monti, & Alberini, 2001). This is
prompting researchers to explore interactions between numerous brain areas in the process of memory consolidation
and reconsolidation.

Figure 4. Feedforward view of the circadian system,
modified by adding feedback loops (curved arrows).

Consider first the effects on entrainment. In mammals the
entrainment signal involves melanopsin, a photoreceptor in
retinal ganglion cells, but there is evidence that the behavior
of melanopsin is affected not only by light but also by other
cells—including peripheral circadian oscillators located in
the retina (Rollag, Berson, & Provencio, 2003). Comparable
evidence of feedback effects in non-mammalian species
(though with different details) led Roenneberg, Daan and
Merrow (2003, p. 190) to conclude that “the clock changes
the properties of the input.”
We turn briefly to the output pathway. Recent research
employing micro-arrays has resulted in a recognition that
there are hundreds of genes whose expression is clock controlled—in some cases 10% of those studied (Panda et al.,
2002). Some of the cycling proteins figure in rate regulating
steps in reaction pathways, indicating circadian regulation
of key metabolic functions. One example receiving attention
recently involves clock regulation of the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation pathway that alters the rate of oxidative-reduction (redox) reactions within cells. Among the
affected molecules are crucial oscillator components Clock,
BMAL1, and NPAS2 (Rutter, Reick, Wu, & McKnight,
2001). As Panda and Hogenesch (2004, p. 381) concluded,
“these observations may indicate that genes involved in redox regulation are both outputs of the clock as well as feedback on clock function.” This is just one illustration of how
investigation of timekeeping began reductively, with a focus
on molecular interactions, but later incorporated causal interactions among higher level systems.
Memory. In a similar manner, research on memory consolidation has ascended from obtaining an intracellular account back to system-level processing. By showing how the
responsiveness of an individual neuron can be altered, LTP
explains one aspect of learning. But the specific change in
neural connectivity that occurs on a given learning trial depends upon what has already been learned. In particular, if
the stimulus is very similar to others for which the desired
response has already been learned, then it is appropriate to
strengthen the connections already involved. If, on the other
hand, the desired response is different than that learned for
these other stimuli, then it is necessarily to learn a new response specific to that stimulus. In studying LTP, investigators typically focused on just one part of the hippocampus
(e.g., CA1), but Rolls and Treves (1998) proposed that the
distinctive organization of the hippocampus is crucial to
how learning will occur. In particular, the various groups of
cells comprising the hippocampus are organized into a loop.

Conclusions
Reductionistic research is often viewed as resulting in
lower-level accounts that supplant the need for inquiry at
higher levels. We have offered two cases to bolster our contention that this is not an accurate portrayal of even highly
successful reductionistic research. Research on memory
consolidation and circadian rhythms has been impressive in
the detail it has provided on the genetic and biochemical
processes involved in parts of the systems responsible for
the phenomena of interest. But, far from supplanting the
need for higher-level accounts, they have themselves

563

Craver, C. (2003). The making of a memory mechanism.
Journal of the History of Biology, 36, 153-195.
Hardin, P. E., Hall, J. C., & Rosbash, M. (1990). Feedback
of the Drosophila period gene product on circadian cycling of its messenger RNA levels. Nature, 343, 536-540.
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a physical world. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Konopka, R. J., & Benzer, S. (1971). Clock mutants of Drosophila melanogaster. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA), 89, 2112-2116.
Lewis, D. J., Bregman, N. J., & Mahan, J. (1972). Cuedependent amnesia in rats. Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 81, 243-247.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B., & O'Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning
and memory. Psychological Review, 102(3), 419-457.
Panda, S., Antoch, M. P., Miller, B. H., Su, A. I., Schook,
A. B., Straume, M., et al. (2002). Coordinated transcription of key pathways in the mouse by the circadian clock.
Cell, 109(3), 307-320.
Panda, S., & Hogenesch, J. B. (2004). It's all in the timing:
many clocks, many outputs. Journal of Biological
Rhythms, 19(5), 374-387.
Pittendrigh, C. S. (1960). Circadian rhythms and the circadian organization of living systems. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 25, 159-184.
Roenneberg, T., Daan, S., & Merrow, M. (2003). The art of
entrainment. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 18(3), 183194.
Rollag, M. D., Berson, D. M., & Provencio, I. (2003).
Melanopsin, Ganglion-Cell Photoreceptors, and Mammalian Photoentrainment. J Biol Rhythms, 18(3), 227-234.
Rolls, E. T., & Treves, A. (1998). Neural networks and
brain function. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rutter, J., Reick, M., Wu, L. C., & McKnight, S. L. (2001).
Regulation of Clock and NPAS2 DNA binding by the redox state of NAD cofactors. Science, 293(5529), 510-514.
Sara, S. J. (2000). Retrieval and reconsolidation: Toward a
neurobiology of remembering. Learning and Memory, 7,
73-84.
Schouten, M., & Looren de Jong, H. (Eds.). (2007). The
matter of the mind: Philosophical essays on psychology,
neuroscience and reduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
Taubenfeld, S. M., Milekic, M. H., Monti, B., & Alberini,
C. M. (2001). The consolidation of new but not reactivated memory requires hippocampal C/EBPβ. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 813-818.
Thagard, P. (2006). Hot thought: Mechanisms and applications of emotional cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M., & Reppert, S.
M. (1995). Individual neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independently phased circadian firing rhythms. Neuron, 14(4), 697-706.

pointed to the need for higher-level accounts that capture
how the systems in question are organized and how they
interact with other systems. These interactions are at a level
of organization above that targeted in reductionist research.
When seen in the context of the new mechanistic philosophy of science, the need for lower-level accounts to be supplemented with information from higher levels is to be expected. Lower-level inquiries investigate the parts and operations of a mechanism, and often the parts and operations
within these parts. But parts and operations in a mechanism
must be organized and orchestrated to produce the phenomenon of interest, and knowledge about the parts and
operations alone does not provide information about organization. Moreover, the mechanism is situated in a context,
and its behavior is influenced by the other occupants of that
context. This too cannot be inferred from knowledge of the
parts and their operations.
The entrée that cognitive neuroscience provides for linking cognitive operations to the brain has not been welcomed
by all cognitive scientists, especially insofar as that opens
the prospect of reductionist inquiry that attempts to dispense
with cognitive explanations in terms of molecular ones. But
that prospect, if our two case examples are an indication, is
unlikely (which is not to say that some researchers may focus their entire attention on molecular mechanisms). Rather,
the more that is learned about the parts and operations figuring in a mechanism, the more it becomes important to understand how the mechanism is organized and how it is situated in a broader context where it both affects, and is affected by, other entities. Cognitive scientists can draw upon
the fruits of reductionist inquiry without losing their distinctive focus on understanding cognitive activities at a relatively high level of organization.

References
Agranoff, B. W., Davis, R. E., & Brink, J. J. (1966). Chemical studies on memory fixation in goldfish. Brain Research, 1, 303-309.
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental mechanisms: Philosophical
perspectives on cognitive neuroscience. London:
Routledge.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (1993). Discovering complexity: Decomposition and localization as strategies in
scientific research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Bickle, J. (2003). Philosophy and neuroscience: A ruthlessly
reductive account. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Bliss, T. V. P., & Lømo, T. (1973). Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the unanaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant
path. Journal of Physiology, 232, 331-356.
Burnham, W. H. (1903). Retroactive amnesia: Illustrative
cases and a tentative explanation. American Journal of
Psychology, 14, 382-396.
Cartwright, N. (1999). The dappled world: A study of the
boundaries of science. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

564

