UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Human Dimension &amp; Cognitive Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/48r4m6t1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
General, Brigadier
Palmer, Peter

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Human Dimension & Cognitive Performance
Brigadier General Peter Palmer
US Army Training and Doctrine Command

“No two persons are born exactly alike … All
things will be produced in superior quantity and
quality, and with greater ease, when each man
works in accordance with his natural gifts.” (Plato,
The Republic, c. 360 B.C.).

Summary
The Army cannot afford to focus only on
current operations as a predictor of the future. It
must prepare people so that future forces can sustain
operations in a time of persistent conflict. Current
trends in the joint and domestic operational
environments will challenge the United States’
ability to maintain a future responsive, professional
all volunteer force. Soldiers will operate in an era of
persistent conflict amongst populations with diverse
religious, ethnic, and societal values. Faced with
continuous employment across the full range of
military operations, the Army will require
extraordinary strength and improvements in the
cognitive components of the human dimension.
Approved Army concepts describe the
employment of Soldiers in the future. The United
States Army Study for the Human Dimension—
approved on 11 June 2008-- goes further to explore
human factors in war across the range of military
operations. This concept reaches beyond the issues
of equipping Soldiers with hardware into the more
subtle underpinnings of Soldier development. It
provides an integrating and forcing function that
draws on other joint and Army concepts to describe
those aspects of a highly nuanced human dimension
interacting at all levels – and particularly under the
stressors created by combat.

The linchpin of all US Army concepts,
capability, or strategy is the individual soldier and
how they perform with other soldiers in the
accomplishment of missions. Humankind possesses
the most variability across individuals than any other
species. Differences exist in individuals’ genetics,
their environmental and social/psychological
influences, and the complex genetic-psychological
interactions--which influence virtually everything
about an individual soldier. A variety of individual
differences have been studied by psychologists and
various relationships to cognitive performance have
been established.
Additionally, psychological
determinants of soldier cognitive function include
cognitive predisposition, prewar experience, and
personality attributes such as ‘hardiness’. These
variables are important factors of resilience /
vigilance which can influence or moderate the stress
reactivity relationship.
There are many interactions between
aptitude, temperament, and behavioral styles that
may lead to differences in cognitive function, yet
mapping these complex relationships has not
occurred. For example, how temperament,
physiological, and neurochemical differences
contribute to adaptation and tolerance of military
operational stressors is especially important to
investigate. Furthermore, we need to understand how
psychological factors and cognitive abilities interact
to predict a soldier’s mental and physical
performance. There is little understanding of how
these abilities progress through the lifespan in a
manner relevant to the military, nor how these
abilities may be modified depending on military
training.

