UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inhibitory Mechanisms and Impairment in Domain-Specific Reasoning: Studies of Healthy
Elderly Adults and Patients with Alzheimer's Disease

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1wj8g3q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Zaitchik, Deborah
Solomon, Gregg

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inhibitory Mechanisms and Impairment in Domain-Specific Reasoning:
Studies of Healthy Elderly Adults and Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease
Deborah Zaitchik (dzaitchiksamet@partners.org)
Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital
Charlestown, MA 02129 USA

Gregg Solomon (gesolomo@nsf.gov)
Division of Research on Learning
National Science Foundation
Arlington, VA 22230 USA
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease; inhibition; aging; domainspecificity; conceptual impairment; naïve theories.

Failure to inhibit?
We hypothesize that the responses that the early behavioral
theory would generate (e.g., attend to autonomous motion)
are typically inhibited by the mature concepts of the later
biological theory. This suggests that old concepts and
outgrown theories are never ‘overwritten’ but continually
‘overridden’. If this is right, then inhibitory mechanisms
play a crucial role in reasoning, learning, and conceptual
change. We conclude by discussing whether the failure in
most AD patients of their mature biological concepts to
inhibit the earlier behavioral concepts arises because of the
degradation of specific concepts in the domain or because of
impairment to more general inhibitory mechanisms.

Domain-specific impairment
Recent studies suggest that reasoning in the conceptual
domain of living things is especially vulnerable to
impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It is broadly
claimed that AD patients have a progressive, bottom-up
impairment in the hierarchical organization of semantic
knowledge (e.g., they might have trouble identifying a zebra
as a zebra rather than as a horse, but not as an animal rather
than as a vegetable). Our finding of the re-emergence of the
phenomena of animism and the failure to conserve species
supports the claim that the domain is particularly vulnerable
to impairment, but undermines the claim that the
degradation of higher order concepts is based on
degradation in lower-order concepts. We discuss the likely
role that general inhibitory mechanisms play in
development.
There is growing understanding that a conceptual domain
specifies not only a taxonomy, but also a rich set of causal
concepts (Solomon et al., 1996; Zaitchik & Solomon, 2001).
Our everyday concepts of living things are organized into a
coherent intuitive theory. Development in this domain
appears to involve the acquisition of two theories – an early
behavioral theory that focuses on action and movement–
and a later biological theory proper that focuses on bodily
processes and the life cycle (e.g., birth, growth, death).

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge support from NIH (NIH/NIA
AG020548 to DZ) and NSF (IR/D to GS).

References
Lombrozo, T., Kelemen, D., & Zaitchik, D. (2007).
Inferring design: Evidence of a preference for teleological
explanations from patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Psychological Science, 18, 999-1006.
Solomon, G. E. A., Johnson, S. C., Zaitchik, D., & Carey, S.
(1996). Like father, like son: Children's understanding of
how and why offspring resemble their parents. Child
Development, 67, 151 - 171.
Zaitchik, D., Koff, E. Winner, E., Brownell, H., & Albert,
M. (2006). The inference of emotions and beliefs in
patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology; 20,
11-20.
Zaitchik, D., & Solomon, G. E. A. (2001). Putting semantics
back into the semantic representation of living things.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 496-497.
Zaitchik, D., & Solomon, G. E. A. (2006). Conservation of
species, liquid, and belief: Evidence for category-specific
conceptual impairment in patients with Alzheimer’s
disease. Manuscript under review. .
Zaitchik, D., & Solomon, G. E. A. (2008). Animist thinking
in the elderly and in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Cognitive Neuropsychology. 25, 27-37.

Empirical evidence
Using well-established methods from developmental
psychology, we discovered the re-emergence of two striking
phenomena characteristic of preschoolers’ early behavioral
theory: 1) animism – the attribution of life to inanimate but
active entities such as the sun and cars (Zaitchik &
Solomon, in press); and 2) the failure to conserve species –
the judgment that an animal can change its species simply
by changing its appearance (Zaitchik & Solomon, 2006).
Control tasks from the domains of naïve physics and
naïve psychology showed spared performance relative to
performance on tasks in the domain of naïve biology
(Lombrozo et al., 2007; Zaitchik et al., 2006).

141

