UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is There Preferential Attachment in the Growth of Early Semantic Noun Networks?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49q2x9kf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Hills, Thomas T.
Maouene, Mounir
Maouene, Josita
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is There Preferential Attachment in the Growth
of Early Semantic Noun Networks?
Thomas T. Hills (thomas.hills@unibas.ch)

1

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN, 47405 USA

Mounir Maouene (mmaoune@ensat.ac.ma) 1
UFR : Artificial Intelligence and Bioinformatics, ENSAT, Tangier, Morocco

Josita Maouene (jcmaoune@indiana.edu) 1
Adam Sheya (aasheya@indiana.edu) 1
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu) 1

accelerated learning rate (Colunga & Smith, 2003).
Although it seems reasonable that later noun learning builds
on earlier noun learning, it need not be. Tomasello (2000)
has argued—with respect to syntactic learning—that
children’s earliest words are part of an imitative, item-byitem process, in which word learning is not dependent on
prior word knowledge—that is, the addition of new words is
independent of the existing lexicon. Similar rules may
apply to early semantic acquisition.
The primary goals of this work involve asking two
questions. First, what are meaningful ways to represent the
development of children’s early semantic networks, prior to
30 months of age? To answer this question, we take two
approaches. One—feature relations—is based on a host of
prior work in the developmental literature showing that
children recognize object features and can use feature
information to identify and place objects into higher-order
categories (e.g., Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988; Bomba &
Siqueland, 1983; Gelman & Bloom, 2000). In many studies
like these, e.g., Booth & Waxman (2002), children
generalize object names across categories with respect to
perceptual or functional features. The children’s feature
network we investigate here has also been shown to produce
meaningful object categorizations consistent with adult
knowledge (Hills et al., 2008). In principle, the
generalization process associated with object categorization
creates opportunities for preferential word learning by
allowing children to differentiate known objects through
processes of word production (or expectation) and
subsequent error correction.
The second—relations based on free association—has
seen dramatic successes in predicting adult performance in
semantic decision and memory tasks (e.g., Griffiths et al.,
2007; McEvoy, Nelson, & Komatsu, 1999) and recent
success in predicting age of acquisition (AoA) at grosser
temporal scales than we address here (e.g., binning data
between 12 and 132 months before and after 52 months),
and using only data from the full adult network (Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2005). In the present work we take a closer

Abstract
Recent research on the statistical structure of semantic
networks has suggested that the structure of the adult lexicon
reveals evidence of a learning mechanism involving
preferential attachment. With preferential attachment, words
entering the lexicon make connections to existing words in
proportion to the connectedness of the existing words. We
asked if preferential attachment—or other growth processes—
might be observed in children’s early semantic networks and
if so, what assumptions would be required for word relations.
To do this, we used words from the MacArthur-Bates Child
Development Inventory over a 15-month period (16 to 30
months)—and the word acquisition patterns of 20 individual
children—to build longitudinal semantic networks using two
separate assumptions for semantic relatedness.
These
involved edges based on feature similarity using the McRae et
al. (2003) feature norms and edges based on association using
the University of Southern Florida Free Association Norms.
The feature-based network showed no evidence of
preferential attachment, or the opposite, preferential
avoidance. However, the association-based network did show
preferential attachment, even across this very small time span.
Currently, we are investigating in more detail the growth of
this network, and other possible growth mechanisms besides
preferential attachment, in an effort to better understand the
mechanisms that drive early semantic growth.
Keywords: Early semantic networks, growing network
models, word learning, preferential attachment.

Introduction
Word learning begins sometime prior to a child’s first
birthday. It is very slow at first with each word added
seeming effortful and with false starts (Nelson, 1973;
McNamara, 1982). But 6 months later, early word learning
shows an accelerating function (Bloom, 2000). At first,
most of these new additions are common nouns, the focus of
this paper. Developmentalists have studied these early noun
vocabularies interested both in the kind of categories that
start the system off and how early noun learning might
create the needed knowledge to facilitate the ensuing
155

observed when the networks are observed in a month-bymonth fashion—or if other patterns are observed.

look at the growth process of this network by following its
development in children.
This leads to our second question: how do these early
semantic networks grow? Recent work using network
analyses to investigate the structure of large-scale adult
semantic networks provides one new approach to
understanding how (whether and when) children’s past word
knowledge facilitates the acquisition of new and
semantically related words. This work suggests that
semantic networks may grow according to itemdependencies, in which new semantic relationships are
formed based on the structure of the existing semantic
network (Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005).
The network approach follows an early proposal by
Quillian (1967) that memory access comes about via
semantic relatedness. Collins and Loftus (1975), Anderson
(1976), and Posner & Snyder (1975), developed these ideas
further into models of spreading activation, in which words
were represented by nodes and relationships between words
were represented by links (or edges). In models of
spreading activation, activity at one node in the network is
assumed to bias the activity of other nodes via the
connections between them.
Steyvers & Tenenbaum (2005) investigated the statistical
structure of large-scale semantic networks by combining
words with inter-word relations based on evidence for
semantic relatedness. Specifically, they constructed three
large-scale semantic networks—generating edges between
words using the University of Southern Florida Free
Association Norms, WORDNET, and Roget’s Thesaurus—
and found robust statistical patterns of connectivity, which
included small world structure and power-law structure in
their degree distributions.
Power-law structure can be a consequence of preferential
attachment, in which words entering the lexicon make
connections to existing words in proportion to the number
of relations (degree) of the existing words (Barabasi &
Albert, 1999). This creates a rich get richer phenomenon
found in a variety of network structures. Steyvers &
Tenenbaum (2005) built a model of preferential attachment
in semantic networks that generated power-law structure,
based on the assumption that words are added to the
network to facilitate the differentiation of complex (highdegree) words that are already known—similar to the
feature network differentiation process we describe above.
If words are added to early semantic networks based on
rules associated with preferential attachment, then words
that are learned earliest in these networks should show
proportionally more connections during later stages of
network development. Steyvers & Tenenbaum (2005)
confirmed this for associative relations using adult estimates
of age-of-acquisition (Gilhooly and Logie, 1980) and age of
acquisition norms based on when children can name an
object in the laboratory (Morrison, Chappell & Ellis, 1997).
In the present work we ask if these same patterns of
connectivity are observed in association-based and featurebased networks using words known prior to 30 months. Our
analysis also asks if preferential attachment patterns are

The Shared Feature Network
The nouns. The 130 noun categories were selected from
the Bates-MacArthur Communicative Developmental
Inventory or Bates-MCDI (Fenson et al., 1994), Toddler
version. This inventory is a checklist of 682 words of
which 285 are basic-level nouns (excluding body parts).
These words are the first words typically acquired by
children learning English and normatively include in the
productive vocabularies of 50% of children at 30 months
of age. We used the month-by-month norms of the
percentage of children with these words in their productive
vocabulary to construct a network for each month from 16
to 30 months. We let the age of acquisition for a word be
equal to the first month at which the word is produced by
more than 50% of the children in the MCDI.
The
checklist contains 285 basic level nouns (excluding body
parts). The nouns studied here are a subset consisting of
the nouns on the Bates-MCDI that were also included in
the McRae et al. feature generation studies. These 130
nouns over-represent animals (33 nouns, 25% of the subset
versus 43 nouns, 15% of the Bates-MCDI nouns) and
under-represent food (17 nouns, 13% of the subset versus
68 nouns, 23% of the Bates-MCDI nouns). Nonetheless,
the sample includes a broad array of nouns across relevant
superordinate categories.
The features. The features associated with each of the
130 nouns were taken from the feature norms reported by
McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan (2003). That study
collected feature norms for 541 concepts from a total of 725
adult participants with 30 participants providing features for
each concept. The participants in that study were given
each noun and 14 blank spaces to fill with features and were
prompted to provide physical properties (how it looks,
smells, sounds etc), functional properties or uses, internal
properties, and other pertinent facts. The generated features
were also classified by the Cree and McRae’s (2003)
theoretical brain region taxonomy into the following
categories: functional, visuo-motor, visual form, visual
color, sound, taste, smell, tactile, encyclopedic, and
taxonomic. For the present study, we only considered the
functional and perceptual features excluding encyclopedic
and taxonomic features as unlikely to be available to
children’s direct experience.
The network. To construct the developing network used
for the subsequent analyses, we let nouns represent nodes.
Then, for every noun-pair, the value of the edge between
them represents the number of their shared features, using
the McRae feature norms. For example, BALL and APPLE
will share an edge of weight one because they both share the
feature IS_ROUND. An edge between two nodes will be
taken as the addition of one degree in connectivity,
regardless of the weight of the edge. In Figure 1 we present
the noun network at 30 months derived from creating edges
between nouns based on shared features where, for visual

156

clarity only edges representing two or more features are
drawn.1

network does not appear to have the structural properties
consistent with preferential attachment when observed at 30
months of age.

Figure 2: Mean degree by age of acquisition for nouns
learned during the first 30 months of development based on
the shared feature network in Figure 1. Error bars represent
standard error of the mean.

Figure 1: Noun network for children at 30 months of age
based on shared features. The network has 130 nodes with
824 edges (not all are shown), with a density of
approximately 0.1. The average degree in the network is
12.67, with a clustering coefficient of 0.53. More statistics
are provided in Hills et al., 2008.

Results
The Feature-based Network
As an initial test of the hypothesis that words learned during
the earliest stages of development have more connections
during later stages—consistent with a model for growth
with preferential attachment—we plotted the mean degree
for each word in the 30-month network against the age of
acquisition for the word (Figure 2). The figure provides no
evidence that words learned earlier are more likely to have
higher connectivity during later stages of development (up
to 30 months).
Another signature of growth with preferential attachment
is that the degree connectivity of the network has a powerlaw distribution. This is revealed by a linear pattern when
the degree distributions of the nodes are plotted on a log-log
plot. Figure 3 shows the log-log plot for the cumulative
degree distribution of the 30-month network. The y-axis
presents the probability density for finding a node of greater
than or equal to degree k. The resulting distribution is more
consistent with the exponential distribution presented for
non-power-law networks in Steyvers & Tenenbaum (2005).
In other words, unlike the USF Free Association,
WORDNET, and Roget networks, the early feature-based

Figure 3: The log-log plot of the cumulative degree
distribution for the 30-month- feature network.
Because we have month-by-month growth data for our
semantic network, we are able to evaluate the growth
patterns in more detail. Specifically, we asked if the feature
networks might grow according to a mechanism besides
preferential attachment. In the world of features, objects
may become salient for the very reason that they do not
generalize to known objects via shared features—in which
case, once one knows the word DOG, it may be easier to
learn the word TELEPHONE than CAT. We looked at the
probability of a word acquiring a new feature-based relation
(a new edge) for each month that the word was in the
network. To do this, we took the degree of each node at the
start of the month and evaluated how many new edges the
node received by the addition of words in the following
month. To make sure we are obtaining a cross-section of
words with sufficient opportunity to receive new

1

All results shown here for the feature network were unchanged
by building the network at different thresholds for inclusion of an
edge (e.g., greater than 1 shared feature, greater than 2 shared
features, or up to greater than 3 shared features). Beyond which
the network is too sparse for meaningful analysis.

157

better than that predicted by a random addition of words to
the network.

connections, we only consider words with more than 10
opportunities (i.e., months) to acquire a new edge. Results
are presented in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Probability of acquiring a new edge as a
function of the nodes degree (k) in the previous month.

Figure 5: Probability of acquiring a new edge as a function
of the nodes degree (k) in the previous month. Thin dotted
lines show the mean and 95% confidence intervals for 100
simulated network growth sequences, in which words are
learned in a random order. The thick dotted line shows the
average regression line for a sample of 20 individual
children. The solid line is the same as in Figure 4.

Figure 4 reveals a significant positive relationship
between the degree of a node and the likelihood the node
will receive a new semantic edge in the following month (R2
= 0.59, p < 0.001). Words with more semantic relationships
are more likely to acquire new relationships in subsequent
months. This suggests the possibility that preferential
attachment is playing a role in our network’s growth, but—
given the prior evidence presented in Figures 2 and 3—it
also suggests that degree is not a causative factor in the
growth of the network. In other words, it may be that the
statistical structure of the edge addition probabilities is no
different from what would be observed if the networks were
generated by randomly acquiring words. To test this, we
generated 100 simulated network growth sequences by
randomizing the age of acquisition for words in each of
these networks. Figure 5 shows that the mean regression
line and the 95% confidence intervals for the simulated data
(dotted lines) are a very close fit to the regression line for
the observed data (solid line). The degree of words in the
network does not appear to influence the acquisition of new
words.
One caveat associated with using the MCDI data is that
the word acquisition data is normative, and therefore not
representative of individual children, but simply of an
average child. It may be every individual child shows
evidence of better than random preferential attachment in
the feature-based network, but that once children are
averaged together to construct the age of acquisition norms,
the evidence for this pattern disappears. We tested this by
collecting (through a longitudinal study) age of acquisition
data for the 130 nouns for 20 individual children (from 18 to
30 months of age) and then for each child independently
calculating the relationship between degree of a word and
the probability of acquiring a new edge in the subsequent
month. The thick dotted line in Figure 6 shows the results
of these 20 individual regression lines averaged together.
Here again, the evidence for preferential attachment is no

The Free Association Network
If young children are truly item-by-item learners with
words learned independently of one another, then the same
results should be obtained with an association network—a
network for which degree does correlate with AoA at a
much grosser level of analysis (e.g., when words between
12 and 132 months are binned before and after 52 months;
Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005). This may be perfectly
reasonable if the environments children learn their earliest
words from—e.g., child-directed speech and the objects
presented to children during play—do not invoke the same
structural patterns as adult reported associations (or
features). On the other hand, associations may capture a
more constrained measure of relatedness than features—
because the feature norms ask for multiple responses per
subject (as compared with one response for associates) and
they also elicit category general features, such as
IS_DIFFERENT_COLORS and IS_DIFFERENT_SIZES.
To examine these issues, we extracted from the USF Free
Association data (Nelson, McEvoy & Schreiber, 1999) the
network based on associative relations using the same 130
nouns used for the feature-based network. Figures 6 shows
what the network looks like at 30 months. We then
evaluated the degree at 30 months with the age of
acquisition recorded by the MCDI.
Contrary to what we found for the shared feature
networks, the network based on adult free associations does
show a pattern consistent with preferential attachment—
with earlier acquired words showing higher degree at 30
months of age (Figure 7). The log-log plot presented in
Figure 8 is also consistent with this pattern, with a

158

preferential avoidance). However, if we ask a similar
question of the early semantic network formed by creating
edges based on adult free association, then the network does
show evidence for preferential attachment.

substantially more linear pattern than that presented in
Figure 3.

Figure 8: The log-log plot of the cumulative distribution
for the free association network.

Figure 6: Noun network for children at 30 months of age
based on direct association in the USF Free Association
Norms. Data from the Free Association Task are shown
here with arrows pointing from stimulus (cue) to the
response (target). All targets were produced by two or more
subjects (as described in Nelson et al., 1999).

Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005) point out that some
semantic resources do not show the statistical structure
associated with preferential attachment without special
assumptions. For example, Latent Semantic Analyses
(LSA) (Landauer & Dumais, 1997), when used in a standard
way (using cosine similarity) to generate relations between
words, generates a degree distribution qualitatively similar
to that shown in Figure 3 (shown in Figure 8 of Steyvers &
Tennenbaum, 2005). Evidence for preferential attachment
is strongly dependent on one’s choice of semantic
relatedness. The lack of any evidence for a statistical pattern
predicting AoA in the feature network suggests that adultgenerated features may not be important in the acquisition
of new words. However it is poses an interesting question
about the relation between feature-based and associationbased semantics.
Others have pointed out that adult
associations are often paradigmatic, and feature associations
are very likely to conserve that relation. However, free
associations may benefit from a more constrained retrieval
process, because only one associate is given for each cue.
In the feature norms we use here, multiple features are
listed, and this may wash out salient features that drive
associations (in those places were associations are feature
driven). We are currently looking at production frequency
in the feature norms to parcel out this possible relation.
Associations, on the other hand, are predictive and
deserve further investigation in developmental studies.
Finally, finding power-law structure in adult networks is
not the same thing as finding growth with preferential
attachment. While it is certainly true that one can generate
power-law structure with models based on preferential
attachment (e.g., Barabasi et al., 1999), random sampling
from statistical structures that already have a power-law
structure will arrive at the same place. For example, the
cognitive processes associated with the evolution of
language may generate power-law semantic structure, and

Figure 7: Mean degree by age of acquisition for nouns
learned during the first 30 months of development based on
the free association network in Figure 6. Error bars are
standard error of the mean for words acquired at a given
age.

Discussion
In the present work we investigated the possibility that early
noun learning reveals a more-gets-more pattern of
development, with words of higher semantic connectedness
being more likely to acquire new semantic relations during
lexical development. Our results suggest that, unlike the
three adult networks presented in Steyvers & Tenenbaum
(2005), when the structure of children’s semantic
information is based on feature-resemblance, there is no
evidence for preferential attachment (or its opposite
159

Hills, T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A. & Smith L.
B. (2008). Categorical Structure in Early Semantic
Networks of Nouns. Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Washington,
DC, USA, July 23-26.
Hills, T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A. & Smith L.
B. (In prep) Early semantic network growth: preferential
attachment versus preferential acquisition.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development 3(3), 299-321.
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
McNamara, J. (1982). Names for things: A study of human
learning. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 37, 547–559.
Morrison, C. M., Chappell, T. D., & Ellis. A. W. (1997).
Age of acquisition norms for a large set of object names
and their relation to adult estimates and other variables.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A,
528-559.
Nelson, K. (1973). Structure and strategy in learning to talk.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 38(1-2), No 149.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1999).
The University of Southern Florida word association
norms. Retrieved from http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation
Posner, M. I., & Synder, C. R. (1975). Facilitation and
inhibition in the processing of signals. In P. M. A. Rabbitt
& S. Dornic (Eds.), Attention and performance V .
London: Academic Press.
Quillian, M. R. (1967). Word concepts: A theory and
simulation of some basic semantic capabilities.
Behavioral Sciences, 12, 410–430.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children’s
early syntactic development. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 4(4), 156-163.
Waxman, S. & Markow, D. (1995). Words as invitations to
form categories: Evidence from 12-month-old infant
Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257-302.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1983). Infant perception of
correlations among attributes. Child Development, 54,
858–867.

children may simply sample words from this adult
structure—with words of higher degree being sampled at
earlier ages. The evidence provided here and elsewhere
does not provide a clear causative direction. However, we
can ask more specific developmental questions about the
growth of these networks—especially with respect to
hypotheses that may produce similar semantic structure as
preferential attachment in the adult state. One model we are
currently investigating is based on preferential acquisition,
in which words are added to the network based on their
degree in the adult state. Analysis of specific preferential
attachment models suggest that preferential acquisition
models are at least as viable a developmental pathway as
preferential attachment and, and in some cases, explain
aspects of the network growth that preferential attachment
does not (Hills et al., in prep).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of
Health, T32 Grant # HD 07475.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1976). Language, memory, and thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barabasi, A. L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling
in random networks. Science, 286, 509-512.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bomba, P.C., & Siqueland, E.R. (1983). The nature and
structure of infant form categories. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 35, 294-328
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading
activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Colunga, E. & Smith, L. B. (2003) The emergence of
abstract ideas: evidence from networks and babies.
Philosophical Transactions by the Royal Society, 358,
1205-1214.
Cree, G. S. and McRae, K. (2003). Analyzing the factors
underlying the structure and computation of the meaning
of Chipmunk, Cherry, Chisel, Cheese, and Cello (and
many other such concrete nouns). Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 163-201.
Gelman, S.A., & Bloom, P. (2000). Young children are
sensitive to how an object was created when deciding
how to name it. Cognition, 76, 91-103.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Logie, R. H. (1980). Age of acquisition,
imagery, concreteness, familiarity and ambiguity
measures for 1944 words. Behavior Research Methods
and Instrumentation, 12, 395-427.
Griffiths, T. L., Steyvers, M., & Firl, A. (2007). Google and
the mind. Psychological Science, 18, 1069-1076.

160

