UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Joint Perception: Gaze and the Presence of Others

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5kc3s6n7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Richardson, Daniel C.
Hoover, Merrit A.
Ghane, Arezou

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Joint Perception: Gaze and the Presence of Others
Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)
School of Psychology, Reading University,
Whiteknights Road, Reading, RG6 6AL, UK

Merrit A. Hoover (mhoover@ucsc.edu)
Arezou Ghane (aghane2002@yahoo.com)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Cruz
1056 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA
Abstract

Social context
In the standard information processing accounts of
cognition, the theoretical model is of a cognitive systems
that thinks and acts in isolation. Accordingly, laboratory
experiments quarantine subjects away from a social context.
While this approach has been greatly productive, for
example, in mapping out the behavioural and anatomical
components of cognition, it risks excluding critical
phenomena from the laboratory. Notably, elsewhere,
neuroscientists are discovering that the brain is highly tuned
to social information (Cacioppo, Visser & Pickett, 2005),
yet such variables are not often part of cognitive theories.
Thus, while the tools of cognitive psychology are being
used to study social phenomena to great effect, the potential
impact of social context upon cognitive and perceptual
processing is rarely explored.
Though the standard cognitive model marginalizes social
context, there have been notable exceptions. Studies of
situated cognition (Barsalou, Breazeal & Smith, 2007;
Robbins & Ayded, in press) show that cognition ‘in the
wild’ is intimately linked not only to representations of the
external world, but also to the cognitive processes of others.
For example, Hutchins (1995) observed the ways that navy
navigators distribute cognitive processes between
themselves by using external tools and representations, such
as maps and notations.
Recently, experimental methods are starting to reveal the
mechanisms involved in such joint activity. Experimenters
have taken some classic experiments in the information
processing model of cognitive psychology, and placed them
in a rudimentary social context (Sebanz, Bekkering &
Knoblich, 2006). For example, in a traditional stimulusresponse compatibility task, participants make a judgment
about one stimulus property (colour) and ignore another
stimulus property (location). If there is an incompatibility
between the irrelevant location property and the response
(left or right finger movement), then reaction times increase,
as the irrelevant property activates the incompatible
response representation (Simon, 1969). Sebanz and
colleagues divided this task between two people. They sat
next to each other, and each person responded to one colour:
in effect, each acting as one of the fingers of a participant in
Simon’s (1969) experiment. Although each individual had
only one response to execute (and hence no need to
represent the incompatible response), they still showed
slower responses in the incompatible trials. There was no
incompatibility effect when performing the same single

We document a new phenomenon: participants’ eye
movements are influenced by the belief that they are either
looking at pictures alone, or that a person next door is looking
at the same pictures. The pictures were in sets of four. One
had a positive and one a negative valence, and others were
neutral. On a trial by trial basis, eye movements to the
negative versus the positive pictures were modulated by
participants’ belief that they were looking alone or jointly. A
second experiment manipulated the beliefs participants had
about the person in the next cubicle, in an attempt to tease
apart possible explanations for this effect of ‘joint
perception’. In each case, a minimal sense of cooperation with
another appears to produce distinct cognitive effects, in
manner similar to that found in studies of ‘joint action’. We
conclude that there may be a pervasive effect of social context
upon cognitive and perceptual processes.
Keywords: vision; joint action; eye movements; social
cognition,, situated cognition

Introduction
Imagine you are at a large, international conference. The
parallel sessions are simultaneously offering little of
interest, and so you wander into the empty hall where the
posters are on display. You begin to study one, and after a
few moments, become immersed. Then you hear a shuffle
over your shoulder. Someone else is looking at the poster
too. You pass over the distraction and return to your study.
How is your perception of the poster now changed by the
knowledge that someone else is looking at it? Does your
attention increase? Do you look more critically or more
generously? The other person could be a senior researcher,
famed for scathing remarks, or a young graduate student.
Does your impression of the other person change the
influence of their presence on your perception?
By their presence - most forcibly by looking into your
eyes - other people compel you to realize that you are an
object for them, Sartre (1948) argues. The arresting
sensation of direct eye contact has certainly been
investigated by philosophers (Stack & Plant, 1982) and
psychologists (Argyle, 1967), who find it closely connected
to the interpersonal forces of dominance and attraction. Here
we are interested in another aspect of ‘the other’. Sartre
(1948) wrote that in the presence of another, "Your world is
suddenly haunted by the Other's values, over which you
have no control.” Is there a systematic effect of social
context upon perceptual processes?

309

response task alone. When acting jointly, participants
represented their partners’ actions as if they were their own.
Further evidence suggests that representing the actions of
another occurs ‘quasi-automatically’ during joint action,
even when it leads to a decrement in performance.
As well as representing the actions of others, there is
recent evidence that we monitor their potential responses by
keeping track of a rich set of social variables. Crosby,
Monin & Richardson (in press) found that people look to
those around them when interpreting potentially offensive
behaviour. Eye movements of participants were tracked as
they watched a video of four people giving their views on
university admissions policy. All four discussants were
visible at all times. When one person voiced strong,
potentially offensive remarks against affirmative action, the
amount of time participants looked at a Black discussant
increased. Importantly, these looks did not occur when
participants viewed an identical video, but were led to
believe that the Black individual could not hear the
comments because his headphones were turned off.
Therefore, participants do not simply direct attention to
members of minority groups whenever affirmative action is
mentioned. Instead, they maintain an awareness of others’
knowledge state, social identity and possible reaction to
particular attitudes.
There is mounting evidence that (when it is provided)
participants ground simple cognitive tasks within a social
context. Inspired by the simplicity of the joint action
experiments, our goal was a take a straightforward case of
perception, eye movements to pictures of differing affect,
and to examine the effect of introducing a minimal social
context. Experiment 1 was designed simply to determine
whether social context alters the way participants view these
images.

the participants looked symbols (but were told their partner
was looking at pictures). In this way, the social context was
varied trial by trial throughout the experiment, and consisted
of no more than a belief about what the person next door
could see on their screen.
The perceptual task was to look at sets of four pictures
that appeared simultaneously onscreen. On each trial,
participants saw two ‘neutral’ fillers, typically, anodyne
objects or landscapes,one pleasant image, and one
unpleasant image. The pictures were collected according the
the subjective opinion of the experimenters. While it is
certain that this may have produced an uneven stimuli set,
the categories are divergent enough that it is implausible, for
example, that what one person would call an unpleasant
image, another would call pleasant. The full set of positive
and negative images are shown in Figure 1.
Valance was chosen as a stimulus dimension because
what is termed negative and positive images are often
loaded with social values. For example, there are taboos
against unclean and violent things, on the one hand; and
more Calvinist taboos against staring covetously at pleasant
things, such as overly indulgent cakes or scantily clad
models on the other. To the extent to which positive and
negative images interact with social mores, they seemed
good bait for effects of social context.
Our simple hypothesis was that the minimal social context
will interact with the perceptual task. Biases towards
negative and positive images will shift when the participants
believe they are looking alone or jointly with another. Our
prediction was that a bias towards positive stimuli will
increase when the participants believe they are looking
alone.

Experiment 1

Participants 27 undergraduates from the University of
California, Santa Cruz took part in the experiment in
exchange for course credit. We did not collect data from 6
due to equipment problems and failures to calibrate because
of corrected vision. Participants were strangers who had not
met prior to the experiment.

Method

The social context in our experiment began when
participants entered the laboratory in pairs. They were led
into separate cubicles next door to each other, and believed
(correctly) that they were going to be run together in an
experiment. Each saw sets of pictures presented on screen
for a short time. In the ‘joint perception’ trials, they heard an
experimenter’s voice say, ‘You will both be looking at the
same set of pictures,’ and in the ‘lone perception’ trials they
heard, ‘You will be looking at pictures. Your partner will be
looking at symbols’. There were also filler trials in which

Apparatus Participants were run, two at a time, in the Eye
Think lab’s speech and gaze tracking system. Each
participant sat in a cubicle in a reclining chair, looking up at
an arm mounted 19” LCD screen approximately 60cm away.
A Bobax3000 remote eye tracker was mounted at the base

Figure 1A. Positive images

Figure 1B. Negative images

310

3000

of the display, consisting of a camera focused on the
participant’s eye and a set of LED illuminators. The
participant wore a headset, through which they could hear
the stimuli and speak to the experimenter. The eye trackers
passed image data to intel iMacs positioned outside the
cubicle. The iMacs calculated gaze position for each
participant approximately 30 times a second, presented
stimuli and recorded regions of interest that were being
fixated. Data was also streamed to an experimenter’s
computer, which saved an audio-video record of what the
participant saw, heard and said during the experiment,
superimposed with their gaze position.

total looking time (ms)

negative

positive

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Alone

Design There were 32 trials presented in a random order.
Half of these were experimental trials. Participants saw
either a set of pictures or a set of symbols, and were
(truthfully) told that their partner was either looking at the
same stimuli, or stimuli of a different type. The picture sets
consisted of two neutral images, one positive and one
negative (Figure 1), and were placed in random locations on
a two by two grid. Symbol sets were taken at random from a
set of geometric patterns found in various font sets. The
other half of the trials were distractor trials, in which one of
the participants saw a single picture with three symbols, and
the other saw four pictures. These trials, and the choice of
abstract, Zener card symbols were intended to resemble
ESP experiments and draw attention away from the
experimental contrasts of interest.

Joint

Figure 2. Mean looking times, Experiment 1.
that they were looking alone, participants looked more at the
negative stimuli, but looked more at the positive stimuli
when they thought their partner could see the same thing.
Figure 3 reveals the timecourse of these gaze patterns. In
both conditions, there was an early peak in gazes to the
negative stimuli. In the lone condition this preference
persisted, but in the joint condition it gave way to a
preference for positive images.

Discussion
Participants’ gaze patterns to positive and negative stimuli
were influenced by whether they thought that a person in the
next cubical was looking at the same pictures, or an
unrelated set of symbols. Indeed, this social context could
flip on a trial by trial basis, yet participants kept track of it
and modulated their looking. The joint perception
hypothesis was supported: even a minimal sense of social
context can change a perceptual process. Our prediction of
the effects of joint perception fared less well:when looking
alone, participants’ gaze was biased towards negative
stimuli. Why does social context affect gaze, and why in this
direction? We put forward two main working hypotheses,
which are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive.

Procedure Participants waited to begin the experiment in a
common waiting area. The experimenter briefly introduced
herself and the participants to each other, and then they were
led to adjacent cubicles. Each underwent a short calibration
session, typically lasting no more than a minute. Once they
were ready, the experimenter warned them over the
intercom that the experiment was to begin. Each trial began
with a pre-recorded voice describing the upcoming stimuli
(pictures/symbols) and social context. Participants were
given no explicit instructions about the images. In the key
experimental contrast, they were told either ‘You will both
be looking at the same pictures’ or ‘You will be looking at
pictures. Your partner will be looking at symbols’. The
visual stimuli then appeared and remained onscreen for
eight seconds. After a 1000ms ISI, the next trial
commenced. Computers in the two cubicles communicated
so that the trials were presented in synchrony throughout the
session. Upon completion, participants were debriefed and
informed of the true experimental hypothesis.

Focal Image Hypothesis When we enter into any joint
activity, coordination is all important. Communication is a
prime example of coordination (Clark, 1996) and when we
talk, we implicitly agree upon names for novel objects
(Clark & Brennan, 1991), align our spatial reference frames
(Schober, 1993) and use each others’ syntactic structures
(Branigan, Pickering & Cleland, 2000). Our accents become
more similar (Giles, Coupland & Coupland, 1992), we sway
our bodies in synchrony (Shockley, Santana & Fowler,
2003; Condon & Ogdon, 1971) and even scratch our noses
together (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999). This coordination at
multiple levels facilitates many functions of communication,
such as promoting goodwill, establishing reference and
setting up common ground. Richardson and colleagues
found that two people looking at a common scene, such as a
painting, closely coordinated their gaze patterns. This
coordination increased with the degree of shared knowledge
possessed by the participants (Richardson, Dale & Kirkham,
2007), and the level of gaze coordination was causally
linked to the success of language comprehension
(Richardson & Dale, 2005).

Results
Positive and negative images were attended to differently
according to the social context. In the alone condition,
negative images were fixated for 2436ms (SD=770) and
positive images for 1853ms (SD = 676), while in the joint
condition, negative images were fixated for 2158ms
(SD=872) and positive images for 2370ms (SD=s =961).
A 2 (picture valance: negative or positive) x 2 (social
context: joint or alone) ANOVA revealed supported this
significant interaction (F(1,20)=5.52, p<.05), with no main
effects (All Fs <1). As Figure 2 shows, when they believed

311

Alone

probability of fixation

0.5

positive

negative

neutral

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

Joint

0

time 0
0

2000

4000

6000

8000

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Figure 3. Timecourse of gaze preferences, Experiment 1.
We hypothesized that participants in our experiment
implicitly entered into a joint activity. Perhaps anticipating a
future discussion of the stimuli between themselves, they
attempted to coordinate gaze patterns with their partner,
when they believed they were looking jointly. In other
words, in the joint condition they looked at the pictures they
thought another person would prefer: the pleasant ones.
The term ‘focal image’ comes from Schelling (1960) who
found that people were very good at guessing what images
others find salient. Schelling realized that everyday cases of
verbal reference are often ambiguous. We say, ‘Hand me the
fork,’ in the presence of many such items, yet listeners
unproblematically infer the same referent. For example,
when presented with a page full of items, such as watches
from a catalog, participants agreed with each other which
one was most likely to be referred to as ‘the watch’ (Clark,
Schreuder & Buttrick, 1983).
The focal image hypothesis assumes that the ‘baseline’
preference is to look at the unpleasant images. The focal
image hypothesis posits that this preference is overridden in
the joint case, when participants imagine that other people
would like to see nice images, and look accordingly. So the
hypothesis asserts that people individually prefer the
macabre, but (incorrectly) think that other people have more
genial tastes.

malleable. In particular, it can be influenced by those around
us. In Darley and Latane’s (1968) studies of bystander
intervention, the presence of other people made an
individual less likely to help in a threatening or difficult
situation, such as helping a stranger who has collapsed on a
street. Partly this was because the individual would rely on
others to interpret the situation as an emergency, and partly
the others would ‘diffuse responsibility’ for taking action.

Threat Calculus Hypothesis Walking down a dark alley, do
you jump quicker at noise behind you when you are alone,
or when you are walking with others? Our intuition is that
of sensible necessity, when you are alone you attend more to
stimuli that could be potentially threatening. This response
is so ingrained that even the minimal solitude of our ‘lone
perception’ condition, participants increase their attention to
negative (and hence threatening) images.
This hypothesis may seem to ascribe too much paranoia
to our participants, since it suggests they are continually
aware of potential dangers. However, they do live a society
with a daily colour coded ‘threat level’. There is also strong
experimental evidence that we have a heightened sensitivity
to negative stimuli. Threatening subliminal words are better
detected (Dijksterhuis & Aarts, 2003) and demand more
attentional resources than positive words (Pratto & John,
1991). At the timescale of milliseconds, we seem to sense
threat within stimuli. At the timescale of minutes, with more
complex stimuli, our understanding of threat seems more

Experiment 2

Task demand hypotheses There are many other factors
that could be contributing to our effect. Perhaps participants
suspect that following presentation there will be some sort
of memory test. This stirs their competitive spirit or fear of
failure, and on joint trials they aim to look more evenly at
all the pictures (rather than simply focusing on the negative
one) so that their memory performance does not suffer a
poor comparison with their partners’. Or perhaps they
imagine that their own gaze patterns will be later compared
with their partners’, and so do not want to appear, by
comparison, to be unduly attracted to unpleasant images.
These hypotheses have not been directly tested yet, but note
that to some degree they all suggest that the participants are
changing their behaviour because they believe that their
partner is looking at particular images. In this sense, they
presuppose the focal image hypothesis.

The hypotheses we lay out are not directly at odds with each
other. The focal image hypothesis attempts to describe the
special case of joint looking, assuming that lone looking is
the baseline. Conversely, the threat calculus hypothesis
assumes that lone looking is something to be explained. In
experiment 2 we devised a test of the focal image
hypothesis, but for these reasons, the results cannot rule out
threat calculus as a possibility. The experiment aimed to
reveal any calculations participants make about the type of
images their partner may prefer. We manipulated
participants’ beliefs about their partner, who in this case was
an experimental confederate in one of two guises as an art
major. In one case, he or she wore a tie dye t-shirt and liked
“taking pictures of everything I find beautiful and pleasing”.
In the other case, he or she wore a death metal t-shirt and
liked ‘taking pictures of everything I find bizarre and

312

negative

total looking time (ms)

3000

Tie-dye

positive

Death metal

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
alone

joint

alone

joint

Figure 4. Mean looking times, Experiment 2.
shocking’. Figure 4 shows examples of our male research
dye vs death metal) x 2 valence (positive vs negative)
assistant in his two guises.
ANOVA revealed no significant interaction (F(1,38)=3.46)
Following the focal image hypothesis, our prediction was
and no main effects (all Fs <1). A similar ANOVA on the
that participants would not look differently in the alone
joint condition found a significant interaction between
condition, but would follow their partners’ assumed
confederate and valence (F(1,38)=4.09, p<.05), with no
preferences in the joint looking condition, looking more at
main effects (all Fs <1).
the positive pictures with the tie-dye confederate, and more
The patterns of these means can be seen in Figure 4.
at the negative pictures with the death metal confederate.
Although, as hypothesized, there was an interaction of
confederate, to our surprise it had the opposite effect that we
Method
predicted. When looking jointly with someone who
professed to like pleasant things, participants spent roughly
Participants 44 undergraduatesfrom UC Santa Cruz
25% longer on the negative pictures (Tukey’s p<.05).
participated for course credit. 4 could not be run because of
calibration errors.
Discussion
Evidence for the focal image hypothesis was not
Apparatus The apparatus was identical to Experiment 1.
forthcoming. In the important joint condition, participants
did not spend more time looking at the images their partner
Design Stimuli were the same as Experiment 1. The
would prefer. Indeed, when paired with the tie-dye
distractor trials were dropped, since debriefing following
confederate, participants looked more at the pictures that
Experiment 1 suggested that participants were not
were anything but ‘beautiful and pleasing’. We draw two
suspicious about the joint/alone manipulation, and were
conclusions from this result, or rather, see two directions for
content to assume it was an experiment investigating stimuli
further research.
preferences. This allowed us to double the number of
Firstly, we do not think we can discard the focal image
experimental trials.
hypothesis yet. The stimulus categories of positive and
negative valence were inherited from the first experiment,
Procedure There were no differences to Experiment 1
but one could argue that they do not naturally lend
except for the fact that participants were run with a
themselves to individuals’ preference. A better test would be
confederate who was a male or a female research assistant.
to vary picture content: a confederate could confess to being
They wore one of two shirts, shown in figure 4, but
a sports fan or an architecture student. In the joint condition
otherwise behaved in a consistent and unremarkable
the focal image hypothesis would predict looks to buildings
fashion. Prior to calibration, with the excuse of breaking
or sporting activities to increase. If no increase was found in
the ice, the experimenter asked the participants to say a few
the alone condition, a general priming effect of talking
things about themselves. The confederate was asked to go
about such preferences could be ruled out.
first and said, "My name is [Jackie / Daniel]. I'm from
We have one reason why the focal image hypothesis
Kresge and I'm an art major. I mostly do photography. I'm
failed
in this experiment. But we have not explained the
all about taking pictures of everything I find [bizarre and
positive result of a preference for negative images in the
shocking / beautiful and pleasing]."
presence of a tie-dye confederate. One possibility, and our
second direction for future research, concerns the threat
Results The identity of the confederate influenced
calculus hypothesis.
participants’ looking behaviour to positive and negative
We imagined that participants modulate their attention to
images. We hypothesized no effect of confederate in the
threatening
stimuli in the light of their social context. Being
alone condition but an interaction in the joint condition, and
alone
is
inherently
riskier, and looking alone, the need for
so carried out separate planned comparisons of the two
vigilance is greater. Looking jointly, there is another set of
social contexts. In the alone condition, a 2 confederate (tieeyes to watch out for threatening things, and the help of

313

another if required, and so the need to attend to negative
stimuli diminishes. However, this ‘threat calculus’ rests on
the assumption that ones partner does indeed attend to
negative stimuli, and would indeed be useful in a
threatening situation. Perhaps in Experiment 2, participants
judged that the tie-dye wearing aesthete would not fulfill
these roles, and their threat calculus led them to increase
attention to negative stimuli when looking jointly. Although
the pattern of our results is consistent with the threat
calculus hypothesis, we cannot say that that Experiment 2
adduces direct support. For that, we need either to untangle
stimuli that are threatening versus simply negative, or to
experimentally manipulate the degree to which the other
participant is seen as ameliorating threat.

Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition
(pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: APA.
Clark, H.H., Schreuder, R. & Buttrick, S., (1983). Common
ground and the understanding of demonstrative reference.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22,
245-258.
Condon, W., & Ogston, W. (1971). Speech and body motion
synchrony of the speaker– hearer. In D. Horton & J.
Jenkins (Eds.), The perception of language (pp. 150 –
184). Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill.
Crosby, J.R., Monin, B. & Richardson, D.C. (in press).
Where Do We Look During Potentially Offensive
Behavior? Psychological Science
Darley, J.M. & Latane, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in
emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 377-383.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Aarts, H. (2003). On wildebeests and
humans: The preferential detection of negative stimuli.
Psychological Science, 14, 14–18.
Giles, H., Coupland, N., & Coupland, J. (1992).
Accommodation theory: Communication, context and
consequences. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & N. Coupland
(Eds.), Contexts of accommodation (pp. 1-68).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hutchins, E., 1995, Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pratto, F., & John, O.P. (1991). Automatic vigilance: The
attention-grabbing power of negative social information.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 380–
391
Richardson, D.C & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to understand:
The coupling between speakers’ and listeners’ eye
movements and its relationship to discourse
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 1045–1060.
Richardson, D.C, Dale, R. & Kirkham, N.Z., (2007) The art
of conversation is coordination: common ground and the
coupling of eye movements during dialogue,
Psychological Science, 18(5), 407-413
Robbins, P. & Aydede, M. (Eds.) (in press), The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Sartre, J-P. (1948), Being and Nothingness, tr. Hazel E.
Barnes, New York: Philosophical Library.
Schelling, T. C. The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Schober, M. F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47(1), 1-24.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: Bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 70-76
Shockley, K., Santana, M.V., & Fowler, C. A. (2003).
Mutual interpersonal postural constraints are involved in
cooperative conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 29(2),
326-332.
Simon, H. (1969). Reactions towards the source of the
stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81.
Stack, G.J., & Plant, R.W. (1982). The Phenomenon of "The
Look", Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 42,
3, 359-373.

Conclusion
Believing that another person, out of sight, is this moment
looking at the same images as you are alters how you look
at them. Your beliefs about that person also influence how
you look. We have established, therefore, two aspects of the
new phenomenon of joint perception: the presence and the
type of social context can interact with perceptual processes.
Surprisingly, perhaps, the condition of looking alone or
looking jointly was not established once at the start of the
session, and its effects left to accrue throughout the
experiment; the social context flipped back and forth, trialby-trial. The causal route of this behaviour has not yet been
made clear, whether it is monitoring threat, the intention to
coordinate, or some other factor. We think that, at the least,
this research reveals the powerful and persuasive effect of
social context upon cognitive and perceptual processes.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Herb Clark, Natasha Kirkham, and
Michael Spivey for helpful comments and Norine Doherty,
Jacquelyn Espino, Victor Hernandez, Daniel Janulaitis and
Jonas Nagel for data collection and insightful discussion.

References
Argyle, M., & Cook, M. (1976). Gaze and mutual gaze.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L.W., Breazeal, C., & Smith, L.B. (2007).
Cognition as coordinated non-cognition. Cognitive
Processing, 8, 79-91.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000).
Syntactic coordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13B25.
Cacioppo, J.T., Visser, P.S.& Pickett C.L.(eds.), Social
neuroscience: People thinking about thinking people.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT press.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76, 893-910.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.

314

