UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language as a Cognitive Technology: English-Speakers Match Like Pirahã When You Don't
Let Them Count

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7nm3w9k1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Frank, MIcheal C.
Fedorenko, Evelina
Gibson, Edward

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language as a Cognitive Technology: English-Speakers Match Like Pirahã When
You Don’t Let Them Count
Michael C. Frank, Evelina Fedorenko, and Edward Gibson
{mcfrank, evelina9, egibson}@mit.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 43 Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

To support this hypothesis, we first discuss numerical
cognition, a case study of language and conceptual change
(Carey & Spelke, 1994) which has been studied across a variety of populations. In particular, we focus on the finding that
the Pirahã—an Amazonian hunter-gatherer group who lack
words for exact numbers, are able to perform simple one-toone matching tasks but unable to perform numerical tasks that
require remembering exact quantities (Everett, 2005; Frank
et al., in press; Gordon, 2004). Here we present experimental data showing the same pattern of performance in American participants who performed these matching tasks while
simultaneously engaged in verbal shadowing. We then discuss these data in light of results from several other domains.

The Pirahã, an Amazonian hunter-gatherer tribe, lack words
for numbers and are unable to complete simple matching tasks
when the tasks require memory for exact quantities (Gordon,
2004; Frank et al., in press). Here we show that American participants perform similarly to the Pirahã when asked to execute
the same kinds of matching tasks under verbal interference.
These results provide support for the hypothesis that number
words act as a “cognitive technology”: a method for quickly
and efficiently storing information via abstraction. We review
a variety of other evidence supporting this proposal from the
domains of color, navigation, and theory of mind.
Keywords: Numerical cognition; verbal interference; language and thought; Whorf hypothesis; Pirahã.

Introduction

Numerical cognition in infants and non-human primates is
thought to be subserved by two distinct systems (Feigenson
et al., 2004). The parallel-individuation (“object file”) system
is related to visual attention and object tracking and is used to
track the identity of small numbers of discrete objects. In contrast, the analog magnitude system is used to represent large,
approximate quantities and can operate over arbitrarily large
quantities. Parallel individuation is precise but only functions
for quantities below three or four; in contrast, analog magnitude estimation exhibits a constant coefficient of variation
(error relative to the size of the set being estimated) (Whalen
et al., 1999).

How does knowing a language affect the way you are able to
perceive, act and reason in the world? Do the differences between languages cause systematic differences in the cognition
of their speakers? These questions about the relationship between language and thought have been among the most controversial in cognitive science for many years. However, recent evidence from non-linguistic and cross-cultural populations has given some insight into this relationship in domains
such as number, color, navigation, and theory of mind.
In this paper, we propose a unifying account of these
strands of evidence, which we call the “cognitive technology”
hypothesis (Dascal, 2002; Frank et al., in press):

The relationship between a lack of number language and
reliance on these core, pre-linguistic numerical systems was
first documented via case studies of two Amazonian groups,
the Pirahã (Gordon, 2004) and the Mundurukú (Pica et al.,
2004). The Pirahã presented a particularly interesting case:
their language was reported to have words roughly corresponding to the concepts of “one,” “two,” and “many”, and
they were unable to perform a variety of simple matching
tasks. Gordon interpreted these results as providing evidence
for a strong Whorfian claim: that without language for number, the Pirahã had no notion of exact quantity and were thus
unable even to put objects in one-to-one correspondence.

Rather than altering underlying representations, languages instead help their speakers accomplish difficult or
intractable cognitive tasks by providing abstractions which
allow for the efficient storage and processing of information.
This hypothesis synthesizes a number of existing theoretical
ideas. Vygotsky (1986) suggested that language could be a
scaffold for action by providing external support for difficult
tasks. Similarly, several authors have suggested that language
works to code experience and that Whorfian effects stem from
differences in the way experience is coded (Hunt & Agnoli,
1991), or that language augments cognition by providing an
external resource for information storage and transformation
(Clark, 1998). While these proposals are deeply related to
our own, we believe that the contribution of the view here is to
synthesize these ideas into an account in which the role of language as a tool for abstraction explains a number of recently
identified “Whorfian” effects, while still acknowledging the
existence of core cognitive abilities which are unaltered by
language (Spelke & Kinzler, 2007; Carruthers, 2002).

In recent work (Frank et al., in press), we provided evidence that Pirahã in fact has no words for exact quantities
whatsoever; the previously reported numerical terms appear
to be comparative or relative terms. In addition, we showed
that—contra Gordon (2004)—the Pirahã succeeded in simple one-to-one matching tasks, suggesting that the concept of
exact quantity (the idea that adding or subtracting one object
makes a difference) does not depend on linguistic knowledge.
However, we replicated Gordon’s results that the Pirahã had

439

considerable difficulty in performing matching tasks which
required memory for exact quantities.
Recent research by Trick (2005) supports the conclusion
that aspects of number are dependent on language. They
showed that counting accuracy was differentially impaired by
a complex verbal interference task (saying the letters F’ and
S’ in alternation) compared with a simple verbal task (saying the letter S’) and both simple and complex tapping tasks.
However, since this work tests performance in an explicitly
verbal task under verbal interference, it does not directly address the hypothesis that numerical cognition relies on language more generally, not simply when a verbal response is
needed.
In the current study, we provide the first direct test of the
hypothesis that memory for exact quantities, but not one-toone matching, is dependent on language. We performed the
same set of matching tasks that we used with the Pirahã with
English-speaking participants in Boston, MA. Pilot testing revealed that these tasks were trivial for our English-speaking
participants; they were able to complete all the matching tasks
with no errors simply by counting. Thus, in order to investigate the role of linguistic knowledge in this task, we introduced a verbal interference task that participants performed
concurrently with the matching tasks. Verbal interference
tasks are typically used to prevent the rehearsal of verbal information in short-term memory. As our interference task we
chose verbal shadowing (repeating meaningful speech immediately after hearing it) (Hermer-Vazquez et al., 1999; Newton & de Villiers, 2007). We hypothesized that, absent the
ability to count, the performance of English-speaking participants in these tasks would have the same qualitative signatures as the performance of the Pirahã.

a line of un-inflated balloons exactly matching the quantity
of spools that they saw (these items were chosen because
they were the same stimulus items we used with the Pirahã).
For each task, participants were tested once on quantities of
spools from four to twelve (in a random order) and the number of balloons they put out was recorded by the experimenter.
No feedback was given.
In the one-to-one and uneven matching trials, the experimenter placed the spools one by one in a line running from
the participant’s left to their right. The spools were evenly
spaced in the one-to-one task and broken into smaller groups
of one to four in the uneven task. The line of balloons placed
by participants was parallel to the line placed by the experimenter, so the participants could simply put balloons in oneto-one correspondence with spools to succeed in the task.
The orthogonal matching task was identical to the one-toone task except that the line of spools ran from close to the
participant to further away, rather than from left to right. The
hidden match task was identical to the one-to-one task except
that the line was hidden by the experimenter after the spools
were placed (by placing a manila folder in front of the spools).
Finally, in the “nuts-in-a-can task,” the experimenter placed
spools one by one into an opaque cup.
On each trial, the experimenter would begin by starting
the audio (which the participant listened to over headphones).
Once the participant had begun shadowing, the experimenter
placed the spools one by one in the task configuration. Once
the experimenter had finished, the participant began placing
balloons to indicate quantity. When finished placing balloons,
the participant indicated that the trial was finished by pressing
a key to end the audio.

Results

Experimental Data

Participants’ individual data is shown in Figure 1 along with
the data we collected with the Pirahã. Additional analyses
are shown in Table 1. For the English speakers as for the Pirahã, the one-to-one and uneven matching tasks were easiest,
followed by the orthogonal and hidden matching tasks; the
nuts-in-a-can task was by far the hardest. Thus, to a first approximation, occupying the verbal resources of speakers of a
language with numbers produced a pattern of data remarkably
similar to the data of speakers of a language without numbers. These data confirm our hypothesis: while performance
in one-to-one matching tasks was largely preserved without
the use of number language, performance on more memoryintensive tasks was dramatically impaired.
However, there were some differences between the Pirahã and our English speaking participants. We compared
the English data to the Pirahã data via an ANOVA, predicting mean performance across participants with language
group and matching task as factors. Both factors and their
interaction were highly significant predictors in the model
(F(1, 70) = 33.61, p < .001 for language group, F(4, 70) =
33.76, p < .001 for task, and F(4, 70) = 5.30, p < .001 for
their interaction), suggesting that the English speakers were

Methods
Participants We recruited 20 participants from MIT and
the surrounding community; our participants varied in age
from 18 to 50, approximately matching the distribution of
ages in our Pirahã population (though exact matching was of
course impossible because the Pirahã could not report their
own exact ages). Participants received $10 as compensation.
Procedure Participants were first familiarized with the verbal shadowing task: they were instructed to listen to short
clips from the Radio News Corpus (Ostendorf et al., 1995)
and to repeat the words spoken by the announcer as quickly
as possible. After their performance was judged to be fluent
by the experimenter and they reported that they were comfortable with the task, they were given instructions for the
matching tasks.
Each participant completed five matching tasks (as described in Frank et al., in press), in the following order: a
one-to-one matching task, an uneven matching task, an orthogonal matching task, a hidden matching task, and a nutsin-a-can task. Each matching task required the participant
to observe some quantity of spools of thread and to put out

440

One−to−one match

"OSTON
correct
incorrect
CoV

10
5
0

4
6
Uneven match

8

10

0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1

coefficient of variation

quantity (participant)

0IRAHÎ
15

0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1

10
5
0

4

6

8

10

12

Orthogonal match

Hidden match

Nuts−in−a−can

Figure 1: Comparison of data collected from the Pirahã (from Frank, Everett, Fedorenko, & Gibson, in press) and data from
the verbal shadowing experiment carried out with English-speaking participants in Boston. Left-hand axes show the match
between the quantity of balloons placed by the participant (Y axis) and the quantity of spools placed by the experimenter (X
axis). Each datapoint is an individual trial for an individual participant. Xs mark incorrect trials while dots mark correct trials;
marks are jittered to reflect the quantity of trials at each quantity for each group. The right hand axes measure the coefficient of
variation (mean / standard deviation), as shown for each quantity by the solid line.

441

English

One-to-one
Uneven
Orthogonal
Hidden
Nuts-in-a-can

Percent correct
0.94
0.96
0.78
0.82
0.47

Pirahã

One-to-one
Uneven
Orthogonal
Hidden
Nuts-in-a-can

0.96
0.89
0.39
0.43
0.32

Mean error
0.03
0.03
0.11
0.29
0.23

Mean COV
0.02
0.02
0.06
0.11
0.14

COV slope
0.006
0.003
0.010
-0.014
-0.003

COV r2
0.39
0.15
0.65
0.10
0.06

COV p-value
0.07
0.31
0.01
0.41
0.53

0.04
0.12
0.50
0.58
0.39

0.02
0.03
0.16
0.15
0.21

-0.002
0.010
0.002
-0.003
0.009

0.03
0.64
0.01
0.01
0.08

0.71
0.03
0.86
0.83
0.53

Table 1: Statistical comparison of results between Pirahã and Boston participants. Percent correct refers to the total proportion
of trials of a particular type that were correct. Mean error is the average difference between the mean of participants’ responses
and the target value (small values indicate that participants’ estimates were correct across the group, despite being variable for
any individual trial). Mean COV refers to the mean coefficient of variance (mean divided by standard deviation) for a task;
a smaller COV indicates more precise estimates. COV slope is the slope of the best linear fit to the coefficient of variance
for that trial. COV r2 and p-value are the r2 and p-values assigned to the linear trend in the coefficient of variance (larger r2
values indicate growth in the coefficient of variance as the quantities being estimated grow, indicating that analog magnitude
estimation may not be responsible for the errors.

of variation data for either group, suggesting that both groups
were using the analog magnitude system to perform this task.

overall better at the tasks, but that the differences between
groups were not constant across tasks.
Examining tasks individually, the one-to-one and uneven
matching tasks were extremely easy for both groups and the
number of errors was relatively small, suggesting that participants in both groups were able to make inferences about exact correspondence. In addition, those errors that participants
did make in these tasks were most likely not the results of
analog magnitude estimation. Analog magnitude estimation
is typically characterized by a constant coefficient of variance
(mean divided by standard deviation) (Gordon, 2004; Whalen
et al., 1999). For the Pirahã we found a significant linear slope
in the coefficient of variation in the uneven match; and for
the English-speakers, we found a trend towards a linear slope
in the one-to-one matching task. These patterns could have
been created instead by adding a constant probability of error
to matching each item (a process which, in contrast to magnitude estimation, would create an increasing COV). While
not conclusive, these correlations suggest a different source
of error in these tasks from the error inherent in magnitude
estimation.
For the hidden and orthogonal match tasks, the Pirahã and
the English-speakers may have been using different strategies. While these two tasks were more difficult for both
groups, the Pirahã performed far worse than the English
speakers. We speculate that English-speakers were able to
use a variety of strategies to mitigate the difficulty of these
tasks. This conclusion is supported, following the same logic
as in the matching tasks above, by the significant linear trend
in the English speakers’ orthogonal match COV.
Finally, the “nuts-in-a-can” task was the purest example
of a task that was extremely difficult without language for
number. There was no hint of a linear trend in the coefficient

Discussion
We asked English-speakers to perform a variety of matching
tasks while performing verbal interference. They were unable to count during verbal interference and thus they were
forced to rely on other strategies to perform these tasks. In the
simplest one-to-one and uneven matching tasks, participants
were relatively accurate, indicating that these tasks do not depend significantly on verbal resources (a finding confirmed
by the success of the Pirahã on these tasks as well). In contrast, in the nuts-in-a-can task, both the Pirahã and the English
speakers were highly impaired (and their responses showed
the signature of analog magnitude estimation), suggesting
that this task was highly dependent on verbal resources. The
orthogonal match and hidden matching tasks fell somewhere
in between. The similarity between the performance of the
two groups lend support to the claim that the concept of “exact match” does not depend on language in either its genesis
(as shown by the Pirahã data, c.f. Frank et al., in press) or its
use (as shown by the current data). However, both learning
and using the ability to remember exact quantities larger than
three or four appears to depend crucially on verbal mechanisms. Further comparative evidence for these claims comes
from Nicaraguan signers who had incomplete or non-existent
knowledge of the recursive count list and showed a similar
pattern of impairments (Flaherty & Senghas, 2007).
It is worth noting that our study has several methodological
limitations. First and most significantly, MIT undergraduates
and Boston natives are not well-matched controls for Pirahã.
In addition to knowing how to count, our Boston participants
also have a lifetime of formal education in a culture radically

442

different from that of the Pirahã with all of the cognitive differences implied by this different background (Scribner &
Cole, 1973). We are currently working to rectify this issue
by identifying groups with similar educational circumstances
but knowledge of number words.
In addition, there remains the possibility that the additional
cognitive load imposed by the secondary task might have
been responsible for our results, rather than the verbal component of the task specifically. Future research should address
this limitation via the use of a matched control task (as in
Hermer-Vazquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999 and Newton &
de Villiers, 2007). However, previous research on this topic
has found differential effects of complex verbal interference
relative to non-verbal interference tasks (Trick, 2005), thus it
is plausible that the verbal component of our shadowing task
was directly responsible for the results we observed.

are relatively small but reliable effects of language on color
memory and color discrimination; crucially these effects are
greater in the visual hemi-field corresponding to the left hemisphere of the brain (specialized for language in right-handers)
and are removed by verbal interference but not by comparable spatial interference (Gilbert et al., 2006; Winawer et al.,
2007). Though more controversial, the cross-linguistic evidence collected by Roberson and colleagues (Roberson &
Henley, 2007) also supports this view. Thus, the evidence on
color can be summarized in a parallel fashion to the evidence
on number. Even for simple perceptual discriminations, color
words provide a second route for processing, increasing efficiency; when this route is unavailable, speakers fall back on
their perceptual abilities (which remain unchanged by their
linguistic knowledge).
In the domain of spatial navigation as well, languages encode information about navigation using a variety of different
devices (Levinson, 2003). While both rats and young children who have not mastered linguistic encoding for spatial
navigation have been shown to use only geometric information about the proportions of a room to reorient themselves,
human adults are able to use multiple sources of information (Cheng, 1986; Hermer & Spelke, 1994, 1996). HermerVazquez et al. (1999) tested adults in reorientation tasks using
both verbal and non-verbal interference tasks and found that
verbal, but not non-verbal, interference dramatically impaired
the integration of landmark and geometric information. When
denied access to verbal resources, participants relied instead
on a purely geometric strategy.

General Discussion
Taken together with the Pirahã data, our current results suggest a clear picture of the relationship between language and
numerical cognition. All human beings (and many other
species) share a variety of core numerical capacities. However, languages which contain recursive count lists allow their
speakers to transcend these capacities and attain genuinely
new numerical abilities. These novel abilities depend both
on having a new representation (number words representing
exact cardinalities) and on the abilities of speakers to learn
new operations over this representation (addition, division,
factorization, etc.). The resulting capacities can be as simple
as remembering exact quantities over time or as complex as
long division or calculus.
As demonstrated by our current results, however, the addition of this new level of representation does not substantially
alter the initial core numerical abilities, which are still accessible and on which numerically-savvy speakers can still rely
when their verbal resources are otherwise occupied. Put another way, when it exists, language for number represents a
preferred route for processing numerical information, but in
the absence or inaccessibility of this route, the original core
abilities of object individuation and magnitude estimation are
still present and accessible. Thus, language is—in the case of
number—a cognitive technology, as in our original statement
of the hypothesis. We speculate that the cognitive technology
hypothesis holds in several other domains as well. In the remainder of this paper, we briefly review evidence supporting
this claim from the domains of color, navigation, and theory
of mind.
Languages vary considerably in the ways that they represent information about color (Kay et al., 2003). While some
languages contain only a small selection of color words, others have much more elaborate vocabularies. A large literature has dealt with the Whorfian question of whether the
presence of linguistic boundaries produce differences in color
perception. Although this topic is still controversial, recent
psychophysical evidence suggests a new consensus that there

Finally, reasoning about others’ beliefs and desires (“theory of mind”) may also rely crucially on linguistic knowledge. Recent research by Newton & de Villiers (2007) suggests that verbal interference (but not a matched non-verbal
task) disrupts performance in a non-verbal false-belief task.
This work follows a body of developmental evidence suggesting links between particular aspects of linguistic development and the ability to pass tasks which rely on the representation of others’ beliefs (de Villiers & de Villiers, 2000)
and more recent research suggesting that populations with
access to limited syntactic resources in their language, such
as speakers of early versions of Nicaraguan Sign Language,
may also be impaired in their false-belief reasoning (Pyers, in
press).
Thus, evidence from four domains—number, color, navigation, and theory of mind—suggests a middle path between
many of the traditional extreme positions in the Whorfian debate. Abstractions of these types arise differentially across
languages due to the particular communicative and cognitive
demands of their speakers, as in the evolution of functionallyspecific specified number systems (Beller & Bender, 2008)
and recent evidence suggesting that color terms represent efficient partitions of perceptual space (Regier et al., 2007).
However, languages do not appear to alter the original representations underlying complex cognitive tasks. Instead, they
enable their speakers to perform complex tasks (often differ-

443

entially across languages) by providing abstractions for efficient information processing.

Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E. S., & Katsnelson, A. S.
(1999). Sources of flexibility in human cognition: Dualtask studies of space and language. Cognitive Psychology,
39(1), 3-36.
Hunt, E., & Agnoli, F. (1991). The Whorfian hypothesis: A
cognitive psychology perspective. Psychological Review,
98(3), 377–389.
Kay, P., Berlin, B., Maffi, L., & Merrifield, W. R.(2003). The
world color survey. Palo Alto, CA: CSLI Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and cognition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Newton, A. M., & de Villiers, J. G. (2007). Thinking while
talking: Adults fail nonverbal false-belief reasoning. Psychological Science, 18(7), 574-579.
Ostendorf, M., Price, P. J., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (1995).
The boston university radio news corpus (Tech. Rep.).
Boston University.
Pica, P., Lemer, C., Izard, V., & Dehaene, S.(2004). Exact and
approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene group.
Science, 306(15), 499-503.
Pyers, J. (in press). Constructing the social mind: Language
and false-belief understanding. In S. C. Levinson & N. Enfield (Eds.), The roots of human sociality. New York: Berg
Publishers.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104(4), 1436-1441.
Roberson, D., & Henley, J. R. (2007). Color vision: Color
categories vary with language after all. Current Biology,
17(15), R605-R607.
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1973). Cognitive consequences of
formal and informal education. Science, 182(4112), 553559.
Spelke, E. S., & Kinzler, K. D. (2007). Core knowledge.
Developmental Science, 10(1), 89-96.
Trick, L. M. (2005). The role of working memory in spatial
enumeration: Patterns of selective interference in subitizing and counting. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 12(4),
675-681.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Whalen, J., Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (1999). Nonverbal
counting in humans: The psychophysics of number representation. Psychological Science, 10(2), 130-137.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M. C., Wu, L., Wade, A. R.,
& Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects of
language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(19), 7780-7785.

Acknowledgments
The first author was supported by a Jacob Javits Grant. The
authors would like especially to thank I. Shauni Deshmukh
for help in data collection. Additional thanks are due to Dan
Everett, Rebecca Saxe, Nathan Witthoft, and Ed Vul.

References
Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2008). The limits of counting: Numerical cognition between evolution and culture. Science,
319(213), 213-215.
Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1994). Domain-specific knowledge
and conceptual change. In L. Hirschfeld & S. Gelman
(Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture (p. 169-200). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2002). The cognitive functions of language.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 25(06), 657-726.
Cheng, K. (1986). A purely geometric module in the rat’s
spatial representation. Cognition, 23, 149-178.
Clark, A. (1998). Magic words: how language augments human computation. Cambridge University Press.
Dascal, M.(2002). Language as a cognitive technology. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 33-59.
de Villiers, J. G., & de Villiers, P. A. (2000). Linguistic
determinism and the understanding of false beliefs. In
P. Mitchell & K. Riggs (Eds.), Children’s reasoning and
the mind. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Everett, D. L. (2005). Cultural constraints on grammar and
cognition in pirahã. Current Anthropology, 46(4), 621-646.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7), 307314.
Flaherty, M., & Senghas, A. (2007). Numerosity and number
signs in deaf nicaraguan adults. Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development.
Frank, M. C., Everett, D. L., Fedorenko, E., & Gibson, E. (in
press). Number as a cognitive technology: Evidence from
pirahã language and cognition. Cognition.
Gilbert, A. L., Regier, T., Kay, P., & Ivry, R. B.(2006). Whorf
hypothesis is supported in the right visual field but not the
left. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
103(2), 489-494.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words: Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496-499.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1994). A geometric process for
spatial reorientation in young children. Nature, 370, 5759.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1996). Modularity and development: the case of spatial reorientation. Cognition, 61, 195232.

444

