UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning, Understanding, and Acceptance: The Case of Evolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0mr776kp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Shtulman, Andrew
Calabi, Prassede

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning, Understanding, and Acceptance: The Case of Evolution
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Occidental College, Department of Psychology
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041

Prassede Calabi (calabi@mindfire.ws)
University of Massachusetts Boston, Department of Psychology
100 Morrissey Blvd., Boston MA 02125
Darwin’s inability to explain the source of heritable
variation, evolution by natural selection eventually came to
be recognized as the unifying paradigm of the life sciences
(Bowler, 1983). As the biologist Dobzhansky (1973) has
succinctly stated, “Nothing in biology makes sense except
in the light of evolution.” Scientific consensus aside, many
outside the scientific community still doubt that evolution
occurs. In a recent survey of 34 countries, only 40% of
Americans agreed with the statement “Human beings, as we
know them, developed from earlier species of animals,”
placing the United States second to last in its overall
acceptance of evolution (Miller, Scott, & Okamoto, 2006).
Do Americans who reject evolution actually understand
what evolution is? One reason to think not is that the
literature on evolution education has documented numerous
evolutionary misconceptions in numerous populations,
including middle school students (Lawson & Thompson,
1988), high school students (Banet & Ayuso, 2003;
Settlage, 1994), college undergraduates (Anderson, Fisher,
& Norman, 2002; Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007; Bishop &
Anderson, 1990; Demastes, Settlage, & Good, 1995; Ferrari
& Chi, 1998; Greene, 1990; Jensen & Finley, 1995),
medical school students (Brumby, 1984), and even preservice teachers (Crawford, Zembal-Saul, Munford, &
Friedrichsen, 2005).
These misconceptions include
conflating mutation with adaptation, conflating species
adaptation with individual adaptation, and preferring
teleological explanations of adaptation to mechanistic ones.
Recent research by Shtulman (2006) and Shtulman and
Schulz (in press) has shown that these misconceptions stem
from an essentialist construal of biological kinds, on which
species are viewed as the physical manifestation of an
underlying “essence” rather than as continuums of randomly
occurring variation. This construal leads individuals to
devalue the prevalence and persistence of within-species
variation, and, consequently, to fail to understand any
mechanism of evolution that operates over such variation –
i.e., natural selection.
Despite these considerations, the claim that disbelief in
evolution stems from a misunderstanding of evolution has
yet to receive empirical support. No study testing for
correlations between understanding and acceptance has
found them (Bishop & Anderson, 1990; Brem, Ranney, &
Schindel, 2003; Demastes et al., 1995; Lawson & Worsnop,
1992; Sinatra, Southerland, McConaughy, & Desmastes,
2003).

Abstract
The relationship between understanding an idea and
accepting it as true has been little studied, yet this
relationship is key to science education. The present study
explored this relationship in the context of evolution by
natural selection, which just 40% of Americans accept as
true. US undergraduates’ understanding of evolution was
assessed before and after a one-semester class on evolution
and behavior and was compared to their acceptance of
evolution. Participants who initially held inaccurate, needbased theories of evolution were less likely to accept
evolution – both microevolution and macroevolution – than
participants who held accurate, selection-based theories.
After instruction, however, participants who had increased
their understanding of evolution had increased their
acceptance of evolution as well. These findings suggest that
understanding evolution is essential to accepting it, and that
teaching evolution is a necessary step to increasing its
public acceptance.
Keywords: conceptual development; intuitive theories; naïve
biology; science education

Introduction
Theories are the ultimate desiderata of science. While
many scientists have devoted their lives to the pursuit of
theoretical knowledge, very few have elucidated theories
sufficiently comprehensive to survive the test of time.
Those theories that have survived – e.g., Newton’s theory
of
universal
gravitation,
Maxwell’s
theory
of
electromagnetic radiation, Wegener’s theory of continental
drift – share several common attributes, including
parsimony, coherence, and vast explanatory scope (see
Kuhn, 1977; Thagard, 2007).
Appreciation of these
attributes presumably requires an understanding of how the
theory works – i.e., how it answers the questions it purports
to answer and how it solves the problems it purports to
solve – yet there is little evidence to support this contention.
The present study attempts to provide such evidence by
exploring the relationship between understanding and
accepting biology’s most fundamental theory: Darwin’s
theory of evolution by natural selection.
First published in 1859, Darwin’s theory sought to answer
the age-old questions of where species had come from and
why species match (i.e., are adapted to) their environment.
Despite initial resistance among biologists skeptical of

235

and question their non-genetic, non-variational assumptions
about species adaptation.
The opening activity was designed to introduce the concept
of superfecundity (the potential inherent in all species to grow
exponentially) and to set the stage for the other three
phenomena. That activity began with the instructor posing
the question, “Why is the earth not covered in dogs?”
Participants were asked to estimate the number of offspring a
single pair of dogs would produce over six generations of
breeding if each pair of each generation produced just ten
offspring each year (the so-called “overlapping generations
model”). After making an estimation, participants calculated
and graphed the actual number of offspring produced. This
value typically exceeded their estimates by several orders of
magnitude, and raised powerful questions that served as entry
points for discussing the other phenomena and inferences. For
instance, the frequently asked question “Why do so few
individuals survive?” raised issues of limited resources (e.g.
food, nests, mates), competition, predation, disease, and bad
weather. The question “Who dies?” set up issues of trait
variation, differential heritability, and chance. And the
question “Who survives?” raised issues of differential
reproduction, trait variability, chance. (For more on the
intervention, see Calabi, 1998, 2005.)
This way of teaching evolution contrasts with typical
instruction in that it allows students to derive relevant
outcomes from first principles and real data, while also
accounting for their pre-instructional misconceptions. (For
similar approaches in other domains, see Smith & Unger,
1997; Slotta & Chi, 2006). Because students had derived and
constructed the relevant concepts themselves, we
hypothesized that they were more likely to accept those
concepts as true, thereby side-stepping the typical “dualistic”
outcome of science education, in which students maintain
their intuitive beliefs alongside those explicitly required by
the instructor (e.g., Bloom & Wiseberg, 2007).

It is possible that these null results reflect a genuine
dissociation between understanding and acceptance. It also
possible, however, that they reflect an inadequacy in the
studies’ methodological power, particularly their power to
differentiate accurate conceptions of evolution from
inaccurate ones. To address this latter possibility, we
sought correlations between understanding and acceptance
with an assessment tool designed in light of the history and
philosophy of biology (e.g., Gould, 1996; Hull, 1965; Mayr,
1982; 2001) to uncover naïve theories of evolution
incompatible with natural selection. Previous research
using this assessment tool (Shtulman, 2006; Shtulman &
Schulz, in press) has shown that, parallel to early
evolutionary theorists, most contemporary students of
evolution construe evolution as the uniform (non-genetic)
transformation of a species’ underlying essence, resulting in
the gradual adaptation of all species members. Although
many students retain this “transformational” understanding
of evolution throughout their biology education, some do
achieve a correct, “variational” understanding of evolution,
in which evolution is construed as the selective propagation
of within-species variation.
In addition to seeking correlations between understanding
and acceptance, we also sought correlations between
learning and acceptance, as such correlations would speak
to the question of whether understanding and acceptance are
causally related. To that end, we measured participants’
acceptance of evolution both before and after a teaching
intervention designed to increase their understanding of
evolution.

Method
Participants
The participants were 45 undergraduates enrolled in a onesemester course on evolution and behavior at a public
northeastern university with similar demographics to the
United States as a whole. All had taken at least one high
school or college-level biology course prior to the course in
which they were currently enrolled, and some had taken as
many as three.

The Comprehension Assessment
At the beginning and end of the 15-week semester,
participants’ understanding of evolution was assessed with a
30-question survey covering six evolutionary phenomena:
variation, inheritance, adaptation, domestication, speciation,
and extinction. Each question was designed to differentiate
inaccurate, transformational interpretations of the
phenomenon at hand from accurate, variational ones. As an
illustration, consider the following task from the section on
variation:

The Teaching Intervention
The main objective of the teaching intervention was to help
participants derive, for themselves, the concepts of evolution
and natural selection from basic principles of biology, natural
history, and population dynamics. The intervention was
based on Mayr’s (1982) analysis of how Darwin initially
derived the concepts of evolution and natural selection from
four basic phenomena (superfecundity, resource limitation,
trait variation, trait hereditability) and two intermediate
inferences (differential survival, differential reproduction).
Five clusters of activities produced opportunities for
participants to reproduce this chain of inferences, either by
generating their own data or by analyzing preexistent data
from real populations of organisms. These activities also
produced opportunities for participants to confront, articulate,

During the 19th century, England underwent an Industrial
Revolution that resulted in the unfortunate side effect of
covering the English countryside in soot and ash. During
this same period of time, England’s native moth species
Biston betularia became, on average, darker in color. If
you had gathered a random sample of Biston betularia
every 25 years over the course of the nineteenth century,
what range of colorations would you have expected to find
at each point in time?

236

Participants responded to this question by shading each
moth in a 5 x 5 matrix representing five samples of five
moths each. The two most common response patterns are
depicted in Figure 1. The pattern on the left depicts an
adaptive variation (i.e., dark coloration) spreading through a
population over time and was classified as an instance of
(correct) variational reasoning. The pattern on the right
depicts a population uniformly acquiring the same
adaptation and was classified as an instance of (incorrect)
transformational reasoning. Note that the main difference
between these two response patterns is the
inclusion/exclusion of within-species variation. Whereas
the pattern on the left depicts variation occurring both
within and across generations, the pattern on the right
depicts variation occurring only across generations.

over time;” (2) “The species in existence today have not
always existed;” (3) “Natural selection is the best
explanation for how species adapt to their environment;” (4)
“Natural selection is the best explanation for the origin of
new species;” and (5) “The origin of human beings does not
require a different explanation than the origin of other
species.” The ordering of these statements was determined
by their hypothesized controversiality, as public opinion
polls have shown that Americans are more accepting of
microevolution than macroevolution and more accepting of
nonhuman evolution than human evolution (Scott, 2005).
Following the five statements about evolution were two
statements about religion: “I believe in the existence of
God” and “I believe in the existence of souls.” Participants’
agreement ratings for these two statements were analyzed
separately from their agreement ratings for the preceding
five, as they do not directly bear on participants’ acceptance
of evolution.
It is worth noting that previous research using the same
comprehension assessment, the same measures of
acceptance, and the same sample size (i.e., Shtulman, 2006)
found a positive, but nonsignificant, correlation between
understanding and acceptance. Re-inspection of those data
revealed the presence of two outliers – i.e., two participants
whose agreement ratings that were more than two standard
deviations below the mean (perhaps because they had
misinterpreted the rating scale).
Removing those
participants from the dataset yielded correlations between
understanding and acceptance of a comparable magnitude to
those reported below.

Figure 1: The variational response pattern (left panel) and
the transformational response pattern (right panel) on the
moth-shading task of the comprehension assessment.

Results

The entire comprehension assessment and scoring rubric
can be found in Shtulman (2006). In brief, participants
responses were scored along a three-point scale. Responses
consistent with variationism were scored +1; responses
consistent with transformationism were scored –1; and
responses consistent with both (i.e., ambiguous responses)
were scored 0. Summed across 30 questions, participants’
assessment scores could range anywhere from -30 to +30.
In actuality, they ranged from -24 to +28.
Half of the questions on the comprehension assessment
were open-ended in nature. Participants’ responses to these
questions (n = 1350) were scored by a single coder blind to
the identity of the participant who had provided them. A
subset of the responses (n = 420) were scored by a second
coder, who agreed with the first coder 92% of the time.
This percentage was considered sufficiently high to retain
the first coder’s scorings.

Assessment Scores
As expected, participants in the present study demonstrated
pervasive,
pre-instructional
misconceptions
of
a
transformational nature. Some of these misconceptions
were corrected by instruction, and some were not. The
effect of instruction on participants’ overall understanding
of evolution can be seen in Table 1, which displays
frequency distributions of participants pre- and postinstructional assessment scores. Before instruction, nearly
half of all participants scored below -10, resulting in a mean
score of -4.0 (SD = 15.0). After instruction, only a quarter
did so, resulting in a mean score of 1.1 (SD = 13.8). A
paired-samples t-test confirmed that this difference was
statistically significant (t(45) = 4.39, p < 0.001).
Although pre-post gains in assessment scores were
modest in size, they were frequent in occurence. A full 71%
of participants increased their score by one or more points,
47% increased their score by five or more points, and 27%
increased their score by ten or more points. This rate of
change is unprecedented in the evolution education
literature (e.g., Bishop & Anderson, 1990; Demastes et al.,
1995; Jensen & Finley, 1995).

Measures of Acceptance
Following the comprehension assessment, participants were
asked to rate their agreement with five statements of belief
on a scale from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 5 (“strongly
agree”). Those statements were (1) “Species have changed

237

The main effect of statement type was explored with a
linear contrast analysis. This analysis confirmed that
participants’ agreement ratings decreased linearly from
statement 1 to statement 5 (F(1,44) = 36.59, p < 0.001).
The main effect of assessment period was explored with
paired-samples t tests comparing participants’ preinstructional agreements ratings to their post-instructional
ones for each statement of belief. These analyses revealed
significant increases for three of the five statements:
statement 2 (about speciation), t(44) = 2.30, p < 0.05;
statement 3 (about adaptation), t(44) = 2.93, p < 0.01; and
statement 5 (about human evolution), t(44) = 2.15, p < 0.05.

Table 1: Frequency distributions of participants’ pre- and
post-instructional assessment scores (n = 45).
Range of scores
-30 to -21
-20 to -11
-10 to 0
1 to 10
11 to 20
21 to 30

Pre-instruction
4
18
6
7
6
4

Post-instruction
2
10
12
10
7
4

Acceptance Ratings
Just as participants assessment scores increased as a
function of instruction, their agreement ratings for the five
statements of belief increased as well. Before instruction,
participants’ ratings averaged 4.2 across the five statements
of belief (SD = 0.7); after instruction, they averaged 4.4 (SD
= 0.6).
A paired-samples t-test confirmed that this
difference was statistically significant (t(45) = 4.39, p <
0.001).
To determine whether participants’ understanding of
evolution was correlated with their acceptance of evolution,
participants’ agreement ratings for the five statements of
belief listed above were averaged together and compared to
their overall assessment score. This analysis revealed that
the higher a participant scored on the comprehension
assessment, the more he or she tended to accept the
occurrence of evolution, both before instruction (r = 0.56, p
< 0.001) and after (r = 0.50, p < 0.001). Thus, even though
participants’ assessment scores tended to increase from
pretest to posttest, the relationship between assessment
scores and agreement ratings remained constant.
This finding was further explored by regressing
participants’ assessment scores against their agreement
ratings for the five statements of belief treated as
independent measures. In other words, agreement ratings
for each statement of belief were entered into the regression
as separate variables. This analysis revealed that
participants’ agreement ratings explained a significant
amount of the variance in their assessment scores both
before instruction (R2 = 0.40, F(5,39) = 5.20, p < 0.01) and
after (R2 = 0.29, F(5,39) = 3.19, p < 0.05), though none of
the individual ratings were significant predictors on their
own (possibly because of the limited range of variability
associated with each).
Participants’ agreement ratings are broken down by
statement type (S1, S2, S3, S4, S5) and assessment period
(pre-instruction, post-instruction) in Figure 2. Two effects
are observable from this figure. First, agreement ratings
decreased from statement 1 (about species change) to
statement 5 (about human evolution), as predicted by the
controversiality of their content. Second, agreement ratings
increased as a function of instruction. The reliability of
these effects was assessed with a 5 x 2 repeated-measures
ANOVA, which revealed main effects of both statement
type (F(4,176) = 17.34, p < 0.001) and assessment period
(F(1,44) = 9.48, p < 0.01) but no interaction between them.

Mean Agreement Rating

5.0
Pretest
Posttest

4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4

S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

Statement of Belief
Figure 2: Mean agreement ratings (+ SE) for the five
statements of belief, both before and after instruction; 1 =
“strongly disagree,” 5 = “strongly agree.”
The data displayed in Figure 2 were averaged over
agreement ratings ranging from “strongly agree” to
“strongly disagree.” To assess the effect of instruction on
participants’ sheer acceptance of evolutionary claims, we
calculated the percentage of participants who agreed (or
strongly agreed) with each statement of belief and compared
those percentages across assessment periods.
Before
instruction, the percentage of participants who agreed with
statements 1 through 5 were 93%, 76%, 76%, 62%, and
58%, respectively. After instruction, those percentages
were 100%, 89%, 91%, 69%, and 76%, respectively.
Parallel to the paired-samples t tests reported above, chisquare analyses revealed a significant association between
instruction and acceptance for three of the five statements:
statement 2 (χ2 = 3.85, p < 0.05), statement 3 (χ2 = 6.08, p <
0.05) and statement 5 (χ2 = 9.36, p < 0.01). The fact that
instruction increased participants’ acceptance of statement 5
(i.e., “The origin of human beings does not require a
different explanation than the origin of other species”) is
particularly noteworthy, as it is this claim that Americans
are least likely to endorse (e.g., Miller, Scott, & Okamoto,
2006; Newport, 2004).

238

This construal is not only incorrect but is also problematic for
appreciating how biological phenomena bear on evolutionary
claims and how evolutionary claims make sense of biological
phenomena.
As an illustration, consider the recent discovery that
humans share over 80% of their genes with mice (Waterston
et al., 2002). This discovery is easily assimilated by a
variationist, who sees species as continuums of variation
related by common ancestry, but is not easily assimilated by a
transformationist, who sees species as discrete entities
characterized by unique, nonoverlapping essences.
A
transformationist must either recast mice as the evolutionary
forbearers of humans (e.g., the San Franscisco Chronicle
reporter who asserted that “scientists have found a wealth of
common chemistry between human beings and our tiny, fourlegged ancestors”) or downplay the importance of genes in
determining a species’ identity (e.g., the London Observer
reporter who asserted that “environmental influences are
vastly more powerful [than genetic influences] in shaping the
way humans act”).
It should be noted that our findings, while implicating
understanding as an important influence on acceptance, do
not implicate understanding as the only influence on
acceptance. One’s religious commitments are presumably an
important influence as well. In this study such influence was
seen in participants’ agreement ratings for the statements “I
believe in the existence of God” and “I believe in the
existence of souls.” These ratings did not change as a
function of instruction and were negatively correlated with
participants’ assessment scores at both pretest and posttest.
Interestingly, adding participants’ agreement ratings for the
religious statements to the regression models of their pre- and
post-instructional assessment scores (described above)
yielded no significant change to the pre-instructional model
but did yield a significant change to the post-instructional
model, increasing the amount of variance that model could
explain by 16% (F-change(2,37) = 5.46, p < 0.01). This
pattern of results indicates that, although religious individuals
were no less likely to understand evolution than nonreligious
individuals before instruction, they were significantly less
likely to do so after instruction, perhaps because of a lack of
attentiveness to instruction.
Clearly, multiple factors influence an individual’s
acceptance of evolution. An understanding of evolution is,
however, the only factor that science educators can hope to
change. Lest the work of such individuals be in jest, the
present study demonstrates that effective instruction can,
indeed, foster an increased acceptance of evolution.
Improving evolution education in the United States, as a
whole, might therefore increase public acceptance of
evolution to a level more typical of other first-world nations.

Although most participants (71%) increased their
assessment score following instruction, some (29%) did not.
To determine whether those who increased their score (the
“learners”) increased their acceptance of evolution more
than those who did not increase their score (the
“nonlearners”), we subtracted participants’ pre-instructional
agreement ratings from their post-instructional agreement
ratings and compared those differences across groups. The
results of this analysis, displayed in Table 2, show that the
effect of instruction on participants’ agreement ratings was
restricted mainly to the learners. In other words, only
participants who increased their understanding of evolution
tended to increase their acceptance of evolution as well.
Table 2: Mean differences between pre- and postinstructional agreement ratings (+ SE) for both learners and
nonlearners.
Statement
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

Learners
+.28 (.11)
+.31 (.13)
+.44 (.11)
+.28 (.71)
+.34 (.13)

Nonlearners
-.15 (.10)
+.08 (.18)
-.08 (.18)
-.23 (.17)
+.38 (.27)

To assess the reliability of this effect, we submitted the
difference scores displayed in Table 2 to a 2 x 5 repeatedmeasures ANOVA in which participant group (learners,
nonlearners) was treated as between-participant factor and
statement type (S1, S2, S3, S4, S5) was treated as a withinparticipant factor. This analysis revealed a significant effect
of participant group (F(1,43) = 5.02, p < 0.05) but no other
significant effects, implying that it was a change in
understanding, not merely a change in exposure, that
increased participants’ overall acceptance of evolution.

Discussion
Many investigators (e.g., Bishop & Anderson, 1990;
Demastes et al., 1995; Lawson & Worsnop, 1992; Sinatra et
al., 2003) have pursued the intuition that understanding
evolution leads to an acceptance of evolution, yet none have
found evidence to support it. Here, we document such
evidence for the first time using a comprehension assessment
sufficiently sensitive to differentiate transformational
conceptions of evolution (consistent with pre-Darwinian
biology) from variational ones (consistent with postDarwinian biology). We found not only that participants’
acceptance of evolution was correlated with their
understanding of evolution but also that their acceptance of
evolution increased in strength as their understanding of
evolution increased in accuracy.
Taken together, these findings suggest that Americans’
disbelief in evolution is fostered, at least in part, by a
misunderstanding of what evolution is. Rather than construe
evolution as the selective propagation of within-species
variation, many appear to construe evolution as the uniform,
cross-generational transformation of all species members.

References
Anderson, D. L., Fisher, K. M., & Norman, G. L. (2002).
Development and evaluation of the conceptual inventory of
natural selection. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
39, 952-978.

239

Lawson, A. E., & Thomas, L. D. (1988). Formal reasoning
ability and misconceptions concerning genetics and natural
selection. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 25,
733-746.
Lawson, A. E. & Worsnop, W. A. (1992). Learning about
evolution and rejecting a belief in special creation: Effects
of reasoning skill, prior knowledge, prior belief and
religious commitment. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 29, 143-166.
Mayr, E. (1982). The growth of biological thought: Diversity,
evolution, and inheritance. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Mayr, E. (2001). What evolution is. New York: Basic Books.
McKie, R. (2001, February 11). Revealed: the secret of
human behavior: Environment, not genes, key to our life.
London Observer, p. 1.
Miller, J. D., Scott, E. C., & Okamoto, S. (2006). Public
acceptance of evolution. Science, 313, 765-766.
Newport, F. (2004). Third of Americans say evidence has
supported Darwin’s evolution theory. Princeton, NJ: The
Gallup Organization.
Russell, S. (2002, December 5). Of mice and men: Striking
similarities at the DNA level could aid research. San
Francisco Chronicle, p. A1.
Scott, E. (2005). Evolution vs. creationism: An introduction.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Settlage, J. (1994). Conceptions of natural selection: A
snapshot of the sense-making process. Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, 31, 449-457.
Shtulman, A. (2006). Qualitative differences between naïve
and scientific theories of evolution. Cognitive Psychology,
52, 170-194.
Shtulman, A., & Schulz, L. (in press). The relationship
between essentialist beliefs and evolutionary reasoning.
Cognitive Science.
Sinatra, G. M., Southerland, S. A., McConaughy, F., &
Desmastes, J. W. (2003). Intentions and beliefs in students’
understanding and acceptance of biological evolution.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40, 510-528.
Slotta, J. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Helping students
understand challenging topics in science through ontology
training. Cognition and Instruction, 24, 261-289.
Smith, C., & Unger, C. (1997). What’s in dots-per-box?
Conceptual bootstrapping with stripped-down visual
analogues. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6, 143181.
Thagard, P. (2007). Coherence, truth, and the development of
scientific knowledge. Philosophy of Science, 74, 28-47.
Waterston, R. H., Lindblad-Toh, K., Birney, E., et al. (222
coauthors). (2002). Initial sequencing and comparative
analysis of the mouse genome. Nature, 420, 20–562.

Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007). The effects of
monological and dialogical argumentation on concept
learning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 99, 626-639.
Banet, E., & Ayuso, G. E. (2003). Teaching of biological
inheritance and evolution of living beings in secondary
schools. International Journal for Science Education, 25,
373-407.
Bishop, B. & Anderson, C. A. (1990). Student conceptions of
natural selection and its role in evolution. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 27, 415-427.
Bloom, P., & Weisberg, D. S. (2007). Childhood origins of
adult resistance to science. Science, 316, 996-997.
Bowler, P. J. (1983). The eclipse of Darwinism. Baltimore,
MD: The John Hopkins University Press.
Brem, S. K., Ranney, M., & Schindel, J. (2003). Perceived
consequences of evolution: College students perceive
negative personal and social impact in evolutionary theory.
Science Education, 87, 181-206.
Calabi, P. (1998). Ecology: A systems approach. Dubuque,
IA: Kendall Hunt.
Calabi, P. (2005). Teaching evolution by natural selection.
Unpublished manuscript.
Crawford, B. A., Zembal-Saul, C., Munford, D., &
Friedrichsen, P. (2005). Confronting prospective teachers’
ideas of evolution and scientific inquiry using technology
and inquiry-based tasks. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 42, 613-637.
Dobzhansky, T. (1973). Nothing in biology makes sense
except in the light of evolution. The American Biology
Teacher, 35, 125-129.
Demastes, S. S., Settlage, J., & Good, R. J. (1995). Students’
conceptions of natural selection and its role in evolution:
Cases of replication and comparison. Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, 32, 535-550.
Ferrari, M. & Chi, M. T. H. (1998). The nature of naïve
explanations of natural selection. International Journal of
Science Education, 20(10), 1231-1256.
Gould, S. J. (1996). Full house: The spread of excellence
from Plato to Darwin. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Greene, E. D. (1990). The logic of university students’
understanding of evolution. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 27, 875-885.
Hull, D. (1965). The effect of essentialism on taxonomy:
2000 years of stasis. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 15-16, 314-326.
Jensen, M. S., & Finley, F. N. (1995). Teaching evolution
using historical arguments in a conceptual change strategy.
Science Education, 79, 147-166.
Kuhn, T. S. (1977). The essential tension. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

240

