UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Associations That Run Counter to Biases in Learning: Overcoming Overshadowing
and Learned Inattention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jk02231

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Heckler, Andrew F.
Kaminski, Jennifer A.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Associations That Run Counter to Biases in Learning:
Overcoming Overshadowing and Learned Inattention
Andrew F. Heckler (heckler.6@osu.edu)
Department of Physics, Ohio State University
191 W. Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
210A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
target associations. This has special relevance to many
scientific misconceptions, where students commonly learn
undesired associations among variables. Often, these
students fail to learn the relevant, fully predictive cues but
rather preferentially learn an association between more
salient, less predictive cues and a given outcome. In
addition to the example above, another example is the
common association between force and motion: both
velocity and acceleration are associated with a net force,
but velocity is a spurious cue—only acceleration is a
perfect predictor. However, this is not how the association
is usually learned: it is a common belief that a nonaccelerating yet moving object is associated with a net
force (e.g., Viennot, 1979, Clement, 1982; Halloun &
Hestenes, 1985).
How then do we best address these misconceptions? If
they are caused at least in part by common but undesired
associations, then what is the best way to train learners on
a target association that is not naturally aligned with
associative learning biases, especially when the learner
has already preferentially learned a different, undesired
association?
In this study, we address this question by first training
learners on specific, novel associations essentially to
mimic the creation of an undesired association or
“misconception”. This allows us to examine more closely
the nature of misconceptions and methods to address them
through counter-training. In particular, in Experiment 1,
we focus on learning biases due to differences in cue
salience. The results provide evidence for the explanation
that learned attention (or inattention) may be at least
partially responsible for differential learning of competing
cues with differential salience. We then use this as a
framework for designing possible counter-training to shift
attention to a given desired cue and target association. In
Experiment 2 we again train learners to create an
undesired association and implement two different
counter-training methods to shift attention. The two kinds
of counter-training examples we use are not only based on
findings from previous associative learning research, but

Abstract
Motivated by the possibility that some common scientific
misconceptions are caused by learning biases that create
undesired associations, we examine the effect of salience
on associative learning tasks and test two methods to
counter-train undesired associations learned during
training. Experiment 1 tests the extent to which a cue can
be learned in a novel task after it has been overshadowed or
blocked in a previous learning task. We find an attenuation
of learning of both the overshadowed and blocked cues,
even though the overshadowed cue showed no evidence of
being learned in the initial learning task. Thus the
overshadowed cues are learned: they are learned to be
ignored. Experiment 2 demonstrates that once a cue has
been overshadowed, multiple kinds of positive examples
are not effective in learning low salience cues, whereas
negative examples attacking the validity of competing
higher salience cues are effective in shifting attention to the
low salience cues. The relevance of these results to
scientific misconceptions is discussed.
Keywords:
Overshadowing, blocking,
learning, attention, scientific misconceptions.

associative

Introduction
In the course of experiencing the world in which we
live, not all information is learned equally well: it is often
the case that people preferentially learn some features
while ignoring others. For example, one might be more
inclined to judge the weight of an object based only on its
size, disregarding its composition. While a preference for
a particular cue may be helpful in most every-day
situations, it may also be the case that this preferred cue is
incomplete or spurious and may hinder the learning of
more relevant cues. In the example of determining weight,
clearly both volume and composition of the object are
needed for a proper estimate, thus attending to size alone
is not sufficient for all cases. Nonetheless, people
commonly assume that in general, larger things are
necessarily heavier (see e.g., Pick and Pick, 1967).
Research reported here focuses on the case when biases
in learning prevent the learner from acquiring specific
511

that it will be more difficult, since by default the lower
salience cue is initially not attended to, and after many
iterations with feedback, its learned attentional weight
should also decrease. Not only does this novel experiment
further test attentional theory, but the context of always
presenting two cues simultaneously—as opposed to the
blocking design in which sometimes only one cue is
presented—is more like real world learning in which most
often both cues, such as the volume and the composition
of an object, are always present. That is, overshadowing is
likely more relevant than blocking for the study of
misconceptions that may arise from associative learning.

they are also fundamental to science, namely counterexample, which reduces the validity of the incorrect
association, and induction, in which the target cue is the
only cue that is always paired with the target outcome.
Standard error-reduction models of learning predict that
both methods will shift attention to the desired cue, thus it
is not a priori clear whether either kind will generally be
more effective in addressing misconceptions.

Overshadowing, blocking and learned inattention
If, as proposed by several successful models of learning
that attention directs learning (e.g., Mackintosh, 1975;
Pierce and Hall, 1980), then to the extent that salience
directs attention, salience may also direct learning.
Certainly a difference in salience between competing cues
has been shown to influence their learning—this is a
special case of overshadowing, in which the learning of a
cue is diminished if a second cue is presented
simultaneously (Pavlov, 1927). For example, if two cues
A and B are paired together, increasing the relative
salience of cue A also increases its utilization, defined as
the probability that the participant will choose the
outcome when cue A is present (e.g., Edgell, 1996), and
similarly, increasing the salience of a competing cue B
will decrease the utilization of cue A (Mackintosh, 1976).
Kruschke and Johansen (1999) have replicated these
results with participants completing a series of
probabilistic categorization tasks, and found that
attentional shifting and learned attentional weights played
an essential role in their successful connectionist model of
the results.
Kruschke and Blair (2000) further used the classic
associative learning phenomenon of blocking to test
another important prediction of learned attention. In
blocking, cues A and B are paired with an outcome, and
the association of cue B with the same outcome is
significantly weakened if it is also learned that A alone is
associated with the outcome (Kamin, 1969). As proposed
by Sutherland and Mackintosh (1971), low association of
B with the outcome is due to a learned shift in attention
away from B. It is not the case that B is not learned, rather
B is learned to be ignored, thus it does not accrue
significant associations. Improving upon an earlier
experiment by Mackintosh and Turner (1971) with rats,
Kruschke and Blair (2000) provided strong evidence for
the diminution of the attentional weight of the blocked
cue in humans by demonstrating that, compared to control
cue, the learning of the blocked cue is attenuated in a
subsequent novel learning task. That is, there is an
attenuation of learning of a cue with a previously learned
low attentional weight.
In Experiment 1 we wish to test whether an
overshadowed cue also accrues a diminished attentional
weight. Just like a blocked cue, is an overshadowed cue
more difficult to learn in a subsequent novel learning
task? This will be done using a method very similar to
Kruschke and Blair’s design. Attentional models predict

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Ninety six undergraduate students from
Ohio State University participated in the experiment and
received partial credit for an introductory psychology
course. Forty eight students each were assigned to the
Overshadowing or Blocking condition (see Table 1).
Table 1. Design of Experiment 1
Condition
Phase

Blocking

Overshadowing

Training
Phase 1

A→O1
H→O4
(pause)
AB→O1
CD→O2
EF→O3

AB→O1
CD→O2
EF→O3

Test

B→?, D→?

B→?, D→?

Number
of trials
10
10
20
20
20

25
(X or Y)B→ O5 (X or Y)B→ O5
25
(X or Y)D→ O6 (X or Y)D→ O6
25
(X or Y)G→ O7 (X or Y)G→ O7
Note: Letters denote cues (computer chip components)
and O1 – O7 denote outcomes (appliances). Bold type (e.g.
A) denotes a high salience cue. In Phase 2, for every trial
one of two novel cues X or Y is randomly paired with the
indicated cue B, D, or G.
Training
Phase 2

Design The design of Experiment 1 is shown in Table 1,
and consists of two conditions, each counter balanced
between subjects with four random cue combinations to
control for any possible effects of specific cues. Both
conditions consist of an initial training and testing phase
and a final training and testing phase. Both conditions are
identical except for the initial training phase. In the
traditional blocking condition, the goal is to train the
participants to block cue B via a traditional blocking
design. Then the second training phase will associate B
with a different outcome, in order to determine how easily
B may be learned in a novel context after it has been
512

installed in specific kitchen appliances in Phase 1, the
participants then learn in Phase 2 that some of these same
components (B and D) are also installed in one of a
selection of non-kitchen household appliances. For
example in the first phase the participant learns that cue B
(which is blocked or overshadowed, depending on the
condition) is associated with a blender, then after this they
learn that it is also associated with a radio. They learn this
second association in way similar to the way in which the
first association was learned: by presenting a pair of chip
components and then asking which of a selection of
appliances in which they are to be installed. Participants
are then given immediate feedback as to the correct
answer. Scores on each training and testing phase were
electronically recorded.

traditionally blocked. Note that in this second phase we
are interested in finding differences in learning curves,
therefore we designed the second learning phase task to
be slightly more difficult by adding in random nonpredictive cues X and Y. The blocking condition is meant
to be a replication of Kruschke and Blair’s results and
used as a standard of comparison for the second
condition, which is novel.
In the second condition, rather than being traditionally
blocked, cue B is overshadowed by a more salient cue A,
and both cues are always shown together. The
overshadowed cue B will then be trained on a new
outcome, in order to determine how easily it may be
learned compared to control cues. In order to account for
any possible effect of novelty, there are two kinds of
control cues with which to compare the blocked or
overshadowed cue during the final training phase. The
first is a cue that is present in the initial training sessions,
but is not blocked or overshadowed. The second is a
completely novel cue introduced only in the final training
phase when new outcomes are introduced.

Results and Discussion
The participants successfully learned during the initial
training sessions, with an average score of 87% in the
traditional blocking condition and 86% in the
overshadowing condition (chance score is 16%). This
excludes 6 participants who scored 2 standard deviations
below average on at least three of the training cue types.
In the initial testing phase, the participants clearly blocked
cue B, with an average score of 40% correct on B and
75% on the control cue D [paired t-test, t(43)=3.9,
p<0.001]. Likewise for the overshadowing condition, B
was clearly overshadowed, with an average score of 21%,
compared to 58% for the control cue D [paired t-test,
t(44)= 5.3, p<0.001]. In fact, the participants in the
overshadowing condition did not score significantly
different from chance (16%) on cue B [t(44)=0.8, p>0.4],
thus one might infer that nothing was learned about the
overshadowed cue. However the subsequent learning task
indicates this is not the case.

Procedure All training and testing was presented to
individual participants on a computer screen in a quiet
room. They proceeded through training and testing at
their own pace, and their responses were electronically
recorded. The participants were given instructions that
they were learning about a (clearly imaginary)
appliance factory, and they were to learn about which
computer chip components (cues) are installed in
various kitchen appliances (outcomes). The computer
chip components (cues) were simple geometric shapes
superimposed on a simple diagram representing a
circuit board, and a maximum of two components were
placed randomly in one of four places on any given
chip. The cues were classified as salient or non-salient.
The salient cues were colored (e.g., red, blue, green)
and somewhat larger than the non-salient cues which
were all light gray.
In each trial the learners were given a multiple choice
question in which a computer chip with a particular
combination of components, say component A (green
square) and component B (grey triangle), was presented
with five pictures of familiar kitchen appliances displayed
on the same screen. Participants were asked: “In which
appliance is this computer chip used?” During the training
phases, they were given immediate feedback, whether
they were right or wrong, indicating which appliance was
the correct one.
During the test phase, the participants are shown novel
single cue and double cue combinations. For example, the
learners are shown a chip with component B (cue B) only
and are asked to chose in which appliance it would be
installed. Likewise they are also asked about a chip with
both components B and D.
The format of Phase 2 training is similar to Phase 1.
After learning that a series of chip components are

Traditional Blocking and attenuation of subsequent
learning. As indicated by the learning curves in Figure 1,
there was a significant attenuation of subsequent learning
of the blocked cue B in the traditional blocking condition
compared to subsequent learning of both the familiar
control cue D and the novel control cue G. In particular, if
we consider the total number of correct responses in the
second training phase the learning as a measure of
learning in the second phase, the score for cue B was
66%, which is reliably less than the average scores for the
control cue D (73%) [paired t-test, t(43) = 3.9, p< 0.001].
While this is a somewhat small difference in scores, the
effect size of the within-subject difference between the
scores was 0.6. The effect was larger when comparing the
score of cue B compared to the average score of novel cue
G (80%) [paired t-test, t(43) = 5.2, p< 0.001], with an
effect size for the within-subject difference of scores
equal to 0.8. There was also a significant difference
between the score for D and G [paired t-test, t(43) = 3.5, p
= 0.001].

513

Overshadowing and attenuation of subsequent
learning. The learning curves in Figure 1 indicate a key
finding of this experiment, namely that the subsequent
learning of the previously overshadowed cue B is
significantly attenuated compared to the familiar control
cue D and the novel control cue G. The total average
score for the second training session for cue B was 55%,
which is reliably less than the scores for the control cue D
(61%) [paired t-test, t(44) = 3.0, p= 0.004]. The learning
curve in Figure 1 indicates that the overshadowed cue
always scored 5-10% below the control on all training
blocks but the first. Much like the blocking condition, this
difference is somewhat small, but the effect size of the
within-subject difference in scores is 0.45. The score for
cue B was also attenuated compared to the novel control
cue G with a score of 63% [paired t-test, t(44) = 3.4, p=
0.001].

Experiment 2
Given that an overshadowed, low salience cue may accrue
a low attentional weight and becomes difficult to learn,
how do we subsequently raise attention to this cue? We
pursue two methods outlined in Table 2. The first method
is suggested by the observation that when two cues
compete, lowering the relative validity of one will
increase the associative strength of the other (Wagner et
al, 1968). This has been modeled in terms of learned
attention: to decrease error, attention is rapidly shifted
toward the cue(s) with more validity, and this cue in turn
gains more associative strength (Kruschke and Johansen,
1999). This suggests that if we wish to raise attention to
an overshadowed cue B, then one must lower the validity
of the competing cue A (e.g. see Hall et al, 1977;
Kruschke and Johansen, 1999). Our first counter-training
method will reduce the validity of the overshadowing cue
(A), by presenting direct counter-examples in which A is
paired with a different outcome (i.e. not O1). Thus A is
not 100% predictive of O1, and the learner will shift
attention to the cue that is more predictive, namely the
previously overshadowed cue B.
The second counter-training method, also outlined in
Table 2, employs a method in which the overshadowed
cue B is always paired with the desired target outcome
O1, whereas the previously overshadowing cue A and a
novel cue X are only sometimes paired with the target
outcome. This is similar to blocking in that there is a cue
(B) which is always paired with a particular outcome, but
cue A is not. Thus in some sense, one might expect A to
be blocked during this counter-training. Models
employing attentional learning suggest that in this case,
attention should shift to cue B, resulting in higher
association with O1. On the other hand, this method is
also somewhat similar to Phase 2 in Experiment 1 in that
the method is attempting to train a previously
overshadowed cue. Since Experiment 1 found inhibited
learning of an overshadowed cue, one might argue that
this method will not be effective. We label this method
induction because the learner must infer from the
examples that since B is the common cue, it must be the
cue that is most strongly associated with the outcome.
Since both of these methods predict at least some
shifting of attention to the overshadowed cue B, it is not
clear which will be more effective.

Traditional Blocking Condition:
Phase 2 Learning Curve
90

Percent correct

80
70
60

Blocked Cue (B)
Control Cue (D)

50

Novel Cue (G)

40
1

2

3

Training block

4

5

Overshadowing Condition:
Phase 2 learning curve
80

Percent correct

70
60
50

Overshadowed cue (B)
Control cue (D)

40

Novel Cue (G)

30

Method
1

2

3

Training block

4

5

Participants Ninety undergraduate students from Ohio
State University participated in the experiment and
received partial credit for an introductory psychology
course. Forty five students were assigned to each of the
two conditions.

Figure 1. Experiment 1 learning curves for both
conditions in Phase 2, in which cues are learned to be
associated with a new set of outcomes. Cue B is the
previously-blocked or overshadowed cue, depending in
the condition. Cue D is a familiar, previously learned
control cue and cue G is a novel control cue. Attenuation
of learning of cue B occurs in both conditions.

Materials and Design Table 2 shows the abstract design.
The format of the materials, training trials, and general
procedure were the same as in Experiment 1. The main
difference is the sequence of training. The first phase of
514

learners in the counter-example condition underwent a
greater amount of error correction during training.
The scores in the final testing phase indicate that there
was a significant difference in final performance between
training conditions. Figure 2 presents the scores for the
overshadowed and trained cue compared to the
overshadowed control cue for both conditions. Both
between condition comparisons for trained cue B [t(77) =
4.7, p< 0.001], and within subject comparisons between
the trained cue B and control cue D [paired t-test, t(38) =
3.6, p= 0.001] indicate that the counter-example training
was significantly more effective, with effect sizes of 1.1
and 0.6 for between condition and within subject scores
respectively.

training results in overshadowing of cues B and D. this
phase is meant to simulate common learner experience
with is responsible for the creation of a “misconception”,
namely that B is not associated with O1. The second phase
employs counter-training to cues A and B. This is meant
to simulate instruction. The third phase simply repeats the
training to the first phase, to simulate the common
experience again, after instruction. The final testing phase
tested on single cues. For example, the learners are shown
a chip with single component B (cue B) only and are
asked to chose in which appliance it would be installed.
Table 2. Design of Experiment 2

Training
Phase 1

Training
Phase 2

Training
Phase 3
Test

Condition
CounterInduction
example

Experiment 2

Trials

AB→O1
CD→O2
EF→O3
GH→O4

AB→O1
CD→O2
EF→O3
GH→O4

20
20
20
20

AB→O1
AX→O5
CD→O2
GH→O4
AB→O1
CD→O2
EF→O3
GH→O4

AB→O1
XB→O1
CD→O2
GH→O4
AB→O1
CD→O2
EF→O3
GH→O4

20
20
10
10
10
10
10
10

B→?, D→?

B→?, D→?

80
B (Overshadowed trained cue)

Percent Correct

Phase

60

D (Overshadowed control cue)

40
20
0
Counter Example

Induction

Figure 2. Experiment 2 final test scores (percent correct)
on the overshadowed cues.

General Discussion

Note: Letters A-H denote cues (computer chip
components) and On denote outcomes (appliances). Bold
type denotes a high salience cue.

The first experiment demonstrates that when two cues of
different salience are paired with an outcome over a
number of trials, two important changes occur. The first is
well known: the highly salient cue is strongly associated
with the outcome, while the low salience cue is at most
very weakly associated with the outcome. This is the
classic overshadowing paradigm. A simple explanation of
this result might be that the low salience cue is simply not
appreciably noticed and in turn is not learned. This is
supported by the first phase of Experiment 1 in which
learners answer at chance when asked about the low
salience cue. However, the second learning phase of the
experiment
uncovers a novel finding about
overshadowing: it demonstrates that in fact something
was learned about the low salience cue: it was learned to
be ignored. Experiment 1 provides evidence that when a
low salience cue is overshadowed, the subsequent
learning of this cue is inhibited compared to a similar
salience, non-overshadowed control cue. Similar to the
corresponding effect in blocking, this result can be
explained in terms of attentional learning models in which
there is a learned decrease in the general attentional
weight of the overshadowed cue.

Results and Discussion
The participants in both conditions successfully learned
during the training sessions, with an average score of 84%
correct in Phase 1, 95% in Phase 3 and 95% in Phase 2 on
the control cues and 75% one the novel counter-training
trials (chance was 16%). This excludes 10 participants
who scored 2 standard deviations below average on the
composite training scores or the any of the Phase 1 or 3
AB trials since these participants did not learn the critical
cues. The scores on the training phases were independent
of condition (ps>0.14) (excluding the novel countertraining trials in Phase 2, which differed by condition).
It is important to note that in the Phase 2 training,
learners scored better on the novel trials: XB→O1 in the
induction condition (83% correct) compared to the
learners on AX→O5 novel trials in the counter-example
condition (70% correct) [t(77) = 2.3, p= 0.025]. Since the
scores in the trials near the end of the training phase are at
virtually 100% for both conditions, this indicates that the
515

This brings us to another result of Experiment 1. Since
it has been demonstrated that a blocked cue also exhibits
inhibited subsequent learning due to learned inattention,
we replicated these previous finding (using a different
learning task) in order to compare to the overshadowing
case. While this effect on a blocked cue has been
observed in humans by Kruschke and Blair (2000), we do
not know of any subsequent replication.
The second experiment investigates the effectiveness of
two different training methods to overcome the inhibited
learning of an overshadowed, low salience cue. The
results indicate that the “counter-example” method which
lowers the relative validity of the competing
overshadowing cue is more effective than the “induction”
method in which the overshadowed cue is the only cue
that is always paired with the target outcome.
We consider two possible explanations for the
difference in training conditions. The first explanation is
to consider a general rule that counter-examples are more
effective than inductive examples in training
overshadowed cues. In other words, in general multiple
kinds of positive examples are not effective in learning
low salience cues, whereas negative examples attacking
the validity of competing higher salience cues are
effective in shifting attention to the low salience cues.
The second explanation for the difference between
training conditions is that, rather than the training method
being inherently important, the factor determining the
extent of learning and attentional shifting is the amount of
error in training. This is supported the results in
Experiment 2 in which learners in the counter-example
condition made more initial errors in training. The extent
to which initial errors in training are coupled to training
method remains a question and a topic for future study.
These results may be very relevant to the learning of
scientific misconceptions, which are notoriously resistant
to training (e.g., Halloun & Hestenes, 1985; McDermott,
1991). In the case of velocity, acceleration and force, the
association between velocity and force is the undesired
association. Instead, the goal is to raise attention to the
less salient cue of acceleration in order to associate it with
force. However, it is continually overshadowed by
velocity, and has a diminished attentional weight. Thus it
may happen that if the lower salience cue is important,
there are two strikes against it when trying to train the
learner to recognize this: the first is that it has a low
salience, so it may be difficult to notice, and the second is
that the cue has a lowered attentional weight and is thus
difficult to learn. One remedy appears to be to attack the
validity of velocity as a predictor rather than only present
positive examples where acceleration is predictive.

References
Clement, J. (1982). Students’ preconceptions in
introductory mechanics. American Journal of Physics,
50, 66-71.
Edgell, S. E., Castellan, N. J., Roe, R. M., Barnes, J. M.,
Ng P. C., Bright R. D., & Ford L. A. (1996). Irrelevant
information in probabilistic categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition 22), 1463-1481.
Hall, G., Mackintosh, N. J., Goodall, G., & Dal
Martello, M. (1977). Loss of control by a less valid or
less salient stimulus compounded with a better
predictor of reinforcement. Learning and Motivation,
8, 145-158.
Halloun, I. A., & Hestenes, D. (1985). The initial
knowledge state of college physics students. American
Journal of Physics, 53, 1043-1055.
Kamin L. J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention,
and conditioning. In B.A Campbell & R. M. Church
(Eds.), Punishment. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Krushke J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of
probabilistic category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition 25 (5), 1083-1119.
Kruschke, J. K., & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and
backward blocking involve learned inattention.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7 (4), 636-645.
Mackintosh NJ. 1975. A theory of attention:variations in
the associability of stimuliwith reinforcement.
Psychol. Rev. 82:276–98
Mackintosh, N. J., & Turner, C. (1971). Blocking as a
function of novelty of CS and predictability of UCS.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 23,
359-356.
McDermott, L. C. (1991). Millikan Lecture 1990: What
we teach and what is learned—Closing the gap.
American Journal of Physics, 59, 301-315.
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned Reflexes. London:
Oxford Univ. Press.
Pearce J.M.,& Hall G. (1980). A model for Pavlovian
conditioning: variations in the effectiveness of
conditioned but not unconditioned stimuli. Psychol.
Rev. 87:332–52.
Pick, H. L., & Pick, A. D. (1967). A developmental and
analytic study of the size-weight illusion. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 5, 362-371.
Sutherland, N. S., & Mackintosh, N. J., (1971).
Mechanisms of Animal Discrimination Learning. New
York: Academic Press.
Viennot, L. (1979). Spontaneous reasoning in
elementary dynamics. European Journal of Science
Education, 1, 205-221.
Wagner AR, Logan FA, Haberlandt K, Price T. (1968).
Stimulus selection in animal discrimination learning.
J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 76:171–80.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the Institute of
Educational Sciences of the U.S. Department of
Education (#R305H050125) to Andrew F. Heckler and
Vladimir M. Sloutsky.
516

