UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning a Hierarchical Organization of Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5xk825pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Verheyen, Steven
Ameel, Eef
Rogers, Timothy T.
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning a Hierarchical Organization of Categories
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000, Leuven Belgium

Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000, Leuven Belgium

Timothy T. Rogers (ttrogers@wisc.edu)
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Psychology
1202 West Johnson Street, Madison, WI 15206 USA

Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000, Leuven Belgium
models are even more rare (Estes, 1993; Palmeri, 1999).
Thus the adequacy of such models to explain critical aspects
of human category learning remains in question.
Palmeri (1999) considered how vertical category learning
might challenge the class of exemplar models. To see this,
let us follow Palmeri in thinking about the issue within the
context of a hierarchically organized category structure and
by investigating the manner in which classification
probabilities are computed in Medin and Schaffer’s context
model (1978), the precursor of all current exemplar models.
Let us assume that a particular set of stimuli belongs to
category A, while a different set of stimuli belongs to a
separate category B. Let us further assume that category A
is comprised of two subordinate categories C and D. That is,
each of the A stimuli also belongs either to C or to D. A
similar hierarchical relationship holds between category B
and subordinate categories E and F. According to the
context model, the probability of assigning a particular
stimulus to one of the specific categories (C, D, E, F) can
never exceed the probability of classifying the stimulus in
the specific category’s superordinate (A or B).
More specifically, the context model proposes that
evidence EX for classifying a stimulus in a particular
category X is accumulated by summing the similarity of
each of the category’s exemplars to the stimulus.
Classification probability P(X) is then taken to be the ratio
of the evidence EX to the evidence that the stimulus belongs
to any of the categories at the abstraction level of the target
category. The probability of classifying a stimulus in
category A is written accordingly as:

Abstract
Although exemplar models of category learning have been
successfully applied to a wide range of classification
problems, such models have only rarely been tested on their
ability to deal with vertical category learning, that is, cases
where the same stimuli may be classified at multiple levels of
abstraction. We report an experiment in which participants
learned to classify artificial stimuli at both levels of a nested
hierarchy and displayed more accurate classification of these
items at the lower level of the hierarchy than at the more
general level. Some authors have suggested that exemplar
models would have great difficulty accounting for this
phenomenon, but we show that the ALCOVE exemplar model
effectively captures the behavioral pattern arising in the
experiment. Despite suggestions to the contrary, superior
performance at the lower level of a nested hierarchy does not
necessarily invalidate the class of exemplar models.
Keywords: context model; exemplar models; vertical
category learning; hierarchies; basic-level effect.

Introduction
When developing and testing formal models of category
learning, researchers have primarily relied upon
experimental paradigms in which artificial stimuli need to
be classified into one of several categories at the same level
of abstraction. While the wealth of classification models
currently available testifies to the fruitfulness of
emphasizing what Rosch (1978) termed the horizontal
dimension of categories, doubts remain about their
usefulness when it comes to determining category
membership at different levels of abstraction. Vertical
relationships between categories, of the kind that exist
between natural language categories such as bulldog, dog,
mammal, and animal, have rarely been studied using
traditional artificial category learning methods (see
Lassaline, Wisniewski, & Medin, 1992; Mervis & Crisafi,
1982; and Murphy & Smith, 1982, for a few notable
exceptions), and efforts to address such data with formal

P(A) = EA / (EA + EB),

(1)

while the probability of appointing the stimulus to category
C becomes:
P(C) = EC / (EC + ED+ EE + EF).

751

(2)

Because of the hierarchical category structure of
example, each of the superordinate categories can
considered the union of its subordinates, so that
evidence for a more general category is equal to
summed evidence of making a decision in favor of
comprising specific categories:
EA = EC + ED and EB = EE + EF.

having them move on to the other level. A first group of
participants learned to classify at the specific level before
moving on to the more general level; whereas a second
group of participants started by learning the more general
classification followed by the specific classification. A
similar procedure was previously used by Murphy (1991)
and by Murphy and Smith (1982). We assessed whether (i)
the pattern of better performance at the subordinate level of
abstraction than at the superordinate one was retained when
participants learned that a stimulus belonged to more than
one category and (ii) whether ALCOVE was able to account
for such classification performance.

the
be
the
the
the

(3)

Thus, the denominators in equations 1 and 2 above are
equal, while the numerator for superordinate classification
(equation 1) must be equal to or higher than the numerator
for subordinate classification (equation 2). Accordingly, the
context model predicts that subordinate classification can
never exceed superordinate classification. This prediction,
however, was violated by a study of human category
learning conducted by Lassaline, Wisniewski, and Medin
(1992).
Palmeri pointed out that the response rule in ALCOVE
(Kruschke, 1992) - a connectionist extension of the context
model - incorporates nonlinearities that exempt the model
from the problem of being unable to produce higher
classification accuracy at the subordinate level of
classification. In order to verify this assertion Palmeri
sought to replicate Lassaline et al’s findings, and to
determine whether they would invalidate ALCOVE. He had
one group of participants classify artificial stimuli in four
categories (C, D, E, and F), while another group classified
the same stimuli in two superordinates (A and B). As in
Lassaline et al., Palmeri found that performance was better
at the subordinate level than at the superordinate level.
Moreover, he showed that ALCOVE could account for the
observed pattern of performance, indicating that, although
vertical category learning might challenge some particular
kinds of exemplar models, such learning did not pose an inprinciple problem for exemplar-based approaches more
generally, or for the ALCOVE model in particular.
In an influential textbook on semantic concepts Murphy
(2002) questioned these conclusions, pointing out that, in
Palmeri’s experiments, each participant only ever learned to
classify the stimuli at one level of abstraction (either
subordinate or superordinate, but not both). Murphy argued
that, since participants never learned that a particular
stimulus can belong to more than one category, an essential
aspect of the vertical organization of natural language
concepts was missing among Palmeri’s artificial
counterparts. As a consequence it remains unclear whether
any exemplar model can capture performance in a truly
hierarchically organized classification task.
The current work addresses this question. We extended
Palmeri’s experiment by incorporating Murphy’s
suggestion. In our experiment, every participant learned that
each stimulus belonged to one of four specific categories
and also to one of two more general categories. Since
learning multiple category labels for a single stimulus is
quite challenging, we chose to have participants learn the
correct classifications at one level of abstraction before

Method
Participants
The participants were 36 undergraduate students of the
Universities of Leuven and Wisconsin-Madison who took
part in the study for partial fulfilment of course credit.

Materials
We used the same stimuli Palmeri (1999) did. Participants
were shown schematic drawings of spaceships that differed
on four dimensions: the shape of their nose, tail, wings, and
porthole. Along each of these dimensions every spaceship
took one of four possible shapes. These stimuli correspond
to the ones previously employed by Hoffman and Ziessler
(1983).
Every participant was presented with 12 different
spaceships which they needed to classify both at a specific
level as a C, D, E, or F and at a general level as either an A
or a B. As was true in Palmeri (1999) and Lassaline,
Wisniewski, and Medin (1992) Categories C and D were
subordinate to A, while E and F were subordinate to B.
Table 1 shows how in the experiment each of the values
along the first stimulus dimension points towards a specific
category. A hierarchical organization is obtained by having
values 1 and 2 along this dimension signify membership of
Category A, while values 3 and 4 signify that a stimulus
belongs to Category B.
At the onset of each experimental session physical
dimensions and shapes were randomly assigned to the
stimulus structure.

Procedure
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of two
conditions. Half of the participants first performed a
supervised category learning procedure at the specific level.
Upon presentation of a particular spaceship they were
required to indicate whether it was of the Diler (C), Frite
(D), Jebet (E), or Katone (F) type. Participants were
provided with corrective feedback after each incorrect
decision, indicating what the answer should have been. The
12 different spaceships were presented in a random order for
25 blocks or until a perfect score was achieved on two
consecutive blocks. In this case a perfect score was awarded
on the remaining blocks. At this point participants were told
that the procedure would be repeated but that they would
752

vs. specific level) x 25 (learning block) analysis of variance
with learning order as a between-subjects variable and level
of abstraction and learning block as within-subjects factors.
All statistical tests were performed at the .05 level of
significance.
A significant main effect of block [F(24,816) = 48.42,
MSe = .70] was found, indicating that participants improved
as the experiment progressed. A significant two-way
interaction between level and block [F(24,816) = 4.25, MSe
= .07] was also observed, indicating faster learning of
specific relative to general categories in the earliest blocks.
Most interesting to our current purposes, however, was a
significant order x level interaction [F(1,34) = 8.16, MSe =
5.54] which we tested by contrasting the two levels of
abstraction for both learning orders. The effect of level did
not reach significance among participants who had learned
to differentiate between specific categories before moving
on to the general ones [F(1,34) = 3.12, MSe = 2.12, p = .08].
For this particular learning order, the effect of level
observed by Palmeri was not retained. However, the
participants who completed the experiment in the reverse
order did perform better at the specific level than at the
general level [F(1,34) = 5.17, MSe = 3.51], thus replicating
Palmeri’s observation using a within-subjects manipulation.
Note that this is exactly the pattern of results that, according
to reasoning explained above, challenges some kinds of
exemplar models. Unlike the undergraduates participating in
Palmeri’s experiment, participants in this experiment were
aware of the fact that stimuli could be classified at multiple
levels of abstraction.
Finally, the analysis of variance revealed that the
observed difference between levels was more pronounced
among the first learning blocks, as indicated by the threeway interaction between order, level, and block [F(24,816)
= 2.02, MSe = .03].

have to classify the spaceships as members of two
categories instead of four. We stressed that spaceships
would be identical to those in the first part, but no further
information on the relationship between both parts was
provided. In the second part of the session the nonsense
names Alpha and Beta were used for categories A and B,
respectively. The supervised category learning task again
lasted for 25 blocks. When participants were able to achieve
a perfect score on two consecutive blocks, the session came
to an end earlier. A perfect score was awarded on the blocks
that otherwise would have followed.
Table 1: Stimulus and category structure.
Stimulus
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Stimulus structure
D1 D2 D3 D4
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
2
1

4
1
2
1
2
3
3
4
1
2
3
4

Category structure
General Specific
A
A
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
B

C
C
C
D
D
D
E
E
E
F
F
F

The other half of the participants first distinguished
categories at the general level before moving on to the
specific level. In all other respects they were subject to the
same procedure as the participants completing the
experiment in the reverse order.

Results and Model Fitting

1

Figure 1 holds the average probability of committing an
error with regard to level of abstraction, learning order, and
learning block. The general level of abstraction is indicated
by circles, while the specific level is indicated by squares.
The two experimental conditions are separated by colour.
Black symbols indicate a start at the general level, while
white symbols indicate a start at the specific level. The
coding of the learning curves is of the format abstraction
level (learning order). We first report on the statistical
analysis before discussing the ALCOVE simulations.

General (first)
Specific (second)
General (second)
Specific (first)

P(error)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Statistical Analysis

0
0

Using a between-subjects design Palmeri (1999) found that
classification of items at the lower level of the nested
hierarchy was superior to classification of these items at the
more general level. For our purposes, of major interest is the
question whether the performance difference remains when
a within-subjects design is employed. To address this
question the experimental results were first subjected to a 2
(general level first vs. specific level first) x 2 (general level

5

10

15

20

25

Learning Block

Figure 1: Averaged probability of error with regard to level
of abstraction, learning order, and learning block.
In the above analysis we followed Palmeri (1999) in
treating learning block as a 25-level factor in the ANOVA
to enable comparability with his results. One might object to
753

learning order, and learning block. As was true for Figure 1,
the general level of abstraction is indicated by circles, while
the specific level is indicated by squares. Each learning
order received a different colour code. Black symbols
indicate a start at the general level. White symbols indicate
a start at the specific level. The coding of the simulated
learning curves is of the format abstraction level (learning
order).

this since the block levels follow a specified order and
cannot be considered independent. However, the critical
observation of the current work – better performance at the
specific level of abstraction than at the general level when
general categories are mastered first – does not rely on the
inclusion of learning block. The observed effect of level was
corroborated by a Bayesian analysis in which it was
demonstrated that the learning curves, corresponding to the
two levels of abstraction, were more likely to be fit by two
separate exponentially decaying functions than by a single
one. (See Dry, Lee, Vickers, & Hughes, 2003 for a similar
use of function-fitting to test experimental hypotheses.)

1

General (first)
Specific (second)
General (second)
Specific (first)

0.8

Model Fitting
P(error)

In our simulations we employed a version of the exemplar
model ALCOVE which is detailed in Palmeri (1999). It
differs from the original version (Kruschke, 1992) in that it
deals with discrete values along the input dimensions. When
a stimulus is presented along these dimensions it activates a
layer of exemplar nodes through the similarity of its
representation to theirs. The extent of this activation is
determined by the strength of attention the model learns to
allocate to each stimulus dimension. Exemplar node
activation is then passed on to all category nodes through
learned association weights. Here activation strengths and
association weights are linearly combined to determine
classification evidence. Classification evidence is finally
converted into classification probability.
For each learning order maximum likelihood fits to the
empirical data were obtained using a Nelder-Mead simplex
algorithm. We employed a six (four specific and two
general) category node ALCOVE model that was initialized
by setting attention strengths and association weights to zero
and awarding random values to the model’s four parameters.
The model was then trained on a first sequence of 25 x 12
randomly ordered stimuli. During this training sequence
attention strengths and association weights were updated
after every presentation of a stimulus to the model.
Depending on which learning order was being simulated,
either the association weights leading to the four specific
category nodes or those leading to the two general ones
were updated.
After all stimuli from the first sequence had been
processed, the model was further trained on a second
sequence of 25 x 12 stimuli. The association weights that
had been updated during the first sequence were left
unchanged, while the others were now updated through
backpropagation after each trial. This manner of adapting
the ALCOVE model to the procedure of our experiment
assumes that there is information taken from one part of the
experiment into the other and that this is located at the level
of the attention strengths: They are updated across all 600
stimulus presentations.
From 1000 repetitions of this procedure for every learning
order, the simulations by the model with the highest
likelihood were withheld. Figure 2 shows the simulated
probability of error with regard to level of abstraction,

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

Learning Block

Figure 2: Probability of error with regard to level of
abstraction, learning order, and learning block as simulated
by ALCOVE.
Of major interest was ALCOVE’s ability to display
superior performance on the more specific level of a truly
hierarchically organized category structure. More accurate
classification of items at the lower level of a nested
hierarchy than at the more general level had been deemed
challenging for the class of exemplar models. Analysis of
the empirical results revealed that this pattern arose in our
experiment when participants started classification at the
general level. As is shown by the black curves in Figure 2,
the ALCOVE model had no difficulty accounting for this
phenomenon.
No such difference in performance was observed when
participants completed the experiment in the reverse order.
In fact, although it did not reach significance, the effect of
level among participants starting classification at the
specific level was in the opposite direction. Participants
were somewhat more accurate classifying items at the
general than at the lower level of the hierarchy. There is no
profound reason why exemplar models would have
difficulties accounting for the latter result, and such is
evidenced by the white simulated learning curves in Figure
2: They display the desired pattern of performance.

Discussion and Summary
Formal models of category learning hardly ever treat
classification at various levels of abstraction. For them to
remain valid accounts of human classification performance
they need to be explicitly tested on their ability to deal with
754

kind would allow for the disentanglement of effects arising
from the hierarchical nature of category organization and
effects due to stimuli belonging to more than one category.
Such a study would obviously benefit from
complementary modeling endeavours to test alternative
hypotheses about the mechanisms involved in vertical
category learning. For instance, the nonlinearity of the
response rule implemented in ALCOVE clearly contributes
to the model’s ability to display a difference in performance
between two levels of abstraction (Palmeri, 1999), but it
remains unclear to what extent the interesting behaviour of
the model (and the participants) arises from the
development of different attention strengths for different
levels of abstraction. Moreover, applied to vertical category
learning results different from the ones reported here, such
modeling efforts might highlight the need for additional
mechanisms to deal with the classification of stimuli at
different levels of abstraction.
The strength of the current endeavour lies precisely in the
fact that the ALCOVE model captures the important
qualitative pattern in the presented data with little taskspecific tailoring. That is, with very minor adjustments, a
model formulated to address horizontal category learning
also captured a challenging qualitative pattern arising in an
experiment assessing vertical category learning.

such a vertical organization of categories. Indeed, it has long
been established that many of the entities we encounter in
everyday life are referred to with multiple names, often
indicating a hierarchical organization of categories. Some
authors have suggested that exemplar models would have
great difficulty accounting for experimental results in which
superior performance on the more specific level of such a
hierarchically structured organization of categories is shown
- a phenomenon reminiscent of the basic level effect in
natural categories (Rogers & Patterson, 2007; Rosch,
Mervis, Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976). In the
current work, we took up this challenge to exemplar theory
by putting ALCOVE, a widely used exemplar model, to test
on the results of an experiment in which participants dealt
with a hierarchically organized category structure.
We extended earlier work by Lassaline, Wisniewski, and
Medin (1992) and by Palmeri (1999) who devised and used
a hierarchical category structure that yielded a basic-levellike advantage: Participants assigning stimuli to categories
at the specific level of the hierarchy outperformed
participants classifying the items in categories at a more
general level of the hierarchy. Murphy (2002) argued
against such an interpretation of the results since
participants were only required to classify stimuli in
categories at a single level of abstraction. Hence, they never
became aware of the hierarchical organization present
among the various categories. Murphy’s concerns about the
employed procedure proved warranted when we had
participants classify stimuli at both levels of abstraction.
When participants started classification at the specific level
of abstraction and then moved to classification at the
general level no significant difference between the two
levels of abstraction was observed. However, when
participants completed classification in the reverse order,
the effect did come about. However, the supposedly
challenging effect did not pose a problem for the exemplar
model ALCOVE. It demonstrated more accurate
classification of items at the lower level of the nested
hierarchy than classification of these items at the more
general level when the general level was mastered first.
Thus, better performance at the subordinate level of a
hierarchical category structure than at the superordinate one
does not necessarily invalidate exemplar theory.
Clearly, a full explanation of why an effect of abstraction
level was observed for one learning order and not the other
is of further interest. For such an explanation to correctly
inform us about the manner in which people acquire vertical
category structure, the current work would have to be
extended by control conditions in which participants learn
about categories at multiple levels of abstraction that are not
hierarchically organized. Such vertical-but-not-hierarchical
organizations abound in natural language. The set inclusion
relation, essential to the hierarchical organization of
categories (Murphy, 2002) is violated in the case of the
categories dog, pet, and animal, for instance. Although all
pets are animals, it is not true that all dogs are pets. Some
dogs are stray dogs. Inclusion of control conditions of this

Acknowledgments
Steven Verheyen is a research assistant at the Research
Foundation - Flanders. Eef Ameel is a post-doctoral
researcher at the Research Foundation - Flanders. Part of
this study was completed when Steven Verheyen was an
Honorary Fellow of the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
This research was supported in part by grant OT/05/27
awarded to Gert Storms by the Research Council of the
University of Leuven. We would like to thank Thomas J.
Palmeri for providing us with the details of the stimuli used
in the study. We are grateful to Bieke Bollen and Matthew
J. Dry for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this
manuscript.

References
Dry, M. J., Lee, M. D., Vickers, D., & Hughes, P. (2006).
Human performance on visually presented
travelling salesperson problems with varying
numbers of nodes. Journal of Problem Solving, 1,
20-32.
Estes, W. K. (1993). Models of categorization and category
learning. Psychology of Learning & Motivation, 29,
15-56.
Hoffman, J., & Ziessler, C. (1983). Objectidentifikation in
kunstlichen Begriffshierarchien [Object
identification in artificial concept hierarchies].
Zeitscrift für Psychologie, 16, 243-275.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 99, 22-44.
755

Murphy, G. L., & Smith, E. E. (1982). Basic-level
superiority in picture categorization. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 1-20.
Palmeri, T. J. (1999). Learning categories at different
hierarchical levels: A comparison of category
learning models. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
6, 495-503.
Rogers, T. T., & Patterson, K. (2007). Object
categorization: Reversals and explanations of the
basic-level advantage. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136, 451-469.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch
& B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
categorization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & BoyesBraem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.

Lassaline, M. E., Wisniewski, E. J., & Medin, D. L. (1992).
Basic levels in artificial and natural categories: Are
all basic levels created equal? In B. Burns (Ed.),
Percepts, concepts, and categories: The
representation and processing of information.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85,
207-238.
Mervis, C. B., & Crisafi, M. A. (1982). Order of acquisition
of subordinate-, basic-, and superordinate-level
categories. Child Development, 53, 258-266.
Murphy, G. L. (1991). Parts in object concepts: Experiments
with artificial categories. Memory & Cognition, 19,
423-438.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

756

