UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mechanisms of Verb Inflection — Regular vs. Irregular or Easy vs. Hard?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zq8p3xn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Westermann, Gert
Kovic, Vanja
Ruh, Nicolas

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mechanisms of Verb Inflection – Regular vs. Irregular or Easy vs. Hard?
Gert Westermann (gwestermann@brookes.ac.uk)
Vanja Kovic (vvucetic@brookes.ac.uk)
Nicolas Ruh (nruh@brookes.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University
Oxford OX3 0BP, UK

irregularizations (Marcus et al., 1992). Agrammatic aphasic
patients have been argued to display selective deficits in the
production of regular past tense forms (Ullman et al., 1997),
whereas patients with semantic dementia show selective
deficits in processing irregular forms (Patterson et al.,
2001). Further dissociations between regular and irregular
forms have been revealed in brain imaging studies (e.g.,
Newman et al., 2002; Tyler et al., 2005).
However, these results have not gone unchallenged. A
contrasting theory of verb inflection argues that all forms,
regulars and irregulars alike, are processed in a single,
associative mechanism (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986;
McClelland & Patterson, 2002). According to this view,
which is closely linked to connectionist modeling,
processing differences between verbs emerge because all
verbs compete for the same resources in a single system,
leading to effects of statistical factors such as frequency and
phonological properties. This single mechanism view
predicts that there is no qualitative, clear-cut dissociation
between regulars and irregulars but instead a graded
continuum of differences based on these statistical factors.
Several empirical studies have backed this view by showing
that apparent dissociations between regulars and irregulars
can be explained by confounding statistical factors. For
example, Marchman (1997) investigated the past tense
errors made by school-age children and found that all errors
were predicted by a combination of statistical factors such
as frequency, phonological complexity of stem and past
tense form, and the numbers of ‘friends’ (similar sounding
stems with the same past tense such as look-looked and
cook-cooked) and ‘enemies’ (similar sounding stems with
different past tense forms such as hear-heard and fearfeared). In another study, Bird et al. (2003) found that
differences in errors for regular and irregular inflection that
had been claimed to exist in Broca’s aphasics (Ullman et al.,
1997) disappeared when the verbs were matched for
phonological complexity. Differences in the activation of
brain areas for regular and irregular verbs (Beretta et al.,
2003) were used by Seidenberg and Arnoldussen (2003) to
argue that irregular verbs are harder to process and therefore
activate more brain areas than regulars if distributional
factors are not controlled for. In an fMRI study, Joanisse &
Seidenberg (2005) found that apparent differences in brain
activation between regular and irregular verbs were better
explained by phonological characteristics of the past tense
forms.

Abstract
We present a speeded production study of the English past
tense that is designed to evaluate between conflicting theories
of the mechanism of verb inflection. Test items are verbs that
systematically differ in regularity but also in overall ease of
processing as defined by a number of statistical and
distributional factors. We show that overall ease, but not
regularity, predicts differences in the response latencies of
produced past tense forms in adults. These results indicate
that the processing of inflections is best explained by a single,
associative mechanism that is responsible for the production
of all verbs.
Keywords: English past tense; verb inflection; speeded
production task

Introduction
The mechanisms underlying the processing of the English
past tense have during the past 20 years become a topic of
intense investigation and controversial debate. Part of the
reason for such a small aspect of language processing taking
such a prominent role is that it touches on wider issues,
namely, the mental reality of linguistic rules. The regular
past tense is the classic case of such a rule: to form the past
tense of a verb, add –ed to its stem (such as look-looked).
However, not all verbs form their past tense in this way.
There are also around 160 irregular verbs with idiosyncratic
past tense forms (such as write-wrote and sing-sang). Two
main theories have emerged from the past tense debate: the
Dual Mechanism, or Words and Rules, Theory (DMT, e.g.,
Pinker, 1999; Pinker & Ullman, 2002) holds that regular
and irregular forms are processed by two separate
mechanisms: a symbolic rule by which regular forms are
generated on the fly, and retrieval from an associative
mental lexicon of irregular forms. Evidence for the DMT
has been collected by describing apparent dissociations
between regular and irregular forms across a range of
studies. For example, elicitation studies in which
participants are asked to produce the past tense form of a
presented stem have shown that frequent irregular forms
were named faster than infrequent ones, whereas no or less
pronounced differences were found between frequent and
infrequent regulars (Prasada et al., 1990; Albright & Hayes,
2003). In the acquisition of the past tense children produce
many overregularization errors such as comed but very few

739

irrespective of their easiness. Single mechanism approaches
predict graded dissociations based on easiness, irrespective
of whether verbs are regular or irregular. In order to test
whether regularity or easiness lie at the basis of processing
differences between verbs, we conducted speeded
production experiments with children and adults.
Previous speeded production studies have yielded
conflicting results. In most cases they had a 2x2 design in
which low and high frequency regular and irregular forms
were used. A study by Prasada et al. (1990) found response
time differences between low and high frequency irregulars
but no differences for regulars. Another study by Beck
(1997) found the same result in one experiment and a longer
response time for high frequency than for low frequency
regulars in another experiment. Such an anti-frequency
effect was also found in a study with German children and
adults (Clahsen et al., 2004). From an easy-hard perspective
these conflicting results could be argued to arise from the
fact that only frequency but not other statistical factors were
controlled for.

Proponents of the DMT have reacted to the evidence that
regular verbs often show characteristics of associative
storage by accepting that regular forms can, but need not be,
stored together with irregulars (Pinker, 1999). However,
unless it is precisely specified under which circumstances a
regular verb becomes stored this modification reduces the
value of the DMT to a post-hoc descriptive theory: if a
regular verb shows storage properties it must be stored, if it
does not it may have been produced by the rule mechanism.
It also makes it difficult to see how this theory could be
falsified.
Whereas the single mechanism view offers a more
parsimonious account of verb inflection, it has not yet been
investigated in detail which factors lead to processing
differences between verbs. Different studies have each
focused on a number of such factors: phonological friends
and enemies, frequency, and presence of a stem final
alveolar (t/d) (Marchman, 1997), imageability and
phonological complexity (Bird et al., 2003), similarity
between base and past tense form (Rueckl et al., 1997) and
concreteness, imageability and phonological similarity
(Joanisse & Seidenberg, 2005). Several authors have made
the more general point that combinations of these factors
make verbs easier or harder to process, leading to
observable processing differences (Westermann, 2000;
Seidenberg & Arnoldussen, 2003). In this paper we take up
this idea and develop a classification for verbs based on
their overall ‘easiness’. This classification then allows us to
directly evaluate single and dual mechanism accounts
against each other by selecting verbs for experimental
studies that vary both in their easiness and their regularity.
Here we argue that the factors underlying processing
differences in a single system can be understood from a
connectionist perspective. In a neural network model several
factors affect how easy or hard it is to learn and process a
certain word. In most models of language processing, the
representations for different forms overlap, making it easier
for similar inputs to map to similar outputs. Similar inputs
requiring different outputs are harder to learn. Thus,
phonological friends would make a verb easier, and
phonological enemies, harder. The frequency of inputoutput mappings is also an important factor, with high
frequency forms being easier as they will lead to more
weight change in a connectionist system than less frequent
forms. Age of acquisition is another possible easiness factor
with early acquired forms having a stronger impact on the
system than later forms (Ellis & Lambon-Ralph, 2000) and
therefore being easier. Finally, previous empirical work
suggests that presence of a final alveolar (t/d) in a verb stem
makes it more difficult to inflect because the stem already
appears to be an inflected form (Stemberger &
MacWhinney, 1986).
Here we classify verbs as overall easy or hard based on
these factors. We can then define easy and hard regulars and
irregulars to directly evaluate the DMT and single
mechanism approaches against each other. The DMT
predicts dissociations between regular and irregular verbs

Experiment
To assess whether processing differences in past tense
production are mainly affected by the grammatical category
of a verb (regular or irregular) as predicted by the DMT or
by a combination of statistical factors as predicted by single
mechanism approaches, we developed a set of verbs in
which these factors were systematically varied to obtain
easy, intermediate and hard regular and easy, intermediate
and hard irregular verbs. These verbs were then used in a
speeded production task in which participants were
auditorily presented with a verb stem and had to say out
loud the corresponding past tense form as fast as possible.
Differences in response latencies for different verbs could
then be analyzed with respect to the two competing theories.
To investigate developmental change in past tense
processing we tested 10-11 year old children as well as
adults.

Method
Participants. For the studies with children, 18 10-11 year
olds (mean age: 11;0) were recruited from a school in
Oxfordshire. Head teacher consent was obtained prior to
testing. Furthermore, 18 adult participants were recruited
from Oxford Brookes University and the University of
Oxford. All participants were native speakers of British
English and had normal hearing.
Stimuli. All monosyllabic verbs with a lemma frequency of
greater than 200 in 17.9 million words were extracted from
the English part of the CELEX database (Baayen et al.,
1993). Each verb was then characterized according to the
following features: log stem frequency, log past tense
frequency, log stem and log past frequency in parental input
(Theakston et al., 2001), stem final alveolar consonant,
phonological complexity (defined as number of phonemes
per syllable), number of ‘friends’ types and tokens, number

740

participants experienced the 60 experimental trials. Whereas
adult participants completed all 60 trials in one run, the
children were given breaks after every 15 trials in order to
incorporate a reward recognition scheme: children received
a gold star at completion of the practice trials and after
every 15 experimental trials which they could stick on a
personal ‘certificate of achievement’, resulting in five stars
if they completed the whole study. Furthermore, the
children were regularly encouraged throughout the study.

of ‘enemy’ types and tokens, ratio of friends to enemies
(types and tokens). Where age of acquisition and
imageability norms were available (Bird et al., 2001) they
were also used. For phonological complexity, number of
enemy types/tokens and age of acquisition, a verb was
assigned a value of 1 (easy) if it fell below the median of
this measure for all verbs and a value of 0 (hard) otherwise.
For the other features a 1 (easy) was assigned if the value
fell above the median and a 0 (hard) if it fell below the
median. A total ‘easiness’ score was then computed for each
verb as the mean of its scores for individual features. Thus,
a verb scoring close to 1 was overall easy, and a verb
scoring close to 0 was overall hard.
From this corpus a set of 60 verbs was extracted so that
there were 30 regular and 30 irregular verbs. For the regular
verbs there were 13 easy, 10 intermediate and 7 hard verbs,
and for irregulars, there were 7 easy, 14 intermediate and 9
hard verbs. These verbs were digitally recorded by a female
speaker with a sampling rate of 48kHz. The mean duration
of a verb stem was as follows: easy regular: 710 ms,
intermediate regular: 642 ms, hard regular: 713 ms, easy
irregular: 627 ms, intermediate irregular: 707 ms, hard
irregular: 758 ms. There was no significant difference
between stem duration for regular and irregular (F(1) =
0.131, p=0.718) or easy, intermediate and hard (F(2) =
2.608, p=0.083) verbs.

Analysis. Errors and reaction times were analyzed
separately. Errors were scored by listening to the recordings
and identifying and classifying incorrect responses.
Reaction times were analyzed by manually measuring the
duration from the onset of the stimulus to the onset of the
participants’ response using the Adobe Audition software
(this method was considered more accurate than using a
voice key). Additional analyses were performed by
measuring reaction times from the middle of the stimulus to
the onset of the response to approximate different
recognition points for different words; results did not differ
systematically from the stimulus onset measures and are not
reported here. Only reaction times for correct responses
were included in the analysis. Answers with false starts
were also excluded. Within each condition, reaction times
that fell above or below two standard deviations from the
mean reaction time were removed as outliers (the same
pattern of results was also observed without removing
outliers).

Design. The two participant groups were tested on their
ability to produce the past tense of 60 English verbs,
differing on grammatical regularity (regular or irregular)
and ease of production (easy, intermediate or hard), based
on the statistical factors discussed above. Each participant
processed the same 60 verbs, consisting of an equal number
of regular and irregular verbs that comprised hard,
intermediate and easy verbs. Each trial consisted of the
auditory presentation of a single verb stem, following which
participants then said out loud the corresponding past tense
form as quickly as possible. Participants received ten
practice verbs; the practice verbs comprised an equal
number of regular and irregular verbs. The order of verbs
was pseudo-randomized between participants, avoiding the
occurrence of more than three regular verbs in sequence.
The auditory stimuli were presented through loudspeakers
connected to a laptop computer. The experimenter
controlled the presentation of stimuli by pressing a key on
the laptop. The laptop screen was not visible to participants.
The experimental sessions were audio-taped for analysis
using a Marantz PMD-660 digital recorder (48kHZ, 768bps)
with an external microphone.

Results
Adults produced 94.4% of past tense forms correctly. By
contrast, 31.9% of the forms produced by the 10-11 year
olds were wrong.
Response latencies. Mean response latencies for the 10-11
year olds are shown in Figure 1. A 3x2 ANOVA with
conditions easiness (easy, intermediate, hard) and regularity
(regular, irregular) revealed a marginal effect of regularity
(F(1, 632) = 3.672; p = .056) and no main effect of easiness
(F(2, 632) = 1.583 ; p = .206). There was no interaction
between easiness and regularity (F(2, 632) = 1.667; p =
.190). The marginal effect of regularity was driven by the
intermediate verbs for which irregulars took longer to
produce than regulars.
These results could be taken as evidence for a dualmechanism account of verb inflection in which regular and
irregular forms are processed differently. From a single
mechanism perspective it could be argued that these results
might be due to a developing lexicon: as children acquire
more words and experience already known words more
frequently, the factors determining easiness of an individual
word change. This is because the experienced frequencies of
a word itself, but also of its friends and enemies changes
with experience. Therefore, the overall easiness of a verb
changes through life with the changing lexicon. However,

Procedure. The children were tested in a quiet room in their
school, and adults in an experimental booth at Oxford
Brookes University. The children were told they would be
participating in a word game and were talked through one
example. The adults received an instruction sheet and a
consent form. During the ten practice trials, if necessary, the
experimenter intervened with further instructions. Next, the

741

frequencies have impacted on the representations of
individual verbs.

the easiness scores used in this study are largely based on
adult norms.
According to the DMT the observed pattern of
dissociations between regular and irregular verbs should
become clearer in adults when both the rule and the
associative lexicon have become fully established and the
system has separated into two mechanisms. In contrast, a
single mechanism view predicts that dissociations between
regulars and irregulars should become less pronounced
while an easy-hard difference would emerge more clearly.

Mean response latencies

Mean response latencies

2000

1500

regular
irregular

regular
irregular

1400

1300

1200

1800
1100

easy

intermediate

hard

Figure 2: Response latencies for easy, intermediate and hard
past tense forms in adult participants

1600

Table 1: Significant correlations between response latencies
and verb factors. All frequencies are log frequencies.

1400

10-11 year olds

1200

easy

intermediate

enemy types

hard

Figure 1: Response latencies for easy, intermediate and hard
past tense forms in 10-11 year olds

enemy tokens
friend tokens

The mean response latencies for the adult participants are
shown in Figure 2. Here, a 3x2 ANOVA revealed no effect
for regularity (F(1, 795) = 0.012; p = .912) but a highly
significant effect for easiness (F(2, 795) = 10.202; p < .001).
There was no interaction between regularity and easiness
(F(2, 795) = 0.578; p = .561). Planned comparisons showed
that response latencies for hard verbs were significantly
slower than for intermediate verbs (t(1, 589) = 2.839; p<.05)
and those for intermediate verbs were significantly slower
than for easy verbs (t(1, 659) = 2.175; p<.005). These
results present strong evidence for a single mechanism
processing system in which graded dissociations arise from
overall easiness and not from the grammatical status of a
verb.
We further investigated which of the factors that had been
used in determining overall easiness of a verb correlated
with response latencies. Those correlations that were
significant at the 0.05 level are displayed in Table 1.
Overall, the factors that were significantly correlated with
response latencies in children also correlated with adult
response times, apart from age of acquisition that was
significant for the children but not for adults. Response
latencies in adults were more sensitive to the friends and
enemies of a verb as well as the frequency of its stem and
past tense forms. This result might indicate a better
developed lexicon in adults in which different token

ratio of friend to
enemy types
ratio of friend to
enemy tokens
total number of
friend and
enemy types
total number of
friend and
enemy tokens
age of
acquisition
stem final
alveolar
frequency
Past frequency
Parental past
frequency

n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
r = -0.12; n = 420;
p = .015
r = -0.11; n = 420;
p = .031

Adults
r = 0.15; n = 463;
p = .001
r = 0.24; n = 463;
p < .001
r = 0.11; n = 557;
p = .009
r = -0.17; n = 572;
p < .001
r = -0.22; n = 572;
p < .001

n.s.

r = 0.21; n = 683;
p < .001

r = 0.11; n = 469; p
= .017

r = 0.25; n = 668;
p < .001

r = 0.10; n = 414; p
= .040
r = -0.13; n = 590;
p < .001
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

n.s.
r = -0.11; n = 787;
p = .01
r= -0.13; n = 787;
p < .001
r = -0.17; n = 787;
p < .001
r = -0.08; n = 607;
p = .019

The directions of correlations were as expected: responses
were slower for verbs with lower frequency of stem, past
tense, and parental input, with more enemy types and

742

Errors. Unsurprisingly, the rate of errors decreased with
age. 10-11 year olds made errors for 31.9% of all verbs,
and adults for 5.6% of all cases. An additional group of 18
5-6 year old children was tested and displayed an error rate
of 57.1%; due to this high rate this group was not analyzed
for reaction times. For the 5-6 year olds the most common
error for both regulars and irregulars was repetition of the
bare stem (35% of regular and 32% of irregular forms) and
for irregulars, overregularization (35% of all irregular
forms). In 10-11 year olds bare stem errors accounted for
4% of regulars and 5% of irregulars, and 40% of irregulars
were overregularized. These children also showed a small
irregularization rate of 2% of all regulars. The most
common errors in adults were overregularizations (6% of
all irregulars) and irregularizations (2% of all regulars). In
all age groups, errors were generally higher for harder than
for easier verbs (5-6 year olds: easy: 45%, intermediate:
64%, hard: 60%; 10-11 year olds: easy: 18%, intermediate:
39%, hard: 39%; adults: easy: 5%, intermediate: 5%, hard:
7%).
While errors for irregulars were generally higher than for
regulars across all age groups, it is important to note that the
single mechanism approach does not claim that there is no
difference between regular and irregular verbs. The regular
case is by far the most common past tense inflection both in
types and in tokens. An associative account would therefore
predict that irregular forms, especially when similar to
existing regulars, would sometimes be prone to
overregularization. Irregularizations would be less frequent
because clusters of irregulars are much smaller than the
large regular group.

tokens, a lower friends-to-enemy ratio, more total
phonological neighbors, a later age of acquisition, and with
stem final alveolars.
Despite deserved caution in interpreting correlation data,
these results indicate that speed of production of the past
tense of a verb is affected by interactions between the
friends and enemies of this verb and the verb’s own
frequency, suggesting an associative mechanism underlying
the production of past tense forms.
Anti-frequency effect. Whereas most speeded elicitation
studies have reported frequency effects for irregular verbs
with more frequent irregular forms being produced more
quickly, only some studies have reported an anti-frequency
effect for regulars in which low-frequency regular forms are
produced faster than higher frequency forms (Prasada et al.,
1990; Beck, 1997; Clahsen et al., 2004). Within a dualmechanism framework this effect has been argued to arise
from the storage in the mental lexicon of high-frequency
regulars whereas low frequency regulars are produced by
the mental rule and thus, faster (Pinker, 1999). In a singlemechanism associative framework, all other factors being
equal, one would not expect to find anti-frequency effects
because memory-storage improves with increasing
frequency, leading to shorter latencies for high-frequent
forms compared with low-frequent ones.
regular
irregular

1500

Mean response latencies

1400

Discussion

1300

The results presented here indicate that easiness, but not
regularity, is the main underlying principle in the processing
of past tense inflection in adults. In particular, in a speeded
production experiment, adult participants showed no
difference between regular and irregular forms, but they
showed different response latencies for easy, intermediate
and hard verbs. This result supports a single mechanisms
view of verb inflection in which differences between verbs
are graded and arise from interacting statistical factors that
determine the overall processing difficulty for a verb. From
this perspective, the processing of a verb depends not only
on the characteristics of that verb, but also on its relation to
other verbs in the mental lexicon. By contrast, in dual
mechanism approaches the way in which a verb is processed
is determined by its grammatical class and is largely
independent of statistical factors and other verbs. Only in
the extended DMT which allows for some regulars to be
stored alongside irregulars would a limited effect of
statistical factors for regulars be expected. However, as the
extended DMT does not provide clear criteria as to which of
the regular verbs are stored alongside the irregular forms, it
seems only a small step to allow for all verbs to be produced
by the same associative mechanism.

1200

1100

1000

low

high

frequency

Figure 3: Adult response latencies for low and highfrequency verbs.
To test for an anti-frequency effect we split the selected
verbs into low and high frequency forms based on their
frequencies in CELEX. The mean response times for low
and high frequency regular and irregular verbs are shown in
Figure 3. A 2x2 ANOVA with conditions frequency (low,
high) and regularity (regular, irregular) revealed a highly
significant frequency effect (F(1, 783) = 15.730; p < .001)
but no interaction between frequency and regularity (F(1,
783) = 0.361; p = 0.548). For both regular and irregular
verbs, high-frequency forms were produced faster than lowfrequency forms. This result contradicts a dual-mechanism
account but supports an account in which all inflections are
generated by a single mechanism.

743

Joanisse, MF, & Seidenberg, MS (2005) Imaging the past: Neural
activation in frontal and temporal regions during regular and
irregular past-tense processing. Cognitive Affective & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 5, 282-296.
Marchman, VA (1997) Children's productivity in the English past
tense: The role of frequency, phonology, and neighborhood
structure. Cognitive Science, 21, 283-303.
Marcus, GF, Pinker, S, Ullman, M, Hollander, M, Rosen, TJ, &
Xu, F. (1992). Overregularization in Language Acquisition,
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
Serial No. 228, Vol. 57 no. 4.
McClelland, JL, & Patterson, K (2002) Rules or connections in
past-tense inflections: what does the evidence rule out? Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 465-472.
Newman, AJ, Ullman, M, Pancheva, R, Waligura, D, & Neville, H
(2002) Regular and irregular English past tense verbs elicit
distinct patterns of neural activity: An event-related fMRI study.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, F63.
Patterson, K, Lambon Ralph, MA, Hodgesa, JR, & McClelland, JL
(2001) Deficits in irregular past-tense verb morphology
associated with degraded semantic knowledge.
Neuropsychologia, 39, 709-724.
Pinker, S (1999) Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language.
New York: Basic Books.
Pinker, S, & Ullman, MT (2002) The past and future of the past
tense. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 456-463.
Prasada, S, Pinker, S, & Snyder, W (1990) Some Evidence that
Irregular Forms are Retrieved from Memory but Regular Forms
are Rule-generated.
Rueckl, JG, Mikolinski, M, Raveh, M, Miner, CS, & Mars, F
(1997) Morphological priming, fragment completion, and
connectionist networks. Journal of Memory and Language, 36,
382-405.
Rumelhart, D, & McClelland, JL (1986) On learning the past tense
of English verbs: implicit rules or parallel distributed
processing? In J. L. McClelland & D. Rumelhart & the PDP
Research Group (Eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Seidenberg, MS, & Arnoldussen, A (2003) The brain makes a
distinction between hard and easy stimuli: Comments on Beretta
et al. Brain and Language, 85, 527-530.
Stemberger, JP, & MacWhinney, B (1986) Form-oriented
inflectional errors in language processing. Cognitive Psychology,
18, 329-354.
Theakston, AL, Lieven, EVM, Pine, JM, & Rowland, CF (2001)
The role of performance limitations in the acquisition of verbargument structure: an alternative account. Journal of Child
Language, 28, 127-152.
Tyler, LK, Marslen-Wilson, WD, & Stamatakis, EA (2005)
Differentiating lexical form, meaning, and structure in the neural
language system. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 8375-8380.
Ullman, MT, Corkin, S, Coppola, M, Hickok, G, Growdon, JH,
Koroshetz, WJ, & Pinker, S (1997) A neural dissociation within
language: Evidence that the mental dictionary is part of
declarative memory, and that grammatical rules are processed by
the procedural system. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9,
266-276.
Westermann, G (2000) A constructivist dual-representation model
of verb inflection. In L. R. Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 977-982).

The results for 10-11 year olds and adults differ in that the
children display a marginal effect of regularity. This can
have several reasons. One is, as discussed above, that in
their developing lexicon the distributional factors are
different from those in adults and that, due to their high type
frequency, regular forms take an even more dominant role
than in the adult lexicon. Another possible explanation lies
in the nature of the task. The children, who were required to
generate from the stem of a verb its past tense form, were
aware of the rule for regular verbs (one 11 year-old child,
when asked “Do you know what the past tense of a verb
is?”, replied: “Yeah, it’s when you add –ed”). This may
have led to a differential processing of regular and irregular
verbs and a high overregularization rate in this age group.
However, whereas the DMT predicts that this dissociation
becomes stronger as it manifests itself in the adult, a single
mechanism view would consider it as temporary explicit
knowledge that becomes internalized as the child develops,
leading to the disappearance of systematic dissociations
between regular and irregular verbs in adults in favor of a
graded difference along an easiness continuum. The results
presented here support this single mechanism view.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ESRC grant RES-061-23-0129
to Gert Westermann. We thank Marcus Priest and Abbie
Pringle for helping with data collection and Anna Theakston
for providing the parental frequency counts.

References
Albright, A, & Hayes, B (2003) Rules vs. analogy in English past
tenses: a computational/experimental study. Cognition, 90, 119161.
Baayen, H, Piepenbrock, R, & van Rijn, H. (1993). The CELEX
Lexical Database.
Beck, M-L (1997) Regular verbs, past tense and frequency:
tracking down a potential source of NS/NNS Competence
Differences. Second Language Research, 13, 93-115.
Beretta, A, Campbell, C, Carr, TH, Huang, J, Schmitt, LM,
Christianson, K, & Cao, Y (2003) An ER-fMRI investigation of
morphological inflection in German reveals that the brain makes
a distinction between regular and irregular forms. Brain and
Language, 85, 67-92.
Bird, H, Franklin, S, & Howard, D (2001) Age of acquisition and
imageability ratings for a large set of words, including verbs and
function words. Behavior Research Methods Instruments &
Computers, 33, 73-79.
Bird, H, Ralph, MAL, Seidenberg, MS, McClelland, JL, &
Patterson, K (2003) Deficits in phonology and past-tense
morphology: What's the connection? Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 502-526.
Clahsen, H, Hadler, M, & Weyerts, H (2004) Speeded production
of inflected words in children and adults. Journal of Child
Language, 31, 683-712.
Ellis, AW, & Lambon-Ralph, MA (2000) Age of acquisition
effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss of plasticity in
maturing systems: Insights from connectionist networks. Journal
of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition,
26, 1103-1123.

744

