UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling The Fan Effect Using Dynamically Structured Holographic Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4pb888f0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Rutledge-Taylor, Matthew F.
West, Robert L.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling The Fan Effect Using Dynamically Structured Holographic Memory
Matthew F. Rutledge-Taylor (mrtaylo2@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6, Canada

Robert L. West (robert_west@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6, Canada
between reaction time and the fan of the sentence (the sum of
the fans of each of the content words in a test sentence). For
example, the time to judge a sentence appearing in the study
set with fans of one for both the person and place was 1178
milliseconds, while for a sentence with fans of three for both
words was 1514 milliseconds.
As a basic phenomenon of human memory, the fan effect
has served as a useful paradigm for testing theories of memory
retrieval, including those pertaining to recall time and
accuracy. DSHM is primarily a theory of how information is
represented and structured in memory. However, as such, it
also offers mechanisms for retrieving information from
memory. Therefore, it ought to be consistent with the
prevailing theories of memory retrieval. Mechanisms such as
spreading activation (Anderson & Reder, 1999), processes
such as retrieval effects (Anderson & Reder, 1999),
representation effects (Goetz & Walters, 2000; Radvansky, et
al., 1993), and memory capacity (Bunting et al., 2004) have all
been proposed as responsible for, or playing a role in,
producing the fan effect. The basic mechanisms in DSHM are
cue based retrieval and interference. However, informational
structures extracted from DSHM can be interpreted as having
a particular activation value and are subject to spreading
activation

Abstract
Dynamically Structured Holographic Memory (DSHM), a
system based on holographic reduced representations, designed
for modeling memory is described. A DSHM model of the fan
effect (Anderson, 1974) is presented. Comparisons between the
DSHM model and an existing ACT-R model (Anderson &
Reder, 1999) are made. It is argued that DSHM can be
interpreted as providing a lower-level account of several features
of ACT-R such as activation, noise, and the ability to make
errors.
Keywords: cognitive modeling; the fan effect; holographic
reduced representation; spreading activation.

Introduction
The aim of this paper is to demonstrate that DSHM embodies
features of human memory, and does so in a way that is
emergent from the manner in which information is structured
within it. As such, DSHM provides an account of the
implementation of several higher-level features of memory,
such as activation and noise, which architectures such as
ACT-R take to be basic. The value of this account is that it
may help to bridge symbolic account of cognition (i.e.,
ACT-R), with neurally inspired accounts, especially those that
make use of vector representations, e.g., the Neural
Engineering Framework (Eliasmith & Anderson, 2003), and
holographic reduced representations (Stewart & Eliasmith,
2008).

DSHM
DSHM is a model of memory that makes use of holographic
reduced representations (HRR). It is based on Jones and
Mewhort’s BEAGLE model of the lexicon (Jones & Mewhort,
2007). The details of the DSHM architecture and the
similarities between BEAGLE and DSHM can be found
elsewhere (Rutledge-Taylor & West, 2007). Here, only the
details necessary for understanding the application of DSHM
to the fan effect will be included.
Objects in the DSHM system, referred to as items, are
represented as pairs of vectors. Every vector in the system is
the same length, which typically consists of hundreds or
thousand of elements. Each vector consists of real valued
elements and has a Euclidean length of 1.0. The environmental
vector is a unique static internal representation of the item. The
memory vector is dynamic and stores all of the associations
existing between the given item and every other item in the
system, from the given item's perspective. An item may also
reference a set of sub-items, from which it is composed. This
set of sub-items is flagged as bearing either an ordered or
unordered relationship to one another, (e.g., the words in a

The Fan Effect
The fan effect is a well known memory phenomenon relating
to the time required to affirm (or, reject) a given proposition as
true. The effect was first described by J. R. Anderson (1974).
Anderson generated a study set of 26 sentences each of which
described a fact about one of 16 persons residing in one of 16
places; the phrase ‘the hippie is in the park’ is a well known
example. The fan of a word is the number of sentences from
the study set in which it appears. The fan of each person and
place in the study set is one, two or three. Thus, the 26
sentences can be divided into cells of a three by three table
according to the fans of the two content words. Anderson had
each experimental participant memorize the study set, and then
measured the time that elapsed between the subsequent
presentation of a sentence and the participant's signal that the
sentence was either a member, or not a member of the study
set. The results showed that there was a positive correlation

385

sentence where order matters versus the keywords of a journal
article where the order of the words does not). This recursive
structure of items allows any form of information that can be
represented as a tree to be represented as a DSHM item. Items
without sub-items are referred to as terminal or atomic items.
A DSHM system defines a multi-dimensional state-space,
where each environmental and memory vector is a point on the
surface of a hypersphere (with radius 1.0). In such a space the
cosine of any two vectors is a measure of their distance, where
a value of 1.0 indicates that the vectors are identical, and 0.0
indicates that they are orthogonal. The cosine of any two
memory vectors is roughly a measure of the similarity of the
items. Specifically, two items that can be exchanged for one
another in many different informational patterns (complex
items) will have common neighbors which will affect their
memory vectors in similar ways. The cosine of the
environmental vector of one item, properly encoded, and the
memory vector of another item is a measure of the items'
co-occurrence frequency. That is, they occur together in the
same informational patterns. Here is an analogy: in a DSHM
model of bus drivers and passengers, two bus drivers that drive
the same route have similar knowledge (memory vector)
because they experience the same traffic and interact with the
same sets of regular passengers. As such, they are
interchangeable. A driver and a regular daily passenger are not
interchangeable. However, they have knowledge of one
another’s daily routines because they co-occur together on the
bus. Their respective environmental vectors influence each
other’s memory vectors.

Decoding
Information is retrieved from DSHM by presenting the system
with incomplete patterns. These patterns take the shape of
DSHM items. The components of the pattern that are complete
(i.e., not missing) are used to generate a set of probe vectors
that point to locations in the state space defined by the system.
The proximity of a probe and the environmental vector of an
item in the system, quantified by calculating the cosine of the
two vectors, is a measure of how well the item matches the
probe. Thus, given a probe cue, every item in the system can
be assigned a value which is relative to the cue. The
cumulative influence of each of the probes generated is used to
produce a rank ordered list of candidate completions of the
incomplete pattern presented to the DSHM system, each with
an associated match value.

Cognitive interpretation
Traditionally, memory retrieval can be divided into two types:
recall and recognition. In general terms, the former can be
understood as retrieving some content from memory that
matches some cue, such as the content provided in a question
like ‘where are the hippies?’. Here, the words ‘where’ and
‘hippie’ cue the recall of places known to be populated by
hippies. The latter can be understood as affirming that a
presented fact or item is known, true, or has been studied.
Asking a participant whether he or she has studied the
proposition ‘the hippie is in the park’ is an example of a
recognition memory task. In this case, the proposition as a
whole and each content word in the proposition is a potential
cue to memory. Participants of experiment 1 of Anderson
(1974) were tasked with both recall and recognition, the
former during the learning phase, and the latter during the
reaction-time phase.
A model of memory must explain the mechanisms that
underlie both recall and recognition. These mechanisms must
account for how these processes can both succeed and fail. In
the case of recall, success is a matter of only retrieving correct
answers to questions, or otherwise providing only the
appropriate matches to the provided cues. Failure is to either
omit correct responses, or retrieve incorrect responses.
Successful recognition is a matter of affirming true facts and
correctly rejecting false ones, while failure is to deny true facts
or to affirm false ones.

Encoding
Information is entered into a DSHM system by presenting it
with a complex object representing that information. When
this happens the object is converted into a DSHM item. As a
reminder to the reader, think of a DSHM item as a tree, where
the head of each non-terminal sub-tree is a complex item itself.
Once represented as a complex item, hereafter the aggregate,
every item that exists as a component of the aggregate is
informed that it is associated with every other item in the
aggregate. This is done by binding the environmental vectors
of various substructures of the aggregate together and adding
the results to the memory vectors of the other items in the
aggregate. The binding of vectors is achieved via circular
convolution (Plate, 1995). The process makes the memory
vector of each item in the aggregate pattern more similar to the
environmental vectors of each other item than they were
previously.
For example, a proposition such as the ‘the hippie is in the
park’ can be represented as an item consisting of only the
content words, [hippie:park]. When entered into the system,
this co-occurrence of the items causes the memory vector of
the item representing ‘hippie’ to become more similar (i.e.,
closer in the multidimensional space) the environmental vector
of the item representing ‘park’, and vise-versa (ignoring some
computational details).

Where are the hippies?
During the learning phase of Anderson’s fan effect
experiment, participants were first asked to rehearse the study
set of sentences. To confirm that they could remember each of
the sentences, the participants were asked questions of the
form “who is in the park?” and “where are the hippies?”
(Anderson, 1974). For each question there is exactly one, two
or three correct answers, depending on the fan of the content
word supplied in the question. A challenge to any model of
memory is to explain how all and only the correct answers to a
question are recalled.
To ask the DSHM system to answer a recall question an
incomplete pattern encoding the question is presented to it. For

386

example, to ask the system ‘where are the hippies?’, the
incomplete pattern [hippie:?] is presented to it. As discussed
above, every item in the system is assigned a value,
corresponding to how well it matches the cue (in this case
‘hippie’). As a matter of how the state-space of the system
organizes itself, only items that have co-occurred with the cue
will be activated to a significant extent. Thus a distinctive
drop-off in activation values between those items associated
with the probe and those that are not can be observed. An
important assumption that we have made is that the items
before the drop are recalled and the items after the drop are not.
Table 1 displays the top six answers to the questions: “where
are the hippies?”, and “where are the lawyers?”, presented to a
DSHM system with vector length of 2048, trained only on the
study set. The word ‘hippie’ has a fan of one, while ‘lawyer’
has a fan of three. Therefore, there is only one correct answer
to former question, and three correct answers to the latter. The
system correctly scores only one answer to the first question
highly, and three to the second. This precise response profile
corresponds to the behaviour of an experimental participant
with extremely good memory. Errors can be produced by a
model with a smaller vector length, corresponding to a
participant with poorer memory. A small vector length limits
the memory capacity of the model, and makes it more
vulnerable errors caused by memory interference.

not by searching memory for the presented proposition, rather
it assesses how tightly associated the content words in the
proposition are. This is done by asking itself “where are the
hippies?”, and ‘who is in the park?”. The average of the
activation values associated with the correct answers (i.e.,
‘park’, and ‘hippie’) determines the activation of the
proposition as a whole. An incorrect rejection of a study set
sentence occurs, when the model fails to recall ‘park’ as an
answer to the former question, and vise-versa. This is possible
due to the cut-off mechanism described above.

Spreading activation
Pattern completion can be interpreted as a form of spreading
activation in which activation spreads out from the probe and
weakens as it spans the state-space (i.e., the closer to the probe,
the higher the activation). Thus the match value would
correspond to a cue specific activation level. We interpret
activation level as determining how much time it takes for
each item to be retrieved (in a manner similar to ACT-R).
When a proposition is recognized it can be affirmed
instantly, without delay. However, in the case of foils, the
model does not know in advance how many items will be
recalled by the ‘who’ and ‘where’ sub-questions. Therefore,
there may be a hesitation associated with waiting to make sure
that no more items (possibly including a match) are
forthcoming. For example, if presented with the foil “the
hippie is in the store”, the sub-question “where are the
hippies?” will quickly cause the recall of ‘park’. However, the
fact that ‘store’ will not make the cut-off cannot be verified
until all of the activated items have been recalled. Thus, a brief
period when no more items are recalled must follow the last
recalled item to ensure that the cut-off has been reached. Here,
an analogy to cooking microwave popcorn can be made. When
cooking microwave popcorn, the instructions typically state
that the popcorn bag is to remain in the oven while the gaps
between pops do not exceed a few seconds. The need to keep
the bag in the oven can be verified the instant a pop is heard.
However, to reject this need and remove the bag one needs to
wait a few seconds after hearing the latest pop to verify that the
maximum distance between pops has elapsed. By analogy, to
reject a foil also requires a hesitation to confirm that the target
proposition is not about to ‘pop’ into mind. If ‘store’ had been
recalled, (or ‘hippie’ in the case of the “who is in the store?”
sub-question), an incorrect affirmation of the foil would occur.

Table 1: Where are the hippies?
Answers to questions posed to DSHM
Where are the hippies?
Answer

Where are the lawyers?
Value

Answer

Value

[hippie:park]

0.041382

[lawyer:store]

0.013675

[hippie:store]

0.000007

[lawyer:park]

0.010719

[hippie:captain]

0.000003

[lawyer:bank]

0.008042

[hippie:cave]

0.000001

[lawyer:fireman]

0.000010

[hippie:debutante]

0.000001

[lawyer:cave]

0.000003

[hippie:church]

0.000001

[lawyer:captain]

0.000002

The drop-off in activation values serves as a mechanism for
determining which items the system will recall, and which it
will not. This makes intuitive sense. When a human participant
is asked “where are the lawyers?”, he or she will not answer
with a rank ordered list of all 16 places mentioned in the study
set. Rather, he or she will respond with only a few answers that
seem more correct than the other possible answers. The ability
of DSHM to provide several appropriate answers to a single
question, when more than one answer is correct, is one of the
strengths of the system.

DSHM Model of the Fan Effect
The DSHM model of the fan effect follows the original
conditions specified in experiment 1 of Anderson (1974). The
sentences were represented as complex items composed of an
ordered list of two items representing a person and place, e.g.,
[hippie:park]. The omission of function words in the
representation of the sentence does not significantly affect the
important features of the memories for these
sentences; they are redundant to the information contained in
the content words, in this case.
Special care was taken to ensure that the DSHM participants
followed as closely as possible the exact procedures as were

Is the hippie in the park?
During the test phase of the experiment, a set of test sentences
is presented to the participant, one sentence at a time. The task
of the participant is to decide as quickly as possible, while
maintaining a high degree of accuracy, whether the presented
sentence was a member of the study set or not (Anderson,
1974). The DSHM model makes this membership judgment

387

followed by the human experimental participants. The DSHM
models: 1) rehearsed the study set; 2) confirmed knowledge of
the study set by answering recall questions of the form ‘where
are the hippies?’; and, 3) answered recognition questions of
the form, “was ‘the hippie is in the park’ a member of the study
set’. When errors were made during confirmation, by
responding with too few correct answers (e.g., ‘the lawyer is in
the store’, and ‘the lawyer is in the park’, but omitting ‘the
lawyer is in the bank’), or with at least one incorrect answer
(e.g., the correct answer, ‘the hippie is in the park’, plus the
incorrect answer, ‘the hippie is in the store’), the models were
made to rehearse the propositions for which recall errors were
made, and retested, just as the human experimental
participants were.
A parameter we chose to manipulate is how much
background knowledge each model instance has preloaded
before learning the study set. Background knowledge was
represented as a variable amount of [person:random number],
and [random number:place] items (e.g., 'hippie:7845'). The
random numbers represent arbitrary facts the participant may
know about the places and persons in advance of the
experiment; e.g., the participant may know that hippies live in
an apartment in his or her building, or that there are pigeons in
the park, etcetera. We hypothesized that background
knowledge could affect a model’s ability to distinguish
between sentences from the study set and foils by increasing
the number of facts that may interfere with one another in the
system. It also adds an element of ecological validity to the
simulations in that no human participant enters into the
experimental scenario without some knowledge relating to the
persons and places, as concepts, appearing in the study set.

The simulations
The two parameters discussed above were manipulated so as
to produce several populations of models, each with common
parameters. Vector length values in the set {32, 128, 512,
2048} and background knowledge parameters in the set {0, 1,
2} were used. The background knowledge parameter is equal
to the number to additional random propositions the model is
trained on for each of the 16 persons and 16 places; e.g., for a
value of 1, one random fact of the form [person:random
number], for every person, and similarly for every place, was
entered into the model's memory prior to learning the study
set. In the case of no background knowledge, the study set was
initially read once during the study phase, and twice otherwise.
This ensured that every sentence in the study set was read at
least one time more than any of the background knowledge
sentences.
The combinations of these parameters make 12 unique sets
of simulations. There were 100 simulated participants for each
set.

Results
For each of the 12 sets of simulations the mean reaction times
and error rates for each of the nine kinds of sentences,
differentiated by the fans of the content words were recorded.
Recall, the person and place appearing in each sentence has a
fan of one, two or three; this makes nine combinations. Data
was collected for both true sentences, those appearing in the
study set, and for false sentences, or foils, those not appearing
in the study set.
There were several general patterns that emerged from these
simulations: 1) mean reaction time was somewhat larger for
the lower vector lengths as compared to the larger vector
lengths; 2) the standard deviation of the reaction times was
dramatically larger for the lower vector lengths as compared to
the larger vector lengths; 3) judgment errors were similar to
human performance for only the sets with a vector length of
128; 4) although the amount of background knowledge did not
significantly affect mean reaction time, it did increase the
standard deviation of the reaction times for all vector lengths,
except for the sets with a vector length of 32; 5) the behavior
profile of the models was approximately equal for both true
sentences and foils.
Figure 1, illustrates points 1 and 2 above. In order to
simplify the figure, only the true sentences with fans of two
and six are depicted. The fan of a sentence is the sum of the fan
of the person and place. These values illustrate the fan effect
pattern in the data, for each vector length. The bars indicate the
standard deviations on these mean reaction times in
milliseconds. The figure truncates the standard deviation of
3671 milliseconds for the simulations with vector length of 32
and fan of six. This decrease in the fan effect with vector
length is consistent with studies showing a decrease in the fan
effect with working memory capacity (Bunting et al., 2004).

Generating reaction times
Reaction times are derived from the activation values of the
sentences produced by the system. Thus, to convert activation
to reaction time, some theory of this relationship must exist. At
present we have not developed a universal function that relates
activation to reaction time. Here we will use an ad hoc
formulae so as to make comparisons between the DSHM
models, the human data from Anderson (1974) possible. For
affirmations we used the formula: 670ms + 70ms * 1/a; where
a is the activation of the affirmed proposition. For rejections
we used the formula: 770ms + 70ms * 1/r; where r is the
activation of rejected proposition. The additional 100
milliseconds added to the reaction times for rejections is
intended to compensate for characteristic delay associated
with judging foils, discussed above.

Generating errors
Human participants incorrectly judged the study set
membership of a test sentence 3.9% of the time in experiment
1 of Anderson (1974). Thus, an adequate model of the fan
effect should make a similar number of errors. Since errors in
DSHM systems only occur when the memory capacity of the
system is saturated, a range of vector lengths were tested to
determine which makes errors with a frequency approximating
that of human participants.

388

model and the human data from Anderson (1974) is provided.
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the close match in the pattern of the
reaction times, for sentences with fans of two, three, four, five,
and six for true sentences and false sentences respectively.
Also, it should be noted that the error bars represent
predictions of what the level of variability in the human results
should be, but this could not be confirmed as that data was not
available.

Reaction time in
milliseconds

Reaction time for study set sentences
2000
1750
1500
1250
1000
750
32

128

512

2048

Vector length
Fan = 2

Fan = 6

Figure 1: Reaction time for study set sentences.
Figure 2, including human data from Anderson (1974)
illustrates point 3. The set of models that best matched the
human data belonged to the set with vector lengths of 128.
They were the only models that produced an error rate
resembling human performance. Additionally, and informally,
the standard deviation of the reaction times for these models
resembles a ‘human-like’ profile, unlike for the other vector
lengths. Unfortunately, Anderson (1974) did not include
standard deviations on his human data, and so we could not
compare the human data and the model on this measure.

Error rate

Error rates for humans and simulations
0.300
0.250
0.200
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000
32

human

128

512

2048

Vector Length
True

False

Figure 2: Error rates.
Tables 2 and 3 present the mean reaction time and error rate
data for the models with a vector length of 128, in the same
format as the human data is presented in Anderson (1974). The
rows are organized by the fan of the place, while the columns
are organized by the fan of the person. Each cell contains a
mean reaction time in milliseconds and an error rate for
propositions with the fans corresponding to the given cell. As
with Anderson (1974), only the times corresponding to the
affirmation of true sentences and the rejection of false
sentences were included in the reaction times; i.e., the times
associated with errors (misses and false positives) were not
included.

Table 2: Model of trues
Reaction times and error rates for trues
Person fan
Place fan
1
2
3
1
1137
1191
1240
0.000
0.002
0.000
2
1166
1285
1377
0.002
0.027
0.038
3
1232
1371
1478
0.000
0.032
0.072
Mean
1178
1282
1365
0.001
0.020
0.037

Mean
1189
0.001
1276
0.022
1360
0.034
1275
0.019

Table 3: Model of falses
Reaction times and error rates for falses
Person fan
Place fan
1
2
3
1
1170
1225
1320
0.003
0.020
0.042
2
1242
1288
1437
0.018
0.023
0.048
3
1323
1413
1488
0.045
0.057
0.072
Mean
1245
1308
1415
0.022
0.033
0.054

Mean
1238
0.022
1322
0.030
1408
0.058
1323
0.036

Reaction times: Trues
2000

Mean RT

1750
1500
1250
1000
750
2

3

4

5

6

Sum of fans

Evaluation of the model

Human

DSHM model

Figure 3: Reactions times for study set sentences. Bars indicate
standard deviation.

The reaction times for the DSHM model were generated
according to ad hoc functions designed to produce values that
match the human data, on average. Thus, gross agreement
between the DSHM reaction times and the human reaction
times is a given. However, the functions are linear and do not
finesse the data so as to produce the fan and min effects
(Anderson, 1974). Thus, a comparison between the DSHM

389

produces the same profile of behavior as an emergent property
of the distributed representation of associations between items
in the state-space of the system. For example, ACT-R
activation can be interpreted as emergent on DSHM
association strength, and ACT-R noise as emergent on DSHM
vector length (memory capacity). As such DSHM resides
hierarchically between ACT-R as an abstract computational
model of memory and lower-level neural network models of
memory, such as those described in Goetz and Walters (2000).

Reaction times: Falses
2000

Mean RT

1750
1500
1250
1000
750
2

3

4

5

6

Sum of fans
Human

DSHM model

Discussion

Figure 4: Reaction times for foils. Bars indicate standard
deviation.

We have shown that a holographic model of memory can
account for the fan effect as an emergent property of the
manner in which information is represented in the system. In
addition to predicting reaction times it also predicts errors of
omission and commission. A strength of the system is that it
can also model the training portion of the fan effect
experiment, which involves the ability to recall multiple
correct answers to questions. Finally, the fan effect was
produced by training and testing the model in exactly the same
manner as were the human participants, which jointly validates
both the encoding and retrieval aspects of the model.

Relationship to the ACT-R model
Although relying on very different mechanisms, the DSHM
model is consistent with the ACT-R model of the fan effect
(Anderson & Reder, 1999). For both models, the characteristic
pattern of reaction times defining the fan effect results from
patterns in the activation levels of the propositions learned by
the systems.
The activation of a target sentence in DSHM is a function of
the association between the person and the place appearing in
the sentence. Mathematically, this is a measure of the distance
between the environmental vector of each word, properly
encoded, and the memory vector of the other word in the
state-space defined by the system.
The activation of a target sentence according to the ACT-R
model is a function of the associations between the chunk
representing the target sentence and the chunks representing
each of the person and place. Mathematically, it is equal to the
sum of a base level of activation and a weighted sum of the
activations of the person and place. In the case of foils, the
target sentence does not exist in the declarative memory
system of the model and cannot be retrieved. Instead, a chunk,
partially matching the target, which contains one of the two
content words is retrieved. As a result of the retrieved chunk
and the target sentence chunk having only one of the person
and place in common the net activation of the retrieved chunk
has one less source of activation, and thus, on average, has a
lower net activation value than the average true sentence.
Anderson & Reder (1999) do not discuss how errors could
be produced by the ACT-R model. Presumably, errors could
be caused by increasing the amount of noise in the system,
and/or raising the activation threshold for recall.
We are of the belief that the DSHM system and the ACT-R
architecture are compatible. The DSHM and ACT-R models
of the fan effect both agree with the human data. This
agreement is a result of DSHM and the declarative memory
system of ACT-R providing alternative accounts of the same
psychological memory mechanisms. We claim that ACT-R
provides a higher-level, more abstract, account of memory,
making use of mathematical formula to describe the
activations of chunks in memory. DSHM, on the other hand,

References
Anderson, J. R. (1974). Retrieval of propositional information
from long-term memory. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 451-474.
Anderson, J. R. & Reder, L. R. (1999). The fan effect: New
results and new theories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 128(2), 186-197.
Bunting, M. F., Conway A. R. A., & Heitz, R. P. (2004).
Individual differences in the fan effect and working memory
capacity. Journal of Memory and Language, 51(4),
604-622.
Eliasmith, C., & Anderson, C. H. (2003). Neural engineering:
Computation,
representation
and
dynamics
in
neurobiological systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goetz, P. & Walters, D. (2000). A neuronal basis for the fan
effect. Cognitive Science, 24(1), 151-167.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing word
meaning and Order information in a composite holographic
lexicon. Psychological Review, 114, 1-37.
Plate, T. A. (1995). Holographic reduced representations.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 6, 623-641.
Radvansky, G. A., Spieler, D. H., & Zacks, R. T. (1993).
Mental model organizaton. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 95-114.
Rutledge-Taylor, M. F. & West, R. L. (2007) MALTA:
Enhancing ACT-R with a holographic persistent knowledge
store. Proceedings of the XXIV Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Nashville, TN.
Stewart, T. C. & Eliasmith, C. (2008). Building Production
Systems with Realistic Spiking Neurons. Proceedings of the
XXV Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Washington, DC.

390

