UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
More-Or-Less Elicitation: Testing a Heuristic Elicitation Method

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2s51p9h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Welsh, Matthew B.
Lee, Micheal D.
Begg, Steve H.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

More-Or-Less Elicitation (MOLE): Testing A Heuristic Elicitation Method
Matthew B. Welsh (matthew.welsh@adelaide.edu.au)
Australian School of Petroleum, North Terrace
University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 3151 Social Sciences Plaza A
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA

Steve H. Begg (steve.begg@adelaide.edu.au)
Australian School of Petroleum, North Terrace
University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
stimulus takes). Such a method, called More-Or-Less
Elicitation (MOLE), is tested and discussed herein.

Abstract
Elicitation of people’s knowledge is a central methodological
challenge for psychology, with important impacts in many
technical disciplines and industrial settings. The need to
convert an expert’s beliefs into a useable format is of
particular importance when judgments and decisions are made
under uncertainty. Simply asking a person for their best
estimate or to estimate a range is subject to many biases –
e.g., overconfidence – and methods for eliciting information
that avoid these effects are required. This paper presents a
heuristic-based elicitation method, More-Or-Less Elicitation
(MOLE) which, rather than requiring people make absolute
judgments, asks them to make repeated relative judgments.
MOLE uses these, along with confidence statements, to
construct probability distributions (pdfs) representing a
person’s beliefs. We evaluate MOLE by comparing these
subjective pdfs with ranges elicited using traditional methods.
The central finding is that use of MOLE greatly improves the
accuracy and precision of elicited ranges, thereby reducing
overconfidence. The benefits of this and other possible
heuristic-based methods of elicitation are discussed.
Keywords:
Heuristic.

Elicitation,

Uncertainty,

Elicitation
The elicitation of uncertainty is the conversion of individual
or group’s beliefs into a probability distribution. Generally,
this is done not for its own sake but to, for example, predict
future outcome ranges, or provide inputs for forecasting
models (Morgan & Keith, 1995).
In order to be of benefit, elicited values need to be
accurate. Accuracy, in this case, however, refers to two
separate ideas. The first sense, which we might call
objective accuracy, is the one that naturally springs to mind:
elicited values need to accurately reflect the probability of
an event occurring. Equally important, however, is
subjective accuracy: how well elicited values map onto an
elicitee’s beliefs. The problem for elicitors is that the two
are not easily separated. Instead we have to rely on
relatively crude measures like overconfidence/calibration
scores (Lichtenstein et al., 1982), which primarily measure
objective accuracy even though, from the elicitor’s point of
view, a measure of subjective accuracy is being sought.

Overconfidence,

Problems for Elicitation
Standard findings in the elicitation literature are that
people’s best guesses are anchored by previously seen
values and that they are overconfident, producing too
narrow ranges of possible outcomes (Tversky & Kahneman,
1974). There is also evidence, however, that this is not
entirely due to inaccuracies in people’s beliefs. Specifically,
different elicitation techniques result in different responses;
Winman, Hansson and Juslin (2004), for example,
demonstrate that having people evaluate a range rather than
produce one leads to less overconfidence in their responses.
There are also concerns about the effect of question order
within an elicitation task. These date back to Tversky and
Kahneman’s (1974) paper, where they suggested that
anchoring on an initial best guess might be a cause of
overconfidence. Research into this idea, however, has been
mixed with, for example, Russo and Schoemaker (1992)
finding the predicted effect but Block and Harper (1991)
and Juslin, Wennerholm and Olsson (1999) finding the
opposite. To complicate matters further, there are concerns
regarding the level of control over question order in some of

Many technical disciplines share with psychological
research the problem of eliciting information from people;
that is, translating peoples’ beliefs into useable data
(Wolfson, 2001). Of particular interest is how to best
achieve this under uncertainty, where there is no single,
correct answer but rather the “correct” response for an
individual to make will vary according to their own level of
knowledge about the topic (Morgan & Henrion, 1990).
The reason so much interest is vested in this area is that,
despite elicitation’s ubiquity, argument continues about the
best way to elicit information and people are still subject to
many biases, so that elicited responses are less accurate than
elicitors would wish (see, e.g., Hawkins, Coopersmith, &
Cunningham, 2002; Lichtenstein, Fischhoff, & Phillips,
1982; Welsh, Begg, & Bratvold, 2007).
This paper discusses elicitation and some of its problems.
Further, it proposes, as a possible solution, the use of
heuristic-based methods – that is, elicitation methods based
on simple judgments, such as which of two options is closer
to the true value (i.e., the value the participant believes the

493

attention to values outside their initial range is sufficient to
widen those ranges.

these studies. For example, Block and Harper (1991) used
answer booklets which, while having questions in a set
order, could not insure they were answered in that order.

Method

Debiasing Elicitation
Given these problems, significant work has gone into
attempts to debias elicited values. Early work (summarised
in Morgan & Henrion, 1990), however, indicated little
success in reducing overconfidence and none for anchoring.
As noted above, however, there are some techniques
known to reduce overconfidence, including Winman et al’s
(2004) use of interval assessment, and the use of long-term
repeated feedback (Lichtenstein et al., 1982). Additionally,
the use by expert elicitors of counterintuitive examples
(lying outside the initial range) has been shown to be
effective in reducing overconfidence (Hawkins et al., 2002).
This remedy, though, requires an expert elicitor to be on
hand to ask the right sorts of questions and leaves open the
question of whether simply drawing people’s attention to
regions of the possibility space outside their initial range is
helpful in the absence of expertise.
Regardless, none of these techniques eliminates
overconfidence – excepting specific cases such as weather
forecasting, where repeated feedback seems to have resulted
in good calibration (Murphy & Winkler, 1977).

Participants
Participants were 40 undergraduate students from the
University of Adelaide. Four, however, were excluded due
to computer errors during testing leaving 36 (10 male and
26 female) with a mean age of 20.1 (SD = 1.9).

Materials
Four graphical user interfaces (GUIs) were developed to
enable automated testing of participants using each of the
elicitation methods chosen for examination. All of the GUIs
displayed an array of circles, from 100 to 300 (determined
randomly at each trial) and elicited the participant’s beliefs
regarding the number of circles - in accordance with the
varying elicitation techniques.

Heuristic Elicitation
Given the problems with elicitation and the observation that
question format has a large impact on the elicited responses,
it is worth considering more radical departures from the
standard elicitation methods. For example, the work of
Gigerenzer and others (Gigerenzer & Selten, 2001;
Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999) on bounded rationality has
yielded insights into the sorts of questions that the human
mind seems most comfortable working with.
One observation is that people are better at making
relative judgments than absolute ones (Gigerenzer & Selten,
2001). This is consistent with Winman et al’s (2004)
observation that people are better at evaluating than
generating ranges. Combining this insight with the
observation that counter-intuitive examples can reduce
overconfidence (Hawkins et al., 2002) leads to the idea that
asking a series of questions covering the range of
possibility, rather than allowing a person to hone in on a
small region of outcomes, thereby excluding other
possibilities, may yield better results.
The idea of such a heuristic-based elicitation method –
using relative judgments – was first explored in Welsh,
Begg, Bratvold and Lee (2004). This found a benefit but
relied heavily on assumptions about the underlying
distribution required to create a probability distribution from
the relative judgments. The current goal was, thus, to create
an elicitation method that makes minimal assumptions in a
principled manner to produce the final distribution.
We aim for an elicitation method that is less subject to
overconfidence than alternative methods requiring direct
estimation of values. We are also interested in whether
requiring a best guess first reduces or increases the width of
estimated ranges, and whether simply drawing people’s

Figure 1. MOLE GUI
For each of the elicitation techniques, the same basic GUI
layout was used, with only the questions being asked and
the buttons that could be used to respond being different.
For example, Figure 1 shows the layout as seen during
More-or-Less Elicitation (MOLE) condition, asking
participants to select which of two values is closer to their
estimate. The GUI controls were sequentially locked and
unlocked to ensure that participants answered each question
before continuing to the next. This ensured that participants
completed the questions in the prescribed order.

Procedure
Participants were tested on four elicitation methods,
described below. Participants, over the course of an hour,
completed ten trials under each condition after being sorted
at random into four groups to allow counterbalancing for
possible order/learning effects as shown in Table 1.
Simple Elicitation
In this condition, participants were asked to provide a
minimum and maximum value for the number of circles.
Following this, they indicated how confident they were that
494

indicating ignorance about where in that range the person
believes the true value lies.

their range contained the true value. This was done using a
slider similar to the one seen in Figure 1 but capable of
taking any integer value from 0 to 100%.

1.25

Table 1. Ordering of Elicitation Methods
Group
Elicitation Methods
A
1
2
3
B
4
3
2
C
2
4
1
D
3
1
4
Note: 1=Simple, 2=Triangular, 3=Iterative, 4=MOLE

1.0
0.75
0.5

4
1
3
2

0.25
90

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

90

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

1.25
1.0

Triangular Elicitation
In this condition, participants were asked to provide a best
guess prior to giving their minimum and maximum values –
thereby providing sufficient information to produce a
triangular distribution. Again, after making estimates, they
were asked to indicate their confidence on a 0-100% scale.

0.75
0.5
0.25

Figure 2. Subjective PDF construction process.

Iterative Elicitation
In this condition, participants were asked to provide an
initial range as in the Simple Elicitation condition but then
shown values for the minimum and maximum that lay
outside their own range - which were described as having
been elicited from “previous participants” but which
actually were always calculated by the program to lie
outside the initial range (60% of the initial minimum and
140% of the initial maximum). Participants were then given
the chance to adjust their estimates of the minimum and
maximum. Once happy with their estimates, they were
asked to indicate their level of confidence that the true value
would fall inside their range on a 0 to 100% range.

In the lower half of Figure 2, the person is then shown the
values of 105 and 130 and states that they are 75%
confident that 105 is closer to the true value. This results in
a weight of 0.75 being applied from the current minimum
up to the midpoint of the two values (117.5) and a weight of
0.25 from the midpoint up to the current maximum –
reflecting the fact that the person’s confidence statement
indicates that they believe a value closer to the lower option
is three times as likely as one closer to the high option.
In this way, over the course of a trial, a PDF was built up.
At the end of each trial, this PDF was corrected by
removing all weight from areas outside the final feasible
range and then adjusted by subtracting 99% of the lowest
weight from all remaining areas. Finally, the
Beta−distribution that minimized summed squared
differences from the resultant PDF was calculated.

More-Or-Less Elicitation
In the MOLE condition, participants did not directly
estimate values. Rather, they selected which alternative in
randomly generated pairs of values from a range from 0 to
400 was closer to their estimate. After each choice,
participants were asked to indicate their confidence that
their selection was actually closer to the true value than the
alternative on a 50% (guessing) to 100% (certain) range.
This process was repeated 10 times during each trial and
the final range of feasible values recorded (i.e., those the
participant’s answers did not rule out). Additionally, the
confidence ratings were used to create a subjective PDF as
described below.
Whenever a confidence rating of 100% was given, any
values lying closer to the unchosen value were excluded
from the experimental range and then weight of 0.5 was
added uniformly across the remaining range. If, however,
the confidence level was less than 100%, weight was added
to each end of the range separately according to the level of
confidence. Figure 2 shows how two stages of this process
might progress, starting with a range of possible value from
90 to 150. In the top half of the figure, the person has been
shown two values: 135 and 150 (highlighted) and stated
with 100% confidence that 135 is closer to the true value.
This means that values above 142.5 (the midway point of
135 and 150) will no longer be considered. An equal weight
of 0.5 is then applied across the entire remaining range,

Results
As described above, while overconfidence is generally used
as the primary measure of the efficacy of an elicitation
method of the sorts used herein, this can be further divided
into the accuracy and the precision of the elicited responses.
Results relating to the primary hypothesis are therefore
described below in terms of all three concepts: overall
overconfidence, precision and accuracy.

Overconfidence
Overconfidence, in terms of elicited ranges, is measured
from the degree of ‘coverage’ achieved (i.e, how often the
elicited range was correct - that is, contained the true value)
and participants’ stated levels of confidence. Table 2 shows
this data for each of the four conditions.
It is clear from Table 2 that all three techniques requiring
participants to estimate absolute ranges resulted in less than
30% coverage, despite the stated confidence of the
participants averaging more than 70%. By comparison, the
MOLE, with its assumed 100% confidence level, resulted in
90.6% coverage. (The confidence level is ‘assumed’ as
participants in the MOLE condition did not directly rate the
495

likelihood of the true value falling within their final range,
rather it was assumed that their final range contained all of
the values they considered feasible.)
Mean Elicited Range Width (95% CI)

350

Table 2. Coverage and mean confidence rating by condition.
Condition
Simple
Triangular
Iterative
MOLE

Correct
92
81
97
308

Trials
340
340
340
340

#

Coverage
27.1%
23.8%
28.5%
90.6%

Confidence
75.5%
72.6%
72.7%
100% *

# - 20 of the 360 trials were excluded as individual analyses
indicated that participants had either misinterpreted the
experimental instruction or were deliberately answering incorrectly
in order to limit their participation time. * - assumed confidence
level.

300

250

200

150

100

50

Simple

Triangular

Iterative

MOLE

Elicitation Condition

Figure 3. Mean width of range by elicitation method.

To determine whether the differences between the
methods were statistically significant, a repeated measures
ANOVA was conducted. The first indicated that there were
significant differences between the number of hits achieved
by participants under the four conditions, F(3, 83) = 123.8,
p <.001. Paired sample t-tests with Bonferroni corrections
were used for each unique pair of elicitation methods to
determine which conditions differed from the others and
these indicated that only the MOLE condition differed
significantly, t(35) = 14.1, 15.7 and 12.4 (from the Simple,
Triangular and Iterative, respectively), p <.001 in all cases.
The question remained, however, as to whether the
improvement in calibration in the MOLE data resulted from
an improvement in precision, accuracy, or both.

True Number

Simple
400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0
0

100
200
300
400
r = −0.01, p = .841

500

0
0

100

Iterative

200
300
400
r = 0.10, p = .058

500

MOLE

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0
0

Precision
Precision reflects the subjective aspect of accuracy (i.e.,
how well a response matches the person’s knowledge and
beliefs). The primary measure of precision in an elicited
range is its width. Figure 3 shows the mean range width
under each of the methods described above, along with the
variability, as measured by the standard deviation.
Looking at Figure 3, it seems clear that an improvement
in the appropriateness of participants’ levels of precision
plays a significant role in the observed reduction in
overconfidence. Specifically, participants’ responses to the
MOLE technique are far less precise, giving much wider
ranges on average than in any of the other three conditions.
The implication of this is that participants in the other
conditions were too precise. That is, their ranges were far
narrower than their level of knowledge warranted. A
repeated measures ANOVA, run using the participants’
mean ranges in each condition, confirmed that the difference
was highly significant, F(2, 59) = 75.9, p < .001. Once
again, paired sample t-tests with Bonferroni corrections
were used post-hoc confirming that only the MOLE results
differed from the other conditions, t(35) = 8.6, 12.1 and 9.4
for comparisons with the Simple, Triangular and Iterative
methods, respectively, p < .001 in all cases.

Triangular

400

100
200
300
400
r = −0.02, p = .737

500

0
0

100

200
300
400
r = 0.64, p < .001

500

Mode of Est. Range

Figure 4. Scatterplots comparing number of objects with the
estimated mode for each elicitation condition.
Accuracy
To assess the objective accuracy of participants’ responses
under each elicitation condition, the mode of each elicited
range was compared with the true value. For the Simple and
Iterative elicitation conditions, a uniform distribution was
assumed and thus the mean (midpoint) was substituted for
the mode. For the Triangular, the mode was the “most
likely” value given by the participant. Finally, for the
MOLE, the mode was calculated using the α and β values
calculated from the beta distribution most closely fitting a
participant’s subjective PDF, giving M = (α−1) / (α+β−2).
Scatterplots showing these data are shown as Figure 4.
Figure 4 suggests that only in the MOLE condition did
participant estimates accurately track the number of objects in the
stimuli. The correlation between the means of the estimated
range and true values was moderately high and highly
significant, r(338) = 0.64, p<.001, whereas correlations between
the true values and the remaining elicited means were all
extremely low, r(338) = -0.01, -0.10 and -0.02 for the Simple,
Triangular and Iterative method respectively, p > .05 in all cases.

496

subjective accuracy by helping people realize the limits of
their knowledge) but also by improving their objective
accuracy. That is, while participants in the other conditions
proved poor at estimating the true number of objects
displayed, repeatedly judging which option was closer to the
true value resulted in participants in the MOLE condition
having a better idea of what that true value was.
This supports the idea from the bounded rationality
(Gigerenzer & Selten, 2001) literature that enabling people
to answer questions in formats they are adept with is a good
way to avoid bias in judgment and decision making.

Other Findings
Best Guesses and Overconfidence
One of our initial research questions asked whether
requiring participants to give a best guess prior to fixing
their confidence interval’s end-points would affect its width
and thus their levels of overconfidence.
Looking at the data in Table 2 and Figure 3, one sees little
difference between the ranges provided in the two
conditions of interest (Simple and Triangular). While
participants in the Triangular condition gave, on average,
narrower ranges (M = 84.7, SD = 61.8) than they did in the
Simple condition (M = 100.3, SD = 105.0) the confidence
intervals in Figure 3 indicate no significant difference
between these values. A repeated measures ANOVA,
similarly, compared the mean levels of confidence indicated
by participants in the three conditions where this was
directly assessed (all but the MOLE) and this found no
significant differences between the conditions, F(2,67) =
2.26, p = .112. Even were the differences significant,
however, overconfidence would not be greatly affected as
the 3.3% decrease in the number of hits is offset by the
2.9% decrease in stated levels of confidence.

Limitations
There are several caveats, however, regarding the current
MOLE method. It could, for example, be argued that the
MOLE gave participants an unfair advantage in that it
limited the range of values that the contrast values could be
selected from to between 0 and 400 (remembering that the
true value was always between 100 and 300). Figure 4
shows that, in the non-heuristic conditions, a number of
estimates lie beyond this range, meaning that participants
had the opportunity to be more inaccurate than in the
MOLE. That said, the vast majority (98.1%) of estimates
from all other conditions fell within that range – it having
been chosen as a reasonable estimate of the range of
responses – so any effect from this would be limited. The
other relevant result for this issue is the qualitative
difference in the scatterplots, which shows better accuracy
in the MOLE condition across the full range of stimuli.
Additionally, the need for bounds limits the usefulness of
the MOLE, as currently formalized, to situations where
limits can be put on what people might believe (although
these limits can be very broad due to the MOLE’s iterative
narrowing of the range to exclude infeasible values). There
remains, however, a risk of limiting the outcomes a person
is allowed to choose. That said, this should not be a problem
in many applied domains where expert knowledge is being
sought - where there are, often, known limits on outcomes.
Finally, the MOLE requires participants to spend more
time observing the stimulus and thus some of the effect may
simply be noise reduction – although this would seem only
to explain improvements in accuracy, not precision. This
also has the effect of increasing the effort required per trial
with the resultant problem that more participants gave
nonsensical answers indicative of random button pushing in
the MOLE (18 of the 20 excluded trials). This is, however,
unlikely to cause a problem in applied setting as large
numbers of values tend not to be elicited simultaneously.

Iterative Elicitation
The final research question related to whether an automated
system would be effective in prompting participants to
reconsider and widen their ranges. Looking again at Table 2
and Figure 3, one sees that there seems to be a weak effect
in line with expectations. Participants’ ranges in the
Iterative condition were wider than in the Simple condition
(M = 105.5, SD = 85.0 compared to M = 100.3, SD = 105.0)
but not significantly so as examination of the CIs in Figure
3 shows. Similarly, the difference in confidence, while
noticeable in Table 2, is not significant – as the repeated
measures ANOVA described above indicated.

Discussion
Our results show a clear benefit to the use of the MOLE
heuristic elicitation technique in terms of both the precision
and the accuracy of elicited ranges. We found little support,
however, for the role of initial best guesses or simplistic
emphasis on counter-intuitive values in improving
elicitations. These results are discussed in greater depth
below.

Heuristic Elicitation
It seems reasonable to conclude that elicitation techniques
enabling people to use the well-honed, heuristic judgment
and decision tools already at their disposal are powerful
tools for reducing bias. The degree of overconfidence
observed in the MOLE responses was much smaller than in
the other conditions, particularly given that when asked for
a wide confidence interval (80% plus), people tend to give
~50% intervals (Morgan & Henrion, 1990) and the MOLE
generated a 100% interval.
Of greater interest is the fact that this method works not
just by causing people to consider more values, thereby
including a wider range of possibilities (i.e., increasing

Future Directions
Given our findings, it seems worthwhile to continue looking
at heuristic-based elicitation as a method for avoiding bias
in elicited responses. In addition to extending its use to nonvisual elicitation tasks, an obvious direction is to refine the
MOLE procedure such that it can automatically determine if
a person has reached the limits of their certainty, rather than
requiring a set number of questions.
The application of this approach to other biases that
impact on elicited responses such as anchoring would also

497

be of interest - given how resistant to debiasing anchoring
has proved (Wilson, Houston, Etling, & Brekke, 1996).
Finally, while we believe the focus on relative judgments
is an important advance in developing elicitation methods, it
should be possible to improve the way in which subjective
PDFs are generated. The current method was chosen so as to
minimize the assumptions needing to be made, but remains
somewhat ad hoc in nature. One interesting possibility is to
follow the recent lead of Sanborn and Griffiths (in press),
who apply modern computational Bayesian sampling
algorithms, based on Markov-Chain Monte Carlo methods,
as experimental procedures for understanding the subjective
probability distributions people use to represent mental
categories. Applying the same principled ideas to the
problem of value elicitation is a promising direction for
future research.

References
Block, R. A., & Harper, D. R. (1991). Overconfidence in
estimation: testing the anchoring-and-adjustment hypothesis.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 49,
188-207.
Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (Eds.). (2001). Bounded Rationality:
the adaptive toolbox (Vol. 84). Cambridge: Massachusetts: MIT
Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (Eds.). (1999). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hawkins, J. T., Coopersmith, E. M., & Cunningham, P. C. (2002).
Improving stochastic evaluations using objective data analysis
and expert interviewing techniques. Paper presented at the
Society of Petroleum Engineers 78th Annual Technical
Conference and Exhibition, San Antonio, Texas.
Juslin, P., Wennerholm, P., & Olsson, H. (1999). Format
dependence in subjective probability calibration. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
25, 1038-1052.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. D. (1982).
Calibration of probabilities: the state of the art to 1980. In D.
Kahneman, P. Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Morgan, M. G., & Henrion, M. (1990). Uncertainty: a guide to
dealing with uncertainty in quantitative risk and policy analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Morgan, M. G., & Keith, D. W. (1995). Subjective judgements by
climate experts. Environmental Science and Technology, 29(10),
468A-476A.
Murphy, A. H., & Winkler, R. L. (1977). Reliability of subjective
probability forecasts of precipitation and temperature. Applied
Statistics, 26(1), 41-47.
Russo, E. J., & Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1992). Managing
Overconfidence. Sloan Management Review, 33, 7-17.
Sanborn, A. N., & Griffiths, T. L. (in press). Markov Chain Monte
Carlo with People. In B. Scholkopf, J. Platt & T. Hoffman
(Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing (Vol. 20).
Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124-1131.
Welsh, M. B., Begg, S. H., & Bratvold, R. B. (2007). Efficacy of
bias awareness in debiasing oil and gas judgments. In D. S.
McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1647-1652).
Austin, Texas: Cognitive Science Society.
Welsh, M. B., Begg, S. H., Bratvold, R. B., & Lee, M. D. (2004).
SPE 90338: Problems with the elicitation of uncertainty.
Proceedings of the Society of Petroleum Engineers 80th Annual
Technical Conference and Exhibition, Houston, Texas: SPE.
Wilson, T. D., Houston, C. E., Etling, K. M., & Brekke, N. (1996).
A new look at anchoring effects: basic anchoring and its
antecedents. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
125(4), 387-402.
Winman, A., Hansson, P., & Juslin, P. (2004). Subjective
probability intervals: how to reduce overconfidence by interval
evaluation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 30(6), 1167-1175.
Wolfson, L. J. (2001). Elicitation of probabilities and probability
distributions. In E. Science (Ed.), International Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences (pp. 4413-4417): Elsevier Science.

Other Issues
While previous work has found estimated ranges to be either
narrowed (Russo & Schoemaker, 1992) or widened (Block
& Harper, 1991) by initial best guesses, the present study,
despite stronger control over question order, has found no
clear effect - although a weak trend was seen towards
narrowed ranges resulting from initial best guesses. As such,
this remains an open research question, with further work
required to tease out the intricacies of this variable effect.
Neither did we find any evidence that simply indicating to
people that other people had made estimates well outside
their own range had any impact on revisions of those
estimates. It could, however, be that participants realized
that these “other participants” were computer generated and
that future research will determine what sort and how much
counter-intuitive evidence people need to provoke them into
changing their mind – or whether this only occurs with the
presence of a known expert (Hawkins et al., 2002).

Conclusion
Heuristic-based elicitation methods seem to be a worthwhile
addition to the arsenal of researchers interested in reducing
the impact of bias on elicited responses. While the fine
detail still requires further refinement, the basic premise, of
using relative rather absolute judgments, is strongly
supported by the findings herein and the concept seems well
placed to contribute to our understanding of how our
cognitive abilities give rise to bias and to aid in improving
the accuracy of forecasting in a variety of areas.

Acknowledgments
MBW is supported by ExxonMobil and Santos through their
support of the CIBP at the Australian School of Petroleum. The
authors wish to thank Ben Schultz for his assistance in data
collection, Dan Navarro for his assistance with the code and the
anonymous reviewers for their comments.

498

