UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonaesthemes: A Corpus-Based Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0s67w5zj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Otis, Katya
Sagi, Eyal

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonaesthemes: A Corpus-Based Analysis
Katya Otis (kotis@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Eyal Sagi (ermon@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
in separating lexical categories, a construct that necessarily
includes some syntactic features and some semantic features
(Monaghan et al., 2005).1 Recent research indicates that
systematic sound-meaning and sound-syntax relationships
play a role in language processing (Hutchins, 1998; Bergen,
2004; Farmer, Christiansen, & Monaghan, 2006), and may
also be important to language learning (Monaghan et al.,
2005).
To the degree that it differs from adult-directed speech,
child-directed speech should be sensitive to the child‟s
status as a language learner. Monaghan et al. (2005) tested
adult speech from the CHILDES corpus for the presence of
16 phonological cues in open- and closed-class words and
for their diagnosticity in determining whether a word is a
noun or a verb. Significantly diagnostic cues to the
noun/verb distinction were: syllable length, onset and
syllabic complexity, syllable reduction, -ed inflection
(voiced or unvoiced vowel), vowel position, and vowel
height. Furthermore, in an experiment on artificial language
learning of bigrams, they found that participants used
phonological cues when distributional cues were weak or
absent. Since grammatical categories can encompass not
only syntactically disparate words but also semantically
disparate words, this might indicate that sound-meaning
correspondences are a boon to language learners, especially
in low-frequency cases.
Farmer, Christiansen, and Monaghan (2006) expanded the
research on phonological diagnostics for lexical category
membership begun in Monaghan et al. (2005). They
performed a regression analysis on over 3,000 monosyllabic
English words that significantly associated certain
phonological features with an unambiguous interpretation as
either a noun or a verb. An associated series of experiments
demonstrated reaction time, reading time, and sentence
comprehension advantages for phonologically “noun-like
nouns” and “verb-like verbs.”
Bergen (2004) used a morphological priming paradigm to
test whether there was a processing advantage for words
containing phonaesthemes over words that shared only
semantic or only formal features, or which contained
“pseudo-phonaesthemes.”
He found a difference in
reaction times between the phonaestheme condition and the
other three conditions by comparing primed reaction times

Abstract
The association between sound and meaning is commonly
thought of as symbolic and arbitrary. While this appears to be
mostly correct, there is some evidence that specific phonetic
groupings can be indicative of word meaning. In this paper
we present a corpus-based method that can be used to test
whether such an association exists in a given corpus for a
specified phonetic grouping. The results we obtain using this
method are compared with other empirical findings in the
field and its implications are discussed.
Keywords: Corpus analysis, Computational linguistics,
Phonaesthemes, Phonetics, Psycholinguistics, SoundMeaning association.

It is a popular intuition that words with similar sounds
also mean similar things. There is a long tradition of belief
in the association between phonetic clusters and semantic
clusters going back at least as far as Wallis‟ grammar of
English (Wallis, 1699). Morphemes form one such wellknown cluster, but other sub-morphemic phonetic clusters
that contribute to the meaning of the word as a whole have
also been hypothesized (Firth, 1930; Jakobsen & Waugh,
1979). Anthropologists have documented sound symbolism
in many languages (Blust, 2003; Nuckolls, 1999;
Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001), but its role as a purely
linguistic phenomenon is still unclear. Moreover, the
Saussurean notion of the arbitrary relationship between the
sign‟s form and its referent is a matter of dogma for most
linguists (Hockett, 1960). This makes the study of words
that do participate in predictable sound-meaning mappings
all the more important, since, under the framework of
contemporary linguistics it is difficult to explain how these
patterns come to be, or why they might survive despite the
obvious benefits of arbitrary sound-meaning mappings.
What we mean by “sound-meaning mapping” is not purely
sound symbolism, however, nor is it morphology. In the
following paper, we offer a statistical, corpus-based
approach to the phonaestheme, a sub-morphemic unit that
has a predictable effect on the meaning of a word as a
whole. These non-morphological relationships between
sound and meaning have not been thoroughly explored by
behavioral or computational research, with some notable
exceptions (e.g. Hutchins, 1998; Bergen, 2004).
By contrast, sound-syntax mappings are somewhat better
documented in the literature. Monaghan, Chater, and
Christiansen (2005) address the role of phonetic similarity

1

For example, Subject-Verb-Object word order implicates
syntax; persons, places, and things (nouns) are semantically
different from actions and states of being (verbs).

65

to RTs to the same words in isolation, drawn from
Washington University‟s English Lexicon Project. He
demonstrated both a facilitation effect for word pairs
containing a phonaestheme and an inhibitory effect for word
pairs in which the prime contained a pseudo-phonaestheme.
His use of corpus-based methods (in this case, Latent
Semantic Analysis: Landauer, Foltz & Laham, 1998) was
limited to ensuring that his list of words used in meaningonly priming pairs did not have any higher semantic
coherence than the list of words used in phonaestheme
priming pairs.
Finally, Hutchins (1998, Study 1 and 2) examined
participants‟ intuitions about 46 phonaesthemes drawn from
nearly 70 years of speculation about sound-meaning links in
the literature.
In her studies, participants ranked
phonaestheme-bearing words‟ perceived coherence with a
proposed gloss or definition meant to represent the meaning
uniquely contributed by the phonaestheme. Participants
also assigned candidate definitions to nonsense words
containing phonaesthemes at rates significantly above
chance, while words without phonaesthemes were assigned
particular definitions at rates not significantly different from
chance. She also examined patterns internal to
phonaesthemes: strength of sound-meaning association,
regularity of this association, and “productivity,” defined as
likelihood that a nonword containing that phonaestheme
will be associated with the definition of a real word
containing that phonaestheme.
In this paper, we chose a different approach to the study
of phonaesthemes than previously demonstrated in the
literature. Where previous approaches relied on intuition or
a structured lexicon to gather words with candidate
phonaesthemes in them, we use a corpus analysis of texts
available through Project Gutenberg (Lebert, 2005). In the
following experiment, we examine 47 distinct groups of
words bearing candidate phonaesthemes from a large corpus
using a statistical method based on Latent Semantic
Analysis.
Previous studies of phonaesthemes relied on the intuitions
of participants to verify the sound-meaning relationships of
interest (e.g., Hutchins, 1998; Bergen, 2004). These
methods are at their best when testing only a limited number
of phonaesthemes. As a result, such studies have often
constrained their examination to only a handful of
phonaesthemes. Even the most extensive of these works,
Hutchins (1998), who identified over 100 phonaesthemes
previously indicated in the literature, uses only 46 of them
in her experiments. In contrast with the experimental
methods employed by Hutchins (1998), Bergen (2004), and
others, we used a computational method based on LSA to
explore sound-meaning relationships such as those exhibited
by phonaesthemes.
One of Latent Semantic Analysis‟ most useful features is
that it can be used to compute and compare semantic vectors
of words and phrases. We use this feature to compare the
semantic relatedness clusters comprised of words that share
a phonaestheme to clusters comprised of words chosen at

random from the entire corpus. Because the phonaestheme
as a construct necessarily involves a partial overlap in
meaning beyond that generally found in language, we
hypothesize that words sharing a phonaestheme would
exhibit greater semantic relatedness than words chosen at
random from the entire corpus.
This computational
approach to the problem has two distinct advantages over
the experimental methods commonly found in the literature.
First, this method is objective and does not rely heavily on
intuition on either the part of the experimenter or
participants2. Second, it is possible to use the method to test
a large number of candidate phonaesthemes without
requiring us to probe each participant for hundreds of
linguistic intuitions at a time.

The Experiment
Method
For our computational model we used Infomap
(http://infomap-nlp.sourceforge.net/; Schütze, 1997), a
variant of Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer & Dumais,
1997; Landauer et al., 1998). Infomap represents words as
vectors in a multi-dimensional space whereby the distance
between the words is inversely proportional to their
semantic similarity. This space is constructed by reducing
the number of dimensions of a matrix that records the
frequency of co-occurrence between content words in the
corpus through the application of a statistical method known
as singular value decomposition. For the purposes of
Infomap, two content words are said to co-occur if they are
found within a specific distance from each other (i.e., for
Infomap the co-occurrence frequency of swim and water
could depend on how many times the word swim appears
within 15 words of water). This results in a space in which
the vectors for words that frequently co-occur are grouped
closer together than words that rarely co-occur within the
analysis window. As a result, words which relate to the
same topic, and can be assumed to have a strong semantic
relation, tend to be grouped together. The semantic
relationship between two words can then be measured by
correlating the vectors representing those two words within
the semantic space.3
Leveraging this property of semantic spaces allows us to
test the hypothesis that pairs of words sharing a
phonaestheme are more likely to share some aspect of their
meaning than pairs of words chosen at random. We tested
whether this was true for any specific candidate
phonaestheme using a Monte Carlo analysis. We first
identified all of the words in the corpus that shared a

2
At present the experimenters choose which phonetic clusters to
test, meaning that intuition is still part of the process. However,
whether or not any phonetic cluster qualifies as a valid
phonaestheme is entirely statistically determined.
3
This correlation is equivalent to calculating the cosine of the
angle formed by the two vectors.

66

conjectured phonaestheme.4 This resulted in a word cluster
representing each candidate phonaestheme. Next we
performed two separate Monte Carlo analyses. The first
analysis averaged the semantic relationship of 1000
instances of word pairs chosen at random from the cluster.
This was designed to measure the overall semantic
relationship of words within the cluster. A second analysis
tested the statistical significance of this relationship by
running 100 t-test comparisons. Each of these tests
compared the relationship of 50 pairs of words chosen at
random from the conjectured cluster with 50 pairs of words
chosen at random from a similarly sized cluster that was
randomly generated from the list of 20,000 words for which
Infomap computed vectors. We recorded the number of
times these t-tests resulted in a statistically significant
difference (α = .05). Both of these analyses were performed
3 times for each conjectured phonaestheme and the median
value for each run was used as the final result.

the word „clasp‟). Preference was given to retaining the
stem itself whenever it was available in the list. We also
removed all words whose pronunciations were inconsistent
over the same orthographic representation (e.g., the word
„touch‟ was removed from the list of words for the
phonaestheme „-ouch‟). A sample list of words is given in
Figure 1.
Knack
Knee
Knife
Knob
Knot

Knapsack
Kneel
Knight
Knock
Knuckles

Knave
Knew
Knit
Knoll

Figure 1 – List of words beginning with the
phonaestheme kn-

Results

Materials

Our two measures, the average strength of the semantic
relationship and the overall frequency of statistically
significant t-test comparisons, were highly correlated (r =
0.93). This indicates that our method is reliable and that its
results are reproducible. Because of this high correlation,
our analysis is focused on the frequency of statistically
significant t-tests, as this analysis is likely to apply equally
to the strength of the semantic relationship and is easier to
interpret from a statistical perspective.
To determine whether a conjectured phonaestheme was
statistically supported by our analysis we compared the
overall frequency of statistically significant t-tests with the
binomial distribution for our α (.05). After applying a
Bonferroni correction for performing 50 comparisons, the
threshold for statistical significance of the binomial test was
for 14 t-tests out of 100 to turn out as significant, with a
frequency of 13 being marginally significant. We therefore
judged significance frequencies (#Sig below) of 15 and
higher to indicate a phonaestheme for which we had
statistical evidence. We judged significance frequencies of
13 and 14 to indicate a phonaestheme for which we had only
marginal statistical support. A list of the results for each of
the tested phonaesthemes can be found in Appendix A.
Among Hutchins‟ original list of 46 possible
phonaesthemes, we discovered 27 statistically reliable
phonaesthemes and one marginally reliable phonaestheme.
Overall our results were in line with the empirical data
collected by Hutchins. By way of comparing the two
datasets, #Sig and Hutchins‟ average rating measure were
well correlated (r = .61). Neither of the unlikely
phonaestheme candidates we examined were statistically
supported by our test (#Sigbr- = 8; #Sigz- = 6), whereas both
of our newly hypothesized phonaesthemes were statistically
supported (#Sigkn- = 41; #Sig-gn = 27).
Interestingly, there was a negative correlation (r = -0.44)
between the number of tokens for a given phonaestheme and
its significance frequency. However, it is important to note
that this correlation is not unique to our method as it is also

We used a corpus based on Project Gutenberg
(http://www.gutenberg.org/). Specifically, we used the bulk
of the English language literary works available through the
project‟s website. This resulted in a corpus of 4034 separate
documents consisting of over 290 million words. Infomap
analyzed this corpus using default settings (a co-occurrence
window of 15 words and using the 20,000 most frequent
content words for the analysis) and its default stop list.
The bulk of the candidate phonaesthemes we used were
taken from the list used by Hutchins (1998) with the
addition of two possible phonaesthemes that seemed
interesting to us. We also included several letter
combinations that we thought were unlikely to be
phonaesthemes in order to test the method‟s capacity for
discriminating between phonaesthemes and nonphonaesthemes. Overall we examined 50 possible
phonaesthemes. Of these, 46 were taken from the list
Hutchins‟ used in her first study5, two were candidates that
we considered to be plausible phonaesthemes (kn- and -ign),
and for the last two we chose phonemic sequences we
thought were unlikely to be phonaesthemes (br- and z-),
yielding a final list of 47 candidate phonaesthemes.
For each phonaestheme we collected all of the instances
of that phonaestheme from the 20,000 most frequent content
words based on an orthographic match. For each individual
word stem, all but one occurrence of the stem were removed
from the list (e.g., from the list for the phonaestheme „-asp‟
we removed the words „clasped‟ and „clasps‟ and retained
4
It is important to note that due to the nature of a written corpus,
the match was orthographical rather than phonetic. However, in
most cases the two are highly congruent.
5
After examining our corpus we decided to drop three of
Hutchins‟ list of phonaesthemes („str_p‟, ‟sp_t‟, and „-isp‟)
because each of them had 3 or fewer types in our corpus and were
therefore not suitable for statistical analysis. It should be noted that
two of these three („str_p‟ and „-isp‟) also had only 3 types
according to Hutchins.

67

evident in the results reported by Hutchins (e.g., r = -0.62
between #Type and the average rating in Hutchins‟ study 1).

not due to a phonaestheme, but instead a common
etymological root or a shared vowel quality within the
subset. Indeed, it is likely that a large enough set of words,
even if random, will contain a subset that shares some
semantic content.
It is also possible that differences between our results and
those reported elsewhere may be attributable to the age of
our corpus. While the Gutenberg corpus is large, it is also
drawn largely from works composed in the 19th century. It
would therefore be interesting to replicate this work with
more recent corpora like the British National Corpus (BNC)
or Touchstone Applied Science Associates (TASA) corpus.
Finally, while the method we present in this paper is
useful for the examination and identification of
phonaesthemes within texts such methods are unlikely to
afford sufficient insights into the processes that underlie the
association between phonetic structure and semantic
content. However, because our method can be used to
identify new phonaesthemes and to compare the relative
strength of various phonaesthemes, we hope that it will
enable researchers to generate experimental designs that can
examine the relationship between phonetic form and
semantic content.
In concurrent research (Otis & Sagi, in prep), we are
examining the effect of phonaesthemes on sentence
processing and paraphrasing. The stimuli are nonsense
nouns bearing phonaesthemes embedded in sentences that
are either congruent or incongruent (determined by an LSA
document-to-term analysis) with a real word bearing that
phonaestheme. Participants are asked to read these
sentences and then write a paraphrase of each. Preliminary
analysis indicates that paraphrase typing latency in the
presence of a congruent phonaestheme is significantly less
than in the presence of a phonaestheme whose meaning is
incongruent with the sentence paraphrased.
This study provides a necessary counterpart to the
evidence from our computational method for detecting
phonaesthemes. Behavioral tests of the effect of
phonaesthemes on language processing can show us that the
patterns that link sound and meaning in large corpora are
not merely metalinguistic intuitions or artifacts of applying
a mathematical method to large corpora, but are also
psychologically real for language users.

Discussion
We successfully used our computational method to verify
phonaesthemes using a statistical corpus analysis. These
results were congruent with the empirical data collected by
Hutchins, suggesting that this statistical method can be used
as a tool to examine the validity of conjectured
phonaesthemes. Unlike previous work, our model can be
used to directly test whether a cluster of words containing a
phonaestheme is more semantically similar than would be
expected by chance. While we successfully applied this test
to discriminate between phonaesthemes and pseudophonaesthemes, at present our method does not identify
what specific semantic content is carried by the identified
phonaestheme. Incorporating statistical methods designed to
identify the topic of a given text, such as those suggested by
Griffiths and Steyvers (2002) and Blei, Ng, and Jordan
(2003) may allow us to extract the specific semantic content
associated with the phonaestheme, using the same corpus in
which we observed the meaning vectors that identified these
phonaesthemes.
It is interesting to note that the most frequently cited
phonaesthemes also exhibited an exceptionally high level of
support (e.g., #Siggl- = 96; #Sig-ump = 75). This supports the
common intuition about these phonetic groups‟ internal
sound-meaning relationship and suggests that intuition tends
to pick out the strongest phonaesthemes rather than weaker
ones. Because of this tendency, it is likely that there is an
inherent bias toward specific “easy to find” phonaesthemes
in the literature.
For instance, it is possible that
phonaesthemes can also be infixes, but all of the
phonaesthemes identified so far have been either prefixes or
suffixes. In order to more rigorously test the effect of
phonaesthemes on processing, a better method for
identifying phonaesthemes of various degrees of strength
and semantic coherence is required. Our computational
method can be adapted for such use within a given corpus or
across several corpora, and is therefore more suitable for the
task of phonaestheme detection than any previous method of
which we are aware.
At the same time, it is important to note that our method
does not always validate the intuitions of previous authors.
For example, we found statistical support for only 27 of the
46 phonaesthemes Hutchins examined. One possible reason
for this is that some phonetic clusters drawn from our
corpus had low internal semantic coherence overall, but are
found in a small subset of words that are highly coherent
with each other. This is especially likely in larger clusters
(e.g., gr- which had 66 tokens). However, it is important to
remember that phonaesthemes are defined as a sound or
cluster of sounds that acts as a carrier for semantic content.
If the number of words that share the phonaesthetic meaning
is only a small subset of the number of words exhibiting the
phonetic cluster then it is possible that the shared meaning is

References
Bergen, B. (2004). The Psychological Reality of
Phonaesthemes. Language, 80(2), 291-311.
Blei, D., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. (2003). Latent dirichlet
allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3,
993-1022.
Blust, R. (2003). The phonestheme ŋ in Austronesian
languages. Oceanic Linguistics 42: 187-212.
Farmer, T. A., Christiansen, M. H., & Monaghan, P. (2006).
Phonological typicality influences on-line sentence
comprehension. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 103(32), 12203-12208.

68

Firth, J. (1930). Speech. London: Oxford University Press.
Griffiths, T. L., & Steyvers, M. (2002). A probabilistic
approach to semantic representation. In Proceedings of
the 24th annual conference of the cognitive society (pp.
381-386). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific
American, 203, 88-96.
Hutchins, S. S. (1998). The psychological reality,
variability,
and
compositionality
of
English
phonesthemes. Dissertation Abstracts International,
59(08), 4500B. (University Microfilms No. AAT
9901857).
Jakobson, R., and Waugh, L. (1979). The sound shape of
language. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998).
Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25, 259-284.
Lebert, M. (2005). Project Gutenberg, from 1971 to 2005.
Retrieved January 22nd, 2008 from http://www.etudesfrancaises.net/dossiers/gutenberg_eng.htm
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. (2005). The
differential role of phonological and distributional cues in
grammatical categories. Cognition, 96(1), 143-182.
Nuckolls, J. B. (1999). The case for sound symbolism.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 28, 225-252.
Otis, K., & Sagi, E. (in preparation). Coherence is not just
semantic: How phonaesthemes facilitate language
processing.
Ramachandran, V. S. & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
Synaesthesia: A window into perception, thought and
language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8(12), 3-34.
Schütze, J. (1997). Ambiguity Resolution in Language
Learning. Stanford CA: CSLI Publications.
Wallis, J. (1699). Grammar of the English Language.
Oxford, UK: Lichfield.
Infomap [Computer Software]. (2007). http://infomapnlp.sourceforge.net/. Stanford: CA.

Appendix A – Detailed results
Table 1: Prefix Phonaesthemes from Hutchins (1998)

Cluster
blclcrdrflglgrsc-/skscrslsmsnspsplsprsquststrswtrtwwr-

69

Strength
0.047
0.033
0.023
0.046
0.052
0.120
0.028
0.038
0.050
0.044
0.048
0.080
0.023
0.069
0.121
0.038
0.028
0.051
0.045
0.033
0.058
0.067

#Sig #Tokens
16
42
7
62
6
64
16
41
13
53
96
22
5
66
12
72
28
16
12
40
21
17
38
16
8
69
31
6
92
8
10
11
9
139
16
38
18
28
5
84
23
23
22
22

Table 2: Suffix Phonaesthemes from Hutchins (1998)

Cluster
-ack
-am
-amp
-ap
-ash
-asp
-awl
-ick
-inge
-ip
-irl/-url
-ng
-nk
-oil
-olt
-oop
-ouch
-owl
-sk
-ump
-ust

Strength
0.056
0.064
0.011
0.060
0.052
0.204
0.074
0.067
0.018
0.064
0.086
0.035
0.037
0.048
0.064
0.055
0.001
0.161
0.029
0.095
0.028

#Sig #Tokens
28
23
33
17
5
9
47
18
17
14
100
4
53
6
44
18
9
4
39
20
68
4
15
36
6
33
18
8
43
4
30
10
7
4
96
6
7
15
75
11
5
17

Table 3: Additional phonaesthemes and non-phonaesthemes

Cluster

Strength

kn-ign
brz-

0.072
0.059
0.029
0.011

#Sig
41
27
8
6

#Tokens
14
14
68
8

70

