UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Picture Perception and the Two Visual Subsystems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92q8n6g3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Nanay, Bence

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Picture Perception and the Two Visual Subsystems
Bence Nanay (nanay@syr.edu)
Syracuse University, Department of Philosophy, Department of Biology, 535 Hall of Languages
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA
whatever else he says about the aesthetic appreciation of
pictures).

Abstract
I aim to give a new account of picture perception: of the way
our visual system functions when we see something in a
picture. My argument relies on the functional distinction
between the ventral and dorsal visual subsystems. I propose
that it is constitutive of picture perception that our ventral
subsystem attributes properties to the scene, whereas our
dorsal subsystem attributes properties to the surface.
Keywords: picture perception; dorsal subsystem; ventral
subsystem

Picture perception and the two visual
subsystems
Humans (and other mammals) have two visual subsystems
that use different regions of our central nervous system, the
ventral and dorsal streams. To put it very simply, the ventral
stream is responsible for identification and recognition,
whereas the function of the dorsal stream is the visual
control of our motor actions. In normal circumstances, these
two systems co-function, but experiments show that if one
of them is removed or malfunctioning, the other can still
function relatively well (see Milner&Goodale, 1995;
Goodale&Milner, 2004, for overview. It is worth noting that
the dorsal-ventral distinction is not really clear-cut as the
two
subsystems
interact
at
various
points
(Goodale&Westwood, 2004).
If the dorsal stream is malfunctioning, the agent can
recognize the objects in front of her, but she is incapable of
manipulating them or even localizing them in her egocentric
space. This happens if a patient is suffering optic ataxia. If
the ventral stream is malfunctioning, the agent can perform
actions with objects in front of her relatively well, but she is
incapable of even guessing what these objects are or telling
where they are. This happens in the case of visual agnosia.
Under exceptional circumstances, the ventral visual
subsystem of healthy humans attributes a different property
to an object from the one the dorsal subsystem does. In the
case of the three dimensional Ebbinghaus illusion, although
our judgment of the comparative size of two chips is wrong,
if we are asked to pick up one of the chips, our grip-size is
not influenced by the illusion (Aglioti et al., 1995). In the
case of the Müller-Lyer illusion, while we (mistakenly) see
the two lines as having different length, our eye- and
pointing movements represent them (correctly) as being the
same (Goodale&Humphrey, 1998; Bruno, 2001).
My claim is that our visual system functions in a
somewhat similar manner when we are perceiving pictures.
I will argue that the dorsal and the ventral visual subsystems
attribute different properties to the perceived object
whenever we see objects in pictures. The ventral subsystem
attributes properties to the depicted scene whereas the dorsal
subsystem attributes properties to the surface of the pictures.
Or, to put it very simply, it is constitutive of our
experience of seeing things in pictures that the depicted
scene is represented by our ventral vision, whereas the
surface of the picture is represented by our dorsal vision.
Although this latter formulation is simpler, it is also slightly

Introduction
How does our perceptual system function when we see a
depicted object in a picture? What makes it possible that we
have this ‘seeing-in’ experience? Ernst Gombrich claims
that when we see something in a picture, our attention
alternates between the two dimensional surface and the
three dimensional represented object (Gombrich 1960).
Richard Wollheim, in contrast, argues that the experience
we are supposed to go through when looking at pictures is a
twofold one: we are simultaneously aware of the picture
surface and the represented object (Wollheim, 1980; 1987;
1998, Nanay, 2004; 2005).
This feature of our experience of pictures is called
‘twofoldness’ and in some form or other, many accounts of
depiction endorsed it as a necessary feature of our
experience of seeing something in a picture: if our
experience is not twofold, then we may see the surface or
the depicted object, but we cannot see the depicted object in
the picture. But neither Wollheim nor other philosophical
accounts of pictorial perception say much about what is
supposed to be meant by the twofoldness of experience. My
aim in this paper is to give a model of how we perceive
pictures and, as we shall see, this model will be consistent
with the Wollheimian notion of twofoldness.
A very important caveat: it has been pointed out that
Wollheim’s notion of twofoldness is ambiguous (Nanay,
2005). On the one hand, it is taken to be a necessary
condition for perceiving pictures. On the other hand, it is
sometimes also taken to be a necessary condition for the
aesthetic appreciation of pictures, a very different notion
indeed (Nanay, 2005 gives a detailed analysis of when
Wollheim uses the former notion and when he uses the latter
one. This paper is not an exegesis of Wollheim’s arguments
and terminology; I am interested in the experience that
constitutes seeing objects in pictures and I will use the term
‘twofoldness’ to refer to the feature of our experience that
Wollheim describes as necessary for seeing-in (regardless of

975

see, it may be represented by ventral perception).1 Dorsal
perception is what allows us to localize objects in our
egocentric space and helps us perform actions with them. As
the space of the picture is not our egocentric space, we
cannot localize the depicted objects (that are in the space of
the picture) in our egocentric space. As Matthen argues, “a
picture gives you no information of the location relative to
yourself. Suppose you are looking at a picture of two men
shaking hands. Where are they? As far as what you can tell
by seeing in the picture, the question has no answer”
(Matthen 2005, p. 315).
Some further care is needed to make this point. How
should we interpret what is meant by ‘the ability to localize
an object in one’s egocentric space’?
One possibility would be to say that this ability is just the
ability to interact with this object. This is, for example, the
way Gareth Evans understood egocentric space, as he
argued that egocentric space is action space (Evans, 1982).
If we accept this interpretation of the ability to localize
objects in one’s egocentric space, then we have a neat
argument for (b). We cannot touch, smell or grasp the
depicted objects: we cannot perform actions with them. We
can touch, smell or grasp the part of the surface that
represents these objects, but not the depicted objects
themselves. Thus, as dorsal vision is what allows us to
perform perceptually guided actions, the depicted objects
are not represented dorsally (Matthen, 2005, p. 312).
However, if we accept this interpretation of localization in
one’s egocentric space, then we are in danger of concluding
that the perception of depicted objects and the perception of
distal objects is analogous. This may or may be an
intuitively plausible claim; Matthen, 2005, pp. 322-323
happily endorses it, for example. But it is much less clear
that we have any empirical evidence that distal objects do
not engage our dorsal vision. A further possible worry about
this interpretation is that there are scenarios where we see
objects in pictures and we also interact with them. When a
surgeon is performing an operation on a surface she can
only see through the display of a monitor, this may be an
instance of seeing an object in a picture and physically
interacting with it. Note that she could not perform this
operation without perceiving objects on the monitor: what
she sees on the monitor guides her action: thus, it needs to
be represented dorsally. Thus, in this case at least, the
argument for (b) does not seem to go through.
Thus, I would like to appeal to another notion of
localization in one’s egocentric space that is less
problematic. It is not necessary for having the ability of
localizing an object in one’s egocentric space that one can
manipulate this object physically. If I see an apple in a thick
plexy-glass container in front of me, I cannot touch it or
grasp it; still, I can localize it in my egocentric space. What

ambiguous. I intend to spell out the ambiguity in order to be
able to use this simple way of characterizing the main claim
of this paper.
Some depicted objects do not exist. As a result, according
to most philosophical analyses of perception, we do not
literally perceive these objects. This is a complex question
and I do not need to engage with it here. What is important
for our purposes is that even if we do not (literally) perceive
depicted objects, we are in perceptual states that represent
these objects (whether or not they exist) as having certain
properties. To sum up, the ventral subsystem represents the
depicted scene (whether or not it exists) as having certain
properties, whereas the dorsal subsystem represents the
picture surface as having certain properties.

The argument
I need to argue for four claims in order to show that the
ventral subsystem represents properties of the scene,
whereas the dorsal one represents properties of the surface:
(a) The depicted object is represented by ventral
perception
(b) The depicted object is not represented by dorsal
perception
(c) The surface is represented by dorsal perception
(d) The surface is not necessarily represented by ventral
perception
I will address these claims in turn.

(a) The depicted object is represented by ventral
perception
I take this claim to be the least controversial of the four.
When we look at pictures, we can recognize what they are
of. This is the reason why we can learn about something by
looking at its pictorial reproduction (Matthen, 2005, p. 308).
Apparently, even chimpanzees are capable of this (Tanaka,
2007).
Some empirical support for this claim is provided by the
fact that patients suffering visual agnosia are incapable of
seeing objects in pictures (Westwood et al., 2002). These
patients have a functioning dorsal stream but there are
serious impairments in the ventral stream. D. M., one such
patient, can copy the two dimensional lines of a picture but
she cannot tell whether these two dimensional lines depict
an impossible object. Further, she is not subject to optical
illusions (Müller Lyer, Ponzo) that are usually taken to
presuppose our ability to see three dimensional objects in
two dimensional figures (Turnbull et al., 2004).

(b) The depicted object is not represented by dorsal
perception

1

It is important to emphasize that we can perceive depicted objects
as affording actions for someone who is also depicted in the
picture (for example, if we watch a sport event on television. But
this does not mean that the depicted objects are represented
dorsally.

The main claim of this sub-section is that depicted objects
are not represented by dorsal perception (though, as we shall

976

is, however, necessary for having the ability to localize an
object in one’s egocentric space, is that the agent represents
the distance between the object and herself in some (not
necessarily conscious or explicit) way. Thus, if I can
localize an apple in my egocentric space, then if I move
towards it (and the object itself does not move) than I
should expect that the object will be closer to me than
before (this ability is sometimes referred to as ‘sensorimotor
skill’, see Noë, 2004; Campbell, in press).
Even if we accept this weaker notion of what it means to
be able to localize an object in one’s egocentric space, we
can still establish (b). If we move towards the direction of a
depicted apple, we do not thereby move closer to the apple:
we move closer to the picture surface, but not the apple.
It is also worth noting that according to this notion of
egocentric space, the surgeon does not localize what she
sees on the monitor (including her own hand) in her
egocentric space. Thus, this potential counterexample to (b)
is no longer a counterexample if we accept the way of
thinking about egocentricity I suggested.2

There are, of course, occasions where we are not aware of
the picture surface: we have no idea how far away it is from
us and if we had to touch it, we would be at a loss. Taking
aside the various anecdotes of insects that tried to fly
through the canvas of a still-life, the obvious examples are
trompe l’oeil paintings. If we are genuinely fooled by the
trompe l’oeil, then we would readily try to reach through the
canvas – we would not be aware of the surface. It is a
controversial question whether trompe l’oeil paintings count
as genuine instances of depiction (Wollheim, 1987; 1998,
Levinson, 1998). Whether or not they do, seeing trompe
l’oeil paintings (that is, being fooled by them, see Lopes,
2005 for a detailed analysis of our experience of trompe
l’oeil paintings) is not a twofold experience, as we are
supposed to be unaware of the fact that it is a picture at all
that we are looking at.
The controversial question is, of course, in what way we
represent the surface: ventrally or dorsally? In order to settle
this question, I would like to appeal to a very widely
discussed phenomenon in connection with picture
perception.
The phenomenon is that if our position changes in front of
the picture, our view of the depicted object does not change
(Vishwanath et al., 2005; Pirenne. 1970; Wollheim, 1980,
pp. 215-216; Matthen, 2005, pp. 315-317). Even if we look
at a picture from an oblique angle, we don’t see it as
distorted. This suggests that we are perceptually aware of
the orientation of the picture surface and this awareness
compensates for the oblique view: that is why we do not see
the depicted object as distorted (Pirenne, 1970).
What is interesting from our point of view is that there are
cases where there is no such compensation. When we are
looking at ceiling frescos from an oblique angle, for
example, we do see the depicted scene as distorted. So what
is the difference? Pirenne’s original suggestion is that we do
not have perceptual access to the orientation of the surface
of the fresco, because it is too far away. When (because of
the crowd) we are looking at the Mona Lisa from an oblique
angle, however, we do have perceptual access to the
orientation of the picture surface, which allows our
perceptual system to compensate for the oblique view: our
experience of the depicted scene is not distorted.
So far, I pretended that Pirenne’s analysis of the
‘compensation’ for the oblique point of view is
uncontroversial. It is not. If Pirenne were right, then
perceptual access to the orientation of the surface would be
necessary and sufficient for compensating for the oblique
angle and thus, for not experiencing the depicted scene in a
distorted manner. But both the necessity and the sufficiency
claims have been questioned. It seems that even if all the
cues that indicate the orientation of the picture surface are
artificially removed, we still experience the depicted scene
without any distortions (Busey et al., 1990). Further, it has
also been argued that even if we do have cues that indicate
the orientation of the picture surface, we sometimes do
experience a distorted depicted scene (Halloran, 1989). It
needs to be noted that these two experiments are not

(c) The surface of the picture is represented by
dorsal perception
Matthen claims that the surface can be represented by dorsal
perception, but he does not make the stronger claim that the
surface must be represented by dorsal perception in order for
us to be able to see objects in this surface (Matthen said that
he would be open to such claim though – personal
communication, June 2007). I will argue for this stronger
claim.
Suppose I am looking at a postcard. If someone asks me
to touch the surface of the picture, I would have no problem
doing so. If someone asked me to move in such a way that I
see the postcard head on, I can do that easily. As dorsal
perception is supposed to guide these actions, it seems that
we must represent the surface dorsally. But let us proceed
more slowly.
It is not a particularly controversial claim that we visually
represent the surface when we recognise the depicted object
in a picture. It has been shown that our judgment of the size
of perceived object is different if these objects are depicted
(even in a hyper-realistic way) from our judgment when we
see these objects through a glass, screen or colored glass.
This phenomenon is taken to demonstrate that we represent
the surface of the picture perceptually (see Hagen et al.,
1978).
2

It has been argued that instead of two visual subsystems, we need
to talk about three: the ventral, the ventrodorsal and the
dorsodorsal. Thus, what has been taken to be one single dorsal
subsystem should be divided into two: one responsible for
manipulating objects (dorsodorsal) and one responsible for
localizing in egocentric space (ventrodorsal) (Rizzolatti&Matelli,
2003). My strategy was to show that we do not localize depicted
objects in our egocentric space. Thus, the argument I presented in
this section, rephrased using the terminology of the three visual
subsystems framework, aimed to show that out ventrodorsal visual
subsystem does not represent the depicted object.

977

considered conclusive (see Rogers, 1995; Kulvicki, 2006),
but they at least challenged the general acceptance of the
‘compensation’ view. As Koenderink et al. 2004, p. 526
says, “there appears to be some (weak) consensus that no
‘correction’ is applied to pictorial space due to obliquely
viewed pictures”.
But the ‘compensation’ view, and the possibility of
explaining what we experience when we look at pictures
from an oblique angle, could be salvaged if we introduce a
distinction between having ventral perceptual access to the
orientation of the picture surface and having dorsal
perceptual access to it. The arguments, pro and contra, on
compensation of oblique angle that I quoted in the last
paragraph seem to assume that our ‘access to the orientation
of the picture surface’ is ventral awareness. In the
experiment, for example, that is supposed to show that we
do ‘compensate’ even without perceptual cues about the
orientation of the picture surface, these cues are cues that
are ventrally represented (the ‘double projection technique’
that Busey et al., 1990 use for removing these cues would
remove ventral cues only). Thus, what this experiment
really shows is that our ventral perceptual access to the
orientation of the picture surface is not necessary for
experiencing the depicted scene without any distortion.
My proposssal is that we should interpret our perceptual
access to the orientation of the picture surface as a dorsal
phenomenon: if we do so, we do not face any of the objections
outlined above and we can indeed use Pirenne’s original
observations to explain what we experience when we look at
pictures from an oblique angle. And some recent studies seem
to support this hypothesis. In a recent article, Vishwanath et al.,
2005 argued for a version of the ‘compensation’ view, where
they describe our perceptual access to the orientation of the
picture surface as ‘task-dependent’ ‘local slant’. Both taskdependence and locality are dorsal features.
To sum up, it seems that if we interpret our perceptual
access to the orientation of the picture surface as a ventral
phenomenon, then it fails to account for the phenomenon
that we experience depicted scenes without distortions even
if we look at the picture from an oblique angle. But if we
interpret this perceptual access as a dorsal phenomenon,
then we can indeed explain this puzzling phenomenon. To
go back to Pirenne’s original fresco example, when we are
looking at a ceiling fresco from an angle, what we are
lacking is dorsal access to the orientation of the fresco – the
fresco is too far away for our dorsal subsystem to allow
localization in our (egocentric) space. Thus, we have good
reason to suppose that our perceptual access to the
orientation of the picture surface is dorsal and this is exactly
what we need in order to support claim (c): the picture
surface is represented not by the ventral but by the dorsal
subsystem.

surface is never represented by ventral perception, but only
that it is not necessary for seeing-in that we represent the
surface ventrally.
The main argument here is that we do not need to
recognize the surface features in order to see an object in the
picture. We do not need to be able to recognize the ellipsoid
shape on the surface to see a round coin in the picture. And
most of the time we do not do so. When I am watching a
football game, I do not need to recognize a trapezoid shape
on the screen in order to see the goal. It seems that most of
the time when we see things in pictures, we can do so
without recognizing any of the surface features – without
representing the surface ventrally.
But there are cases where we might do just this, especially
if we are interested in the way the coin (or the goal) is
depicted. In this case, our attention may be drawn to some
of the features of the surface: brushstrokes, composition,
and so on. My point is that this is not necessary for seeing
things in pictures. We can see an apple in a picture even if
we cannot recognize, thus, ventrally represent any features
of the surface.
It is an extremely interesting question when we represent
surface features ventrally and the answer to this question
may be a step towards understanding not seeing-in, but the
aesthetic appreciation of pictures or what is known in the
depiction literature as ‘inflection’: the phenomenon that our
perception of the depicted object is ‘inflected’ by the fact
that it is depicted (Podro, 1991, p. 173; 1998, p. 28; Lopes,
2005 p. 40, pp. 128-9; Hopkins, ms). It has been suggested
that (ventral) attention to the picture surface is necessary for
inflection and thus, for the aesthetic appreciation of pictures
(Podro, 1991; Lopes, 2005, and arguably (see Nanay, 2005)
this is also Wollheim’s view in Wollheim, 1980; 1987). But
as it has been pointed out (Levinson, 1998; Lopes, 1996, pp.
37-51), the aesthetic appreciation of pictures is not
necessary for seeing-in. To put these two claims together: (i)
(ventral) attention to the surface is necessary for the
aesthetic appreciation of pictures, (ii) the aesthetic
appreciation of pictures is not necessary for seeing-in. Thus,
(ventral) attention to the surface is not necessary for seeingin, which is exactly what we need to establish claim (d).
Even if it is a necessary condition for the aesthetic
appreciation of pictures that the surface engages our ventral
vision, this claim should not be extended to seeing-in in
general.

Two objections
I need to address two possible objections that could
jeopardize the account of picture perception I put forward.
First, how would my account explain the fact that we can
perceive pictures of pictures? I have argued (see (b) above)
that our dorsal vision does not attribute properties to
depicted objects. But then our dorsal vision cannot attribute
properties to the surface of the depicted picture either. But
as (see (c)) it is necessary for seeing things in pictures that
our dorsal vision attributes properties to the picture surface,

(d) The surface of the picture is not necessarily
represented by ventral perception
It is crucial to note that the scope of this claim is different
from that of the previous three. I will not argue that the
978

we cannot see anything in the depicted picture. But this does
not sound right.
To put it briefly, suppose that I am looking at a picture A
that depicts another picture B depicting object C. Because of
(b), I cannot perceive the surface of B dorsally. But because
of (c), I need to perceive the surface of B dorsally in order
to see C in B. Thus, I cannot see C in B.3
My response is to bite the bullet. We do not see anything
in a depicted picture: we do not see C in B. We do see C in
A, the picture we are looking at, and whose surface we do
perceive dorsally. And we do see B in A. We see a picture
(B) in A and we see the object depicted by this picture B in
A, but we do not see C in B. Consider the painting on the
wall of the room in Vermeer’s Woman holding a balance. It
depicts the Last Judgment. My claim is that we do not see
the Last Judgment in the picture on the wall of the woman’s
room. We do see a painting on the wall of the woman’s
room in the Vermeer painting and we do see the Last
Judgment in the Vermeer painting.
If we want to adjudicate between my explanation of
seeing pictures in pictures and the one that is supposed to be
problematic for my account, according to which we see
things in depicted pictures, we need to decide whether we
see things in the depicted picture (on the wall in Vermeer’s
painting) or in the picture we are looking at (the Vermeer
painting itself). I will argue that we have good reason to
believe that it’s the latter.
Consider the perception of pictures in pictures where a
picture is depicted from an oblique angle. Our estimation of
the spatial relations of the objects depicted by the depicted
picture is notoriously wrong. And our estimation of the
spatial relations of objects depicted by a picture viewed
from the same oblique angle is not (Vishwanath et al., 2005;
cf. Koenderink et al., 2004).
Take Canaletto’s Grand Canal looking South-east. There
is a larger building on the right hand side of the Canal. If we
look at this picture face to face, even from a very oblique
angle, we have no problem identifying what building on the
left hand side of the Canal would be opposite this large
building. If, however, we look at a high resolution
photograph of this painting from an oblique angle, it is
extremely difficult to tell, which building on the left hand
side of the Canal is the one that would be opposite the large
building on the right (see also Sedgwick & Nicholls, 1993).
We do not perceive the surface of the painting dorsally.
Thus, my account predicts that we cannot see objects in this
painting in the same way as we would if it were in front of
us so that we could perceive its surface dorsally. And this is
exactly what we experience: the way we see objects in
surfaces that we do not perceive dorsally is distorted. The
way we see objects in surfaces that we do perceive dorsally

is not distorted even if we look at these pictures from an
oblique angle.
Thus, we see the (distorted) Grand Canal in the
photograph and we see the painting in the photograph. We
do not see the (distorted) Grand Canal in the painting. The
‘pictures of pictures’ objection is avoided.
The second possible objection is the following. I argued
that both the ventral and the dorsal subsystems are needed
for the perception of objects in pictures. There may be some
empirical worries about this claim. It seems consistent with
the empirical literature that the ventral subsystem is needed
for picture perception as it has been shown that the
breakdown of the ventral stream (as we have seen in the
case of D. M., the patient with visual agnosia) leads to a
breakdown in picture perception. So far so good.
But what happens if the dorsal stream breaks down? As in
my account both the ventral and the dorsal subsystems are
needed for picture perception, one could argue that if my
account is correct, then, we should expect somewhat
impaired picture perception among optic ataxia, that is, if it
is not the ventral but the dorsal stream that breaks down.
The picture perception of patients with optic ataxia has not
been tested but researchers who work with such patients
would not exclude the possibility that they can indeed see
objects in pictures (David Milner, personal communication,
June 2007, Christopher Striemer, personal communication,
June 2007). If this turned out to be the case, would this
jeopardize my account?
I don’t think it would. Patients with optic ataxia tend to
cope well with their environment, the lack of the dorsal
stream is only manifest under some special
circumstances. For example, they have no problem
reaching for and grasping objects in their fovea,
difficulties with manipulation only occur if they
perceive something outside of their fovea. Also, as
these patients have been growing up in a world full of
pictures, it seems unlikely that they wouldn’t acquire
a non-dorsal way of recognizing that they perceive a
picture. And maybe their way of relating to pictures
is based not on seeing-in, but on the ventral
recognition that they perceive pictures. More
experiments need to be conducted on this, but for
now it is sufficient to point out that if optic ataxia
patients have problems with their picture perception,
this would confirm my account, but if they don’t, this
would not falsify it. 4

4

It is also possible that the way patients with optic ataxia perceive
pictures is similar to the way we perceive pictures depicted by
another picture: we do not see objects in them. They see the
depicted object, they see the picture surface and they infer that this
object is depicted by this picture. Yet, they don’t see the object in
the picture. This hypothesis could also be tested by examining
whether optical ataxia patients misestimate the spatial relations
between the depicted objects in a picture viewed from an oblique
angle.

3

It is important to note that this problem does not arise if the
surface of A is the same as that of B, as they most often are when
we look at reproductions of paintings. I will take it for granted in
what follows that the two surfaces are different and
distinguishable.

979

Koenderink, J., van Doorn, A., Kappers, A., & Todd, J.
(2004). Pointing out of the picture. Perception, 33, 513–
30.
Kulvicki, J. (2006). On Images: Their Structure and
Content. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levinson, J. (1998) Wollheim on Pictorial Representation.
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 56, 227-233.
Lopes, D. M. (1996). Understanding Pictures. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lopes, D. M. (2005). Sight and Sensibility. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Matthen, M. (2005). Seeing, Doing and Knowing: Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Nanay, B. (2004). Taking Twofoldness Seriously. Walton
on Imagination and Depiction. Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism, 62, 285-289.
Nanay, B. (2005). Is Twofoldness Necessary for
Representational Seeing? British Journal of Aesthetics,
45, 263-272.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Pirenne, M. H. (1970). Optics, Painting, and Photography.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Podro, M, (1998). Depiction. Harvard University Press.
Rizzolatti, G. & Matelli, M. (2003). Two different streams
form the dorsal visual system: anatomy and functions.
Experimental Brain Research, 153, 146-157.
Rogers, S. (1995). Perceiving Pictorial Space. In: W.
Epstein and S. Rogers (Eds.), Perception of Space and
Motion. San Diego: Academic Press, pp. 119-163.
Sedgwick, H.A. & Nicholls, A.L. (1993). Cross Talk
between the Picture Surface and the Pictorial Scene:
Effects on Perceived Shape. Perception, 22 (suppl.), 109.
Tanaka M. (2007). Recognition of pictorial representations
by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Animal Cognition, 10,
169-179.
Turnbull, O.H., Driver, J & McCarthy R.A. (2004). 2D but
not 3D: Pictorial depth deficits in a case of visual agnosia.
Cortex, 40, 723-738.
Vishton, P.M., Cutting, J.E., (1995). Veridical size
perception for action: reaching vs. estimation.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 36
(Suppl.), 358.
Vishwanath, D., Girshick, A.R. & Banks, M.S. (2005). Why
pictures look right when viewed from the wrong place.
Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1401-1410.
Westwood, D. A., Danckert, J., Servos, P. & Goodale, M.
(2002). Grasping two-dimensional images and threedimensional objects in visual-form agnosia. Experimental
Brain Research, 144, 1432-1106.
Wollheim, R. (1980). Seeing-as, Seeing-in, and Pictorial
Representation. In: Art and its Object. Second Edition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 205-226.
Wollheim, R. (1987). Painting as an Art. Princeton,
Princeton University Press.
Wollheim, R. (1998). On Pictorial Representation. Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 56, 217-226.

Conclusion: Twofoldness revisited
I argued that it is necessary for picture perception that our
ventral vision attributes properties to the depicted object,
whereas our dorsal vision attributes properties to the picture
surface. And these separate perceptual processes constitute
the two folds of our twofold experience of pictures.
Wollheim stated that the twofoldness of our experience is
a necessary condition for representational seeing or seeingin. This suggestion has often been dismissed and criticised
for its obscurity. I argued that there is a straightforward and
empirically plausible way of filling in the details of
Wollheim’s notion of twofoldness that would preserve the
spirit of the original notion but would also make it testable
and, therefore, falsifiable.

Acknowledgments
I am grateful for Dom Lopes’ and Mohan Matthen’s
comments as well as the members of the depiction reading
group at the University of British Columbia in Summer
2007.

References
Aglioti, S., DeSouza, J.F.X., & Goodale, M.A. (1995). Sizecontrast illusions deceive the eye but not the hand.
Current Biology, 5, 679-685.
Bruno, N. (2001). When does action resist visual illusions?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 385-388.
Busey, T.A., Brady, N.P., and Cutting, J.E. (1990).
Compensation is unnecessary for the perception of faces
in slanted pictures. Perception & Psychophysics, 48, 1-11.
Campbell, J. (in press). Sensorimotor Knowledge and Naïve
Realism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gombrich, E. (1960). Art and Illusion. New York:
Pantheon.
Goodale, M.A. & Humphrey G.K. (1998). The objects of
action and perception. Cognition, 67, 181-207.
Goodale, M. A., & Westwood, D. A. (2004). An evolving
view of duplex vision: Separate but interacting cortical
pathways for perception and action. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 14, 203–211.
Haffenden, A. & Goodale, M.A. (1998). The effect of
pictorial illusion on prehension and perception. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 122–136.
Hagen M. A., Glick R. & Morse B. (1978). Role of twodimensional surface characteristics in pictorial depth
perception. Perception and Motor Skills, 46, 875-881.
Halloran T.O. (1989). Picture perception is array specific:
viewing angle versus apparent orientation. Perception &
Psychophysics, 45, 467-82.
Hopkins, R. (ms). Inflected Pictorial Experience: Its
Treatment and Significance
Jeannerod, M. (1997). The Cognitive Neuroscience of
Action. Oxford: Blackwell.
980

