UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Polyscheme and Cognitive Substrate Tutorial

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tb172f6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Cassimatis, Nicholas
Bignoli, Perrin
Kurup, Unmesh

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Polyscheme and Cognitive Substrate Tutorial
Nicholas Cassimatis (cassin@rpi.edu), Perrin Bignoli (bignop@rpi.edu), Unmesh Kurup (kurup@rpi.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th St., Troy, NY 12180 USA
2007); many difficult linguistic reference resolution
problems can be resolved by using substrate relations to
encode and jointly reason over both linguistic and nonlinguistic constraints (Cassimatis 2008).

The Cognitive Substrate and Polyscheme
This tutorial describes a research program that aims to
explain the breadth and power of human intelligence by
creating a parsimonious computational model with these
abilities. The approach is based on the Cognitive Substrate
Hypothesis and the Polyscheme theory of cognitive
architecture. These theories aim to explain two key
properties of human intelligence: (1) it can operate in a
broad range of situations, many of which never occurred
when human cognitive mechanisms evolved and (2) it can
simultaneously integrate several forms of perception,
knowledge and reasoning.
The Cognitive Substrate Hypothesis (Cassimatis 2006)
states that 1. A modest set of relations (involving, for
example, time, causality, identity and space) are sufficient to
encode knowledge about most or all domains and that 2.
Once cognition involving these relations is understood,
explaining the rest of cognition can proceed by
characterizing problems using these substrate relations. This
hypothesis is motivated in part by work into lexical
semantics (Talmy 1988; Jackendoff 1990) and cognitive
development (Carey and Spelke 1994) suggesting that a
core set of representations and mechanisms from physical
reasoning and/or perception underlie cognition in many
domains.
The Polyscheme theory of cognitive architecture is
intended to explain how mechanisms for reasoning over the
substrate relations can be integrated and it thereby motivates
an implementation of a cognitive substrate that people can
use to model human intelligence in a wide array of domains.
It is based on the belief that much human reasoning can be
explained in terms of simulations using “lower-level”
processes. Three of the ways Polyscheme differs from
traditional production-system architectures are: (1) the
extent of its focus on the breadth and power of human
reasoning abilities, (2) its commitment to richer, more
specialized primitive representational elements and (3) its
inclusion of multiple representational formalisms and
computational mechanisms (including, for example, neural
networks, quantified probabilistic and logical constraints,
temporal constraint graphs and category hierarchies).
Much work has demonstrated Polyscheme’s ability to
implement a cognitive substrate that supports models of
reasoning in many domains. This work often proceeds by
providing mappings between cognitive structures that occur
in one domain and those in the cognitive substrate. For
example, the structures in modern formal grammatical
theories can be mapped onto the structures in physical
reasoning (Cassimatis 2006); reasoning about people’s
beliefs can be reduced to reasoning about categorical,
identity and counterfactual relations (Bello, Bignoli et al.

Objectives of Tutorial
The objectives of this tutorial are to (1) introduce
participants to results from linguistics and cognitive
development that motivate that Cognitive Substrate
Hypothesis (2) to explore the ramifications of this work for
theories of cognitive architecture, development and
evolution and (3) to enable them to use the Polyscheme
architecture to develop, refine and apply models using
substrate relations. Models of infant physical reasoning,
children’s metacognition, syntactic parsing, reference
resolution and spatial reasoning will be used as examples.
Applications discussed will include robotics, natural
language processing and human-computer interaction.

Background of Participants
Participating in the tutorial will only require some
familiarity with basic notions in cognitive science and a
comfort with simple formal notation. Anyone able to read a
basic production rule or a formula in introductory logic will
be able to follow the tutorial. No programming apart from
the use of Polyscheme’s input format will occur during the
tutorial.

References
Bello, P., P. Bignoli, et al. (2007). Attention and
Association Explain the Emergence of Reasoning About
False Belief in Young Children. 8th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling, Ann Arbor, MI.
Carey, S. and E. S. Spelke (1994). Domain-specific
knowledge and conceptual change. Mapping the mind:
Domain specificity in cognition and culture. L. Hirschfeld
and S. Gelman. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University
Press: 169-200.
Cassimatis, N. L. (2006). “A Cognitive Substrate for
Human-Level Intelligence.” Artificial Intelligence
Magazine 27(2).
Cassimatis, N. L. (2008). Resolving Ambiguous, Implicit
and Non-Literal References by Jointly Reasoning over
Linguistic and Non-Linguistic Knowledge, LONDIAL
2008: 12th Annual SEMDIAL Workshop on Semantics
and Pragmatics.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic Structures. Cambridge,
MA, The MIT Press.
Talmy, L. (1988). “Force Dynamics in Language and
Cognition.” Cognitive Science 12: 49-100.

3

