UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Poverty of the Stimulus' Revisited: Recent Challenges Reconsidered

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2541f4dp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Berwick, Robert C.
Chomsky, Noam

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

‘Poverty of the Stimulus’ Revisited: Recent Challenges Reconsidered
Robert C. Berwick (berwick@csail.mit.edu)
Department of EECS and Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 32D-728, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Noam Chomsky (chomsky@mit.edu)
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, 32D-840, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract

Recent Challenges to the POS Reconsidered

A central goal of modern generative grammar has been to
discover the invariant properties of language, presumably
“part of the innate schematism of mind that is applied to the
data of experience” and that “might reasonably be attributed
to the organism itself as its contribution to the task of the
acquisition of knowledge” (Chomsky, 1971). One such
putative principle is the structure dependence of
grammatical rules generally, including rules of question
formation. One argument for this position, presented in
Chomsky (1968), is sometimes called an ‘argument from
the poverty of the stimulus’ (POS) since the sample data for
selecting a correct target hypothesis does not seem rich
enough without positing a priori the principle in question.
Recently, several researchers have claimed that this POS
argument can be deflected without resort to this ‘innate
schematism,’ among these a string substitutability procedure
(Clark & Eyraud, 2006), or a Bayesian model selection
algorithm that adjudicates between regular and context-free
grammars (Perfors, Tennenbaum & Regier, 2006). We
demonstrate that all these recent arguments fail. We
conclude that the POS argument and its support for a priori
structure dependence holds, without qualification.

Certain recent research challenges this particular argument.
For example, Perfors, Tennenbaum & Regier (2006) assert
that “dependence of linguistic rules on hierarchical phrase
structure” could be learned “given typical child-redirected
input,” thereby defusing the POS argument. But this
challenge, like the others cited, is flawed. The POS
argument was formulated on the assumption that
hierarchical structure was the right representation. Whether
it is learned or not is irrelevant. The AFP remains, because
the learner faces the same competing choice between (A)
and (B) as before: rules remain formulable as structuredependent or not, independent of the claim that hierarchical
structure is learned or not. Further, to the best of our
knowledge no one has ever challenged the claim that
hierarchical structure can be learned. It can trivially be
learned – assuming that the learning system allows the
choice of the simplest possible hypothesis, without resort to
any complex learning method. If this is true, then these
challenges have no bearing whatsoever on the AFP and the
related POS argument, appearances to the contrary. Indeed,
such work does not even address the AFP as originally
posed, since the original formulation employs the notion
‘front,’ i.e., ‘move,’ not a part of the CFGs or alternatives
used in these recent challenges. CFGs must be immensely
and unnecessarily complicated to replicate such phenomena
before we can even state the (A) vs. (B) choice properly.
Even assuming all this, these challenges fail because they
actually arrive at the wrong target result: verb (adjective,
wh) movement is a priori barred in Subject relative clauses,
as evidenced by a long-known and more general “island
constraint”; thus there is no need and weaker empirical
support for the more specific rule (B).

The Argument from “Poverty of the Stimulus”
One popular exposition of the POS argument (Chomsky,
1968) proceeds by positing learners presented with example
sentences such as (1) below, but crucially not (2), both
sentences represented phrase structure terms as illustrated.
We then ask how a child might, given examples such as (1),
choose between two competing rules for question formation,
each rule operating via the ‘displacement’ of the auxiliary
verb is to the front of the representation: rule (A), which is
not structure-dependent but refers only to words and ignores
phrase structure; and rule (B), which is structure-dependent
and refers to phrase structure. We call this the ‘auxiliary
fronting problem’ (AFP):
(1) [[the man] [[is] [happy]]]
(2) [[[the man [who is tall]] [[is] [happy]]]
(A) Front the first occurrence of is
(B) Front the structurally most prominent occurrence of is
Application of (A) leads to the correct result when applied
to examples such as (1), but does not generalize correctly to
(2), whereas (B) works properly on (2). Children and adult
grammars select (B), indicating that structure dependence is
part of the a priori schematism cited earlier.

References
Chomsky, N. (1968). Language and Mind. New York:
Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovitch.
Chomsky, N. (1971). Problems of Knowledge and Freedom.
London: Fontana.
Clark, A. & Eyraud, R. (2006). Learning auxiliary fronting
with grammatical inference. Proc. 28th Annual meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, Canada.
Perfors, A., Tennenbaum, J., & Regier, T. (2006) Poverty of
the stimulus? A rational approach. Proc. 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver,
Canada.

383

