UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Predicting Reasoning from Visual Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4nc4d5xg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Heit, Evan
Hayes, Brett K.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Predicting Reasoning from Visual Memory
Evan Heit (eheit@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive Science, University of California, Merced, CA, USA

Brett K. Hayes (B.Hayes@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

instances that have that property. This overlap goes beyond
the level of task description; models of both recognition
memory (Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Hintzman, 1988; Ratcliff,
1990) and induction (Feeney & Heit, 2007; Osherson et al.
1990; Sloman, 1993) view similarity computation as a core
process that determines performance.

Abstract
This work examined the relationship between recognition
memory and inductive reasoning for a common set of visual
stimuli. Adults were shown pictures of large dogs and then
asked whether test pictures were old or new (memory task) or
whether they shared a target property with old items (reasoning
task). Although more positive responses to test stimuli were
made in the reasoning task, there was a strong correlation
between memory and reasoning judgments. Simulations
confirmed that both sets of judgments could be explained by a
single exemplar-based model with variations in the parameter
corresponding to the generalization gradient for each task.

Table 1: Chapter Numbers for Perception, Memory, and
Reasoning in Cognitive Psychology Textbooks
Textbook

Keywords: Inductive reasoning, Recognition memory

Anderson (2004)
Eysenck (2005)
Galotti (2008)
Goldstein (2007)
Hunt & Ellis (2003)
Kellogg (2007)
Matlin (2004)
Medin, Ross, &
Markman (2004)
Solso, MacLin, &
MacLin (2007)
Sternberg (2005)

Introduction
By tradition, reasoning and memory are kept separate. On
average, reasoning and memory are six chapters apart in
cognitive psychology textbooks (see Table 1, with
comparison to perception as well). Each topic is most often
studied with its own experimental paradigms, addressing
different questions and resulting in reasoning phenomena and
memory phenomena being addressed by separate theories. Of
course, there are exceptions to this generalization. For
example, research on meta-cognition sometimes addresses
how people reason about their own memories (e.g., Finn &
Metcalfe, 2008), and research has shown false memories can
be created through reasoning (Brainerd & Reyna, 1993;
Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004). Modeling frameworks such as
Bayesian models (Chater & Oaksford, 2008) and
connectionist models (e.g., McRae, 2004) have been applied
to both reasoning and memory. Still, the usual conception is
that reasoning and memory are very different cognitive
activities.
Despite the apparent differences there are some good
reasons for thinking that reasoning and memory may share
underlying cognitive processes. At a very general level,
reasoning and memory, like many other perceptual and
cognitive tasks, involve the generalization of existing
knowledge (about familiar stimuli and their properties) to a
novel set of stimuli (cf., Shepard, 1987). A more specific
point of overlap is the central role accorded in each task to the
similarity between familiar targets and test items in
determining test responses. In recognition the probability that
an item is recognized as “old” is a positive function of its
similarity to previously studied items (Jones & Heit, 1993). In
inductive reasoning the probability that a novel item is judged
to have some property depends on its similarity to known

Mean
Standard Deviation

Perception

Memory

Reasoning

2
3
3
3
2
2
2.5

6
7
6
6
5.5
5
6

10
16
12
12
12
10
12

3

6.5

11

3.5
4

6
6.5

13
12

2.80
0.67

6.05
0.55

12.00
1.70

Note: When a topic is covered in multiple chapters within a
textbook, the average chapter number is reported.

Our own approach therefore is to investigate the similarities
between memory and reasoning rather than treat them
differently. We developed a new experimental paradigm that
makes reasoning and memory tasks as comparable as
possible. In particular, people were either asked to make
recognition judgments about a set of pictures they had
studied, or make property inferences about the same set. We
examined whether the overgeneralization errors that people
make in visual recognition predict the pattern of
generalization that other people show in inductive reasoning.
When memory and reasoning tasks differ only in the nature of
judgments being made at test, we predicted that there will be
a reasonably close correspondence between them in
performance on individual items. Items that are more likely to
be identified as old should generally be judged as stronger
candidates for property inference.

83

and Zaki (1998), for example, were able to account for past
dissociations in recognition and categorization among
amnesic patients and normal controls using a single,
exemplar-based model, allowing a sensitivity parameter to
vary from the categorization task to the recognition task. The
key idea was that categorization involves broader
generalization and recognition involves more sensitivity to
exact matches between studied items and test items. In the
current work we followed the same logic assuming that, all
things being equal, inductive judgments would show a
broader pattern of generalization across test items than
recognition judgments.

On the other hand, by making the tasks comparable, it
could be the case that dissociations between memory and
reasoning are made more salient, interpretable as revealing
the deeper nature of memory and reasoning as opposed to just
task differences. For example, a visual recognition memory
task may be more perceptually driven, whereas a reasoning
task might tap into deeper conceptual knowledge. Sloutsky
and Fisher (2004), for example, argued that children use the
same information (perceptual similarity) for memory and
reasoning, but that adult reasoning is particularly influenced
by conceptual (taxonomic) information. Other researchers
have emphasized the role of more complex conceptual
knowledge, such as beliefs about causal mechanisms, in
property induction (e.g., Medin, Coley, Storms & Hayes,
2003; Rehder, 2006). Although such conceptual knowledge
could conceivably affect picture memory, one might expect a
greater influence on a reasoning task.
One form of conceptual knowledge that might affect
induction but not recognition is knowledge about the
relationships between a particular stimulus (and the category
to which it belongs) and the kind of property that is to be
inferred. Previous work has shown that varying the nature of
the property can strengthen or weaken property generalization
between the same target and test items. Heit and Rubinstein
(1994), for example, found that anatomical properties were
more likely to be generalized from sparrows to hawks than
from tigers to hawks, but that this pattern reversed when the
property was predatory behavior. One interpretation is that
different properties cause people to compute similarity
between target and test instances in different ways (e.g.,
inferences about anatomical properties may be based on
taxonomic similarity while inferences about predation may be
based on similarity between ecological roles). This work
suggests that the relationship between recognition and
induction performance might vary with the type of property
being inferred. This possibility was tested in the current study
by varying the target property for induction; people doing
induction made inferences about either anatomical or
behavioral properties.
A second important goal of this work was to examine
whether reasoning and memory performance could be
accommodated within a single computational model. As
noted by Heit and Hayes (2005), previous, successful models
of recognition memory have not addressed reasoning and
likewise previous models of inductive reasoning have not
addressed memory. The key assumption of our model was
adapted from exemplar models of categorization (Medin &
Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1988); namely that the tendency to
make a positive response to a test stimulus is a positive
function of the total similarity between that stimulus and all
studied items. Exemplar models have been successful in
accounting for patterns of categorization and recognition of
the same stimulus sets (e.g., Nosofsky, 1988; Shin &
Nosofsky, 1992) but have only rarely been applied to
reasoning data (e.g., Estes, 1994). A strength of these models
is that they can account for apparent dissociations between
tasks without assuming multiple cognitive systems. Nosofsky

Method
Participants
Ninety-seven students were recruited individually in quiet,
public places, such as the library, on the University of
California, Merced campus. Subjects were randomly assigned
to one of three conditions: memory (n=31), reasoninganatomical property (n=32), reasoning-behavioral property
(n=34).
Materials
The stimuli were color photographs of dogs, 280 pixels
square, adapted from a compendium of dog breeds (American
Kennel Club, 2006) and other internet sources. The same
stimulus set was used for all three conditions. The study list
consisted of 10 pictures of large dogs. The test list consisted
of 45 pictures of dogs. There were 10 old items (the large
dogs originally studied), 15 lure items (other large dogs, not
previously studied), and 20 new items (10 small dogs and 10
medium dogs).
Procedure
The experiment was run using a program on a laptop
computer. In the memory condition, subjects were instructed
to memorize the initial set of pictures. They were shown the
10 pictures on the study list, in a different random order for
each subject. Each 10 cm2 picture was presented for 2 s, with
a 0.5 s interstimulus interval during which the screen was
blank. There was a 60 s unfilled retention interval before the
test phase. Subjects were instructed to judge whether or not
they had seen each test picture, by selecting either a yes or no
button on the computer screen. During the test phase, the 45
test pictures were shown sequentially, in a different random
order for each subject.
The reasoning-anatomical property condition was like the
memory condition, except for the following. Before the study
phase, subjects were told they would see a set of animals with
“beta cells” in the blood. Before the test phase, subjects were
told to judge whether or not each animal has “beta cells.”
The reasoning-behavioral property condition was like the
reasoning-anatomical property condition, except for the
following. Before the study phase, subjects were told they
would see a set of animals which had been observed to
perform “behavior X.” Before the test phase, subjects were

84

Table 2: Results (proportion of “yes” responses and d’) and
Model Predictions

told to judge whether or not each animal performs “behavior
X.”

Results and Discussion
Across the 45 items on the test list, responses in the three
conditions were very strongly correlated. The correlation
between the memory condition and the reasoning-anatomical
property condition was .83, the correlation between the
memory condition and the reasoning-behavioral property
condition was .88, and the correlation between the reasoninganatomical property condition and the reasoning-behavioral
property condition was .86. In other words, memory was a
very good predictor of reasoning, and the correlations
between memory and reasoning were approximately the same
as the correlation between two reasoning tasks. This relation
is illustrated in Figure 1, showing a scatter plot of memory
responses versus reasoning on anatomical properties, for the
10 old items, 15 lure items, 10 new, medium dogs and 10
new, small dogs. Note the curvilinear relation between
memory and reasoning, falling above the main diagonal,
indicating a greater level of generalization for reasoning than
for memory.

Results
Memory
ReasoningAnatomical
ReasoningBehavioral
Model
Memory
Reasoning

Reasoning

0.8

old
lures
new-medium
new-small

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

New
Medium

New
Small

All
New

Lure

d’
(OldNew)

d’
(OldLure)

0.68

0.13

0.17

0.15

0.30

1.64

1.09

0.82

0.41

0.49

0.45

0.68

1.15

0.39

0.79

0.39

0.42

0.40

0.57

1.21

0.66

0.68
0.81

0.18
0.48

0.10
0.42

0.14
0.45

0.30
0.68

1.55
0.99

0.99
0.38

Compared to the memory condition, subjects in the
reasoning-anatomical property condition were more likely to
give positive responses. On old items, they inferred beta cells
.82 of the time, and on new items, .45 of the time, with
discrimination measured as 1.15 in d’ units. Hence
discrimination between old and new items was poorer in the
reasoning-anatomical property condition than in the memory
condition. As in the memory condition, there were more
positive responses to medium dogs than to small dogs. For
the lure items, the rate of positive response was high, .68,
with a corresponding d’ (old compared to lures) of .39.
Overall, compared to the memory condition, in the reasoninganatomical property condition, there was a high rate of
generalization, with subjects particularly likely to extend the
property to the lure items, other large dogs. The results for the
reasoning-behavioral property condition were similar to the
reasoning-anatomical condition.
These observations were confirmed by ANOVAs on
responses for individual subjects. The probability of
responding “yes” to old items, new items (small and medium
dogs) and lures was higher in the induction conditions than in
the recognition condition (F(1, 91) = 7.97, p<.01, partial η2 =
0.08; F(1, 91) = 23.52, p<.001, partial η2 = 0.21; and F(1, 91)
= 21.934, p<.001, partial η2 = 0.19; respectively). Sensitivity
(d’) was higher for recognition judgments than induction
judgments for both old vs. lure items, F(1, 91) = 6.69, p<.05,
partial η2 = 0.07 and old vs. new items, F(1, 91) = 3.98,
p<.05, partial η2 = 0.05 No differences between the two
reasoning conditions were found in yes responding or
sensitivity (F’s < 0.5) 1.

1.0

0.6

Old

1.0

Memory

Figure 1: Relationship between memory and reasoning
judgments (axes show probability of a “yes” response)
The key descriptive results are shown in Table 2. In the
memory condition, recognition performance was good, with a
hit rate of .68 on old items (large dogs) and a false alarm rate
of .15 on new items, with discrimination measured as 1.64 in
d’ units based on these averages. The false alarm rate was
slightly higher on pictures of medium dogs than pictures of
small dogs. For the lure items (large dogs not studied), the
average false alarm rate was .30, with a corresponding d’ (old
compared to lures) of 1.09.

Simulations
We used an exemplar model framework, applied to the
recognition memory task as in Nosofsky and Zaki (1998) as
well as Heit (1993) and Estes (1994). We modeled the overall
pattern of results, rather than the actual stimuli used in the
experiment. Hence, predictions were made for four types of
1
Data from three participants who responded “yes” to all test items
were not analyzed.

85

applied to 20 different random stimulus configurations. The
average estimated parameter values of A, B, c for memory, c
for reasoning, and β were as follows: 1.22, 1.49, 4.10, 1.65,
and 0.53. The estimated A and B values indicate that the
medium dogs were somewhat closer in psychological space
to the large dogs than were the small dogs. Notably, the c
value was considerably higher for memory than for
reasoning, reflecting steeper generalization for memory and
broader generalization for reasoning.
Overall, there was a good fit between model and data, with
an average RMSE of .0554. Table 2 shows average
predictions of the model. This table shows that the main
trends in the data have been captured, such as differences
between the memory and reasoning conditions, and
differences between old, lure, new medium, and new small
items. Likewise the predicted d’ measures are close to the
original results. Note that the simulation had actually made 45
predictions for the memory and reasoning conditions, for 45
test items. Thus it was possible to calculate the predicted
correlation between memory and reasoning, just as the
original data had shown a .83 correlation between memory
and reasoning with anatomical properties across the 45 test
items. In the simulations, the average predicted correlation
between memory and reasoning was .84. This result was
simply an emergent property of the model, that is, the
correlation results were not fitted directly by the model.
Figure 2 shows representative predictions from one
simulation.

stimuli, assigned by simulations to randomized positions in
hypothetical two-dimensional stimulus space.
The study list contained 10 large dogs. Their X-Y positions
were drawn randomly from a bivariate normal distribution
with mean of (0, 0) and a standard deviation of 1. The test list
included these 10 old items as well as 15 lure items,
additional large dogs also drawn randomly from a bivariate
normal distribution with a mean of (0, 0) and a standard
deviation of 1. There were 10 new items that were medium
dogs, in the simulations drawn randomly from a bivariate
normal distribution with an origin of (A, A) and a standard
deviation of 1. Finally, there were 10 new items that were
small dogs, in the simulations drawn randomly from a
bivariate normal distribution with an origin of (B, B) and a
standard deviation of 1. Note that A and B were estimated as
free parameters—these values would reflect the average
positions in psychological space of the large, medium, and
small dogs. It was expected that B>A, reflecting the notion
that large dogs are more similar to medium dogs than large
dogs are to small dogs.
The model was embodied by two equations. Equation 1
shows the familiarity rule. The familiarity of each test
stimulus equals its summed similarity to the 10 studied items.
Similarity is assumed to be an exponential function of
distance between the test item and the studied item, calculated
according to the standard Euclidean formula. The parameter c
is a free parameter reflecting sensitivity-lower values of c
correspond to broader generalization and higher values of c
correspond to steeper generalization gradients.

1.0

10

fam(test ) = ∑ exp(− c dist (test , study i ))

(1)

0.8

i =1

fam( x )
resp(test ) =
fam( x ) + β

Reasoning

The response rule is shown in Equation 2. Essentially, the
probability of a positive response is a monotonic function of a
test item’s familiarity. The response rule has a single scaling
parameter, β. In effect, a lower value of β corresponds to a
greater overall bias to respond positively.

0.6

old
lures
new-medium
new-small

0.4

0.2

(2)
0.0
0.0

The model was used to make predictions on 45 test items,
for memory and for reasoning with anatomical properties.
(Although not reported here, it was also straightforward to fit
the model to reasoning with behavioral properties). These
predictions were compared to the main 8 data points shown in
Table 2, namely the average response rates on old, lure, new
medium, and new small items. The c parameter was allowed
to vary between the memory and reasoning conditions, but
otherwise the model was the same for the two conditions,
hence there were 5 free parameters: A, B, c for memory, c for
reasoning, and β. The free parameters were estimated using
the Solver function in Microsoft Excel, minimizing the root
mean squared error (RMSE) of prediction. The model was

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Memory

Figure 2: Simulated Predictions (axes show predicted
probability of a “yes” response)
To summarize, it was possible to simulate both recognition
memory and inductive reasoning within a single modeling
framework. Only the steepness of the generalization gradient
varied between memory and reasoning. Although the fit of
the model was good, in this initial exercise we did not engage
in comparative model fitting. It would not surprise us if
alternative models could be developed, such as a
connectionist model along the lines of McRae (2004). Even in
absolute terms, this model could be subjected to stronger
86

property induction may involve additional cognitive
processes (e.g., access to knowledge about causal relations)
that are unlikely to be central to visual recognition. Having
said that our work underscores the pervasive influence of
similarity in ostensibly “conceptual” tasks like inductive
reasoning. Broadly, these results resemble those of studies
which have examined the role of the specific similarity
between old and new items in classification. Even when
people are asked to classify novel instances on the basis of an
abstract and perfectly predictive rule old-new similarity still
has a potent influence on classification judgments (e.g., Allen
& Brooks, 1991).
An important question for future work is whether there are
any conditions where memory performance does not predict
reasoning. One factor that we thought would affect the
relationship between memory and reasoning but was not
found to do so was the type of property that people were
asked to infer. Unlike previous studies (e.g., Heit &
Rubinstein, 1994), changing the property had little effect on
patterns on induction. The anatomical and behavioral
properties used in this study, however, may have been so
abstract that participants judged them as equally likely to
apply to most study and test items. Stronger effects are likely
with properties that more clearly prime different kinds of
relations between stimuli. One possibility might be to contrast
the generalization of a novel anatomical property of dogs with
generalization of an evaluative property like “makes a good
pet.” The anatomical property is likely to be generalized
along taxonomic lines while the evaluative property might
lead to much broader generalization with positive responses
to test items from very different taxonomic categories (e.g.,
cats, goldfish).
More broadly, both the memory and reasoning literatures
suggest other factors that might lead to more divergent
response patterns (e.g., Gentner, Ratterman, & Forbus, 1993).
Recognition judgments, for example, are influenced by both
the similarity of old and new items, and the context in which
they are encoded and retrieved (Tulving, 1983). Hence, the
addition of a distinctive contextual cue (e.g., different
photographic backgrounds) for familiar and unfamiliar items
is likely to enhance recognition sensitivity but may have little
effect on property induction. Alternately, if items from
different basic categories were used during study and
properties were correlated with category membership, this
should lead to a broader generalization of the property at test
(to new items from the same categories) but have little effect
on item recognition (cf., Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004).
We suspect that these kinds of manipulations may reduce
the strong contingency that was found between responses in
memory and reasoning tasks. It remains to be seen though
whether such task dissociations can be explained within a
unitary model or require multiple processing systems to be
invoked. In principle, neither single nor double dissociations
between the factors affecting memory and reasoning provide
conclusive evidence for the operation of distinct underlying
processes (Dunn, 2004). Moreover, in a related line of
research, Nosofsky (1988) has shown how dissociations

tests, e.g., by having a greater number of data points relative
to free parameters, or by actually fitting each individual test
item rather than making general predictions for types of
stimuli based on a simulation of random stimuli. This latter
approach would require more detailed data about each test
stimulus, namely its perceived similarity to each studied item.

General Discussion
Our aim was to examine the relationship between memory
and inductive reasoning judgments about the same set of
visual stimuli. The main empirical finding was that when
procedural differences between these tasks were kept to a
minimum there was a close correspondence between the two
kinds of judgments. Judgments about whether a novel
property would generalize to a given test item was positively
related to the probability of responding “old” to that item in
recognition. The strength of this relationship supports the
view that recognition and induction share some underlying
component processes. (For related results, showing high
correlations between categorization and induction, see Rehder
and Hastie, 2004, and Sloutsky and Fisher, 2004.)
There were also some interesting differences between
recognition and induction. People doing induction were more
likely to make positive responses to both familiar and novel
test stimuli (and hence showed lower sensitivity) than those
doing recognition. Induction instructions promoted a broad
generalization of the novel property across the dog category,
whereas recognition instructions led to more of a focus on
whether the test pictures were identical to previously studied
items.
Reasoning and memory judgments could be accounted for
by a single model in which positive test responses were
determined by the total similarity between a test item and
previously studied items. Differences between recognition
and induction in the rate of “yes” responding were captured
by changes in a sensitivity parameter that increased or
decreased the overall psychological distance between study
and test stimuli.
The most straightforward implication of these findings is
that reasoning and memory are not as different as has often
been assumed. Our work provides some preliminary evidence
that exemplar similarity plays a major role in both kinds of
tasks. Differences in patterns of recognition and inductive
responding may be explained in a relatively straightforward
way by altering similarity parameters in the respective
decision rules and do not require the postulation of multiple
systems of representation or processing, or even different
sources of information affecting the two tasks.
Although similarity has been long been acknowledged as a
key component in models of induction and recognition, ours
is the first attempt to explain recognition and induction
judgments for a common stimulus set using a single
theoretical model.
As noted earlier, there is evidence that inductive judgments
are sometimes influenced by complex knowledge that goes
well beyond the visual or taxonomic similarity of old and new
items (e.g., Medin et al., 2003). So at least some kinds of
87

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 411–
422.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 95, 528–551.
Jones, C. & Heit, E. (1993). An evaluation of the total
similarity principle: Effects of similarity on frequency
judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 19, 799-812.
McRae, K. (2004). Semantic memory: Some insights from
feature-based connectionist attractor networks. In B. H.
Ross (Ed.), Psychology of Learning and Motivation:
Advances in Research and Theory, Vol. 45. (pp. 41-86).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207-308.
Medin, D. L., Coley, J. D., Storms, G., & Hayes, B. K.
(2003). A relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 517–532.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1988). Exemplar-based accounts of
relations between classification, recognition, and typicality.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 14, 700–708.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Zaki, S. R. (1998). Dissociations between
categorization and recognition in amnesic and normal
individuals:
An
exemplar-based
interpretation.
Psychological Science, 9, 247-255
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185–200.
Ratcliff, R. (1990). Connectionist models of recognition
memory: Constraints imposed by learning and forgetting
functions. Psychological Review, 97, 285-308.
Rehder, B. (2006). When similarity and causality compete in
category based property induction. Memory & Cognition,
34, 3-16.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2004). Category coherence and
category-based property induction. Cognition, 91, 113-153.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal Law of
Generalization for psychological science, Science, 237
(4820), 1317-1323.
Shin, H. J., & Nosofsky, R. M. (1992). Similarity-scaling
studies of dot-pattern classification and recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 121, 278–
304.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231–280.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 166–
188.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York:
Oxford University Press.

between responding in categorization and recognition can be
accommodated by a singe exemplar model using modest
variations of the decision-rules used in each task. This leads
us to be guardedly optimistic about the prospect that a single
modeling framework might be used to explain a wide variety
of memory and reasoning phenomena.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation
grant to Evan Heit and Caren Rotello, and an Australian
Research Council Discovery Grant to Brett Hayes and Evan
Heit. Thanks to Brooklynn Edwards, Brooke Hahn, Nic
Raboy, and Haruka Swendsen for assistance in carrying out
this research.

References
Allen, S. W., & Brooks, L. R. (1991). Specializing the
operation of an explicit rule. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General. 120, 3-19.
American Kennel Club (2006). AKC Recognized breeds.
Retrieved 03/21/2006 from
http://www.akc.org/breeds/breeds_a.cfm
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (1993). Autosuggestibility in
memory development. Cognitive Psychology, 28, 65-101.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (Eds.) (2008). The probabilistic
mind: Prospects for Bayesian cognitive science. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dunn, J. C. (2004). Remember-know: A matter of
confidence. Psychological Review, 111, 524-542.
Estes, W. K. (1994). Classification and cognition. New York:
Oxford. University Press.
Feeney, A. & Heit, E. (Eds.). (2007). Inductive reasoning:
Experimental,
developmental,
and
computational
approaches. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Finn, B., & Metcalfe, J. (2008). Judgments of learning are
influenced by memory for past test. Journal of Memory and
Language, 58, 19-34.
Gentner, D., Ratterman, M ., & Forbus, K .D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability
from inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524575.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R.M. (1984). A retrieval model for
both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 167.
Heit, E. (1993). Modeling the effects of expectations on
recognition memory. Psychological Science, 4, 244-252.
Heit, E. & Hayes, B. K. (2005). Relations among
categorization, induction, recognition, and similarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 596605.
Heit, E., & Rubinstein, J. (1994). Similarity and property
effects in inductive reasoning. Journal of Experimental

88

