UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preparing Research Grant Proposals for the Institute of Education Sciences: Bringing
Cognitive Science to Education Research

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7453z1cb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Albro, Elizabeth R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preparing Research Grant Proposals for the Institute of Education Sciences:
Bringing Cognitive Science to Education Research
Elizabeth R. Albro (elizabeth.albro@ed.gov)
Associate Commissioner, Teaching and Learning Division
National Center for Education Research
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
555 New Jersey Ave., N.W., Suite 608c
Washington, D.C. 20208-5521

education practice, either at the level of instruction or
through the creation of materials that support teaching and
learning. The purpose of the Cognition and Student
Learning research program is to establish a scientific
foundation for education by building on these theoretical
and empirical advances and applying them to education
practice with the goal of improving student learning and
academic achievement. The success of this program
within NCER has led to the development of a parallel
program of research with the Special Education Research
Center. During the FY 2009 competition, NCSER is also
competing a topic entitled “Cognition and Student
Learning in Special Education.”

The Institute of Education Sciences provides
opportunities for researchers to bring their knowledge of
learning and cognitive science to bear on education
practice. This half-day workshop will provide attendees
with an opportunity to learn about available funding
opportunities through the National Center for Education
Research (NCER) and the National Center for Special
Education Research (NCSER) within the Institute of
Education Sciences. In particular, this workshop invites
potential applicants unfamiliar with the Institute an
opportunity to learn in detail about the types of research
that we support.
The Center seeks research applications designed to
examine ways to improve student learning through
curriculum and instruction, through improving teacher
quality, and through changes in the education system. Dr.
Albro brings six years of experience as an IES program
officer and will provide detailed insights into the grant
preparation, submission, and review process. After
providing an overview of the program, the presenter will
discuss in detail the components of successful grant
applications, and will provide opportunities for potential
applicants to ask questions about the grant application
process.

Participants in the workshop will also learn about other
possible topic areas to which applications can be
submitted. The Institute supports research in the topic
areas of: education research in reading and writing;
mathematics and science; cognition and student learning;
teacher quality; social and behavioral context for
academic learning; education leadership; education
policy, finance, and systems; early childhood programs
and polices; high school reform; interventions for
struggling adolescent and adult readers and writers;
postsecondary education; and education technology. In
addition, both Centers hold competitions for establishing
predoctoral and postdoctoral research training grants, and
for establishing National Research and Development
Centers. Finally, the National Center for Special
Education Research (NCSER) within the Institute of
Education Sciences funds research targeting the
educational needs and outcomes of students identified
with special education needs.

The Institute’s research program entitled “Cognition and
Student Learning” may be of particular interest to the
Cognitive Science Society membership. Through this
program, the Institute supports research that utilizes
cognitive science to develop, implement, and evaluate
approaches intended to improve teaching and learning in
authentic education settings. Although cognitive science
has generated new and important fundamental knowledge
on how people learn over the last 30 years, most of these
research principles have not been incorporated into

15

