UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preventing Postcompletion Errors: How Much Cue Is Enough?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vj5038s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Byrne, Micheal D.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preventing Postcompletion Errors: How Much Cue Is Enough?
Michael D. Byrne (byrne@acm.org)

Departments of Psychology and Computer Science
Rice University, 6100 Main St., MS-25
Houston, TX 77005 USA
Abstract

as well as significant in the real world. For example, one
form of postcompletion error is reportedly common in
electronic voting machines: voters forget to press the final
“cast vote” button after making all their selections, thus
failing to actually vote (see Everett, Greene, Byrne,
Wallach, Derr, Sandler, & Torous, 2008). Legitimate
practical consequences naturally lead to questions about
what can be done to mitigate such errors.
In many cases, the solution is obvious: re-design the task
so that there are no postcompletion steps. This is the
strategy now used in many ATMs: the cash is not dispensed
until the user has retrieved his or her card. While this is
almost certainly the optimal solution in many cases, there
are many other cases where this approach is not possible,
such as already-deployed hardware-based systems.
The next most obvious mitigation strategy is to provide
some kind of cue to let the user know that such an error has
occurred (or is possible). Again, this is the solution adopted
by many ATMs; they emit a loud beeping sound and/or flash
a light near the card slot after dispensing cash. But how
effective are such cues?
This is exactly the question asked by Chung and Byrne
(2004; 2008). In one of their experimental conditions, they
introduced a cue which completely eliminated
postcompletion errors by their experimental subjects. The
cue in this case was a pair of colored, blinking arrows which
pointed to the button which needed to be pressed at the time
it needed to be pressed. This cue has three properties that
Chung and Byrne considered critical:
• Salience. The display used was a grayscale display, so
the blinking colored arrows had a high level of perceptual
salience.
• Specificity. Unlike the beeping of the ATM, which is
non-specific, the cue used made it clear to the user exactly
what to do: the arrows pointed directly to the relevant
button on the display.
• Just-in-time. The cue appeared right at the moment that
action on the critical button needed to be taken. Thus, it
did not rely on the user to have to remember to take action
at a specific time.
Chung and Byrne (2008) also describe an ACT-R model
of the postcompletion error which demonstrates the
effectiveness of the cue. As the model was constructed, it
depended critically on all three of these properties to prevent
the error. The model had to notice the cue (salience), had to
have knowledge about what the cue meant (specificity), and
had to be able to act on that knowledge immediately (just-

Postcompletion error (Byrne & Bovair, 1997) is a robust form
of routine procedural error that can be difficult to prevent.
However, Chung and Byrne (2004, 2008) reported the
complete elimination of this error with a highly aggressive
cue, one which was just-in-time, highly specific, and highly
visually salient. This paper reports three experiments designed
to investigate the role of each one of these factors by using
cues which have only two of the three key properties.
Surprisingly, salience appears to be the least critical property,
and being just-in-time seems to be the most vital. This has
important implications for the mitigation of real-world
postcompletion errors.
Keywords: human error; postcompletion error; routine
procedures; visual cues; visual salience

Introduction
Even in the execution of known routine procedures, people
make non-random errors. Everyone has had this experience,
whether it is leaving one’s bank card in an automated teller
machine (ATM) or failing to attach a promised file to an
email message. While many such errors have little or no real
cost, many such errors have dire consequences, including
loss of human life (Casey, 1998). A particularly robust type
of routine procedural error is the postcompletion error (or
PCE; Byrne & Bovair, 1997). Postcompletion errors occur
when the primary goal of a task is fulfilled and terminal step
(or steps) of the procedure, which occur after this, are
omitted. Standard examples of this error include the
aforementioned bank card left in an ATM, leaving the
original document on a photocopier or flatbed scanner, and
forgetting to replace the gas cap when filling up the car;
most people are personally familiar with at least one
postcompletion error.
While postcompletion errors have been discussed in the
human-computer interaction literature for some time (e.g.,
Young, Barnard, Simon, & Whittington, 1989; Polson,
Lewis, Reiman, & Wharton, 1992), it is only in the last few
years that they have begun to receive more substantial
attention, both theoretical (e.g., Altmann & Trafton, 2002)
and empirical (Byrne & Davis, 2006; Li, Blandford, Cairns,
& Young, 2005; Li, Cox, Blandford, Cairns, & Abeles,
2006; Ratwani, McCurry, & Trafton, 2008). This makes
postcompletion errors unique among routine procedural
errors, as errors in such tasks are generally not robust
enough to lend themselves to controlled experimentation.
Postcompletion errors, however, are both pervasive and
robust, making them both tractable to study in the laboratory
351

in-time). Thus, the model predicts that all three properties
are necessary in order for the cue to fully mitigate the error.
The goal-activation account of Altmann and Trafton
(2002) is the other most obviously relevant account of
cognitive control; the Chung and Byrne model was built
with this account in mind. Both agree that the cue must be
just-in-time to be effective. Both these accounts posit that if
the external cue is noticed, if it meets the other conditions, it
should be able to prevent the error. Thus, a reduced-salience
cue should be partially effective as long as it is noticed at
least some of the time. To be 100% effective the cue would
have to be noticed all the time, so high salience should be
required for perfect mitigation, but both agree that partial
mitigation should be possible.
The most complex property with respect to these two
accounts is specificity. Neither are entirely clear about how
much specificity is enough. The Altmann and Trafton
account says that to the extent that the environmental cue
primes the correct action, it should be effective. That is, if
the cue primes enough to overcome background activation
noise, then the cue should be enough. If not, it shouldn’t.
Cues which prime a little might then be partially effective.
However, predictions about the degree to which that
priming should occur in specific situations is unclear.
The Chung and Byrne ACT-R model has a similar scope
problem with less specific cues, though it is in some sense
less probabilistic than the Altmann and Trafton account
because it does not rely on a noisy priming process, but
rather a single production rule to associate the cue and the
appropriate action. If the model has that rule, then the cue
should work every time. If not, then the cue should fail
every time. This seems a bit too discrete to be accurate.
However, one has to consider how such a rule would be
formed by ACT-R’s learning mechanisms. To form such a
rule, essentially the same information must be encoded in
declarative memory. That is, the model has to have a chunk
which says “What do I do when I see the cue? Take action
x.” When the model first sees the cue, this should be
retrieved, and after enough retrievals, a production rule will
be compiled. However, until that rule is compiled, the model
will have a chance to fail when it tries to retrieve the
relevant chunk. The failure rate for this retrieval will be a
function of the strength of association between the cue and
the relevant chunk—essentially the same unknown and nonpredicted parameter as in the Altmann and Trafton account.
It is hard to say what other accounts of cognitive control
for routine procedural tasks (e.g., Cooper & Shallice, 2000;
Botvinick & Plaut, 2002) would predict, since these
accounts do not cover postcompletion errors. This kind of
phenomenon is particularly problematic for the Botvinick
and Plaut account which argues that subgoals are
epiphenomenal, in which case there should be no
postcompletion errors at all. Whether the Cooper and
Shallice account can be extended to postcompletion errors
remains an open question.

So, how do the predictions hold up? How effective would
a cue be if it had only some of those properties? And which
ones are most important? These are exactly the questions the
following series of experiments were designed to
investigate. Cues with only two of the three properties were
implemented and compared with a non-cued control
condition. To the extent that the weaker cue is effective, it is
reasonable to conclude that whatever property that cue is
missing is less important to mitigating postcompletion
errors.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, the non-cued (control) condition was
compared with two conditions: one a cue that was just-intime and visually salient, but nonspecific, and one that was
just-in-time and specific, but less salient.

Methods
Participants. Participants were 47 Rice University students
ranging in age from 17-24 who were compensated either
with $25 or credit towards a course requirement.
Design. The design was a one-way between-subjects design
with three conditions, to which participants were randomly
assigned: Control (no cue), Reduced Specificity, and
Reduced Salience. See the Stimuli section for details of how
the cues were implemented.
The primary dependent measure was error frequency on
the postcompletion step. On each trial, errors were binary;
that is, either the participant did or did not make an error on
the postcompletion step. An error consisted of clicking on
any button other than the correct button.
As a secondary dependent measure, the time taken to
complete each step was also recorded, primarily to assess
speed-accuracy tradeoff effects.
Stimuli. The task used in this experiment was the same
Phaser task used in previous work (i.e., Byrne & Davis,
2006; Chung & Byrne 2004, 2008) based on the Phaser task
from Byrne and Boviar (1997). The experiment was set in a
fictional “Star Trek”-themed universe, and the task was to
fire the phasers to destroy the enemy Romulan ship. The
display is presented in Figure 1. Participants learned and
performed multiple tasks in this setting; only the Phaser task
is relevant here.
When a participant completed any task, they clicked on a
“Main Control” button to return to the display where they
received feedback about their performance and received the
next task. The Phaser task procedure had 11 steps. After the
10th step, the participant had fired the phaser and knew
whether or not the enemy had been destroyed. However,
before returning to Main Control, the task required that the
“Tracking” button be clicked to de-activate the tracking
system. This was the postcompletion step.

352

Phaser task. Order of trials were randomized for each
participant. During the second session, the experiment
software emitted a warning beep whenever the participant
made an error. However, there was no other error message
and the participant was allowed to continue the trial after
making an error, unlike during training.
Since postcompletion error frequency is linked to memory
load (Byrne & Bovair, 1997), during testing participants
also performed a concurrent memory loading task.
Participants heard a letter presented through headphones at a
rate of one letter per 3 seconds. At random intervals ranging
from 9 to 45 seconds, a tone replaced the letter and a dialog
box appeared on the display, prompting participants to enter
the last three letters they had heard, in order.
Finally, participants were encouraged to work quickly and
accurately by a scoring system. Participants earned points
for correct steps and for rapid performance, and were
penalized for errors in task execution or letter recall. The top
three scorers among the participants earned additional
compensation.

Figure 1. Display for the Phaser task.
The Control condition was identical to the one used in
previous research. That is, there was no special reminder,
instruction, or cue to the participants to remember the
postcompletion step. In the Reduced Specificity condition,
participants saw a cue that consisted of a blinking,
alternating red and yellow, dot which appeared near the
“Tracking” button. This cue appeared as soon as the 10th
step was complete, and continued to blink until the
participant clicked on the “Tracking” button. This cue is less
specific than the successful cue in the Chung and Byrne
experiments because it does not clearly indicate which
control is to be clicked.
In the Reduced Salience condition, two red arrows
appeared, one on either side of the “Tracking” button. These
also appeared immediately after completion of the 10th step
and also remained visible until the “Tracking” button was
clicked. However, these arrows neither blinked nor changed
color. Since the display was almost entirely gray and white,
the arrows were a color singleton.

Materials. Stimuli were presented on Apple eMac
computers with 17” displays at 1024 x 768 resolution; the
Phaser task was implemented in Macintosh Common Lisp.
Participants wore Sony MDR-201 headphones.
0.20
0.18
PCE Frequency ± 1 SEM

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04

Procedure. Participants were run in two sessions spaced
approximately one week apart. The first session was a
training session. In this session, participants read about each
of the tasks and then performed them once, during which
time they could refer to the manual. In the cued conditions,
the manual made specific mention of the appearance of the
cue and the purpose of cue. After the first trial on a task, the
manual was returned to the experimenter and participants
trained until they achieved the criterion of three error-free
performances of the task. When an error was made during
training, the trial was immediately ended and the participant
was given feedback about the correct step, and a new trial
was begun.
Participants trained on three different tasks, only one of
which is reported here. Order of training was randomized
between subjects. Data on performance during training are
not reported here.
The second session was the test session. Participants
received a total of 39 trials, 15 of which were with the

0.02
0.00
Control

Reduced Specificity Reduced Salience
Condition

Figure 2. Postcompletion error frequency by condition for
Experiment 1.

Results
The primary result for Experiment 1 is presented in Figure
2. Obviously, neither of the cues were as effective as Chung
and Byrne’s cue, which completely eliminated
postcompletion errors. However, the the cued conditions did
lead to fewer PCEs than the control condition, contrast on
control vs. cues F(1, 44) = 9.92, p = .003. While the
Reduced Salience cue did produce fewer errors than the
Reduced Specificity cue, this difference did not quite reach
353

reported in Byrne, Maurier, Fick, & Chung, 2004.) The third
condition was a cued condition. In this condition, the red
and yellow flashing arrows from Chung and Byrne were
used; however, they were not presented at the time the
“Tracking” button needed to be clicked. Instead, they were
presented after the 9th step of the procedure. This step
initiated a tracking subtask where the participant had to
track a moving blip to fire the phaser at it. This subtask took
participants on average a little more than seven seconds to
complete. In this cued condition, the red and yellow
blinking arrows blinked for the first two seconds of the
tracking subtask, and were then removed from the display.
Thus, the cue was highly salient and specific, but it was not
just-in-time, and will thus be referred to as a precue.

the conventional significance level, contrast of cue
conditions vs. each other F(1, 44) = 3.74, p = .06.
The reduction in errors in the cued conditions was not due
to a speed-accuracy tradeoff, as the mean step completion
times for the cued conditions were actually slightly smaller
for the cued conditions. (Mcontrol = 4.2 sec, Mreduced specificity =
3.9 sec, Mreduced salience = 3.3 sec; F(2, 44) = 2.76, p = .07). If
anything, the cues helped encourage more rapid
performance while also reducing errors.

Discussion
Both cues produced an intermediate level of mitigation.
That is, neither cue eliminated postcompletion errors, but
both cues reduced PCEs considerably. This suggests that all
three properties are indeed necessary to be sure to mitigate
the error, but that weakened cues can at least provide some
degree of protection against postcompletion errors.
However, this experiment is limited because it did not
examine a cue lacking the just-in-time property. This was
the purpose of Experiment 2.

Results
Because the two control conditions were not different at the
postcompletion step and showed no reliable difference in
error frequency, t(26) = 0.70, p = .49, the two control
conditions were combined.
Figure 3 shows postcompletion error frequency for the
control and precue conditions. Obviously, this difference is
not reliable, t(43) = 0.14, p = .89, as it is hardly a difference
at all. This is unlikely to be an issue of statistical power, as
the power to detect a difference as large as the one obtained
between the control and the cued conditions in Experiment 1
was just over 85%. (Power calculations were performed
with G*Power 3; Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007.)
If the Experiment 2 cue had been as effective as those cues,
it most likely would have been detected.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 examined two cues, each one missing one of
the three properties considered critical by Chung and Byrne
(2004; 2008). Experiment 2 tried a third cue, this one
lacking the just-in-time property and instead providing a cue
in advance of the time needed. Providing a cue prior to the
appropriate time sets up a prospective memory situation;
that is, the cue needs to be remembered and acted up on
later, which is a notoriously unreliable mitigation strategy
(e.g., Guynn, McDaniel, & Einstein, 1998). The situation is
particularly bad for postcompletion errors, which are more
likely when memory load is high. Thus, mitigation with a
prospective cue seems particularly unlikely to be effective
in this case. However, it is important to verify this
empirically.

0.20
0.18
PCE Frequency ± 1 SEM

0.16

Methods
Except where noted below, methods for Experiment 2 were
the same as those in Experiment 1.

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04

Participants. Participants were 45 Rice University
undergraduate students ranging in age from 18-22 who were
compensated either with $25 or credit towards a course
requirement.

0.02
0.00
Precue

Control
Condition

Figure 3. Postcompletion error frequency by condition for
Experiment 2.

Design and Stimuli. There were three between-subjects
conditions to which participants were randomly assigned.
Two of these were non-cued control conditions where other
aspects of the display not related to the postcompletion error
were manipulated. In one condition the buttons were
changed so that all of them were push button-style buttons
(that is, the radio buttons and checkboxes were replaced
with pushbuttons). In another, extra unused buttons were
added to the display. (Effects of these other manipulations
on the earlier steps in the procedure were small and are

Again, there was no issue with speed-accuracy trade-off
here, as the mean step completion time for the precue group
was 3.6 sec and the mean for the control group was 4.1 sec,
t(43) = 0.74, p = .46.

354

Discussion

Postcompletion Error Frequency ± 1 SEM

0.20

Despite high salience and specificity, the cue used in
Experiment 2 was completely ineffective at mitigating
postcompletion errors. Given the prospective/working
memory issues in play, this is not particularly surprising.
However, it is interesting that cues missing one of the other
two key properties were still partially effective, yet this cue
was not. This suggests the just-in-time nature of the cue is
the most critical of the three key properties.

Experiment 3
The previous experiments suggest that just-in-time is the
most important property and that a cue with somewhat
reduced salience can still be at least helpful. Just how
important is salience? How low can cue salience be while
still maintaining some effectiveness for the cue? This is the
key question that motivated Experiment 3.

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
Control

Cued
Condition

Figure 4. Postcompletion error frequency by condition for
Experiment 3.

Methods
Except where noted below, the methods for Experiment 3
were identical to those for Experiments 1 and 2.

Discussion
Experiment 3 demonstrates that it is possible to have a cue
which at least partially mitigates postcompletion errors even
when that cue has modest salience. Obviously, the cue had
some degree of salience, as there was still a visual onset
when the cue first appeared, and onsets themselves tend to
be salient (e.g., Yantis & Jonides, 1990). However, this cue
was so light that it was barely visible; in fact, some
participants complained that they had trouble seeing it at all.
Nonetheless, the cue did substantially reduce, though not
eliminate, postcompletion errors. This suggests that while
salience plays a role in cue effectiveness, high levels of
salience are not necessary to confer substantial benefit.

Participants. Participants were 45 Rice University students
ranging in age from 18-31 who were compensated either
with $25 or credit towards a course requirement.
Design and Stimuli. There were three between-subjects
conditions to which participants were randomly assigned.
Two of these were non-cued control conditions where other
aspects of the display not related to the postcompletion error
were manipulated. In one condition, the display was rearranged to a different layout. In the other, the text on the
buttons was replaced with a string of “x” characters to
prevent semantic label-following.
The third condition was a cued condition. In this
condition, arrows appeared at the same location as in the
previous experiments, and appeared just-in-time. However,
the arrows in this condition were a very light gray and did
not blink on and off. Thus, salience was quite low, while
specificity and just-in-time properties were maintained.

General Discussion
These results show that for a cue to be fully effective at
mitigating postcompletion errors, that all three properties—
salience, specificity, and just-in-time—are required.
Removing any one of these weakens the cue; removing the
just-in-time property makes the cue entirely useless. This
has implications both for design of real-world systems and
for the theories in this domain.
On the practical side, it is clear that designers of realworld warnings and cues often rely solely on cue salience.
Aircraft have many bright red flashing lights which are nonspecific and not just-in-time. ATMs which beep at the
postcompletion step provide a cue which is possibly salient,
sometimes a little late in terms of timing, and entirely nonspecific. It is thus unsurprising that ATMs in many parts of
the world no longer beep and instead use a task re-design to
prevent the error.
The fact that all three properties are important also
explains why it is that it is so difficult to mitigate PCEs via
cueing. In order to provide a cue, the system needs to know

Results
Because the two control conditions were not different at the
postcompletion step and showed no reliable difference in
error frequency, t(28) = 1.31, p = .20, the two control
conditions were combined.
Figure 4 shows postcompletion error frequency for the
control and cued conditions. This difference is statistically
reliable, t(43) = 3.51, p = .001. Clearly, this cue did reduce
postcompletion errors, though it did not eliminate them.
Again, this is not the result of a speed-accuracy tradeoff, as
the trend was actually in the opposite direction, with the
cued condition being faster than the control. The mean step
completion time for the control condition was 4.2 sec and it
was 3.7 sec for the cued condition, t(43) = 1.78, p = .08.
355

both what action the user should take and when they should
take it. If the system knows what to do and when, why not
simply automate the step in the first place? Many
postcompletion errors will be impossible to mitigate exactly
because the system cannot know either the appropriate time,
the appropriate action, or both.
Another possible drawback of the cueing approach to
error mitigation is that people may learn to depend on the
cue and thus be particularly error-prone were the cue to fail.
Further studies need to be done to determine the extent to
which people develop such a reliance on the cue.
These results also have implications for theories of
cognitive control and goal management. Both the Chung
and Byrne model and the Altmann and Trafton account
predict that a cue that is not just-in-time will have no effect,
as found in Experiment 2. They also essentially agree about
the role of salience. As both theories are somewhat vague
with respect to the role of specificity, they both at least
suggest some role, which is consistent with the partial
mitigation found in Experiment 1.
One of the issues which is still open in the domain is more
precise specification of specificity, salience, and just-intime. There are many different definitions of salience in the
visual attention literature; which is the most appropriate in
this domain? Similarly, specificity is also probably not
binary. And there is plenty of room for exploration in terms
of just how temporally close the cue must be to the
appropriate action in order to count as just-in-time.
Despite their importance in both everyday life and in
safety-critical situations, errors in the execution of routine
procedures are still not well-understood. This research is
one of many steps which need to be taken to rectify that
situation.

Byrne, M. D., & Davis, E. M. (2006). Task structure and
postcompletion error in the execution of a routine
procedure. Human Factors, 48, 627–638.
Byrne, M. D., Maurier, D., Fick, C. S., & Chung, P. H.
(2004). Routine procedural isomorphs and cognitive
control structures. In C. D. Schunn, M. C. Lovett, C.
Lebiere & P. Munro (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling (pp.
52-57). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Casey, S. (1998). Set phasers on stun (2 ed.). Santa Barbara,
CA: Aegean.
Chung, P. H., & Byrne, M. D. (2004). Visual cues to reduce
errors in a routine procedural task. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Chung, P. H., & Byrne, M. D. (2008). Cue effectiveness in
mitigating postcompletion errors in a routine procedural
task. To appear in International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 66, 217–232.
Cooper, R., & Shallice, T. (2000). Contention scheduling
and the control of routine activities. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 17(4), 297–338.
Everett, S. P., Greene, K. K., Byrne, M. D., Wallach, D. S.,
Derr, K., Sandler, D., & Torous, T. (2008). Electronic
voting machines versus traditional methods: Improved
preference, similar performance. In Human Factors in
Computing Systems: Proceedings of CHI 2008 (pp. 883–
892). New York: ACM.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007).
G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program
for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences.
Behavior Research Methods, 39, 175-191.
Guynn, M. J., McDaniel, M. A., & Einstein, G. O. (1998).
Prospective memory: When reminders fail. Memory &
Cognition, 26, 287–298.
Li., S. Y. W., Blandford, A., Cairns, P., & Young, R. M.
(2005). Post-completion errors in problem solving: A
study. Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1278–
1283). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Li., S. Y. W., Cox, A. L., Blandford, A., Cairns, P., Young,
R. M., & Abeles, A. (2006). Further investigations into
post-completion error: The effects of interruption position
and duration. Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Ratwani, R. M., McCurry, J. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2008).
Predicting postcompletion errors using eye movements. In
Human Factors in Computer Systems: Proceedings of
CHI 2008 (pp. 539–542). New York: ACM.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1990). Abrupt visual onsets and
selective attention: Voluntary verses automatic allocation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16, 121-134.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Phil Chung, Chris Fick, and Jennifer
Tsai for their assistance in conducting the experiments.
This research was supported by the Office of Naval
Research under grants #N00014-03-1-0094 and
#N00014-06-1-0056. The views and conclusions expressed
are those of the author and should not be interpreted as
representing the official policies or endorsements, either
expressed or implied, of the ONR, the U.S. government, or
any other organization.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39–83.
Botvinick, M., & Plaut, D. C. (2002). Representing task
context: Proposals based on a connectionist model of
action. Psychological Research, 66, 298–311.
Byrne, M. D., & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory
model of a common procedural error. Cognitive Science,
21, 31–61.
356

