UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Priming and Lexical Interference in Infancy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6b11c5hr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Styles, Suzy J.
Arias-Trejo, Natalia
Plunkett, Kim

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Priming and Lexical Interference in Infancy
Suzy J. Styles (suzy.styles@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3UD, U.K.

Natalia Arias-Trejo (natalia.arias-trejo@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3UD, U.K.

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3UD, U.K.
1998), b) that the speed of picture naming is primed by
thematic relationships at 6 years-of-age, and additionally by
taxonomic relationships at 8 years-of-age (Carr et al., 1982),
c) that reaction time is primed by taxonomic, thematic and
perceptual relations in an object decision task at 6 and 8
years-of-age (Hashimoto, McGregor, & Graham, 2007), and
d) that both semantic and thematic relationships prime
reaction time in an auditory lexical decision task for
normally developing school children at 10 years-of-age
(Nation & Snowling, 1999).
Researchers in the field of electrophysiology have sought
to replicate adult patterns of primed brain activity in infants,
using event related potentials (ERPs). While the findings
from this domain are highly suggestive (Friedrich &
Friederici, 2004), it is unclear whether observed infant brain
activity is functionally adult-like (Torkildsen et al., 2007). It
remains to be seen whether adult-like processing effects can
be replicated in on-line behavioural tasks for infants. If
relationships such as word association and semantic
taxonomy can influence children’s online language
processing, it provides strong support for a model of lexical
acquisition which is interconnected from a very early age
(see Steyvers & Tenenbaum (2005) for a computational
model of lexicon growth which relies on early network
connectivity).
This paper reports three experiments investigating
relationships between words in the early lexicon. The
method is an adaptation of the inter-modal preferential
looking (IPL) paradigm (Golinkoff et al., 1987), which
shares similarities with some versions of the visual world
paradigm, where systematic looking behaviour is obtained
without explicit verbal instruction (e.g., Huettig &
McQueen, 2007). In the current primed design, infants hear
two words presented in quick succession (prime, target).
Following the onset of the target word, a pair of images is
presented (target, distracter), for a period of free looking
(2500ms). Eye movements are recorded and looks to target
and distracter are analyzed. In this paradigm, relationships
between prime, target and distracter can be systematically
manipulated, as can the predictive validity of each auditory
cue.
Based on previous research showing that infants reliably
look at named images more than at unnamed images

Abstract
Three experiments investigate priming effects in a looking
task for infants in their second year. Infants hear two words
(prime, target) in quick succession (separated by 200ms), and
are presented with a picture pair (target, distracter) for
2500ms of free looking. Prime-target pairs are semantically
and associatively related half of the time. Eye-movements are
monitored. Infants aged 18- (Experiments 1, 2 and 3), 21(Experiment 3) and 24- (Experiments 1 & 2) months were
tested (N=328). 18-month-olds show consistent interest in
named targets, but no priming effects. Experiment 1
demonstrates priming for 24-month-olds. Experiments 2 and
3 attempt to clarify whether this priming is fundamentally
lexical (word-word) or visually mediated (word-picture), by
varying the cue validity of the target as well as the prime. In
Experiment 3, phonological competition produces a pattern of
lexical interference and primed facilitation in 21-month-olds.
This result supports a model of lexicon connectivity during
the early stages of linguistic development.
Keywords: Priming; Lexical Development; Infancy.

Introduction
Infants acquire a vast number of words during their first two
years of life (Caselli et al., 1995; Dale & Fenson, 1996;
Goldfield & Reznick, 1990). To date, most research into
infant vocabulary development has focused on infants’
ability to generate mappings between words and their
referents, leaving aside questions of when lexical
relationships develop, and whether infants possess adultlike lexicon organization.
Adult studies investigating lexical processing have
demonstrated that exposure to a related word facilitates
subsequent word processing (Meyer & Schvanereveldt,
1971; Neely, 1991). These ‘priming’ effects reflect
organization in the adult lexicon (Collins & Loftus, 1975).
Such priming studies typically measure reaction times in a
naming task, or a ‘lexical decision’ about whether a test
stimulus is a real word. Clearly, neither task is appropriate
for use with infants, whose metalinguistic knowledge is
limited, and whose verbal skills are still developing.
Priming methodologies have been extended for use with
toddlers and school-aged children, demonstrating a) that
associative relationships influence accuracy in verbal
memory tasks for 3- to 4-year-olds (Krackow & Gordon,
651

(Reznick, 1990), the underlying hypothesis is this: if
infants’ degree of interest in a named image varies with the
relationship between target and prime, then the relationship
is encoded in infants’ knowledge structure.
Experiment 1 is the first reported attempt to bias infants’
looking behaviour with the use of bare auditory primes. 18month-olds and 24-month-olds saw 12 trials in which all
targets were named, and the relationship between prime and
target varied. As a further experimental manipulation,
infants were separated into two groups who were tested with
the same stimuli at different timing intervals.
Experiments 2 & 3 attempt to tease apart two distinct
processing routes which might cause primed looking
behaviour. If lexical facilitation occurs, activation from the
prime word would flow to the target word enhancing normal
processing of the target, thus enhancing image interest. This
account can also be termed word-word priming.
Alternatively, if visual mediation occurs, hearing the prime
would trigger conceptual activation of the prime, including
information about its visual form. When the target picture
appears, infants show interest according to a partial visual
match or an overextension of the prime word to the target
image. This account can also be termed word-picture
priming. As visual mediation may occur independently of
target word processing, the ultimate test of these accounts is
whether the target word is necessary to induce primed
picture looking.
If word-word priming is evident in the looking behaviour
of infants in their second year, this new methodology will
provide a valuable tool for investigating the precise nature
of early relationships in the developing lexicon.

targets were preceded by primes which were related by
word-association and semantics (basic-level taxonomic
sisters), and half, by unrelated primes. Across lists, each
target was preceded by a related prime, and an unrelated
prime. Unrelated primes shared no phonological onset or
rhyme, no association and no taxonomic relationship.
Distracters were similarly unrelated to both the target and
the prime. Associations were based on adult norms for
British English (Moss & Older, 1996). No word was
repeated within a stimulus list, and each subject saw each
item in the list only once.
Related

Unrelated

… cat!
Dog!

… plate!
Dog!

Prime:
Target:
Display:

(target)

(distracter)

(target)

(distracter)

Figure 1: Related and unrelated prime conditions
The inter-stimulus interval (ISI) between prime and target
was fixed at 200ms. The stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)
between the onset of the target word and onset of the image
pair (target and distracter) was either 200ms or 400ms,
according to subject group.
Materials Auditory recordings were made in a single
session by a female native speaker of British English, using
high-affect child directed speech. A 16-bit signal was
recorded at 44.1 Hz in a sound dampening room, directly
onto a computer. Stimuli were selected from multiple
recorded tokens for clarity, typicality and affect, and were
digitally edited to remove head and tail clicks. Visual
stimuli were high-quality digital photographs of animals and
objects, presented on a 10% grey background.

Experiment 1
Participants were recruited from a database of parents who
had previously expressed an interest in participating in
developmental studies. In the week before visiting the
laboratory, primary caregivers were asked to fill out a
vocabulary inventory, the Oxford CDI (Hamilton, Plunkett,
& Schafer, 2000), which they brought with them to the
testing session.
Seventy two 18-month-olds (mean age: 18.2 months,
range: 17.1 to 18.8; 40 males) and 72 24-month-olds (24.1
months, range: 23.4 to 25.0; 34 males) were tested. 25
additional infants were excluded for failure to complete,
parental failure to return CDI, fussiness during test, or
experimenter error. Two subjects were later excluded due to
data loss and to parental interference during test.

Procedure After a few minutes of ‘settling in’, infants sat
on their caregiver’s lap facing a rear-projection screen in a
purpose-built IPL booth. Parents were asked to wear
headphones and to close their eyes during the procedure,
which lasted approximately one and a half minutes. The
experimenter moved to an adjacent control booth, where
each trial was manually initiated when the infant’s attention
was centered on the screen.
While the screen was blank, the priming phrase began
(e.g., Yesterday, I saw a cat). 200ms after the offset of the
prime, the target word began. At a fixed stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA) from the onset of the target (200ms or
400ms), the test phase began with the onset of images,
which remained on screen for 2,500ms. Target side was
counterbalanced. Trial order was randomized on
presentation. Infants sat approximately 90cm from the
790mm wide screen. Images were 320mm wide, together
occupying a visual angle of approximately 48º, and
separated by a gap of 155mm (10º).

Method
Two stimuli lists were created for a cross-modal priming
task, using words likely to be comprehended by the majority
of 18-month-olds. Twelve words acted as auditory ‘targets’,
depicted on screen. Twelve words acted as auditory
‘primes’, presented shortly before the onset of the target
word. Twelve images acted as distracters, depicted on
screen alongside the target image, but remained unnamed.
Relationships between primes, targets and distracters were
systematically manipulated so that in each list, half of the
652

18-month-olds show a preference for named targets over
unnamed distracters, but no effect of prime. These
differences between age groups may be due to increasing
strength or density of lexical relationships, but changes in
memory span may also be critically involved.

Infants’ eye movements were monitored by two small
cameras located above the image presentation areas of the
screen. The camera feeds were combined online into a
single split-screen image and digitally captured during test.
Blind manual coding was conducted offline frame-by-frame
at a temporal accuracy of 40ms. All coding was conducted
by an experienced coder (previously assessed inter-coder
reliability above 95%). Looks to left and right were
automatically re-combined with trial information. Looks to
the target and distracter were analyzed from the onset of
image presentation.

Mean PTL

18M

Results
Only trials in which both the prime and target words were
reported as “understood” in the vocabulary survey were
included in analyses (18-month-olds: 67%; 24-month-olds:
91%), and infants were excluded if they contributed trials to
only one priming condition. Trials were excluded from
analysis if infants did not fixate the screen area for more
than a few frames, which constituted less than 5% of trials
in all groups. The dependent measure of interest is the
proportion of target looking (PTL), which is calculated as
the total amount of time spent looking at the target as a
proportion of the total amount of time spent looking at both
images.

24M

0.70

n.s.
_____

n.s.
_____

_____

_____

0.65

*

*

*

*

*

0.60

n.s.

*

*

*

Related
Unrelated

*

0.55

Prime Cond.

* p<0.05

0.50
0.45
200ms

400ms

200ms

400ms

Stimulus Onset Asynchrony

Figure 2: Mean Proportion of Target Looking in
Experiment 1. Two ages, separated by timing condition
(SOA) and prime type. +/- one standard error.

Experiment 2
The priming effect in Experiment 1 could have been either
word-word (lexical facilitation) or word-picture (visual
mediation) priming. In order to clarify the type of priming,
Experiment 2 manipulates target naming as well as prime
type, with half of all targets remaining unnamed. In this 2x2
design, if ‘priming’ is primarily mediated by word-picture
matching, then target naming should have no effect on the
degree of target interest. If priming is primarily lexical
(word-word), then interest in the target would only be
greater in the condition where the target is both named and
primed. If both types of priming (word-word and wordpicture) are present, then more complex interactions
between naming and priming would be evident.
For Experiment 2, the longer SOA condition was selected,
as priming effects were more reliable in this timing
condition. As an additional control, all images in
Experiment 2 behaved as both targets and distracters to
reduce any effects of visual preference within an image pair.
Participants were recruited as in Experiment 1, and
parents filled out CDIs prior to their visit. Thirty six 18month-olds (mean age: 18.2 months, range: 17.0 to 19.3; 21
males) and 40 24-month-olds (24.1 months, range: 22.9 to
24.9; 25 males) were tested. Nine additional infants were
excluded for parental failure to return the vocabulary
questionnaire and for experimenter error. One further infant
from each age group was later removed due to data
corruption.

18-month-olds Subject means were calculated for each
priming condition. In a 2x2 univariate ANOVA comparing
the effects of SOA (400ms, 200ms) and priming condition
(related, unrelated) on PTL, no effects or interactions were
found. With an overall mean PTL of 0.59 (SD = 0.17), 18month-olds systematically looked at the target more than the
distracter (t(122) = 6.02, p < 0.001, d = 0.54).
24-month-olds Simple comparisons were conducted due to
unequal variance across subsets of the data. Older infants
looked more at targets in the related priming condition than
in the unrelated priming condition (t(139) = 3.80, p < 0.001,
d = 0.63). There was no reliable difference between SOA
conditions, either at the overall level or within priming
conditions. Due to this lack of difference, data were pooled
across SOA conditions. In both priming conditions, infants
systematically looked to the target, with a mean PTL of 0.61
(SD = 0.12) in the related priming condition (t(70) = 8.24,
p < 0.001, d = 0.98), and 0.54 (SD = 0.11) in the unrelated
condition (t(69) = 3.04, p < 0.005, d = 0.36).

Discussion
At 24 months-of-age, where two words (prime, target) are
presented in quick succession prior to dual image
presentation (target, distracter), the looking pattern varies
according to the relationship between prime and target:
When the prime and the target are related by association and
taxonomy (e.g., cat and dog), older infants direct more
visual attention to the target than they do when the prime
and target are unrelated (e.g., plate and dog). Overall, they
look more at named targets than unnamed distracters, and
this visual preference is modulated by the prime.

Method
Four stimuli lists were created in which target-distracter
picture pairs were yoked across lists. Across lists, all images
occurred equally often as targets and as distracters. As in

653

d = 0.52), with a mean PTL of 0.61 (SD = 0.21). In
unnamed trials, mean PTL was 0.53 (SD = 0.21), and target
preference was not reliable.

Experiment 1, within each list, half of the targets were
preceded by primes which were related by word-association
and semantics (basic-level taxonomic sisters), and half, by
unrelated primes. Across lists, each target was preceded by a
related prime, and an unrelated prime. Unrelated primes
shared no phonological onset or rhyme, no association and
no taxonomic relationship. Distracters were unrelated to
both the target and the prime. Novel to this design, in half of
the trials, the target was named, and in half, it was replaced
by a place-holder such as ‘Look!’ Thus each list contained
12 trials, of which three were related-primes with namedtargets, three were unrelated-primes with named-targets,
three were related-primes with unnamed-targets, and three
were unrelated-primes with unnamed targets (see Figure 3).
No word was repeated within a list. Infants encountered
each trial only once during test.
As in Experiment 1, the inter-stimulus interval (ISI)
between prime and target was fixed at 200ms. The stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA) between the onset of the target
word and the image pair (target-distracter) was fixed at
400ms.

24-month-olds In a 2x2 ANOVA comparing the effect of
priming condition and target condition on PTL, no main
effects or interactions were found. Pooled data indicated that
24-month-olds looked more at targets overall than at
distracters (M = 0.55, SD = 0.17, t(155) = 3.37, p = 0.001,
d = 0.27), demonstrating that they had extracted targetidentifying information from auditory stimuli in the
majority of cases. Their performance did not, however,
show systematic variation according to prime or target
condition.

Mean PTL

18m

Materials Visual and auditory stimuli were prepared and
edited as in Experiment 1, although this time, digital
recordings were made in a quiet room with a Marantz
PMD670 solid state recorder, sampling a 16 bit signal, at
44.1Hz. A single recording session provided all of the
tokens for Experiments 2 and 3, and a single set of images
was collated for both experiments.

0.70

n.s.
_____

0.65

* *

(*)

n.s.
_____

(*)

0.60

n.s.

n.s.
_____

Related
Unrelated

* p<0.05
(*) p<0.10

*
n.s.

n.s.

0.55

Prime Cond.

24m
n.s.
_____

0.50
0.45
Named Unnamed

Named Unnamed

Target Status

Figure 3: Mean PTL in Experiment 2. Two ages,
separated by target status and prime type. SOA is 400ms.
+/- one standard error.

Procedure The testing procedure was identical to
Experiment 1, with three minor exceptions: First, during the
priming phase a small abstract shape rotated on screen for
500ms as a visual attention-holder. This shape left the
screen before prime or target word were heard; Second,
testing was carried out in a booth adjacent to the one used in
Experiment 1, which differed only in stereo output and a
flat-screen monitor (Images were 25cm x 34cm, together
subtending an approximate visual angle of 52°, separated by
a gap of 12°); Third, carrier phrases for primes were slightly
shorter than in Experiment 1 (e.g., I saw a cat!).

Discussion
Younger infants in Experiment 2 replicate the pattern of
Experiment 1, responding to target naming, but showing no
systematic effect of prime type. The older infants in
Experiment 2 respond to the majority of target images, but
their preference reduced to a low average, where differences
between the conditions are difficult to detect.
One consequence of the design in Experiment 2 is the
variation in auditory cue validity. In Experiment 1, the
target word was 100% predictive of a screen image. In
addition, the prime was relevant 50% of the time. Auditory
stimuli were therefore highly reliable cues. By contrast, in
Experiment 2, primes and targets had cue validities of only
50% each. It is thus possible that older infants were aware
of the unreliable nature of the auditory cues, and employed a
form of strategic responding which may have overshadowed
systematic responses to primes and targets. Post hoc review
of video recordings supports this interpretation (compared
to Experiment 1, more gestures and facial expressions were
consistent with annoyance, e.g., shaking head at screen,
looking away early, closing eyes).

Results
As in Experiment 1, only trials in which both prime and
target words were reported as “understood” were included
in analyses. Trials were also excluded from analysis if
infants did not fixate the screen area for more than a few
frames. Exclusion rates were comparable to Experiment 1.
18-month-olds In a 2x2 univariate ANOVA comparing the
effect of prime condition (related, unrelated) and target
condition (named, unnamed) on PTL, there was a main
effect of target (F(1,110) = 4.18, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.038), with
no further effects or interactions. Data were thus pooled
across priming conditions, confirming that PTL was greater
in the target named conditions (t(109) = 2.09, p < 0.05,
d = 0.40). 18-month-olds showed systematic preference for
the target in named conditions, (t(52) = 4.10, p < 0.001,

Experiment 3
To circumvent possible strategic responding in 24-monthold infants, Experiment 3 introduced three changes to the
methodology. First, an intermediate age group (21 months)
654

was targeted, as strategic responding may not yet have
developed in this group. Second, to increase task difficulty,
and thus, the automaticity of responding, target and
distracter images were selected to share phonological
onsets, making them cohort-competitors. Third, to
maximize the likelihood of phonological interference, a
shorter SOA (200ms) was used
Participants were recruited and were sent CDI forms prior
to their visit, as in Experiments 1 and 2. Fifty two 18month-olds (mean age: 18.0 months, range: 17.2 to 18.3; 25
males) and 56 21-month-olds (20.9 months, range: 20.1 to
21.2; 22 males) were tested. Four additional infants were
removed and replaced for fussiness during test. Eight 18month-olds were later removed for failure to comprehend
test items in more than six trials.

there was an interaction between prime type and target
status (F(1, 217) = 5.91, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.026).
Simple effects clarified the pattern of interaction: Target
looking was greater in the related-named condition than in
either the related-unnamed condition (t(54) = 2.86, p < 0.01,
d = 0.52), or in the unrelated-named condition (t(54) = 2.84,
p < 0.01, d = 0.47). Thus, 21-month-olds looked at the target
more than the distracter only in the condition where both the
target was named, and the prime was related (M = 0.57,
SD = 0.15, t(55) = 3.52, p = 0.001, d = 0.95).

Discussion
As in Experiments 1 & 2, 18-month-olds responded to target
naming, but were unaffected by lexical primes presented at
short latencies. In contrast to Experiment 2, older infants
were affected by both target naming and by priming
relationship. The combination of short SOA with a
phonological onset-competitor meant that infants had only
begun to process the target word when two equally valid
images appeared. To identify the correct target, infants
needed to continue processing the target word, while
inhibiting response to a cohort competitor. In this case, 21month-olds only showed target looking above chance in the
related-named condition. Thus the phonological interference
was only overcome with support from a related prime.
Moreover, older infants do not show preference for primed,
but unnamed targets, as would be predicted by a visual
mediation account. This pattern of inhibition and processing
facilitation is only compatible with a lexical, or word-word
priming account.

Method
Four stimuli lists were created in which target-distracter
pairs were yoked across lists. Priming relationships (related,
unrelated) and target naming (named, unnamed) were
counterbalanced within and across lists as in Experiment 2.
That is, within each list, half of the targets were preceded by
primes related by word-association and semantics (basiclevel taxonomic sisters), and half, by unrelated primes.
Across lists, each target was preceded by both prime types.
Unrelated primes shared no phonological onset or rhyme, no
association and no taxonomic relationship. Both within and
across lists half of all targets were replaced by the word
‘Look!’ The critical difference in stimuli preparation for
Experiment 3 was that distracters in all four conditions
shared a phonological onset with the target (e.g., target: dog,
distracter: door).

18M

Mean PTL

Materials Auditory stimuli were recorded and prepared in
the same session and manner as for Experiment 2, and
visual stimuli were created from the same pool of images.
As in Experiments 1 and 2, the inter-stimulus interval
(ISI) between prime and target was fixed at 200ms. The
SOA between the onset of the target word and the image
pair was fixed at 200ms, the shorter of the SOAs previously
employed in Experiment 1.

0.70

n.s.
_____

0.65

* *

21M

n.s.
_____

n.s.
_____

*

0.60
0.55

*

_____

n.s.

n.s. n.s.

n.s.

Prime Cond.
Related
Unrelated

* p<0.05

0.50
0.45
0.40
Named

Procedure The testing procedure was identical to
Experiment 2, except that a different visual attention-holder
was used.

Unnamed

Named

Unnamed

Target Status

Figure 4: Mean PTL in Experiment 3. Two ages, separated
by target naming and prime type. SOA is 200ms. Picturepairs share onset. +/- one standard error.

Results
18-month-olds In a 2x2 univariate ANOVA comparing the
effect of prime condition (related, unrelated) and target
condition (named, unnamed) on PTL, a main effect of target
status was found (F(1,157) = 26.52, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.144).
A one-sample t-test confirmed that 18-month-olds looked at
the target more than the distracter in the named conditions
(M = 0.61, SD = 0.17, t(79) =5.61, p < 0.001, d = 0.81).

General Discussion
In the current series of experiments, 18-month-olds showed
a consistent preference for named targets over unnamed
images, with no reliable sensitivity to prime-target
relationships. By 24 months-of-age, lexical primes created
additional target interest, but this was only the case when
auditory cue validity was high, as in Experiment 1. When
auditory cue validity dropped, as in Experiment 2, older
infants’ behaviour became un-systematic, and difficult to

21-month-olds In a 2x2 univariate ANOVA comparing the
effect of priming condition and target condition on PTL,

655

Goldfield, B. A., & Reznick, J. S. (1990). Early lexical
acquisition: Rate, content, and the vocabulary spurt.
Journal of Child Language, 17, 171-183.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Cauley, K. M., &
Gordon, L. (1987). The eyes have it: Lexical and syntactic
comprehension in a new paradigm. Journal of Child
Language, 14, 23-45.
Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K., & Schafer, G. (2000). Infant
vocabulary development assessed with a British
communicative development inventory. Journal of Child
Language, 27, 689-705.
Hashimoto, N., McGregor, K. K., & Graham, A. (2007).
Conceptual organization at 6 and 8 years of age: evidence
from the semantic priming of object decisions. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 161-176.
Huettig, F., & McQueen, J. M. (2007). The tug of war
between phonological, semantic and shape information in
language-mediated visual search. Journal of Memory and
Language, 57, 460-482.
Krackow, E., & Gordon, P. (1998). Are Lions and Tigers
Substitutes or Associates? Evidence against Slot Filler
Accounts of Children's Early Categorization. Child
Development, 69, 347-354.
Meyer, D. E., & Schvanereveldt, R. W. (1971). Facilitation
in recognising pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence
between retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 90, 227-234.
Moss, H. E., & Older, L. (1996). Birkbeck Word Association
Norms. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Nation, K., & Snowling, M. J. (1999). Developmental
differences in sensitivity to semantic relations among good
and poor comprehenders: evidence from semantic
priming. Cognition, 70, B1-B13.
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word
recognition: A selective review of current findings and
theories. In D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys (Eds.), Basic
processes in reading: Visual word recognition. Hillsdale
NJ: Earlbaum.
Reznick, J. S. (1990). Visual preference as a test of infant
word comprehension. Applied Psycholinguistics, 11, 145166.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Torkildsen, J. v. K., Syversen, G., Simonsen, H. G., Moen,
I., & Lindgren, M. (2007). Electrophysiological correlates
of auditory semantic priming in 24-month-olds. Journal of
Neurolinguistics, 20, 332-351.

interpret. Phonological interference effects shown by 21month-olds in Experiment 3 support a lexical facilitation
interpretation of the priming effect, as both prime and target
were necessary for the older infants to systematically
identify the target. The visual mediation account predicted
target preference even when the prime was related and the
target unnamed. This was not found.
The developmental trajectory presented here could be
taken to indicate that lexicon connectivity begins between
18- and 21-months of age. This suggests that the onset of
lexicon inter-connectivity is timed to a critical mass of
vocabulary items, or to the onset of an individual’s ‘word
spurt’. Alternatively, it is also possible that experimental
features of the current task make it inappropriate for 18month-olds. For example, prime-to-target activation may
take longer for younger infants (thus younger infants may
require longer ISIs), or memory capacity may limit younger
infants processing of phonological information to only the
most recent item (hence, their performing as though no
prime was presented). It remains to be seen whether early
lexical relationships, such as those demonstrated here, are
primarily associative or taxonomic in nature, as the two
were intertwined in the current design.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted with the financial support of
The Leverhulme Trust and The Clarendon Fund. The
authors would like to thank Jennifer Boyd, Brittany Kendig
and Lucy Holdstock for their assistance.

References
Carr, T., H, McCauley, C., Sperber, R. D., & Parmelee, C.
M. (1982). Words, pictures, and priming: On semantic
activation, conscious identification, and the automaticity
of information processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8, 757758.
Caselli, M. C., Bates, E., Casadio, P., Fenson, J., Fenson, L.,
Sanderl, L., et al. (1995). A cross-linguistic study of early
lexical development. Cognitive Development, 10, 159-199.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Friedrich, M., & Friederici, A. D. (2004). N400-like
semantic incongruity effect in 19-month-olds: processing
known words in picture contexts. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16, 1465-1477.

656

