UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processes and Constraints in Explanatory Scientific Discovery
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pq2w2m1
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)
Authors
Langley, Pat
Bridewell, Will
Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

         Processes and Constraints in Explanatory Scientific Discovery
                                   Pat Langley (langley@csli.stanford.edu)
                                  Will Bridewell (willb@csli.stanford.edu)
                                      Computational Learning Laboratory, CSLI
                                    Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
          Constructing Process Models                         a variety of constraints among processes and the enti-
                                                              ties they relate. Unlike the hierarchical structures, these
In previous publications, we have reported a compu-
                                                              constraints combine the benefits of search reduction with
tational approach to constructing explanatory process
                                                              modularity, and one can imagine how a scientific com-
models of dynamic systems from time-series data and
                                                              munity might alter them as it matures. In ongoing work,
background knowledge. We have not aimed to mimic the
                                                              we are exploring methods for inducing these constraints
detailed behavior of human researchers, but we maintain
                                                              from experience with successful and unsuccessful model
that our systems address the same tasks as ecologists,
                                                              structures, which may help explain the origin of such
biologists, and other theory-guided scientists, and that
                                                              principles in a variety of disciplines.
they carry out search through similar problem spaces.
                                                                 The distinction between process and constraint knowl-
   Our initial research (Langley et al., 2002) introduced
                                                              edge has been notably absent from the cognitive science
an approach to model discovery that uses background
                                                              and philosophy of science literatures, yet it seems cru-
knowledge about generic processes in a scientific domain
                                                              cial to understanding the generation of scientific expla-
to generate candidate model structures that relate a set
                                                              nations. Processes provide the content from which sci-
of continuous variables. For each model structure, the
                                                              entists construct models, whereas constraints correspond
method carries out a gradient descent search through the
                                                              to theoretical principles about how to combine processes.
parameter space, with random restarts, to fit the struc-
                                                              Knowledge about such constraints is often implicit, and
ture to observations. Generic processes serve as building
                                                              our work provides a formalism for making them explicit,
blocks from which to construct explanatory models.
                                                              which in turn supports their controlled use in directing
   We have applied this framework successfully to infer       search through the space of explanatory models.
plausible models of dynamic systems observed by ecolo-
gists (Asgharbeygi et al., 2006) and biologists (Langley                         Acknowledgements
et al., 2006). These have included phytoplankton growth
in the Ross Sea, predator-prey interactions in protists,      This research was funded by NSF Grant No. IIS-0326059.
gene regulation of photosynthetic activity, and water dy-     We thank Kevin Arrigo, Matt Bravo, and Ljupčo Todor-
namics in a Danish fjord. Extensions have included mak-       ovski for their contributions to the ideas presented here.
ing the approach robust with respect to noise (Bridewell
et al., 2005) and handling data sets with missing obser-                              References
vations, both of which reduced variance across data sets      Asgharbeygi, N., Bay, S., Langley, P., & Arrigo, K.
and lowered the squared error on novel test cases.               (2006). Inductive revision of quantitative process mod-
                                                                 els. Ecological Modelling, 194 , 70–79.
     Two Forms of Scientific Knowledge
                                                              Bridewell, W., Bani Asadi, N., Langley, P., & Todor-
Unlike most early computational models of scientific dis-        ovski, L. (2005). Reducing overfitting in process model
covery, which emphasized knowledge-lean induction of             induction. Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Interna-
descriptive laws, our recent research has emphasized             tional Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 81–88).
knowledge-laden construction of explanatory models.
                                                              Langley, P., Sanchez, J., Todorovski, L., & Džeroski,
However, our initial forays produced an important in-
                                                                 S. (2002). Inducing process models from continu-
sight: adding generic processes to the background knowl-
                                                                 ous data. Proceedings of the Nineteenth International
edge increases the search space, since it supports the
                                                                 Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 347–354).
creation of more model structures. Clearly, the adage
about knowledge reducing search does not always hold;         Langley, P., Shiran, O., Shrager, J., Todorovski, L., &
it depends on the type of knowledge involved.                    Pohorille, A. (2006). Constructing explanatory pro-
   In response, we imposed a hierarchical organization           cess models from biological data and knowledge. Ar-
on process knowledge (Todorovski et al., 2005). This             tificial Intelligence in Medicine, 37 , 191–201.
reduced search, improved accuracy, and produced more          Todorovski, L., Shiran, O., Bridewell, W., & Langley,
plausible models, but the hierarchy itself was cumber-           P. (2005). Inducing hierarchical process models in dy-
some and unfamiliar to the scientists we interviewed. In         namic domains. Proceedings of the Twentieth National
recent work, we have had more success by introducing             Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 892–897).
                                                          527

