UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Quantum Information Processing Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49m680q0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Busemeyer, Jerome R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Quantum Information Processing Theory
Jerome R. Busemeyer (jbusemey@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science, Indiana University
1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Keywords: classical information processing; quantum
information processing; logic and mathematical foundation;
quantum probability; Markov and quantum processes; quantum
computing; quantum game theory; concepts; decision making

Participant Background: This tutorial will introduce
participants to an entirely new area and no previous
experience or background with quantum theory will be
assumed. No background in Physics is required. What is
required is an elementary background in classic logic,
classic probability, and linear algebra (e.g. matrix
multiplication).

The cognitive revolution that occurred in the 1960’s was
based on classical computational logic, and the
connectionist/neural network movements of the 1970’s were
based on classical dynamical systems. These classical
assumptions remain at the heart of both cognitive
architecture and neural network theories, and they are so
commonly and widely applied that we take them for granted
and presume them to be obviously true. What are these
critical but hidden assumptions upon which all traditional
theories rely? Quantum information processing theory
provides a fundamentally different approach to logic,
reasoning, probabilistic inference, and dynamical systems.
For example, quantum logic does not follow the distributive
axiom of Boolean logic; quantum probabilities do not obey
the disjunctive axiom of Kolmogorov probability; quantum
reasoning does not obey the principle of monotonic
reasoning. Nevertheless Mother Nature seems to rely quite
heavily on quantum computing principles in many domains
of science. This tutorial will provide an exposition of the
basic assumptions of classic versus quantum information
processing theories. These basic assumptions will be
examined, side by side, in a parallel and elementary manner.
For example, classical systems assume that measurement
merely observes a pre existing property of a system; in
contrast, quantum systems assume that measurement
actively creates the existence of a property in a system. The
logic and mathematical foundation of classic and quantum
theory will be laid out in a simple and elementary manner
that uncovers the mysteries of both theories. Classic theory
will emerge to be seen as a possibly overly restrictive case
of the more general quantum theory. The fundamental
implications of these contrasting assumptions will be
examined closely with concrete examples and applications
to cognition. New research programs in cognition based on
quantum information processing theory will be reviewed.

Material to be covered:

Dr. Busemeyer is a professor of Psychological and Brain
Science and Cognitive Science at Indiana University. He is
also the chief editor of the Journal of Mathematical
Psychology. He recently ended his position as manager of
the Cognition and Decision Program at the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research. His research interests include
decision making and dynamic modeling.

11

1.

Presentation of the differences between classic
versus quantum theories of probability. This
section will show how classic probability theory is
a special and restrictive case of quantum
probability. The concept of superposition is
introduced and distinguished for classic and
quantum systems, and an example violation of the
OR rule by quantum theory is provided.

2.

Identifying differences between simple classical
dynamical systems and quantum dynamical
systems. A parallel development of Markov and
quantum processes will be shown. The concept of a
state will be distinguished for Markov and quantum
systems. A key feature of this section is to show
when and how quantum processes depart from
Markov processes. Computational examples using
Matlab will be illustrated in detail and emphasized
more this year.

3.

Introduction to quantum computing ideas. This
section contrasts: a bit with a qubit, conjunctive
properties with tensor products, production rules
with controlled U-gates, connectionist networks
with quantum transformations. The concept of
fuzzy representation will be compared for fuzzy set
theory, Bayesian theory, and quantum theory. The
idea of an entangled state will be described. Bell’s
inequality will be introduced, and the dramatic
implications of violations of this inequality for
classical theories will be discussed. Much more
time will be spent on this section this year.

4.

The final section will review three ongoing
research programs in cognitive science that are
making use of quantum information processing
theory. The first is quantum game theory, the
second is a quantum theory of concepts, the third is
a quantum theory of decision making.

Further Information can be found at:
http://mypage.iu.edu/~jbusemey/quantum_info_proc.ppt

You can download the following related papers:
Busemeyer, J. R., Matthew, M., Wang, Z. (2006). A
Quantum Game Theory Explanation of Disjunction
Effects. Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 131-135). Available at
http://mypage.iu.edu/~jbusemey/quant_games.pdf
Busemeyer, J. R., Wang, Z., & Townsend, J. T. (2006).
Quantum dynamics of human decision making. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 50, 220-241. Available at
http://mypage.iu.edu/~jbusemey/QD.pdf

Major references:
Nielsen, M. A., & Chuang, I. L. (2000). Quantum
Computation and Quantum Information. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Hughes, R. I. G. (1989). The Structure and Interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

12

