UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Retrospective Evaluations of Gambling Wins: Evidence for a 'Peak-End' Rule

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6b21s4qm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Yu, Erica C.
Lagnado, David A.
Charter, Nick

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Retrospective Evaluations of Gambling Wins:
Evidence for a ‘Peak-End’ Rule
Erica C. Yu (E.Yu@ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, Gower Street
London, England WC1E 6BT UK

David A. Lagnado (D.Lagnado@ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, Gower Street
London, England WC1E 6BT UK

Nick Chater (N.Chater@ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, Gower Street
London, England WC1E 6BT UK
neman, 1993), medical procedures (Redelmeier & Kahneman, 1996) and sounds (Schreiber & Kahneman, 2000). In
these experiments, researchers arrived at three main findings
that indicate a conflict between the remembered and instant
utilities of past episodes: the peak-end rule and its two related effects of duration neglect and violations of
“monotonicity”. In this study, we focus on the peak-end
rule.
The peak-end rule states that a simple average of the instant utilities (or disutilities) felt at the peak intensity of an
experience and at the end of an experience determines the
global assessment given retrospectively. For example, consider Redelmeier & Kahneman (1996), a study of patients’
retrospective evaluations of colonoscopies. Patients experienced the same routine procedure, but doctors prolonged the
experience for some, adding additional pain at a lower intensity. Although the patients in the shorter procedure group
experienced objectively less pain, they rated their experience more negatively than the patients in the longer procedure group. Patients’ future choices and memories for the
pain felt during the colonoscopies matched a peak-end average better than an aggregation of total disutility.
While previous research has provided strong evidence for
the peak-end rule and catalogued its factors and behavior to
some depth (see Schreiber & Kahneman, 2000), there still
remain questions about its determinants and applicability.
The research field to this point has focused on passively
experienced and primarily sensory stimuli to evoke hedonic
responses, such as colonoscopies and aversive sounds. But
how does the peak-end rule fare when experiences are actively generated? And does it apply for monetary, and hence
only indirectly hedonic, stimuli?

Abstract
This study explored retrospective evaluations of temporally
extended outcomes. Participants, primarily non-gamblers or
recreational gamblers, played a fruit machine that presented
sequences of payouts and then retrospectively evaluated their
experiences. Experiments 1 and 2 replicated a robust “peakend” effect on estimation judgments and choices, with participants exhibiting biases in favor of sessions with high peakend values. Experiment 3 used modified stimuli that reduced
the payout structure to wins and non-wins (no extreme values)
and found no effect; we suggest this may arise from the influence of sensitivity to affect. Analysis across conditions found
a consistent underestimation of total winnings and frequency
of wins, in support of memory-based evaluation strategies.
Consequences of these findings for gambling judgments and
decisions are discussed.
Keywords: estimation; frequency; gambling; peak-end; retrospective evaluation.

Introduction
Watching one of the year’s Oscar-tipped films might mean a
rollercoaster ride through an intense drama played out
through fight scenes, love scenes and, more than likely, boring dialogue and long looks at the scenery. Despite the
range of emotions you might feel during the movie, you can
probably still tell your friend the next day that the film was
“not bad” or maybe even “pretty good”.
An essential distinction here is between instant and remembered utility. While instant utility is the pleasure or
pain we feel at a moment—a fleeting feeling that is replaced
by the next moment’s instant utility—remembered utility is
the global assessment we make retrospectively that encompasses those moments and becomes our memory for the
experience. While both are useful constructs in their own
right, a conflict between the validity of a person’s total utility (sum of instant utilities) and remembered utility of an
experience emerges when evaluating temporally extended
outcomes (TEOs), or experiences that take place over time
(Kahneman, Wakker, & Sarin, 1997).
Previous research has explored the utilities of TEOs in a
range of contexts, including film clips (Fredrickson & Kah-

Peak-End in Monetary Sequences
Sequences of monetary gains or losses are common experiences in the real world. Regular bills and payments are
ubiquitous and the ability to make accurate retrospective
judgments about them may have a serious impact on our
decision making.

77

Economic theory would have our judgments of monetary
sequences follow normative rules, such as maximizing the
average or total money gained or lost; rational people prefer
more money to less. Langer, Sarin and Weber (2005) tested
this concept and observed that, rather than use normative
rules, people overweighed peak-end values. However, the
result was not found in tasks of little affective experience;
the effect was strongest on performance-based tasks. The
extension to monetary sequences is still unclear. Gambling
outcomes are yet more ambiguous: gambling has acutely
hedonic wins and losses but also cognitive biases such as
illusion of skill, tendency to scrutinize losses, or inclination
to transform losses into “near-misses” (Gilovich, 1983).

Peak value

Session-Random Average = 5.86 points
Total = 293 points

Payout (points)

Session-Peak

Average = 5.46 points
Total = 273 points

End value

1

25

Spin

50

Figure 1: Example payout stimuli for Experiment 1
extreme values should have no effect on evaluations. In contrast, the peak-end rule predicts preferences and estimation
judgments biased in favor of Session-Peak.

Estimating Sums and Frequencies over Time
The objective nature of monetary stimuli broadens the scope
of possible analyses beyond that of previous research. In
addition to peak-end choice evaluations comparing sequences, these experiments can also examine numerical
inference and frequency estimation, two concepts central to
fundamental cognitive processes and particularly critical to
gambling judgments and decisions.
Most of the numerical estimation literature focuses on
numerosity or magnitude, largely neglecting the problem of
arithmetic involving sequences. Results from Langer, et al.
(2005) suggest that subjects keep running totals, but this
was found for sequences of 10 or fewer numbers under the
explicit direction to attend to the sequences. It is still unknown how subjects evaluate longer trials, which resemble
real world scenarios that persist beyond 10 instances (a session at a fruit machine might continue beyond 100 spins).
In contrast, there is a rich literature studying frequency estimation (Sedlmeier & Betsch, 2002). Comparisons across
paradigms and stimuli have resulted in conflicting conclusions about our ability to accurately encode frequencies. We
will study this here with a simplified comparison of wins
and non-wins to see how affective experience might contribute to the debate.

Method
Design and Materials The experiment used a withinsubjects design and a fruit machine simulation played for 2
sessions, each lasting 50 spins. The simulation appeared to
function like an actual fruit machine, though running on a
conventional PC; there was no cost to play on each trial.
Participants clicked a button to activate the spinning of the
machine’s reels and several seconds later, when the reels
came to a stop, the value of points awarded based on the
combination of symbols was shown for one second. The
program then waited for the participant to spin again. The
machine did not show cumulative winnings.
The two fruit machine sessions were similar; however, the
session averages and total payouts were varied, as described
in Figure 1. Session-Peak was lower in average spin outcome and lower in overall winnings but had high peak and
end values. These extreme payout values were excluded
from any other spin outcome to ensure the peak characteristic. Session-Random followed a random pattern of payouts
with no extreme values. The order in which the participants
saw each session was counterbalanced.
Three evaluations questions were included. A question
aimed at hedonic evaluation asked participants to choose
which of the two sessions they most enjoyed. An informational question asked participants to estimate how many
points they had won in each session. A choice evaluation
prompted participants to choose at which machine they
would prefer to play an additional high-stakes session.

Aims of This Study
We report three experiments using monetary stimuli to explore the peak-end rule and estimation of sequence sums
and frequencies. Experiments 1 and 2 establish support for
the peak-end effect for monetary sequences in contrast to
alternative models while also demonstrating a consistent
underestimation of the sequentially-presented sums. In Experiment 3 designed to reverse the peak-end effect, participants do not use the peak-end rule, as expected, and continue to underestimate sums and frequencies.

Participants Twenty-four participants (10 female) were
recruited via the UCL Psychology Subject Pool and paid for
participation. Ages ranged from 19 to 67 years (M = 29).

Experiment 1

Procedure Participants were told they would play a virtual
fruit machine on the computer and afterwards answer questions about their experience, and that they would be compensated for their time. The computer program presented
instructions for operating the fruit machine and provided a
payout table listing the combinations of symbols and their
payouts. During the fruit machine session, the participants

We designed payout sums for two sessions such that Session-Peak paid less but had high peak-end values, while
Session-Random paid more and followed a random pattern
with no extreme payouts. Normative maximizing behavior
(e.g., using a rule such as maximizing total session payout)
predicts preference for higher-paying Session-Random, as

78

controlled the speed at which the session progressed, but the
duration of presentation of payout remained constant at 1.5
seconds. The end of the first session was followed by a short
break of a blank screen before the start of the second session. After completing the second session, the program
prompted the participant to answer the evaluation questions,
one at a time, in a random order except with the preference
question (at which machine they preferred to play again)
always appearing last.

Session Total Points

350

Peak v
(Low)

Random
(High)

Actual payouts

300
250

Participant estimates

200
150
100
50
0

Figure 2: Participant estimates for Experiment 1

Results and Discussion

Experiment 2

Estimations A comparison of the means for the participants’ estimated values shows that participants identified
Session-Peak as significantly higher-paying than SessionRandom (z = -1.67, one-tailed p < .05). Participants mistakenly identified the lower-paying session as higher-paying.
Figure 2 shows a significant underestimation of total payout across both sessions. Comparisons of the actual and estimated values for each session confirm significant differences (Session-Peak: z = -3.83, p < .001; Session-Random:
z = -4.14, p < .001). The data show fundamental errors in
estimation of the sum of a sequence of numbers. This may
be because the participants’ “losses” lingered with them
longer than their wins (as the machine gave only positive or
zero payouts, losses in this experiment equate to not winning any points on a spin). As Gilovich (1983) found, people may spend more time after gambles thinking about their
losses and remember more information about them.

To understand participants’ baseline retrospective evaluations, conditions comparing two Sessions-Random (both
sessions free from extreme payout values) were included.
To explore the boundaries of the peak-end rule, conditions
comparing session pairs with large differences and also
small differences between them were also added. We expected a repeat of the behavior found in Experiment 1 for
the small difference condition and a slightly stronger set of
results for the large difference condition, reflecting the weakening of the peak-end effect as the two session pairs’ total
payouts converge.

Method
Design and Materials This experiment closely mimicked
the within-subjects set up of Experiment 1. Participants
played the fruit machine simulation with sessions shortened
to 25 spins each, resulting in a total of 300 spins over 12
sessions. Participants were presented two sets of conditions:
a set in which the differences between the two conditions
were 30 points and a second set in which the differences
were 15 points. Within each set, participants saw three pairs
of sessions. A control pair compared two random sessions.
Two pairs compared sessions on a 2 (presence of high peakend values) x 2 (relative position) framework similar to the
design of Experiment 1. This is described in Table 1 below.

Peak-End Analysis of participant estimates suggests that
the presence of high peak-end values created an upward
bias. A repeated-measures ANOVA found a significant effect of the peak-end manipulation for the differences between session total payouts and participant estimates
(F(1,22) = 7.18, p < .01). In other words, although estimates
for both sessions were far below actual values, participants’
estimates for Session-Peak were significantly closer to actual values than for Session-Random.

Table 1: Conditions A-F for Experiment 2

Choice Behavior Analysis of the hedonic and choice data
(proportion enjoying Session-Peak most, 46%; proportion
preferring to play Session-Peak again, 54%) found that
choices were not significantly different from chance (enjoyment: t(23) = -.40, ns; preference: t(23) = -.40, ns).

Large Difference
Higher
Lower
Random
A Random
Peak-End
C Random
Random
E Peak-End

B
D
F

Small Difference
Higher
Lower
Random
Random
Random
Peak-End
Peak-End
Random

Payout design repeated that of Experiment 1; however,
the range of stimuli was restricted due to the shortened
length of sessions. Peak values were set to 50 points on the
12th spin and end values set to 25 points on the 25th spin.
Participants evaluated their experiences after each session
pair. Evaluation questions matched those of Experiment 1.

Summary The results extend previous research by establishing the peak-end rule’s effect on estimations of monetary winnings. The data show that participants’ evaluations
are significantly distorted upwards by an emphasis on the
peak and end values.
After establishing the peak-end and underestimation effects with monetary sequences, the second experiment
aimed to replicate and confirm these results and explore the
boundaries of these effects.

Participants Seventeen participants (11 female) were recruited via the UCL Psychology Subject Pool and told they
would receive a set payment for their time and an opportunity for bonus pay dependent on performance in the experiment. Ages ranged from 21 to 67 years (M = 30).

79

session, as suggested by the previous finding of distorted
estimations and in support of the peak-end rule.

Session Total Points

Procedure The procedure followed that of Experiment 1 for
each condition. After evaluating each pair of sessions, the
program looped and presented the next pair of sessions and
evaluations. After eight sessions, the program presented a
reminder of the bonus payment contingent on performance.
The order of conditions and the order of sessions within
each condition were randomized.

Results and Discussion
Baseline Conditions To establish a baseline model of retrospective estimations, repeated-measures ANOVAs were
used to analyze participants’ estimations for control conditions A and B. Participants were able to distinguish between
the two sessions and correctly identify which session was
higher-paying (Large difference: F(1,16) = 38.47, p < .001;
Small difference: F(1,16) = 4.64, p < .05). Across conditions, estimates were significantly lower than actual sums
(t(67) = 6.78, p < .001). The leftmost data in Figure 3 compare the actual session sums in each condition side by side
with participants’ estimations.
Preference data assessing participants’ hedonic evaluations confirmed the informational estimation findings. For
the larger difference condition (A), all participants preferred
the higher-paying session, as expected. However, the smaller difference condition (B) produced weaker results: only
76% of participants preferred the higher-paying session.
This analysis provides confidence in people’s ability to
discriminate between higher- and lower-paying sessions.
Additionally, the trends match expectations that small 15point differences would be difficult but still manageable for
participants to distinguish. These estimation performances
represent unbiased estimations and benchmarks for comparison to experimental conditions.

160
140
120
100
100
80
60
40
20
0

Random v Random
Small
Large
Random
v Random

Random (H) v Peak (L)
Small
Large
Random(H)
v Peak(L)

Random (L) v Peak (H)
Small
Large
Random(L)
v Peak(H)

120
A

B

C

Actual
payouts
Actual
Payouts

E
D
F
Participant
Participant estimates
Estimates

Figure 3: Participant estimates for Experiment 2
Results across Experiments 1 and 2 Collating across all
session evaluations (n = 252), a robust result emerges. Participants underestimated session sums across all conditions
(z = -10.68, p < .001). Using error percentage (because sums
varied between sessions, a standardized measure of error
was used, with actual session total as a base), mean underestimation was 19.43%. Additionally, the peak-end bias held
(t(250) = 2.22, p < .05).
Summary Overall, the findings confirm the results of Experiment 1 in support of upwardly biased estimates in the
presence of high peak-end values and underestimation
across all conditions. Compared to baseline conditions, participants were worse at estimating session sums and made
suboptimal decisions when asked to choose between sessions where one had high peak-end values. Additionally, the
manipulation of the size of the difference between sessions
within a condition found that 15 points approximates a threshold for the peak-end bias.
These findings were replicated even with a reduced number of payouts (Experiment 1: 50 spins per session; Experiment 2: 25 spins per session) and complete information regarding the evaluation task. Participants knew they would
be asked to estimate sums before seeing the sequences of
payouts but still did not overcome the underestimation and
peak-end biases.
Given that participants made these estimation errors yet
managed consistent relative judgments between session
pairs, it seems likely that participants are using a memorybased estimation strategy rather than an online encoding
strategy. Participants may be retrieving instances of payout
outcomes and extrapolating using a consistent calculation.
Such processes have been found to produce underestimations in frequency judgments (Brown, 1995).
To explore frequency estimations in sequences of monetary values, Experiment 3 uses a simplified payout structure
of wins and non-wins. Given the task (gambling), it was
expected that participants would naturally attend to win and
non-win frequencies and perform well on frequency evaluations. Additionally, the experiment addresses two design
concerns, incentives and comparison judgments. Although

Experimental Conditions A repeated-measures ANOVA
was run to compare estimates of the experimental condition
session sums. Analysis found that, as expected, the presence
of high peak-end values had a significant upwards effect on
estimations of sums (F(1,16) = 5.63, p < .05). In line with
Experiment 1 and the peak-end rule, this finding indicates
that the presence of high peak-end values distorts estimations. Participants’ estimates for sessions with high peakend values (summed across conditions, M = 127.87, se =
4.84) were higher than for those without (M = 118.24, se =
6.89). No interactions were significant.
To take a closer look at the data, Figure 3 compares the
actual session sums in each condition side by side with estimations. Across all conditions, participants’ estimations
are significantly lower than actual sums (t(135) = 7.10, p <
.001), with a mean difference of more than 19 points.
Choice data for the experimental conditions were compared
to their baseline counterparts. For example, experimental
conditions with a large difference between session sums
were compared to the baseline condition with a large difference between session sums. Nonparametric analysis found
significant effects for the large difference conditions (comparison between A and C: z = -2.24, p < .05), showing that
many participants mistakenly preferred the lower-paying
80

was left upon completion. Participants then heard and read
instructions on how to operate the machine, played one session and gave retrospective evaluations.

the participants received a performance-related bonus payment in Experiment 2, this incentive may not have been
strong enough to approximate realistic fruit machine gambling behavior; Experiment 3 uses a more realistic machine
environment. Similarly, the comparative judgment design
may also be producing unique results that do not generalize
to single session evaluations.

Results and Discussion
Peak-End The effect of manipulations of the peak streak of
wins on participant estimations of total winnings and estimates of win frequency were non-significant (totals: F(1,46)
= .00, ns; frequency: F(1,46) = .90, ns). Likewise, manipulations of end streaks were also non-significant (totals:
F(1,46) = .12, ns; frequency: F(1,46) = 1.99, ns). Additionally, the data show that, although participants in the conditions with “peak” streaks recognized the streak (F(1,46) =
35.75, p < .001), it had no significant effect on their evaluations. There were no main or interaction effects on any
measure for the SOGS score.

Experiment 3
To enable the exploration of frequency estimations and
maximize control over the payout stimuli and manipulations
between participants, the third experiment used a simplified
payout stimuli structure. However, while this modification
was expected to lead to accurate frequency estimations, we
expected these modifications to lead to a decreased dependency on the peak-end heuristic, or any related availability
heuristic, as the peak value was no longer high and unique.

Estimation Although there were no differences between the
conditions, there was significant underestimation of winnings across all participants (t(45) = 3.92, p < .001). There
was no significant difference based on SOGS score (t(44) =
0.78, ns). Even under simplified conditions with equal payouts for every win, participants showed a similar underestimation bias as previously found, with a mean estimation of
their bank at £3.75 compared to the actual value of £4.90.

Method
Design and Materials A modified payout table used 0 and
30 pence outcomes, resulting in a straightforward payout
pattern of wins and non-wins. In a 2x2 between-subjects
design, the presence of both long “peak” and “end” streaks
were manipulated. Peaks were represented with a long
streak of nine wins. Ends were represented by nine spin
outcomes, with a positive end denoted by a positive trend
(five non-wins followed by four wins) or a negative end
(four wins followed by five non-wins). The number of wins
and, therefore, session total payout was held constant across
conditions. A cost to play was charged, with each spin deducting 10 pence from an endowed bank. This was illustrated by an animation of a coin being put into the fruit machine for each spin. Stimuli were randomized as previously
and each session consisted of 90 spins.
Retrospective evaluations were modified to reflect the
change to single-session evaluations. The informational
question was modified to consider the endowment and cost
to play modifications, asking how much the participant
thought was left in his or her bank. The question set also
included a frequency and streak evaluation, asking how
many times the participant had won and what was the length
of their longest streak of consecutive wins. The South Oaks
Gambling Screen (SOGS) was given at the end of the experiment to assess gambling experience.

Frequency and Streak Estimation Similarly, participants
underestimated the number of wins experienced during the
sequence, both in total and in streaks. The mean estimation
of wins was 15.40, across all conditions, compared to the
actual 23 wins (t(46) = 11.18, p < .001). The mean estimation of the streak in the “peak” streak conditions was 5.52,
compared to the actual 9 wins (t(23) = 10.64, p < .001). This
strong inaccuracy of frequency judgments in the same direction as the total winnings estimation indicates that memory
may play a key role in evaluations and that participants are
not likely to be automatically encoding frequencies during
the task (Haberstroh & Betsch, 2002).
Summary The third experiment suggests limitations of the
strong peak-end effect that had been found initially and implies sensitivity to value and strings of losses. For example,
participants informally reported streaks of 30 pence wins as
less affectively exciting than high-value “jackpot” wins,
especially when experienced alongside long strings of nonwins (a necessary consequence of controlling the number of
wins across conditions). In line with Gilovich (1983) hypotheses of post-gambling behavior, participants seemed to
focus on the “losses” from the sequence when reporting
about their experience. And in this simplified win/non-win
condition, we again found the underestimation of total session winnings and saw this extend to frequency estimations
as well. These results support a memory-based strategy for
retrospective evaluations.

Participants Forty-eight participants (29 female) were recruited from the UCL Psychology Subject Pool and compensated based on their performance on the task. Participants were randomly assigned to the two conditions. Analysis of SOGS scores identified 24 participants as having no
problem with gambling and 22 as having some or serious
problems (scores above 1, including 2 probable pathological
gamblers).
Procedure Participants were told at the start of the experiment that they were being given a bank of £7.00 with which
to play a fruit machine, and they would keep however much

81

In the context of gambling judgments and decisions, these
findings depict a dangerous picture for gamblers. Evidence
from this study suggests that these biased memories may
further translate to suboptimal decisions—choosing to continue gambling despite losses. In gambles with variable but
clearly-defined outcomes (as with the highly popular fruit
machine and betting forms), people may be using the peakend rule, making positive memories out of losing gambling
experiences; flashes, sounds and excitement focused on the
peak win may exploit this bias and lead to a more extreme
effect. The time spent gambling and even the overall
amount of money played and lost might be forgotten in favor of the powerful memory of a big hand or jackpot win.
Our memories of our experiences—colonoscopies, films,
trips to the casino or otherwise—may not be quite as dependable as we would like to think.

General Discussion
In this study we explored retrospective evaluations of temporally extended gambling episodes, focusing on estimations and choices between experiences. In examining these
issues in the new domain of monetary sequences, we tested
the boundaries and limitations of the peak-end rule found in
previous research and explored the basic cognitive processes
of frequency and sum estimations.
The main results of these experiments demonstrate that
the peak-end rule extends to monetary sequences of gains,
and indicate that this extension is linked to the affect or value associated with the numbers. Unlike previous experiments that used sensory stimuli without an accompanying
objective scale, the point and money value stimuli used here
lend themselves to aggregative rules and arithmetic calculations. Despite the availability of these simple rules, the affective saliency of peak and end values—when accentuated
with high values—seems to act as an easy cue and drive
retrospective evaluations. Experiment 3 showed that high
monetary peaks alone may be insufficient (participants did
recognize the presence of a peak streak of wins but this did
not influence their evaluations). Without heightened affect
to accompany the peak value, the peak-end effect may disappear. Ongoing research is examining the separate effects
of affect and numerical magnitude and how the peak-end
rule handles affectively-heterogeneous stimuli with positive
and negative peaks. Further evidence is also needed to determine whether peak-end values are good predictors of
remembered utility in subsequent decision making.
These experiments also reveal significant underestimation
of sums and frequencies of numbers presented in a sequence
over time. Participants did not use the simple arithmetic
strategies typically used in addition or estimation tasks;
however, given that estimations for sums of compared sessions reflected actual differences between those sessions, it
seems likely that participants did use a strategy of some
kind. Coupled with the inaccuracy of the absolute judgments, this study suggests participants may have been using
a memory-based strategy for evaluations and consequently
were susceptible to errors in processing and retrieval. Despite the real-world relevance of the cognitive process of
estimation, there is little existing literature studying this
issue and our results point to the need for future attention to
this area.
While these experiments did control for likely alternative
models of estimation, a confounding variance factor could
not be controlled. Compared sessions differed in payout
variance because the high peak-end values within a session
were compensated with many low values to control the total
payouts and frequency of wins. Participants in these sessions experienced longer strings of non-wins or more low
payouts. However, there is evidence that the present study’s
findings are robust. Alba, Mela, Shimp, and Urbany (1999)
concluded that, while variance cues may impact estimations
in certain conditions, simple data conditions (e.g., simple,
clearly-defined distribution of values) weakened the bias
and strengthened other cues such as depth (e.g., magnitude).

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a scholarship to Erica Yu from the
Responsibility in Gambling Trust.

References
Alba, J. W., Mela, C. F., Shimp, T. A., & Urbany, J. E.
(1999). The effect of discount frequency and depth on
consumer price judgments. Journal of Consumer Research, 26, 99-114.
Brown, N. R. (1995). Estimation strategies and the judgment of event frequency. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(6), 15391553.
Fredrickson, B. L. & Kahneman, D. (1993). Duration neglect in retrospective evaluations of affective episodes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 45-55.
Gilovich, T. (1983). Biased evaluation and persistence in
gambling. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
44(6), 1110-1126.
Haberstroh, S. & Betsch, T. (2002). Online strategies versus
memory-based strategies. In P. Sedlmeier & T. Betsch
(Eds.), Etc. Frequency processing and cognition. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Kahneman, D., Wakker, P. P., & Sarin, R. (1997). Back to
Bentham? Explorations of experienced utility. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 375-405.
Langer, T., Sarin, R., & Weber, M. (2005). The retrospective evaluation of payment sequences: Duration neglect
and peak-and-end effects. Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization, 58, 157-175.
Redelmeier, D. A. & Kahneman, D. (1996). Patients’ memories of painful medical treatments: real-time and retrospective evaluations of two minimally invasive procedures. Pain, 66, 3-8.
Schreiber, C. A. & Kahneman, D. (2000). Determinants of
the remembered utility of aversive sounds. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129(1), 27-42.
Sedlmeier, P. & Betsch, T. (Eds.). (2002). Etc. Frequency
processing and cognition. New York: Oxford University
Press.

82

