UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Convergence in the Bilingual Lexicon

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/935412jc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Ameel, Eef
Storms, Gert
Malt, Barbara
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Convergence in the Bilingual Lexicon
Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be)

Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)

Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3068

Fons Van Assche (fons.vanassche@scarlet.be)
H.V.W., Ridderstraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
The one-pattern hypothesis holds that bilinguals are not
able to maintain two separate, monolingual-like mappings of
words to the same objects. Interactions between the two
languages yield patterns of connections between the word
forms and referents in the two languages that differ from
either monolingual naming pattern.
Evidence suggests that the two lexicons of bilinguals are
not isolated from one another. For instance, cross-language
priming occurs in lexical decision and in categorization (e.g.,
De Groot & Nas, 1991). Stroop-like between-language
picture-word interference points to activation spreading from
one language to the other through access to a shared meaning
representation system (Costa, Miozzo, & Caramazza, 1999).
If there are interconnections of some sort, it may be difficult
or impossible for bilinguals to maintain two separate and
distinct patterns of mappings from word forms to referents.
Ameel, Storms, Malt and Sloman (2005) studied the
naming patterns of Belgian Dutch- and French-speaking
monolinguals and Dutch-French bilinguals. They found that
the Dutch and French naming patterns of bilinguals did not
fully parallel the patterns of Dutch- and French-speaking
monolinguals, respectively. Instead, the bilingual naming
patterns converged on a common naming pattern in the two
languages. Bilinguals agreed better on naming in their two
languages than monolinguals of the two languages did. For
example, the nesting relation found for monolinguals between
Dutch fles on the one hand and French bouteille and flacon on
the other hand was found in bilinguals as well, but in contrast
to the equal distribution of fles objects among the French
monolingual categories, bilinguals speaking French called a
majority of fles objects bouteille (21/30) and only a minority
flacon (6/30). Thus, bouteille for them more closely
resembled their Dutch fles category.
It is possible that the manifestation of convergence in
naming is different in the category centers and the category
boundaries because centers and boundaries differ in the type
of exemplars that mostly contribute to their formation. Given
the strong correlation between typicality and production
frequency (Barsalou, 1985; Hampton, 1979; Mervis, Catlin,
& Rosch, 1976), category centers are likely to be determined
by high-frequency items, while the boundaries should mainly
reflect exposure to lower-frequency items. Hence, category

Abstract
Two studies investigated how convergence between linguistic
representations in Dutch-French bilinguals affects the centers
and boundaries of lexical categories for common household
objects. In Study 1, correlations between typicality ratings for
roughly corresponding categories were higher for bilinguals in
their two languages than for monolinguals in each language,
indicating that bilingual prototypes converge. In Study 2, fewer
dimensions were needed to linearly separate bilingual than
monolingual categories, and bilinguals showed fewer violations
of similarity-based naming. Implications for theories of the
bilingual lexicon are discussed.
Keywords: Bilinguals; lexicon; convergence; prototypes;
linear separability.

Introduction
Languages map words onto referents in different ways.
For instance, the linguistic boundary between chairs and sofas
is not the same in Dutch as in English. In English, a large
stuffed seat for one person is given the same label as a
wooden chair, but Dutch speakers give the stuffed one the
same label that they would give a stuffed multi-person seat -what English speakers call sofa.
Malt et al. (1999) studied naming for a set of 60 common
household containers (mostly called bottle or jar in English)
by speakers of English, Chinese and Spanish and found rather
different ways of carving these familiar objects up by name.
These results were later replicated for Dutch- and Frenchspeaking Belgians (Ameel et al., 2005).
The differing patterns of naming across languages raise the
question of how bilinguals name these objects in their two
languages. To become fully native-like in both languages,
they must attend to the distinctions between the two
languages’ naming patterns for the same set of referents,
acquire both patterns, and maintain them as distinct over time.
Are they able to do so?
The two-pattern hypothesis states that bilinguals acquire
and maintain two distinct sets of connections of word forms
to their referents and that, for each language, the naming
pattern parallels that of the corresponding monolinguals.
Presumably this is what bilinguals strive to achieve.

53

counterbalanced. Stimulus photos were presented in a
random order on a computer screen. The complete set was
presented as many times as there were category names for the
set. At the top of the screen appeared the category name for
which typicality was rated.

boundaries may be more vulnerable to convergence than the
category centers, although convergence in the category
centers cannot be excluded. In the present paper, we further
investigate the nature of bilingual semantic convergence
evident in the names for household objects (Ameel et al.,
2005). We ask how convergence is manifested in two aspects
of lexical category structure: the category centers and the
category boundaries.

Results and Discussion
The split-half reliability was above 0.96 for all rated
categories in all participant groups. For each language group,
ratings were averaged across participants for each object in
each category. Next, the correlation between the mean Dutch
and French ratings of the bilinguals was computed for each
category pair and compared to the correlation between the
ratings of the two monolingual groups for the same pair. The
correlations between typicality ratings were, for bilinguals
and monolinguals respectively, for fles-bouteille: .98 and .91;
for pot-pot, .98 and .94; for kom-bol, .88 and .70; for tastasse, .99 and .99; for schaal-plat, .95 and .91; and for bordassiette, .99 and .94. A two-sample paired t-test showed that
the mean Z'-transformed correlation between the ratings of
the bilinguals was significantly higher than the mean Z'transformed correlation for monolinguals, t(5) = 3.514, p <
.01. For each pair of category names separately, we found
that the improvement in correlation for the bilinguals, in
comparison with the monolinguals, was significant.
The significantly better values for the bilinguals was not
just the result of the fact that the ratings being compared for
the bilinguals came from the same people. To demonstrate
this, for each pair of bilinguals, correlations were computed
between Dutch and French typicality ratings, under the
condition that the ratings in the two languages did not belong
to the same individual (i.e., 21*21- 21 = 420 pairs).
Likewise, ratings were correlated for each pair of Dutch- and
French-speaking monolinguals (i.e., 28*24 = 672 pairs). For
both stimulus sets, the mean Z'-transformed correlation
between Dutch and French bilingual ratings was significantly
higher than the mean Z'-transformed correlation between
ratings of the Dutch- and French-speaking monolinguals:
t(1090)=29.3, p<.0001 for the bottles set and t(1090)=18.6,
p<.0001 for the dishes.
In sum, the results showed higher correlations between
Dutch and French typicality ratings of bilinguals than
between typicality ratings of Dutch-speaking and Frenchspeaking monolinguals, suggesting that bilinguals’ prototypes
of corresponding categories are more similar to each other
than monolinguals’s are. Although this outcome may seem
surprising given that typical exemplars tend to be high
frequency bilinguals might incorporate exemplars of the
categories of one language into the corresponding categories
of the other language as well, resulting in a higher overlap of
corresponding categories in the two languages of a bilingual
and hence, more similar prototypes.

Study 1: Prototype Convergence
This study evaluates how convergence is manifested in the
prototypes of corresponding categories in the two languages
of a bilingual by looking at typicality ratings. We compared
the extent to which bilinguals agree on typicality ratings for
roughly corresponding categories across their two languages
with the extent to which monolingual speakers agree on
typicality ratings for the same categories. For example, we
compared the judged typicality of objects as examples of
Dutch fles with their judged typicality as examples of French
bouteille for the bilinguals and for the monolinguals. If
bilinguals agree better than monolinguals, the bilingual
prototypes can be inferred to be more similar to each other
than the monolingual prototypes.

Method
Participants. The participants were 28 Belgian Dutch
speaking and 24 Belgian French-speaking monolinguals and
21 Dutch-French balanced bilinguals. The bilinguals had a
Dutch-speaking mother and a French-speaking father or vice
versa, and from childhood onward, each parent had
consistently been speaking their own language to them.
Materials. The categories studied were derived from the
naming data of Ameel et al.'s (2005) study, where two sets of
common household objects were used. The 'bottles' set
contained 73 objects that were likely to receive the name
bottle, jar, or container in American English, or else to have
one or more salient properties in common with those
categories. The 'dishes' set consisted of 67 objects that were
likely to be called dish, plate, or bowl in American English, or
else to share one or more salient properties with those
categories. Objects were photographed on a neutral
background that preserved relative size. (For examples, see
Ameel et al., 2005.)
In order to compare the typicality ratings of different
language groups, pairs of frequently generated category
names from Ameel et al. (2005) were selected that were
considered sufficiently good (but not perfect) translation
equivalent in Dutch and French. For the bottles set, the
selected pairs were fles-bouteille and pot-pot. For the dishes
set, the pairs were kom-bol, tas-tasse, schaal-plat, and bordassiette.
Procedure. Participants were instructed to rate the typicality
of each object with respect to a specified category name on a
7-point rating scale (1 = 'very atypical', 7 = 'very typical').
Monolinguals gave ratings in one language and bilinguals
rated the stimuli in both languages, with language order

Study 2: Boundary Convergence
In Study 2 we focused on evaluating convergence in the
category boundaries. Atypical member of lexical categories
may often be language-specific, gaining category

54

membership through historical cultural and linguistic
influences not transparent to current speakers of a language
(see Malt et al., 1999). It is in principle possible that
bilinguals learn the language-specific complexity at the
category boundaries in both languages, in which case
bilingual and monolingual categories will be equally
complex. If so, the observed convergence must arise entirely
from other aspects of the lexical representations, such as the
prototype convergence demonstrated in Study 1.
A more plausible possibility, given the lower frequency and
atypical nature of boundary cases, is that bilinguals do not
fully master language-specific complexities at the category
boundaries in their two languages. Convergence would
therefore occur. Convergence of category boundaries could
be manifested either in more complex or simpler category
boundaries for bilinguals as compared to monolinguals. On
the one hand, it is possible that the boundaries of bilingual
categories are more complex than those of monolingual
categories if bilinguals are unable to keep boundary
exemplars of each language separate. Instead, they
incorporate the boundary exemplars of a category in one
language into the roughly corresponding category in the other
language as well, and vice versa. As a result, the categories of
each language of a bilingual acquire language-specific
complexities of both languages and will be more complex
than the categories of monolinguals of either language.
On the other hand, it is possible that the boundary
exemplars of each language get only poorly encoded as a
member of the relevant category in either language. As a
consequence, bilinguals may drop (some of) the boundary
exemplars in both languages. In other words, languagespecific idiosyncrasies will not (or only to a smaller degree)
be appreciated in either language, resulting in less complex
categories for bilinguals as compared to monolinguals. Under
this scenario, bilinguals may be more likely to assign the
boundary exemplars to the category to which they are most
similar, rather than to the category to which they are assigned
by monolinguals.
To discriminate among these possibilities, we first
evaluated the complexity of bilingual categories compared to
monolingual ones by determining how many dimensions it
takes to separate the categories. The more complex the
categories are, the more dimensions are needed to separate
the categories linearly. To provide more direct evidence for
whether bilinguals incorporate or drop boundary exemplars,
we also compared the proportion of outliers (i.e., objects that
are more similar to the prototype of another category than to
their own category prototype) for bilinguals and
monolinguals.

Method
The same materials described in Study 1 were used. The
naming data of Dutch- and French-speaking monolinguals
and Dutch-French bilinguals described in Ameel et al. (2005)
were used as well as the MDS representations, based on their
aggregated sorting data over the three participant groups.
LINSEP (Van Assche, 2006) is a method that allows us to
determine whether two categories are linearly separable in a
given number of dimensions by looking for a linear function
that perfectly divides the extensions of the two categories
when projected onto the specified number of dimensions.
LINSEP assumes an underlying M-dimensional geometrical
representation in which the exemplars belonging to different
categories of a semantic domain are embedded. The more
dimensions that are needed to separate the categories linearly,
the more complex the categories are.
For the category pairs in the present study, we selected the
most frequently generated names that were used for at least
10 percent of the objects of a stimulus set. (The percentage of
objects varied between 12% and 34%.) For the bottles set, the
pairs fles-bus, fles-pot, and bus-pot were selected for Dutch
and the pairs bouteille-flacon, bouteille-pot, and flacon-pot
were selected for French. For the dishes set, the pairs kom-tas,
kom-schaal, kom-bord, and schaal-bord were selected for
Dutch and the pairs bol-tasse, bol-plat, bol-assiette, and platassiette were selected for French. For the dishes set, not all
possible pairs of category names were selected. The Dutch
pairs tas-bord and tas-schaal and their French approximate
equivalents tasse-assiette and tasse-plat were not used, since
the category of tas (tasse) objects was rather isolated from the
categories of bord (assiette) objects and schaal (plat) objects
in the MDS representation. The category of kom (bol) objects
is more interrelated to the category of tas (tasse) objects, at
least in the studied dimensionalities.

Results and Discussion
Testing linear separability. Analyses were based on naming
data from every participant separately to avoid biases due to
averaging. Analyses on aggregated data (i.e., the most
frequently generated names) could lead to wrong conclusions
(under-estimation or over-estimation of the number of
dimensions), since aggregated data contain information about
a (non-existent) ‘average person’. For each participant of a
language group, LINSEP determined for each pair of
category names of each stimulus set the lowest
dimensionality at which the pair was linearly separable. This
yielded for each participant seven different values, one for
each pair of the studied category names. Next, for each
language group (Dutch- and French-speaking monolinguals,
and bilinguals in Dutch and French) and for each pair of
category names, the minimum dimensionalities at which the
pair was linearly separable were averaged across participants.
Figures 1A and 1B display the averaged minimum
dimensionality for the selected pairs of category

55

are poorly encoded in memory, resulting in less complex
categories for the bilinguals.
This outcome indirectly suggests that boundary exemplars,
which are more likely determined by idiosyncrasies than
centrally situated exemplars, are dropped by bilinguals in
both their languages, and instead, are assigned to categories
according to their similarity. However, the linear separability
analyses do not provide direct evidence for this conclusion. A
more direct way to evaluate whether bilinguals drop boundary
exemplars from the categories relative to monolinguals (and
instead assign them to similarity-based categories) is to
compare the proportions of outliers for bilinguals and
monolinguals, with outliers defined as objects that are more
similar to the prototype of another category than to the
prototype of their own category.
Comparing proportions of outliers. Proportions of outliers
were determined for the category names that were most
frequently generated for at least 10 percent of the objects of a
stimulus set (the same category names used in the linear
separability analyses). For the bottles set, these were Dutch
fles, bus, and pot and French bouteille, flacon, and pot. For
the dishes set, they were Dutch kom, tas, schaal, and bord,
and French bol, tasse, plat, and assiette. In geometrical
representations, an outlier can be defined as an object that is
located closer to the prototype of another category than to the
prototype of its own category. We computed outliers for the
two sets of stimuli in a 2-dimensional MDS representation.
We used only a 2-dimensional space because, if there are
differences in the number of outliers between bilinguals and
monolinguals, these differences can be less pronounced in
higher-dimensional
spaces,
since
increasing
the
dimensionality of a solution may cause an outlier to become a
non-outlier.
To avoid biases due to averaging, outliers were computed
for each participant separately. For each participant of a
particular language group and for each stimulus set, we first
selected the objects that were called by the category names
selected for the particular stimulus set and the language of the
participant. For example, for each Dutch-speaking
monolingual participant, the objects that were called fles, bus,
or pot by the participant were selected from the bottles set;
the object that were called kom, tas, schaal, and bord were
retained from the dishes set. On average across all language
groups, 60% of the objects from the bottles set were selected
(varying between 42% and 78%) and 69% of the objects from
the dishes set (varying between 37% and 94%). Next, for
each participant, the distances were computed between the
selected stimuli for a particular stimulus set and the
prototypes of the selected category names relevant to the
stimulus set and language of the participant. An object was
considered to be an outlier if the distance to the prototype of
its own category name was larger than the distance to the
prototype of another category name. For each participant, the
proportion of outliers was calculated for each category name.
Finally, for each category name of both stimulus sets, the
proportion of outliers was averaged across the participants in
each language group. This resulted in 14 averaged
proportions for bilinguals and 14 averaged proportions of

Figure 1: Average dimensionality of linear separability for
bilinguals and monolinguals in the bottles set (upper panel)
and dishes set (lower panel)
names for the different language groups for the bottles and
the dishes set, respectively.
To test whether bilingual categories are linearly separable
in an equal, higher, or lower dimensionality than monolingual categories, a two-sample paired t-test for the means of
bilinguals and monolinguals was calculated. Overall, the
minimum dimensionality at which perfect linear separability
was found was significantly lower for bilinguals than for
monolinguals (3.6 < 3.9, t(13) = -2.59, p < .05). The same
result was found for the two stimulus sets separately,
although significance was only reached for the bottles set (3.9
< 4.3, t(7) = -2.43, p < .05). As can be seen in Figure 1, there
were three exceptions to this general pattern: the categories
fles-pot, schaal-bord, and bol-assiette were linearly separable
in a higher dimensionality for bilinguals than for
monolinguals (respectively, 4.4 > 4.19, 3.8 > 3.7, and 3.9 >
3.3).
In sum, the finding that bilingual categories are linearly
separable in lower dimensionalities on average than
monolingual categories implies that the categories of
bilinguals tend to be less complex than the corresponding
monolingual categories, since bilinguals need fewer features
to separate their categories linearly than monolinguals. This
finding suggests that language-specificities of both languages

56

features. In line with most models of bilingual memory, the
distributed feature model assumes that the features space
representing knowledge of the world is shared across a
bilingual’s two languages, and features on this level are
available to either language. However, how these features
combine is language-specific. While this model was
developed to account for differences in the extent to which a
bilingual’s lexical representations overlap for the two
languages depending on word-type and grammatical class
(e.g., abstract vs. concrete words; nouns vs. verbs), we
believe that the model is also a useful framework to
understand differences in the extent to which they overlap for
two languages depending on the speaker (monolingual versus
bilingual). Since similarity perception appears to be shared
across languages (Ameel et al., 2005; Malt et al., 1999; at
least for concrete objects for which knowledge is heavily
determined by direct experience), we assume that featural
knowledge is shared, not only across a bilingual’s two
languages, but also across speakers of different languages.
The upper panel of Figure 2 shows the monolingual
situation. The circles on the lexical level represent words in
Language 1 and Language 2 that are rough translation
equivalents of one another for monolinguals in each. The
black circles in the feature space represent features that are
relevant to the words of interest in both Language 1 and
Language 2. The white circles are language-specific features
that are not shared across the words in Language 1 and
Language 2. These language specificities for the two
languages account for the cross-linguistic differences in
naming (Ameel et al., 2005; Malt et al., 1999).

outliers for monolinguals; one for each selected category
name. In 11 out of the 14 category names (79%), the bilingual
proportion of outliers was smaller than the monolingual
proportion, which is a significantly larger percentage than
would be observed by chance (p < .05). The smaller
proportion of outliers for bilinguals indicates that bilinguals
drop at least part of the boundary exemplars compared to the
native categories of both languages. Bilinguals make fewer
violations of similarity-based naming than monolinguals,
confirming the finding from the linear separability analysis
that
bilingual
naming
respects
language-specific
idiosyncracies to a smaller degree than than monolingual
naming does.

General Discussion
The permeability of the language representations of bilinguals
(Ameel et al., 2005; De Groot & Nas, 1991; Kirsner et al.,
1984), in combination with meaning representations in a
bilingual’s two languages that may be less well established
than those of a monolingual (Gollan et al., 2005), may yield
bilingual representations that are highly vulnerable to
convergence. The present paper investigated in which aspects
of the bilingual lexical category structure this vulnerability is
manifested. Study 1 was designed to find out how bilingual
category prototypes were affected by semantic convergence.
We found higher correlations between Dutch and French
typicality ratings for corresponding categories of bilinguals
than between typicality ratings for corresponding categories
of Dutch-speaking and French-speaking monolinguals,
implying that the prototypes of corresponding categories in
the two languages of bilinguals were closer to each other than
the prototypes of corresponding monolingual categories.
In Study 2, we examined how the boundaries of bilingual
categories were affected by semantic convergence. If
convergence is manifested in category boundaries, bilinguals
could either have more complex categories by incorporating
boundary exemplars of each language in both languages, or
simpler categories by dropping boundary exemplars in both
languages. We found that fewer dimensions were needed to
linearly separate bilingual categories than monolingual
categories. Furthermore, the number of outliers (i.e., objects
more similar to the prototype of another category than to the
prototype of their own category) for bilinguals was smaller
than for monolinguals. Together these results indicate that the
boundaries of bilingual lexical categories are simplified, and
the naming of boundary exemplars in bilinguals is less
determined by language-specific idiosyncrasies than the
naming of boundary exemplars by monolinguals.
Implications for models of the bilingual lexicon. Ameel et
al. (2005) considered Van Hell and De Groot’s (1998)’s
distributed conceptual feature model a useful framework to
account for the bilingual naming pattern. We believe that the
model can also more specifically account for the
simplification that takes place in bilinguals as compared to
monolinguals (see Figure 2). In the distributed feature model,
a word (on the lexical level) is represented as a pattern of
activation across a network of interconnected units or

Figure 2. Schematic representation of the monolingual
(upper panel) and the bilingual (lower panel) lexicon
The lower panel of Figure 2 shows the bilingual situation.
The less complex category structure found for bilinguals can
be explained in terms of dropped language specificities. This
is represented by the white circles that are not taken into
account to represent meaning in any language, and thus these
features are not connected to the lexical level. As can be seen,
we allowed some language specificity for bilinguals, since
there remain subtle differences between the bilingual naming
patterns (see the white circles that are connected to the lexical
level).

57

structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11, 629654.
Costa, A., Miozzo, M., & Caramazza, A. (1999). Lexical
selection in bilinguals: Languagespecific or languageindependent? Journal of Memory and Language, 41, 365397.
De Groot, A. M. B. (1992). Determinants of word translation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 18, 1001-1018.
De Groot, A. M. B., & Nas, G. L. J. (1991). Lexical
representation of cognates and noncognates in compound
bilinguals. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 90-123.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161-178.
Gollan, T. H., Montoya, R. I., Fennema-Notestine, C., &
Morris, S.K. (2005). Picture-naming and classification in
monolinguals and Spanish-English bilinguals. Memory and
Cognition, 33, 1220-1234.
Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
18, 441-461.
Kirsner, K., Smith, M. C., Lockhart, R. S., King, M. L., &
Jain, M. (1984). The bilingual lexicon: Language-specific
units in an integrated network. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 23, 519-539.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Mervis, C. B., Catlin, J., & Rosch, E. (1976). Relationships
among goodness-of-example, category norms, and word
frequency. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 7, 283-284.
Miller, G. A., & Fellbaum, C. (1991). Semantic networks of
English. Cognition, 41, 197- 229.
Plaut, D. C., & Shallice, T. (1993). Deep dyslexia: A case
study of connectionist neuropsychology. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 10(5), 377-500.
Tokowicz, N., Kroll, J. F., De Groot, A.M.B., & Van Hell,
J.G. (2002). Number of translation norms for DutchEnglish translation pairs: A new tool for examining
language production. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 34, 435-451.
Van Assche, F. (2006). The use of LS solvers in the
determination of linear separability of ntuple classes.
(Tech. Rep.). Leuven, Belgium: Catholic University of
Leuven, Department of Psychology.
Van Hell, J. G., & De Groot, A. M. B. (1998). Conceptual
representation in bilingual memory: Effects of concreteness
and cognate status in word association. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 1, 193-211.

As the examples described above suggest, bilinguals do not
necessarily drop language-specific features of both languages.
What will be dropped may depend on the level of complexity
imposed by the language specificity of the two languages on
the category structure. Less complex category structures are
more likely to be retained than more complex category
structures. Hence, the schematic representation of the
bilingual situation (lower part of Figure 2) is too strong, since
it assumes that language specificities of both languages are
dropped. More moderate versions need to be considered
allowing language specificities of one language to be
retained, while dropping specificities of the other.
Generalizations to other classes of words. The conclusions
about convergence in bilinguals drawn from the studies
described in this paper are based on concrete nouns referring
to common objects. Can these conclusions be generalized to
other classes of words, such as abstract words or verbs?
According to Van Hell and De Groot’s (1998) distributed
feature model, the degree of overlap in semantic features
between translation equivalents is much smaller for abstract
than concrete words (e.g., Plaut & Shallice, 1993). This
means that the meaning of abstract words is even more
strongly determined by language-specific features (Van Hell
& De Groot, 2003).
In a study with Dutch-English bilinguals who judged how
similar two words of translation pairs were, Tokowicz, Kroll,
De Groot, and Van Hell (2002) indeed found that abstract
translation equivalents were less likely to share meaning than
concrete ones. We suggest that abstract words might be less
vulnerable to convergence through simplification than
concrete words, because it would imply that a larger portion
of the meaning (i.e., the language-specific part) is dropped,
resulting in a too impoverished meaning in both languages.
Similarly, verbs, as compared to (concrete) nouns may vary
more across languages than the meanings of nouns (Gentner,
1981). To the extent that that is true, we expect that
convergence (in the form of dropping of language-specific
features), is less likely to occur in verbs than in nouns.
However, the process of grasping the meanings/uses of such
lexical items may be delayed relative to monolingual
children, due to the added difficulty of acquiring the
necessary information from the reduced exposure to each
language that a child growing up with two languages will
receive.

References
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B. C., & Sloman, S. A. (2005).
How bilinguals solve the naming problem. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53, 60-80.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded

58

