UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Science: Complex Cognition in Early AIDS Research

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4g0938qs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Lippa, Katherine D.
Shalin, Valerie L.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Science: Complex Cognition in Early AIDS Research
Katherine D. Lippa (lippa.2@wright.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA

Valerie L. Shalin (valerie.shalin@wright.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA
in cognitive science. Perhaps a broader perspective on
reasoning will identify processes not apparent in pre-focused
laboratory research. Examining real world cases, like AIDS
research provides an opportunity for a richer picture of
scientific reasoning to emerge.
The research reported here examines reasoning by several
influential figures in early efforts to combat AIDS. It
evaluates both their unique reasoning processes and how they
interacted with one another to gain critical insights and make
discoveries.

Abstract
AIDS presented a totally unknown disorder requiring
immediate solutions. This study examines how leading
scientists studied and thought about AIDS during the first years
of the epidemic. We present a detailed analysis of three
interviews with scientists who worked at or with the National
Institutes of Health. Though representing different disciplines
(epidemiology, clinical work, & immunology), the scientists
went through similar stages in their thinking. An initial data
gathering stage characterized by inductive logic was followed
by an explanatory phase using abduction to understand the
initial results and generate hypotheses. And finally a deductive
stage where the data from the different scientists were
combined to help discover the HIV virus as the underlying
cause of AIDS. We highlight the discipline-specific manner in
which each researcher engaged with the problem, the role of
abduction and the influence of the scientists on each other’s
reasoning.

Methods
In this study, we apply cognitive-historical analysis
(Nersessian, 1992), which approaches scientific reasoning by
examining historical documents with an analytic lens
grounded in cognitive science.

Data

Keywords: scientific reasoning, medical reasoning, analogical
reasoning, cognitive-historical analysis, logical processes,
AIDS

The primary data source was a series of post hoc interviews
with early AIDS researchers who were working with the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) (NIH, n.d)1. Victoria
Harden conducted these interviews between 1988 and 1998.
Ten interviews were selected for analysis that were primarily
concerned with clinical or laboratory research (as opposed
social or administrative issues), addressed the interviewee’s
thinking regarding some issue relevant to early research, and
addressed the interviewee’s own thoughts and experiences
rather than their recollections of what others were doing.
Preliminary analysis raised two methodological problems.
First, many of the studies were shared efforts by several
researchers (e.g. 3 researchers spent time in the same
laboratory group), creating redundancy. Second, the data set
was unmanageably large, making it difficult to see patterns.
Therefore, we focused on three researchers, Dr. James
Curran, Dr. Thomas Waldmann, and Dr. Anthony Fauci, for
detailed analyses. These three were selected because they
represented different disciplines and they headed efforts that
involved most of the other researchers. Curran was working
as an epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) in Atlanta and headed their task force on AIDS.
Waldmann was a researcher at the NIH in Bethesda, but his
involvement with AIDS was primarily clinical, having the

“Pneumocystis Pneumonia – Los Angeles” (Gottlieb, et al.,
1981) these words headed a brief article disseminated to
virtually every medical facility in the United States. The brief,
apparently un-alarming report described five cases of a rare
condition in a distrusted minority. It was also the first
announcement of what would become the most deadly
epidemic in modern times - AIDS.
The early years of AIDS present a unique opportunity to
study how scientists solve complex, novel problems. Most
cognitive science research on scientific reasoning has either
examined the historical records pertaining to specific
individuals making exceptional discoveries or has used
experimental and/or computational techniques to analyze
some aspect of individual reasoning (Klahr & Simon, 1999).
Both types of research have strengths and limitations.
Until quite recently, studies based on historical records
have tended to examine single individuals. The sudden
appearance of AIDS presented the same information at the
same time to many scientists from different disciplines. As
such, AIDS provides an opportunity to compare reasoning
among individuals and to see how the interactions among
disciplines contributed to problem solving.
A hypothetical-deductive model of science popular with
philosophers in the mid 20th century (Popper, 1959) appears
to inform most laboratory experiments on scientific reasoning

1
This study is limited by the post hoc nature of the data. A more
extensive study is planned with a larger data set and incorporating
contemporary documents (e.g. memos and scientific papers).

787

first AIDS patient to come to the NIH in his service. Fauci, an
immunologist, was the first researcher at the NIH to devote
his lab to AIDS research. The contributions of these three
researchers linked to the thinking of a forth researcher, Dr.
Robert Gallo (NIH), whose discovery of HIV caps this early
period of research. By tracing how these three researchers
developed insights leading to Gallo’s work we were able to
see how their unique contributions came together to create a
cohesive whole.
Other documents were used to support the statements made
in the interviews including journal articles published by or
referred to by interviewees, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Reports published by the CDC, and a small number of memos
circulated through the NIH at that time.

Code
Induction

Deduction

Abduction

Coding
The interviews were first coded for reasoning processes
and content. The codes were used to create concept maps
illustrating the reasoning of the researchers individually and
in interaction with each other. These maps facilitated the
identification of critical points and trends.
Coding occurred in two phases. First an emergent coding
method, based on principles of grounded theory, captured
major modes of reasoning and content (Bohm, 2004). This
coding scheme was simplified by merging overlapping codes
and eliminating infrequent codes. All transcripts were
recoded by two coders. The codings were compared and
instances of disagreement were resolved by discussion until
consensus. From the consensus coding three additional codes
were eliminated because of near total correlation with other
codes (e.g. ‘information seeking’ was eliminated because it
always accompanied the ‘action’). The final coding scheme
included four reasoning codes, induction, deduction,
abduction, and analogical reasoning, and three content codes,
action, belief, and information; see Table 1. Coding was
facilitated using Atlas.ti© (Atlas.ti, 2008).

Analogical
reasoning
Action
Belief
Information

Table 1: Coding examples.
Example
“cases of Kaposi’s sarcoma, … cases of
opportunistic infections …. paralleled
each other. They were all going up; they
were all in the same age groups; they were
all in the same places. So this was really
one epidemic.”
“When you deal with infections that are
sexually transmitted and blood borne, …
there is no reason to believe they will stay
confined … because sex is a universal …
and people donate blood”
“Since there was a seemingly selective
defect in CD4-positive T cells, there was
much speculation that we were dealing
with a retrovirus…”
“it was going to be in the blood supply if it
were caused by a virus like hepatitis B”
“We did another study-it was a cluster
analysis-that began in 1982”
“we were dealing with something that was
going to be a disaster”
“their B cells were inappropriately
hyperactive”

This belief was shared by Fauci and was a critical factor in
his assessment of the disease as serious and motivation to
study it. So Curran’s and Fauci’s maps were connected at the
shared belief node. The map was pared down so that only
those nodes and links that included significant information or
influenced later reasoning were retained. This map is shown
in Figure 1.
Description
Finally, an enriched description of the trends and patterns
observed in the maps was created by combining simplified
maps used for illustrative purposes with selected quotations.
This description is presented below.

Mapping
Banxia Decision Explorer© was used to create cognitive
maps of the researchers’ reasoning from the coded transcripts
(Banxia, 2005). Each of the content codes became a node and
each of the reasoning codes became a link. An additional kind
of arrow was added: a directional link indicating that one
thing leads to another (usually an action leading to a piece of
information obtained via the action). Each node has a unique
identifying number; which directs attention to specific nodes
in the discussion below. To represent interactions between
researchers, the researchers’ individual maps were connected
at nodes that were common to both maps. For example,
Curran’s work led him to believe AIDS was caused by an
infectious agent (node 396).

Results
Although the researchers approached AIDS from different
disciplines, they passed through similar structural stages. In
the first stage, the researchers had to take ownership of the
problem by realizing that it was serious and that they could
contribute to a solution. In the second stage, they had to
define the parameters of the problem by making extensive
observations and using induction to create a profile for the
disease. Next, from the perspective of their disciplines, the
researchers used abduction to come up with causal
hypotheses. Finally, all of these beliefs converged to convince
Gallo that a retrovirus was the underlying cause. This pattern
is illustrated in Figure 1.

788

Fauci
Immunology

Key
Curran
Epidemiology

Waldmann
Clinical

Figure 1. Map of reasoning across three scientists
Curran, the epidemiologist, was working at the CDC and
saw a draft of the first report before it was published. He
consulted with colleagues and looked for additional cases.
When the report was published, he headed the task force to
deal with the problem. Immediate concern for the disease as
an emerging threat led to a quest for further information:
“initially, it was thought that these unusual cases might be
the next epidemic for the CDC to address. Scientists from
different disciplines convened to talk ... It was agreed that
we needed to find out more.” This movement directly from
the 1st report to perceived threat to action, is represented by
the direct connections between nodes 373, 387, and 388.

The First Report: Problem Ownership
A mixed reaction greeted the first report of what would
come to be known as AIDS. Some people realized it
represented a potential threat, while others failed to notice
or dismissed it. The degree of resulting action by individuals
within the sample depended upon whether they perceived
the reported as relevant to them or their research. They had
to take ownership of the problem by realizing that it a)
mattered and b) fell within their domain (Shalin & Bertram,
1996). The three researchers targeted in this study each took
action in a way that was characteristic of their disciplines.

789

Waldmann’s involvement was clinical. He missed the first
report. When later that month a patient with strangely varied
opportunistic infections showed up at the NIH in his service
(node 374), he had no frame of reference for understanding
the problem. Like most of the first clinicians to deal with
AIDS, he had a patient with an unknown illness. While
Waldmann engaged with AIDS on a clinical level he chose
not to devote his research to it. This decision was based on
the fact that he was uniquely suited to work on problems in
other areas and felt that other scientists, including Fauci,
were more suited to this area.
Fauci, the immunologist, recalled reading the first report
and having two theories about what it represented (a bad
drug reaction or a virulent strain of cytomegalovirus). He
dismissed the issue: “I put the idea to the back of my mind.”
As an immunological researcher, neither a drug reaction nor
a virulent virus was within his purview.
Fauci’s eventual involvement was prompted by
conclusions from prior research. The beliefs formulated by
Curran and Waldmann (described below) that AIDS was an
immunodeficiency disorder transmitted by blood and sex
led Fauci to be interested in AIDS. An immunodeficiency
fell within his domain; the modes of transmission suggested
to him that it would spread and be a serious threat. “I said,
‘My goodness. This could be an infection that is transmitted
by blood and by sex, and I do not have the foggiest idea of
what it is.’” This is shown by the connection between
Curran’s and Waldmann’s conclusions (nodes 396 & 384)
and Fauci’s assessment of the situation (node 401). At this
point Fauci became committed to studying AIDS and began
to transition his lab entirely to AIDS related work. This was
a drastic measure and Fauci described being concerned that
“people might think that I was a little strange switching my
laboratory over to the study of a new and strange disease.”
Possibly to support his decision, he published a summary of
current knowledge of AIDS and argued for the probable
seriousness of the disease (Fauci, 1982).

characterize the patient population (nodes 389-393): “the
average age of patients was 35 … all of the patients were
gay men, and they were living in areas of high opportunity
for gay men…They seemed to have large numbers of
partners, and they were getting a rare condition…They all
went to the same clubs. Most of them used poppers or
isobutyl nitrite or amyl nitrite, and they may have been
exposed to other things in their environment.” The two
unusual characteristics of the patient population were their
sexual orientation and their use of drugs.
Waldmann was engaged as a clinician, because he had a
patient who required care. Since no underlying diagnosis
was available, Waldmann and his colleagues created a
clinical profile of the patient. This consisted of cataloguing
the many opportunistic infections from which the patient
suffered (nodes 376-382): “…he had Pneumocystis carnii
pneumonia, lymphocytopenia, cytomegalovirus [CMV] in
the blood and urine, herpes simplex II perianaly, Candida
esophagitis, and Mycobacterium avium tuberculosis of the
lung, bone marrow, and esophagus.” In retrospect, the
profile of this patient proved typical of AIDS.
Fauci’s immunology lab began bringing patients to the
NIH to study. They ran the fundamental laboratory tests
(node 407), which showed reduced T-cells counts and that
the B-limb of the immune system was hyperactive even
though the patient was immune deficient (nodes 402-404).
Fauci also experimented with potential therapeutic
interventions. One of his first patients was an identical twin.
This allowed him to attempt a bone marrow transplant to
reconstitute the immune system (node 408). These efforts
failed (node 405) though contributed to Fauci’s later
reasoning described below. Fauci combined the results of
the laboratory tests and the transplant attempts to develop an
immunological profile of these patients; they were immune
deficient but with abnormal activations of certain
components of the immune system and their immunological
functioning could not be restored via transplant.

Initial Observations: The Inductive Phase

Formation of Core Beliefs: Abduction, Analogy,
and Hypothesis Testing

Knowing little about the disease, the first researchers used
whatever methods their disciplines offered to search for
information. As this information became available scientists
drew together findings inductively to form domain specific
profiles of the disease.
Epidemiology is concerned with who contracts a disease
and why. In an effort to answer these questions, Curran and
his team set out to track every case of the disease. Luckily
one common manifestation of the disease, pneumocystis
carnii, was treated with a rare drug that had to be specially
requested. Using drug requests as a marker, Curran’s team
located previously unidentified cases. As epidemiologists,
they looked for characteristics people with the disorder had
in common to identify potential causes. “We wanted to talk
to as many living patients as we could. We devised a
questionnaire, 30 pages or something, and flew out to talk to
every living patient that we could find.” This effort is
represented in node 388. The profiling effort produced
detailed information that was combined inductively to

With a disease profile in hand, the researchers tried to
explain what could cause such a pattern to occur. Abduction
is a posteriori inference of a potential cause from an
observed effect (Peirce, 1868). Researchers used abductive
thinking, often in conjunction with analogical reasoning, to
develop hypothetical explanations of the results they were
seeing. Sometimes these hypotheses could be tested
immediately; in other cases months or years were needed to
accumulate necessary evidence to support the hypothesis.
With his epidemiological profile, Curran used abduction
to consider what might generate this pattern. Without
dismissing the drugs as a possible cause (node 395), Curran
was leaning toward a sexually transmitted infectious agent
as the source of disease (node 396). He believed that since
the most striking characteristic of the patient population was
its sexual behavior and since it was the only characteristic
common to all patients it was the most likely solution. This

790

understanding that a virus that was destroying the immune
environment itself (node 416).

belief was supported by an analogy to Hepatitis B, which
had a similar pattern of transmission. To support this
hypothesis, Curran’s team conducted a cluster analysis
(node 397) linking known cases via sexual contact and
found a high level of sexual connectedness amongst the first
cases. “Nine of the first 13 cases, whether living or dead,
were linked to each other through sexual contact. Eventually
they linked up to 90 other people around the country
through sexual contact, which was 40 percent of the first
220 gay men reported with AIDS.” The cluster analysis
supported the sexual transmission hypothesis.
Over the next two years data from new cases accrued.
Three other risk groups came to Curran’s attention: recent
Haitian immigrants, hemophiliacs, and intravenous drug
users. The Haitians could be incorporated into the sexual
transmission explanation, since several of the patients had
had sexual encounters in Haiti. The latter two groups
suggested that blood born transmission was also possible.
This increased the parallelism between AIDS and Hepatitis
B, which is also transmitted by blood and sex. Curran
became even more convinced that the source of AIDS was
an infectious agent similar to Hepatitis. This is illustrated in
the connections between nodes 394, 419, and 396. At this
point, Curran was completely convinced that AIDS was
transmitted in a way that was analogous to Hepatitis B and
his efforts turned towards convincing others he was correct
and implementing policies to limit transmission.
As a clinician, Waldmann found it easy to identify the
opportunistic diseases in the first NIH AIDS patient. The
question was what underlying diagnosis would make sense
of this pattern of infection. In this respect AIDS was not
unique: “Even in that era before AIDS, one recognized this
pattern of infections as the hallmark of a cell-mediated
immune defect. If a patient didn't make antibody, we knew
he would have trouble with highly pathogenic bacterial
diseases.” This explanation is illustrated in the abductive
connection between node 383 and node 384. If this
hypothesis was correct, the patient’s body should not
respond to known pathogens. Waldmann’s team tested the
cell-mediated immunodeficiency hypothesis by looking at
the patient’s response to skin tests for diseases to which he
had been exposed and cultures testing his immunoglobin
production (node 386). These tests confirmed the belief that
the cause was a cell-mediated immune deficiency.
Fauci’s immunology lab had previously studied B-cell
hyperactivity, so that aspect of the immunological profile
intrigued him. His group undertook a controlled
investigation of B-cell involvement with the disorder and
found clear evidence of polyclonal B-cell activation, which
they suggested might best be explained by a virus. “These
findings of polyclonal B-cell activation in vivo are very
suggestive of viral stimulation or transformation.” (Lane, et
al., 1983). The failed transplant procedure also led to an
important discovery. The destruction of the transplanted
cells suggested that the underlying agent was destroying the
environment of the immune system and was transmissible to
the new tissue. These two insights led to the critical

Discovering the Virus: The Deductive Phase
Each of the researchers produced an insight into the disease
that was the culmination of their work and led others to have
new ideas about AIDS. Curran’s insights that the disease
was infectious and transmitted via blood or sex and
Waldmann’s insight that his patient’s many infections
indicated a cell-mediated immunodeficiency led to Fauci’s
work. These insights convinced him that AIDS was going to
spread and become a major problem that he could help
resolve. All three researchers helped contribute information
that lead to the ultimate discovery of the HIV virus.
Like Fauci, Gallo was not immediately intrigued by
AIDS. He only became involved when the disease seemed
to intersect his own specialty, human retroviruses. In fact,
Curran recalls dedicating one of his earliest talks presenting
information about AIDS to Gallo and trying to elicit his
interest in the problem. “So I got up and I dedicated my talk
to him. I said, ‘Since you have worked on T4-trophic
viruses, what you need to do is find this one.’ … He
listened, and that is probably why he occasionally attributes
his involvement in AIDS to me.” Ultimately, in his
interview, Gallo lists seven things that convinced him that
AIDS was caused by HIV. Some of this evidence is
technical, based on laboratory data and techniques. But also
included are: the epidemiological profile and modes of
transmission, the fact that the disease was characterized by
immune deficiency combined with knowledge that in cats a
retrovirus was known to cause immune deficiency, and the
immunological results that suggested a virus causing
specific defects relating to CD4+ cell. The conclusions of
the other researchers can be seen feeding into Gallo’s work
in the connections between nodes 396, 384, 416, and 417.

Discussion
This paper describes how scientists engaged with a novel
problem, learned about it and developed the insights
necessary to lead to a solution. We found that researchers
went though several stages in their discovery processes.
First, researchers had to take ownership of the problem.
Second, they gathered data and used inductive processes to
profile the problem to be solved. Third, they used abduction
and analogy to generate explanations for the profiles they
observed and tested these explanations. And finally, they
generated conclusions that were picked up by other
scientists and influenced future work.
While parts of the discovery processes observed have
received research attention (i.e. hypothesis testing), three
major aspects described have not been generally discussed.
First, in most studies the decision to take ownership of a
problem is not addressed, possibly because in laboratory
paradigms the experimenter provides the problem. For
AIDS, this initial step was very important; problem
ownership required the researcher perceive the problem as
significant and within his purview. Future research should

791

further explore these two requirements and be alert to
additional factors that may influence this initial stage.
Second, abduction was found to be an important part of the
discovery process. After making initial observations,
researchers engaged in abduction to generate hypothetical
causal mechanisms. This study suggests the importance of
futher research on how people engage in abduction and when
this type of reasoning is used. As a diagnostic problem, AIDS
may have required more abductive reasoning than other
domains, but it seems likely that abduction will have some
role in many areas.
Finally, research on scientific reasoning usually focuses on
individual scientists. This work suggests that the social
dynamics and interchange of ideas among researchers have an
important impact on the discovery process. These social
aspects of discovery are probably common to many discovery
processes but are particularly evident in this case because of
the urgency of the problem and the nature of the data set.
Because AIDS was completely unknown and required an
immediate solution researchers had to share work
immediately. While in other discoveries researchers might
have influenced each other via publications and presentations
across years or decades, in this case the social influences were
more immediate and direct. Also, in most cases, discoveries
are seen as the work of a single individual whose papers and
biography are studied; little is known about others working on
the problem. In this case, because interviews were conducted
with multiple individuals, many view points are available to
see the interchange of ideas. Finally, AIDS research received
more public attention than most research. This meant that in
addition to considering input from other scientists, the
researchers had to consider how their decisions and
conclusions would be evaluated by policy makers and the
public at large. Future research tracking the social interactions
amongst scientists and between scientists and other
stakeholders could help understand these diffuse cognitive
processes.

Acknowledgments
We are indebted to Victoria Harden the historian at the NIH
whose interviews were used as a primary data source, to
Helen Altman Klein for suggesting AIDS as a domain, and to
Ashley J. Wenner for helping with coding.

References
Atlas.ti: The knowledge workbench (Version 5.2.8). (2008).
Berlin: Atlas.ti Scientific Software Development.
Banxia decision explorer (Version 3.3). (2005). Kendal,
UK: Banxia Software.
Bohm, A. (2004). Theoretical coding: text analysis in
grounded theory. In Flick, U., von Kardorff, E., &
Steinke, I. (Eds.) A Companion to Qualitative Research.
(pp.270-275). London: Sage.
Clancey, W.J. (1985). Heuristic classification in artificial
intelligence. North-Holland: Elsevier.
Elstein, A.S. & Schwarz, A. (2002). Evidence base of clinical
diagnosis: Clinical problem solving and diagnostic decision
making: selective review of cognitive literature. British
Medical Journal, 324, 729-732.
Fauci, A.S. (1982). The syndrome of Kaposi’s sarcoma and
opportunistic infections: An epidemiologically restricted
disorder of immunoregulation. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 96, 777-779.
Gottlieb, M.S., Schanker, H.M., Fan, P.T., Saxon, A.,
Weisman, J.D., Pozalski, I. (1981). Pneumocystis
Pneumonia – Los Angeles. Morbidity & Mortality Weekly
Report, 30, 1-3.
Klahr, D. & Simon, H.A. (1999). Studies of scientific
discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 524-543.
Lane, C., Masur, H., Lynn, E., Whalen, G., Rook, A., &
Fauci, A. (1983). Abnormalities of B-cell activation and
immunoregulation in patients with the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. New England Journal of
Medicine, 309, 453-458.
National Institutes of Health. (n.d.). In their own words: NIH
researchers recall the early years of AIDS. Retrieved
February 1, 2007, from http://aidshistory.nih.gov/
transcripts/index.html
Nersessian, N.J. (1992). How do scientists think? Capturing
the dynamics of conceptual change in science. In R.N.
Giere (Ed.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science:
Vol. 15. Cognitive models of science (pp. 3-42).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Peirce, C.S. (1868). Some consequences of four incapacities
claimed for man. Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 2,
140-157.
Popper, K.R. (1959). Logic of scientific discovery. London:
Hutchinson.
Shalin, V.L. & Bertram, D.A. (1996). Functions of expertise
in a medical intensive care unit. Journal of Experimental
and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 8, 209-227.

Conclusions
We think of science as conducted by isolated individuals,
removed from the world in ivory towers functioning within
the confines of narrow disciplines. And, although
interdisciplinary work is increasing, this is still often true.
Scientific disciplines tend to define themselves in terms of
fixed methods and topics (Livingston, 1987). The case of
AIDS shows that science does not have to work this way.
Here a real world problem demanded a scientific response
and researchers rose to the challenge. Each used the unique
methods of his discipline and gained valuable insights. But
they also collaborated and the ultimate solution depended on
efforts distributed across disciplines. This study points to the
importance of these social factors in scientific cognition. But
beyond that, it suggests the need to provide ongoing support
mechanisms for interdisciplinary collaboration and dialogue.

792

