UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Somatic Markers and Frequency Effects: Does Emotion Really Play a Role on Decision
Making in the Iowa Gambling Task?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98g2737k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Fum, Danilo
Napoli, Antonio
Stocco, Andrea

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Somatic Markers and Frequency Effects:
Does Emotion Really Play a Role on Decision Making in the Iowa Gambling Task?
Danilo Fum (fum@units.it)
Antonio Napoli (napoli@psico.units.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia, Università degli Studi di Trieste
via S. Anastasio, 12 34124 Trieste (Italy)

Andrea Stocco (stocco@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract
The role of the frequency of wins and losses in the Iowa
Gambling Task (Bechara, A., Damasio, A., Damasio, H., &
Anderson, S. 1994. Insensitivity to future consequences
following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50,
7–15) was investigated in 2 experiments manipulating the
long-term expected value of the decks participants had to
choose from. The first experiment adopted the typical setting
of the task in which every card selection was followed by a
monetary win, while losses happened only occasionally. In
the second experiment every decision led to a loss while the
contingent event was represented by wins. In both
experiments the long-term expected value of the decks did
not seem to influence the participants’ choices that were,
however, sensitive to the frequency with which the decks
produced the contingent event. Immediate gains or losses
associated with the decks exerted their effect on the first few
choices only. The relevance of these findings for Damasio's
Somatic Markers Hypothesis are discussed.
Keywords: Decision making; Emotion; Somatic markers
hypothesis, Iowa gambling task; Frequency effects.

The Somatic Markers Hypothesis
The last years have witnessed a deep revaluation of the role
of emotions in decision making, and the idea that feelings
and sentiments could affect the way people make their
decisions has gained increasing acceptance (Connolly, &
Zeelenberg, 2002; Lee, 2006; Loewenstein, 2000;
Rottenstreich & Hsee, 2001; Schwarz, 2000; Slovic,
Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2004; Wang, 2006). An
influential part in this revaluation has been played by the
Somatic Markers Hypothesis (SMH) put forward by
Antonio Damasio and coworkers (Damasio, 1994;
Damasio, 1996; Bechara & Damasio, 2005).
The SMH originates from the attempt to understand the
difficulties experienced by patients with neurological
damage in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC)
who present both emotional problems and difficulties in
making decisions in their personal and social sphere.
These patients are unable to express their feelings and to
experience those affects that are normally evoked by
emotionally arousing situations. On the other hand, while
their basic cognitive capabilities (attention, memory,
reasoning, etc.) are preserved, they run into troubles in
making decisions concerning work, family and friends,

money, or moral issues. People with VMPFC damages are
unable to foresee the long term consequences of their actions,
and are incapable of learning from their mistakes. Their
choices are characterized by a “myopia for the future”
(Bechara et al., 1994), and are very different from those that
were made before the neurological damage.
According to the SMH, there exists a relationship between
these problems: the difficulties experienced by VMPFC
patients in their decision making could depend on the faulty
workings of an emotional mechanism that in healthy persons
is capable of rapidly signalling the (positive or negative)
consequences of an action, freeing people from pondering
about any possible option, and helping them to make
advantageous and profitable decisions. This regulatory
mechanism is constituted by the so-called “somatic markers”.
The SMH assumes that decision making is influenced by
neurobiological biasing signals (markers) generated by the
system underlying emotions. When experiencing an
emotionally arousing event, a set of changes is produced that
concern both the body and the brain. The bodily (or somatic)
modifications deal with the internal milieu (viscera, heart,
glands, smooth muscles, etc.), the external posture and
behaviour, while brain effects lead to neurotransmitters
release, the updating of somatosensory maps and the
transmission of signals to somatosensory regions. Once a
somatic state has been induced by an emotionally arousing
experience, a pattern is made for it. Any stimulus capable of
triggering memories or thoughts related to the experience
reenacts this pattern generating a somatic state similar to that
generated by the original event.
While making a decision, for any possible choice a somatic
marker is produced that indicates the positive or negative
value of what is being taken into account. In dealing with
complex and uncertain situations, the somatic markers help to
reduce the options space to treatable dimensions by marking
them with an emotional signal. Only the options marked as
promising are considered for further deliberation, while the
less attractive ones are ignored. Rational decision making
could thus be considered as a combination of deliberate topdown reasoning, in which an in-depth analysis of the effects
of a conceivable action is performed, and a quick bottom-up
screening, based on somatic markers, that indicates how likely
a given action is to lead to positive or negative effects.

89

The VMPFC plays a critical role in the generation of
somatic markers because it is the brain area where the
representation of environmental stimuli is coupled with the
states associated with the actions triggered by them. A
damage to the VMPFC and to the regulatory structures
implied in the representation and control of somatic states
leads to faulty decision making because the somatic
markers system could not be activated. In situations in
which a complete rational analysis is not possible, this leads
to lengthy deliberation (trivial matters could take a huge
amount of time to be decided upon) or to inappropriate
choices that would be immediately discarded by people
with intact somatic markers.

The Iowa Gambling Task
The SMH relies not only on clinical evidence but is
endorsed also by experimental findings. The most
important empirical support for it is constituted by the
results obtained through the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT).
Participants in the IGT are required to repeatedly choose
a card from one of four decks. Every time a card is selected,
participants gain a given amount of money but sometimes,
unexpectedly, a card selection leads also to a monetary loss.
Two of the decks (called A and B) produce always a
$100 gain but are also associated with strong, and variable,
monetary losses (on average $-1250 every 10 card
selections) leading thus to long-term monetary deficit.
Decks C and D produce instead a small $50 win for every
selection but give rise to smaller, and variable, losses ($250 every 10 choices, on average) resulting advantageous
in the long run.
While decks A and B are both “bad” and share the same
long-term expected value ($-250), they differ from each
other according to the frequency of losses they give rise to:
deck A yields 5 losses every 10 selections, while deck B
produces only 1 out of 10. The same is true for the “good”
decks C and D, that lead in the long run to the same gain
($+250): losses in C occur 5 times out of 10 while in D they
happen only once.
Participants are instructed to try to gain the greatest
amount of money (or to loose the smallest) by attempting to
figure out which decks are good and which ones are bad.
By using a complex matrix of wins and losses associated
with the various decks, the IGT tries to replicate the
uncertainty conditions that characterize the decisions
carried out in daily life where it is difficult to figure out the
exact consequences of each choice, and where is often
necessary to make a trade-off between the immediate and
long-term effects of actions.
Working with the IGT, Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, &
Anderson (1994) found that normal controls were initially
drawn toward decks A e B, which led to high immediate
gains, but after a series of losses they started to prefer the
less attractive, but in the long-term economically more
advantageous, decks C and D. Patients with VMPFC
lesions, on the other hand, stuck to their initial choices and

kept choosing preferentially from the bad decks, apparently
insensible to the financial losses induced by their behavior.
An important support for the SMH came from the
discovery of a neurophysiological correlate of successful
performance in the IGT. Bechara, Tranel, Damasio, &
Damasio (1966) measured the skin conductance responses
(SCRs) developed by participants during the execution of the
task. Normal controls and VMPFC patients did not differ in
the SCRs that were induced after a card had been picked up.
Following a series of selections, however, normal controls
started to develop anticipatory reactions, i.e., SCRs produced
before a choice, that were stronger for the disadvantageous
decks. Frontal patients, on the other hand, were unable to
develop such physiological reactions before a card choice.
The lack of anticipatory SCRs correlated with bad
performance in the card selection task. According to Bechara
et al. (1966), this result would depend on the incapability of
these patients to activate the somatic markers (as revealed by
the SCRs) that would help them to distinguish between the
advantageous and disadvantageous options under uncertainty
conditions. More particularly, it was impossible for these
patients to activate, when taking into account a selection from
a disadvantageous deck, a negative somatic marker based on
the previous losses that would warn them about the likelihood
of receiving a possible punishment when choosing from these
decks.
To establish whether the negative performance of VMPFC
patients in the IGT could be explained by an altered
sensitivity to punishments or rewards, Bechara, Tranel, &
Damasio (2000) employed a variant of the original task in
which any card choice would lead to a monetary loss while
wins would happen only occasionally. In this variant, the
advantageous decks were those that initially looked less
attractive because they produced high losses ($-100) even if,
in the long run, they led to still higher gains ($1250 every 10
choice, on average). The disadvantageous decks, on the other
hand, were associated with a lower initial cost for each card
selection ($-50) but led to still smaller gains ($250 every 10
choices). Participants with VMPFC lesions: (a) choose more
cards from the disadvantageous decks both in the standard
and in the modified version of the task even if (b) their SCRs,
after having experienced a reward or a punishment, were
similar to those developed by normal controls.
According to Bechara et al. (2000) the simplest explanation
for the behavior of VMPFC patients is that they stuck to bad
decks because they were insensitive to future consequences:
they considered only the immediate effects of their choices
unable to taking into account the long-term results.

A neglected factor?
The seminal work carried out by Damasio and coworkers on
the IGT inspired a conspicuous amount of studies that
analyzed the situational variables that could influence the
selection behavior, investigated several aspects of the SMH
and applied the IGT to several clinical populations (for a
critical review, see: Dunn, Dalgleish, & Lawrence, 2005). The
results obtained with the IGT are quite robust and attest both

90

the capability of normal people to discriminate between
good and bad decks1, and the difficulties encountered by
several categories of participants, not only VMPFC
patients2, to make this discrimination.
An idea shared by the majority of researchers working
within the IGT paradigm is that the key factor underlying it
is the capability to figure out the long-term expected value
of the decks while possible differences between decks of
the same “goodness” were considered as irrelevant.
Consequently, most researcher used as dependent variable
to measure the quality of performance in the IGT the
difference in the number of total choices from the
advantageous and disadvantageous decks; in the standard
version of the IGT this is given by the formula (C+D)–
(A+B). A significant difference would show the capability
of the participant to discriminate between profitable and
unprofitable decks; a difference near zero is considered as a
sign of lack of discrimination.
By concentrating only on this difference, however, we
run the risk of disregarding an interesting phenomenon,
potentially embarrassing for the SMH, that is highlighted in
those few papers that report analytically, deck by deck, the
choices performed by participants in the IGT.
The phenomenon relies on the fact that the decks differ
not only according to their long term expected value but
also in the frequency of the losses associated with them,
making thus possible to distinguish between decks with
high frequency losses (A and C) and low frequency ones (B
and D). This distinction is orthogonal with the goodness
dimension and is completely ignored when data are
presented only in aggregate form.
Several papers (es: Fernie & Tunney, 2006; Goudriaan,
Oosterlaan, de Beurs, & van den Brink, 2005; O'Caroll &
Papps, 2003; MacPherson, Phillips, & Della Sala, 2002;
Wilder, Weinberger, & Goldberg, 1998; Yechiam, Stout,
Busemeyer, Rock, & Finn, 2005) report findings that
suggest that, contrary to the common-held assumption,
decks of the same expected value could not be considered
as equivalent, but some of them are chosen systematically
more frequently than others. Participants tend to
concentrate their selection on those decks (B and D) that
are associated with a low number of losses, suggesting the
existence of a possible frequency effect.
Lin, Chiu, Lee, P., & Hsieh, (2007) explicitly tested the
so-called “prominent deck B” phenomenon, i.e., the fact
that deck B, a “bad” deck that originates a small number of
strong losses, is preferred not only to deck A, which has the
same expected value, but it is chosen as frequently as (or
even more frequently than) the good decks C and D. The
somatic markers system, in this case, would assist the
1
Of the 27 papers cited in the Dunn et al. (2005)
review that utilized normal controls, only 4 failed to replicate the
original results.
2
Among the populations that have been investigated
through the IGT we mention, by way of example, schizophrenic
patients, pathological gamblers, substance dependent
individuals, alcoholics, adolescents with attentional deficit
hyperactivity disorder, Parkinson and Hungtington patients, etc.

decision maker in situations characterized by frequent losses,
but could not prevent the choice of disadvantageous decks in
the case where the losses, even if they were rare, would be
disadvantageous in the long run for the decision maker.
Instead of being discouraged by the negative somatic markers,
selections from deck B seemed favored by the low frequency
of punishments.
To investigate whether the frequency of the unexpected
events (e.g.,, losses in the standard version of the task) could
be a critical factor in determining the performance in the IGT
in addition to (or in substitution of) the long term expected
value of the decks, we performed the following experiments.

Experiment 1
Three factors may influence the behavior of participants in the
standard IGT paradigms: the immediate gains associated with
each selection, the long term expected value of the decks, and
the frequency of losses. Immediate gains vary inversely with
the expected value (i.e., the decks with the highest immediate
gain are those leading to disadvantageous results) while the
frequency of losses is counterbalanced among the low-value,
high-immediate-gain decks A and B, and the high-value, lowimmediate-gain decks C and D. A further variable, i.e. the
magnitude of the losses, could play a possible role in this
paradigm, but it is generally considered a function of the
previous ones and it is not directly manipulated in the
experiments. For example, the huge losses in deck B depend
on its high immediate gains, its occasional losses and its
negative value; on the other hand, because deck C is a “good”
one with low immediate gains and frequent losses, each loss
is kept small.
In Experiment 1 we manipulated the long term expected
value of the decks to investigate whether this could be the
critical factor in determining the participants’ choices. Three
conditions were utilized in the experiment. The standard
(STND) condition replicated the typical settings of IGT in
which the immediate gains vary inversely with their expected
value (see Table 1 for details, where + indicates a high or
positive effect and – a small or negative one).
In the NULL condition, the expected value of the decks was
set to zero, (indicated by = in Table 1) i.e., the amount of
money that in the long run participants were expected to win
was identical to that they were expected to loose. In the last
FRQN condition we contrasted the expected value of decks
with their loss frequency by making them co-vary, i.e., the
decks with frequent losses were the most profitable ones.
If the long term expected value of the decks (as assumed by
the SMH) is the determinant factor in this task, participants
should prefer decks C and D in the STND condition, A and C
in the FRQN, while they should choose more or less
randomly in the NULL one. On the other hand, if the
participants choices are influenced by the frequency of losses,
they should show the same behavior in the three conditions
consistently preferring decks B and D to A and C.

91

Table 1: Deck features in the experimental conditions

Expected Value
Immediate Gain
Loss Frequency

A
–
+
+

STND
B
C
–
+
+
–
–
+

D
+
–
–

NULL
B
C
=
=
+
–
–
+

A
=
+
+

Participants. Ninety-six participants (49 males) were
recruited from the students enrolled at the University of
Trieste. They were aged between 18 and 29 years (M= 21.8,
SD= 2.2) and none of them was suffering from any
neurological disease. The participants were randomly
assigned to the experimental conditions.
Procedure. Experimental sessions were held individually by
having participants interact with a computer-based
implementation of the IGT. Decks were visually presented in
the lower part of a 15 in. LCD screen, and participants used a
mouse to point and select the deck they had chosen.
Immediately after each card selection, the amount of money
won (and possibly lost) was displayed in the upper half of the
screen. The running total of money was coarsely indicated by
a colored bar in the uppermost part of the screen that was
updated after each selection. In each experimental condition
participants had to perform 100 card selections.

Results
Table 2 reports the mean number of selections from the four
decks in each experimental condition.
By even a cursory look at the table, two results come
immediately about: the similar number of selections from
each deck in the different experimental conditions, and the
consistent preference for the low-frequency-loss decks B and
D. The fact that an explicit manipulation of the long term
expected value of the decks did not lead to different selection
patterns, and the fact that decks B and D were consistently
chosen not only in the NULL condition, in which the
expected value was zeroed out,, but also in the FRQN one, in
which they lead to long term monetary deficits, suggests that
the frequency of losses could play a critical role in
determining the selection decisions in the IGT. The following
statistical analyses support this intuition.
Table 2: Mean number of deck choices in Exp. 1.
Deck A
14.87
14.75
15.34

Deck B
32.84
36.72
32.87

Deck C
17.09
14.62
22.40

A
+
+
+

B
–
+
–

FRQN
C
+
–
+

D
–
–
–

decks in the three experimental conditions were not
significantly different. Two separate ANOVAs were
conducted to highlight possible differences among the
experimental conditions in the number of selections from
decks with high and low loss frequencies (i.e., (B+D) –
(A+C) and from decks leading to high and small imediate
gains (i.e., (A+B)-(C+D) No significant difference was found.
The manipulation of the expected value of the decks did not
seem to have any influence on the decisions performed by
participants in the IGT.
Independently from the particular experimental condition
to which they were assigned, however, participants showed a
well defined preference for decks with low frequency losses
(M=33.93, t(95) = 11.26, p <.000001) while immediate gains
did not seem to play any significant role in determining their
choices.
According to the SHM, participants should be initially
attracted by high immediate gains and only through the
influence of the somatic markers, and after experiencing a
few losses, they should be led to prefer the more
advantageous decks. To test this assumption, we contrasted
the number of choices between high and low immediate gains
through successive blocks of 20 choices. A mixed design
ANOVA was carried out that revealed a significant effect of
blocks (F(8)=4.83, MSE=191.6, p=.001) while there was no
significant effect of the conditions nor of their interaction. A
t-test (M=1.48, t(95) = 2.87, p=.005) carried out for the initial
block of choices (1-20) confirmed that in the first few
selections the immediate gains associated with a deck could
be a relevant factor in determining the participants selections.
Further analyses carried out for the following blocks
confirmed that the effect of the immediate gains was limited
to the first block choices.
A similar analysis was performed on the differences
between the selections from decks with low vs. high loss
frequency. A mixed design ANOVA showed a significant
effect of blocks (F(4)=15.12, MSE=576.7, p<.000001), but no
effect of the experimental conditions nor of their interaction.
Table 3 reports the results of the t-tests carried out for the
blocks of choices showing that the frequency effects were
replicated in every single one.
In summary, Experiment 1 showed that the main factor
determining the selection behaviour of participant in the IGT
seems to be constituted by the frequency of losses. Changes
in the expected value of the deck did not have any effect on
the pattern of choices displayed by participants while a
possible effect of immediate gain seem to be limited to the
first block of choices.

Method

STND
NULL
FRQ

D
=
–
–

Deck D
35.19
33.91
29.37

An independence analysis carried out through a chisquared test confirmed that the number of selections from the

92

of choices from high vs. low immediate losses, and from high
vs. low frequency wins did not reveal any difference.
Analogously to what was obtained in the previous
experiment, participants were influenced by the frequency (of
wins, in this case) (M=24.54, t(81)=5.68 p>.000001) while
the immediate losses did not seem to influence their selection
behaviour .
Separate mixed-design ANOVAs were carried out that
highlighted (a) a significant effect of the blocks on the
selections from low vs. high immediate loss decks
(F(4)=.6.35, MSE=290.1, p<.000001) and of the interaction
block x condition (F(8)=3.50, MSE=160.0, p=.001) but no
main effect of the conditions and (b) the main effect of blocks
on the selection from high-frequency vs. low frequency decks
(F(4)=4.22, MSE=194.2, p=.002).
Even in this experiment the frequency effect was evident
throughout the blocks (detailed analyses omitted due to space
limitations), while that of immediate losses was restricted to
the first and third block.

Table 3: Frequency effects for the different blocks

Block 1-20
Block 21-40
Block 41-60
Block 61-80
Block 81-100

Mean
2.69
6.35
8.15
8.65
8.10

df
95
95
95
95
95

t
5.15
8.63
9.55
9.23
8.22

p
0.000001
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

Experiment 2
In the second experiment we kept the same design of the first
one but applied it to the variant of the IGT developed by
Bechara et al. (2000) in which every card selection leads to a
monetary loss while the contingent event is represented by
wins. There are several reasons to assume that people react
differently to rewards and punishment (Kahneman &
Teversky, 1979), and we wanted to ascertain whether the
factors that were effective in the standard condition would
work also for the variant task.

Conclusions
According to the SMH, emotions play a critical role in the
decision processes through the somatic markers which would
allow to discriminate between options that lead only to
immediate advantages and options that in the long run are
beneficial for the decision maker. By protecting against the
myopia for the future, they would support rational decisions
that are not granted to people which are unable to activate the
somatic markers mechanism.
In this paper we presented empirical evidence showing that
a stronger factor in determining the decisions made in the
IGT is represented by the frequency of the contingent event,
both in the case it is constituted by a reward (Experiment 1)
and it is represented by a punishment (Experiment 2).
In the normal scenario in which the IGT is usually run
(STND conditions), frequency of the contingent event is
confounded with the expected value of the decks. This fact
gives raise to the “prominent deck B” phenomenon and could
contribute to explain a common result found in the IGT
findings—and acknowledged also by Damasio’s group
(Bechara et al., 2000)—i.e., the fact that a remarkable
proportion of normal controls do not seem to be able to
discriminate between good and bad decks, showing a pattern
of choices similar to that produced by frontal patients.
In the situations in which the long term expected value of
the decks was kept the same and in which only the options
with immediate appeal should be taken into account (NULL
conditions), participants consistently choose according to the
frequency of the contingent event. In the situations in which
the frequency of the contingent event contrasted directly with
the long-term expected value (FRQN conditions), they
systematically preferred the options which led to the highest
number of rewards or to the least number of punishments,
even if their choices lead to negative outcomes which somatic
markers should have warned them against.
The main result of this paper is to highlight the role of a
critical factor determining the behavior of participants in the

Method
Participants. The participants were 81 University of Trieste
students (51 males), aged between 20 and 31 years (M= 21.4,
SD= 2.5), that were randomly assigned to the experimental
conditions. None of them reported any neurological problem.
Materials and procedure. The procedure was identical to
that utilized in Experiment 1. In this experiment, however,
the payoff matrix of the decks was reversed by transforming
the wins in losses, and viceversa, while keeping their
frequency and absolute value the same. As a result, the
“good” decks in the STND condition were A and B, while C
and D were the disadvantageous ones. In the FRQN condition
A and C were associated with frequent wins but led to
negative expected values, while B and D were the
advantageous ones even if they were associated with a low
number of rewards. In the NULL condition, obviously, there
was no difference about the expected value of the decks.

Results
The number of selections for each deck of the experimental
conditions are reported in Table 4.
Table 4: Mean number of deck choices in Exp. 2.
STND
NULL
FRQ

Deck A
36.74
35.33
31.59

Deck B
17.48
14.78
21.48

Deck C
27.48
29.78
25.89

Deck D
18.30
20.11
21.04

Again, the pattern of selections from the decks was similar
among the experimental conditions. A chi-square test on the
proportion of choices from the various decks failed to reveal
any significant difference among the conditions. One-way
ANOVAs testing the effect of the conditions on the number

93

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–
291.
Lee, D. (2006). Neural basis of quasi-rational decision
making. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16, 191–198.
Lin, C., Chiu, Y., Lee, P., & Hsieh, J. (2007, March 17). Is
deck B a disadvantageous deck in the Iowa Gambling
Task? Behavioral and Brain Functions, 3: 16. Article
doi:10.1186/1744-9081-3-16
retrievable
from
http://www.behavioralandbrainfunctions.com/content/3/1
/16.
Loewenstein, G. (2000). Emotions in economic theory and
economic behavior. The American Economic Review, 90,
426–432.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N.
(2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
267–286.
MacPherson, S. E., Phillips, L. H., & Della Sala, S. (2002).
Age, executive function, and social decision making: A
dorso lateral prefrontal theory of cognitive aging.
Psychology and Aging, 17, 598–609.
O'Carrol, R.E., & Papps, B.P. (2003). Decision making in
humans: The effect of manipulating the central
noradrenergic system. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 74, 376–378.
Rottenstreich, Y., & Hsee, C. K. (2001). Money, kisses, and
electric shocks: On the affective psychology of risk.
Psychological Science, 12, 185–190.
Schwarz, N. (2000). Emotion, cognition, and decision
making. Cognition & Emotion, 14, 433–440.
Shanks, D. R., Tunney, R.J, & McCarthy, J. D. (2002). A reexamination of probability matching and rational choice.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 15, 233–250.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M. L., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G.
(2004). Risk as analysis and risk as feelings: Some
thoughts about affect, reason, risk, and rationality
Risk Analysis, 24, 311–322.
Vulkan N. (2000). An economist’s perspective on probability
matching. Journal of Economic Surveys, 14, 101–118.
Wang, X. T. (2006). Emotions within reason: Resolving
conflicts in risk preference. Cognition & Emotion, 20,
Vol. 1132–1152.
Wilder, K. E., Weinberger, D. R., & Goldberg, T. E. (1998).
Operant conditioning and the orbitofrontal cortex in
schizophrenic patients: Unexpected evidence for intact
functioning. Schizophrenia Research, 30, 69–174.
Yechiam, E., Stout, J.C., Busemeyer, J.R., Rock, S.L., &
Finn, P.R. (2005). Individual differences in the response
to forgone payoffs: An examination of high functioning
drug abusers. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
18, 97–110.

IGT that was somehow hinted at in previous studies but never
directly investigated. The frequency of the contingent event is
alien to the pattern of explanations developed within the
SMH and is more in line with results deriving from
probability matching and n-bandits studies (Berry & Fristedt,
1985; Shanks, Tunney, & McCarthy, 2002). While the
present findings do not directly refute the somatic markers
hypothesis, they put, however, some serious doubts on the
real role of emotions on the decision making that occur in the
IGT and, indirectly, on the main non-clinical support for the
theory.

References
Bechara, A., & Damasio, A. R. (2005). The somatic marker
hypothesis: A neural theory of economic decisions.
Games and Economic Behavior, 52, 336–372.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S.
(1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50, 7–15.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H. (2000).
Characterization of the decision-making deficit of
patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions.
Brain, 123, 2189–2202.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R.
(1996). Failure to respond autonomically to anticipated
future outcomes following damage to prefrontal cortex.
Cerebral Cortex, 6, 212–225.
Berry DA, & Fristedt B. (1985). Bandit problems: Sequential
allocation of experiments. London: Chapman and Hall.
Connolly, T., & Zeelenberg, M. (2002). Regret in decision
making. Current Direction in Psychological Science, 11,
212–216.
Damasio, A. R. (1994) Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason,
and the Human Brain. New York: Avon Books.
Damasio, A.R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and
the possible functions of the prefrontal cortex.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, (series B) 351 (1346), 1413–1420.
Dunn, B. D., Dalgleish, T., & Lawrence, A. D. (2006). The
somatic marker hypothesis: A critical evaluation.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 239–271.
Fernie, G., & Tunney, R. J. (2006). Some decks are better
than others: The effect of reinforcer type and task
instructions on learning in the Iowa Gambling Task.
Brain and Cognition, 60, 94–102.
Goudriaan, A.E., Oosterlaan, J., de Beurs, E., & van den
Brink, W. (2005). Decision making in pathological
gambling: A comparison between pathological gamblers,
alcohol dependents, persons with Tourette syndrome,
and normal controls. Cognitive Brain Research, 23, 137–
151.

94

