UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Language and Landmark Use: Can 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds find the Middle?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fk7p56q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Sims, Nina
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Language and Landmark Use: Can 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds find the Middle?
Nina Simms (ninasimms@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract

in the second scene that played the same role as some object
in the first scene. Importantly, when the object from the first
scene was also in the second scene but played a different
role, young children were likely to pick the identical object
rather than the object in the same role in the event.
The shift from a focus on perceptual properties and from
objects to relations has been termed the relational shift
(Gentner, 1988). Many factors have been proposed to
contribute to such a shift, including maturational changes in
cognitive capacity (Halford, 1993), increases in domain
knowledge (Gentner & Rattermann, 1991), and the
representational affordances of language (Gentner, 2003).
Strikingly, children display difficulty reasoning about
relations even in domains, like space, that are accessible to
them and in which they are likely to have fairly extensive
experience. Loewenstein and Gentner (2005) found that 3year-olds had trouble mapping the location of an object
from one three-tiered box to another, identical box. In
another spatial mapping task, 3-year-olds failed to use the
spatial relations in a model room to distinguish between two
identical objects in the room. They were successful at
locating a hidden object only when it was placed at a unique
object, but chose randomly between two identical objects in
different relative locations (Blades & Cooke, 1994),
although having an opportunity to compare two similar
models improved their performance dramatically
(Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001).
However, even very young children are able to use spatial
relational information in certain kinds of navigation and
search tasks (Bushnell et al., 1995; Newcombe et al., 1998).
In particular, children can encode location relative to
landmarks. There are three main types of landmark
encoding strategies: beacon, vector, and relational (Figure
1). Beacon coding refers to the use of a single landmark as a
general marker for location. This kind of encoding roughly
corresponds to spatial relations such as at, by, or near. In
Figure 1, X would be encoded as lying somewhere proximal
to the landmark (e.g. somewhere inside the circle). Vector
coding, in contrast, specifies a direction and distance (or
vector) from a particular landmark. In this case, distal
locations could be encoded relative to the landmark. In
Figure 1, this is represented by the arrow from the landmark
to X. Finally, relational coding marks location relative to
multiple landmarks in an array, rather than to a single

Evidence suggests that (a) young children have difficulty
reasoning about spatial relations, and that (b) spatial language
can facilitate their performance (Loewenstein & Gentner,
2005). This study investigates children’s ability to reason
about a particular spatial relation, middle, which we
hypothesize may be particularly challenging. We ask when
children become able to encode the middle and whether this
ability is related to acquisition of the words “middle” and
“between.” Finally, we explored the errors children make
when reasoning about middle. We gave 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old
children a search task in which the hidden object was always
in the middle of two landmarks (Midpoint Task), followed by
a language task assessing their understanding of the spatial
relational terms “middle” and “between.” Children’s accuracy
on the Midpoint search task increased with age; and, more
interestingly, increased with knowledge of the relevant words.
Keywords: Relational reasoning; language; spatial relations;
cognitive development.

Introduction
The ability to recognize and reason about relations is
critical to the human capacity for higher order cognition. In
fact, it is so powerful and so fundamental that it has been
offered as a major part of the reason why “we’re so smart”
(Gentner, 2003). Despite adults’ fluency with relational
concepts, young children have repeatedly demonstrated
difficulty with tasks that require them to focus on relations,
especially in those instances where they must ignore or
abstract across the identity or perceptual properties of the
entities involved in the relations. For example, Christie and
Gentner (2007) gave 4½- and 8½-year-olds a simple
relational task that has been used in comparative studies
(e.g., Thompson, Oden & Boysen, 1997). Children were
shown a standard with two identical objects (e.g. two
squares) and were asked to match it to one of two choices: a
relational match, which had two identical new objects (e.g.
two triangles) or an object match, which had two different
objects, one of which was identical to the standard’s objects
(e.g. a circle and a square). The 4½-year-olds significantly
preferred the object match over the relational match, and
even the 8½-year-olds failed to show a reliable preference
for the relational match. Richland, Morrison, and Holyoak
(2006) demonstrated a similar phenomenon using line
drawings of event scenes. In their study they showed
children two scenes, and then asked them to find an object
191

of multiple landmarks (Uttal, Sandstrom, & Newcombe,
2006). Locating an object in the middle of two landmarks
still requires that children encode location with respect to a
configuration, but there are fewer spatial relations that must
be considered simultaneously. Studies that have used twolandmark arrays have produced conflicting results. Uttal et
al. took children to a large open field and showed them that
a toy would be hidden in the middle of two chairs. After the
children demonstrated that they could locate the hidden toy
with the same inter-landmark distance as at training (6
meters), the chairs were surreptitiously moved further apart.
All of the 4- and 5-year-olds correctly searched for the toy
in the middle of the expanded landmarks. In contrast,
Spetch and Parent (2006) found that only 14 out of 38 3-, 4-,
and 5-year-olds were able to reliably locate a hidden object
in the middle of two landmarks in small-scale, discrete
space (a row of small boxes), even before expanding the
landmarks. This study also found that by 5-years-old, boys
were significantly better at the task than girls, a gender
effect that has not been reported in other studies
investigating the development of relational landmark use in
children. A male advantage is well established in many
spatial cognitive tasks but is not usually present until
children are older (Linn & Petersen, 1985; Jones et al.,
2003).
One intriguing finding to emerge from the work on the
development of a middle strategy in children comes from
MacDonald et al. (2004). In their task with 3- to 5-yearolds, there were a few children who did concentrate their
search for the goal in the middle of the four landmarks,
rather than at the training vector from one landmark, and
these children were the same ones who also spontaneously
used the word “middle” during the task. Interestingly, these
few children were not simply the oldest – one of them was
only about 3½ years old.
This result is in accord with findings suggesting that
children’s ability to reason about space is bolstered by their
relevant linguistic knowledge. For instance, HermerVazquez, Moffet, and Munkholm (2001) had preschool
children try to remember in which corner of a rectangular
room with a single distinguishable wall an object was
hidden and found that their ability to do so was correlated
with their knowledge of relevant spatial terms, specifically
“left” and “right.” Likewise, Loewenstein and Gentner
(2005) found that preschool children were much more
successful at a spatial mapping task when labels were
provided for them. They showed preschoolers where a star
was hidden in one three-level box and told the children that
they would find another star in the same place in a
corresponding box. Children who were given the labels
“on,” “in,” and “under” or “top,” “middle,” and “bottom”
for the different levels of the box were far more accurate in
their searches than children who were asked to perform the
task without any linguistic reminders.

landmark. The arrows from both landmarks in Figure 1
represent this strategy.

X

X

Beacon

Vector

X
Relational

Figure 1: Location encoding strategies.
Children as young as one year old can locate objects
using a beacon strategy, which only requires direct coding
of the location of a single landmark. For example, if a toy is
hidden in an array of small pillows, 1-year-olds can find the
toy if it is directly under a distinctive pillow (Bushnell et al.,
1995). But they are unable to encode a position relative to a
landmark (i.e., to use a vector strategy): they do not search
under the correct pillow when the toy is hidden under a
contiguous, non-distinctive pillow. However, by the end of
the second year, children are able to encode location in
terms of its vector (its distance and direction) from a single
landmark (Bushnell et al., 1995; Newcombe et al., 1998).
In this research, we ask when children become able to
coordinate more than one landmark in location encoding:
specifically, how do children encode the spatial relation of
middle. Middle, along with its counterpart between,
involves an object’s relationship to two or more ground
objects simultaneously (e.g. “The boy sat in the middle
of/between his mom and dad.”). It has been argued that
infants as young as 6 months old can form a categorical
representation of between (Quinn et al., 2003; Quinn et al.,
1999), but using an encoding strategy to find an object
hidden in the middle of a configuration requires quite a
different set of capabilities.
MacDonald et al. (2004) trained 5- to 9-year-old children
to find a treat in the middle of four landmarks forming a
square, placed on a grid-like matrix (the space was not
continuous). Once children could reliably find the treat, the
landmarks were expanded to a new distance while
preserving the relative configuration (square). Unlike adults,
who searched in the center of the square after expansion, the
children searched close to individual landmarks, suggesting
that they had encoded the location using a single-landmark
strategy such as a beacon or vector strategy, rather than a
relational one. Younger children, aged 3- to 5-years, also
failed to search in the middle of four expanded landmarks
when trained and tested in a continuous search space
(MacDonald et al., 2004).
However, success in a four-landmark array may be an
unnecessarily stringent test of children’s ability to make use

192

treasure chest. In this phase, the child watched the
experimenter bury the treasure chest at different locations in
the finding box two to four times (without landmarks) and
was encouraged to point to its location before digging. If
children failed to point accurately on at least two practice
trials, their data were omitted from data analyses.
In the training phase, the experimenter introduced the
landmarks. The child watched as the experimenter placed
the flags twelve inches apart in the finding box and buried
the treasure chest in the center of the two flags. The blue
flag was always placed on the child’s left, and the red flag
on his or her right. This was repeated at another location in
the finding box, for a total of two training trials. The
experimenter did not use the words “middle” or “between”
during training. Children who were unable to point
accurately on both training trials were excluded from further
analyses.
Finally, in the test phase, children were asked to turn
around and close their eyes while the experimenter hid the
treasure chest. As a precaution against children accidentally
seeing where the treasure chest was being hidden or being
able to locate it by audible cues, the experimenter was
careful to always put both hands under the Styrofoam
peanuts, in separate locations, while hiding the treasure
chest. As in the pointing and training phases, children were
asked to point to the location of the treasure chest before
digging.
A maximum of nine test trials were administered to each
child, in different locations and with varying inter-landmark
distances. Not all children completed every trial.
Throughout the nine test trials, the distance between the two
flags was increased and decreased, in the following pattern:
12”, 12”, 24”, 12”, 36”, 12”, 24”, 12”, 36”. On the final four
test trials, the red and blue flags were switched so that the
red flag was on the child’s left and the blue on his or her
right. Children were allowed to search until they found the
treasure chest, but only the location of the child’s first point
was used in data analyses.
At the end of the Midpoint Task, children were asked,
“How did you know where to look for the treasure chest?”
Their answers were recorded. Additionally, any spontaneous
productions of either “middle” or “between” were noted
throughout the task.

The present study addresses several questions raised by
the above discussion: (1) when does the ability to encode
location relative to two landmarks emerge, specifically the
ability to encode in the middle, (2) what is the relationship
between this ability and knowledge of the words “middle”
and “between,” and (3) what errors do children make when
reasoning about middle? To investigate these questions,
children participated in a hide-and-seek game in which they
had to find a hidden object in the middle of two flags. After
this game, children were given a language task to assess
their production and comprehension of the words middle
and between (as well as some other simple spatial terms).
Finally, the relationship between children’s performance on
these two tasks was assessed.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-nine 3-year-olds (30-41 months, M = 34.93), 22 4year-olds (42-53 months, M = 46.36), and 23 5-year-olds
(54-65 months, M = 58.30) recruited from the university’s
surrounding areas participated in this study. The data from
seven 3-year-olds, three 4-year-olds, and one 5-year-old
were excluded due to failure to meet certain criteria,
outlined in the Procedure and Results sections, leaving 22
3-year-olds (M = 35.36), 19 4-year-olds (M = 46.79), and
22 5-year-olds (M = 58.00) in the final analysis. All
children were run in our laboratory on campus and
received a t-shirt and a book or small toy prize for their
participation. All were normally-developing, monolingual
English speakers.

Materials and Procedure
Children participated in a single session, in a 6’ x 10’ testing
room. The Midpoint Task was administered first, followed
by the Language Task. For both portions of the session, the
children and experimenter faced each other across the
finding box.
Midpoint Task A 72” x 8” x 9” box constructed with
hardboard and filled with Styrofoam packing peanuts served
as the finding box. The hiding object was a 1.5” x 1” x 1”
yellow, plastic treasure chest, inside which farm animal
stickers were placed. In order to prevent the treasure chest
from moving as children searched for it, a strip of Velcro
was attached to its bottom, as well as along the inside
bottom of the finding box. One red and one blue flag served
as landmarks.
Throughout the Midpoint Task, children were required to
first point to the location of the hidden treasure chest before
digging to retrieve it. There were three phases to the
Midpoint Task: the pointing practice, the training, and the
test. The pointing practice was implemented to ensure the
children could accurately point and allow the experimenter
to record their response before attempting to find the

Language Task The Language Task immediately
followed the Midpoint Task. It was composed of three parts:
production,
comprehension,
and
forced-choice
comprehension. These were administered in that order for
all children. A small plastic cow and pig served as reference
objects throughout the language task. Ground objects were
two of each of the following small, unpainted wooden
figurines: car, airplane, basket, crib, cabinet, and table.
Before beginning the language task, children’s knowledge
of the object labels was assessed, to ensure that any error or
confusion was not caused by labels for the individual items

193

Midpoint Task Accuracy

rather than unfamiliarity with the spatial prepositions
themselves.
The spatial prepositions middle and between, along with
several other prepositions, were tested in all sections of the
language task. These additional prepositions served to
calibrate children’s general language knowledge, as well as
to disguise the main intent of the task.
On production trials, children were shown arrays with two
objects and a small plastic cow and asked, “Where’s the
cow?” On comprehension trials, children were also shown
arrays with two objects, but were told to put a small plastic
pig in the appropriate relation (e.g. “Put the pig between the
airplanes.”). Finally, on forced-choice comprehension trials,
children were shown two identical two-object arrays, one
with the pig in one relation (e.g. on the basket) and the other
with the cow in a different relation (e.g. in the basket). The
children were then asked, for example, “Is the pig or the
cow in the basket?”

Not all children completed every trial. Because some
children did not complete the entire task, children’s
performance was measured by proportion correct out of
the total number administered. To investigate the effects of
age and gender on performance, these scores were entered
into a 2(gender) x 3(age) univariate ANOVA. The effect of
age was significant, F(2,56)=12.51, p < .001, and post-hoc
tests revealed that the 3-year-olds (M = 0.34, SD = 0.25)
were significantly less accurate than either the 4- or 5year-olds (M = 0.68, SD = 0.25; M = 0.72, SD = 0.30),
Bonferroni, p < .001. The 4- and 5-year-olds’
performances did not differ significantly from one another.
Neither an effect of gender nor a gender by age interaction
was significant.
As previous studies have done, we also analyzed
performance on the first expanded trial. The proportion of
3-year-olds (M = 0.19) who answered correctly was
significantly lower than the proportion of 5-year-olds (M =
0.73) who did so, Bonferroni, p < .05. The proportion of 4year-olds (M = 0.50) who answered correctly did not differ
significantly from either the 3-year-olds or the 5-year-olds.
Again, no gender effects were found.

Results
Coding and Exclusion Criteria
During the task, the location of each child’s points were
marked on a length of ribbon and measured to the nearest
half inch. Each location was then coded as a correct or
incorrect response. On trials with flags spaced 12 in. apart,
responses within one-and-a-half inches on either side of the
correct location were coded as correct. This margin was
increased a half inch for every 12 inches the flags were
expanded, so that responses to 24 in. trials were given two
inches on either side and responses to 36 in. trials were
given two-and-a-half inches on either side. A one-and-a-half
inch margin was used for the pointing and training trials as
well. Children who were unable to point within this margin
on at least two pointing trials and both training trials, their
data were excluded from further analysis.
Incorrect responses were further coded into several error
types: beacon, vector, perseverative, and other. Beacon
errors reflected the children’s use of a beacon encoding
strategy, resulting in search near the flags themselves.
Vector errors retained the same distance and direction from
a flag as at training (i.e. six inches from one of the flags).
Perseverative errors refer to instances in which children
searched for the treasure chest at the same location it was
found on the previous trial. Finally, other errors consist of
any responses made that did not fall into one of the
previously described categories. In addition, errors were
coded more generally as within or outside the flags, in order
to ascertain the degree to which children understood that the
treasure chest was to be found between the flags, even if
they did not understand that it should be precisely in the
middle.

Word Knowledge and Accuracy
As in McDonald et al.’s (2004) study, children who
produced the words middle or between during the Midpoint
Task, either spontaneously or in response to the question,
“How did you know where to look for the treasure chest?,”
were more accurate than children who did not (Table 1).
Table 1: Mean proportion correct for producers and nonproducers of middle or between during the Midpoint Task

Producers
Nonproducers

3-yearolds
0.56
N=1
0.29
N = 21

4-yearolds
0.79
N=4
0.64
N=15

5-yearolds
0.83
N=3
0.68
N=19

Total
0.78
N=8
0.52
N = 55

To further investigate the relationship between word
knowledge and accuracy, age in months and proportion
correct on middle/between trials from the Language Task
were entered into a standard regression, along with their
interaction term. The model accounted for 40% of the
variance and was significant, F(3,55)=12.14, p < .001. Both
age, β = 0.02, p < .01, and proportion correct on
middle/between trials, β = 0.27, p < .05, were significant
predictors of performance on the midpoint task, though the
interaction between these two factors was not.

194

Table 2: Mean proportion of responses on Midpoint Task by type out of total trials completed

Correct
Beacon
Vector
Perseverative
Other
Within
Outside

3-year-olds
N = 22

4-year-olds
N = 18

5-year-olds
N = 22

M (SD)
0.34 (0.25)
0.04 (0.12)
0.12 (0.14)
0.05 (0.08)
0.44 (0.27)
0.34 (0.16)
0.31 (0.27)

M (SD)
0.68 (0.25)
0.00 (0.00)
0.09 (0.16)
0.05 (0.07)
0.18 (0.15)
0.27 (0.21)
0.05 (0.10)

M (SD)
0.72 (0.30)
0.00 (0.00)
0.03 (0.08)
0.06 (0.08)
0.18 (0.28)
0.18 (0.15)
0.10 (0.22)

Errors

Total
N = 62
M (SD)
0.58 (0.31)
0.02 (0.07)
0.08 (0.13)
0.05 (0.08)
0.27 (0.27)
0.26 (0.18)
0.16 (0.24)

was predicted by age. Finally, the analysis of children’s
errors on the Midpoint Task revealed one especially striking
result: 3-year-olds, in contrast to 4- and 5-year-olds,
searched for the hidden object outside of the flags nearly
one third of the time. This suggests that the 3-year-olds were
not merely making errors due to lack of metric precision,
they were not able to encode location as between the flags.
In general, children’s errors on the Midpoint Task decreased
uniformly with age, with the exception of other errors.
Because these errors did not fall into categories predicted in
the previous literature, it is difficult to draw many
conclusions from this except to say that children’s errors
became more systematic with age.
As we did, Uttal et al. (2006) found that 4- and 5-yearolds could encode location as in the middle, but unlike in
our study, all of their participants were successful on the
first expanded trial. In this study most of the 5-year-olds,
but only half of the 4-year-olds, accurately pointed to the
middle on the first expanded trial. One key difference
between this study and Uttal et al. is the scale of the space.
Previous research has demonstrated that children may be
more successful reasoning spatially in larger, rather than
smaller, spaces (Learmonth, Newcombe, & Huttenlocher,
2001). Also in contrast to Uttal et al.’s task, in which the
location of the hidden object did not change across trials, the
hidden object moved on every trial in this study. Although a
control condition in Uttal et al. suggested that children were
not able to find the hidden toy by dead-reckoning alone, this
may have contributed to their greater success on their task
than on ours.
A remaining question from this study is the directionality
of the link between word knowledge and success with
middle. Language has been proposed to facilitate conceptual
understanding (Gentner, 2003; Gentner & Namy, 1999;
Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Loewenstein & Gentner,
2005), and it might be that when children have ready access
to the word “middle,” they can more easily encode location
in those terms. Current work is investigating whether
training with the word “middle” helps children
appropriately encode location as in the middle, to examine
this proposal. Future studies will also investigate whether
there are different learning trajectories for encoding between
versus middle. Not only did three-year-olds not reliably

Table 2 shows the mean proportion of each response type
(including correct responses) out of the total number of trials
for each age group. One striking finding is that 3-yearolds frequently searched outside of the flags – on average
nearly a third of their responses fell outside the flags. Their
errors did not merely lack metric precision, but rather the 3year-olds did not understand that the toy was hidden between
the flags.
To evaluate whether children’s error patterns changed
with age, their mean proportions of each error out of the
total number of trials completed were entered into a 3(age) x
4(error) repeated measures ANOVA. The interaction
between age and error type was significant, F(2,59) = 4.07,
p < .05, suggesting that children’s errors did not decline
uniformly with age. Follow-up univariate ANOVAs
performed on each error type indicated that a main effect of
age was significant only for other errors, F(2,59) = 8.00, p <
.01, although the effect was marginally significant for
beacon errors, F(2,59) = 2.51, p = .09, and vector errors,
F(2,59) = 2.51, p = .09.

Discussion
This study sought to investigate the following questions: (1)
when does the ability to encode location as in the middle
emerge, (2) what is the relationship between this ability and
knowledge of the words “middle” and “between,” and (3)
what errors do children make when reasoning about middle?
By 4-years-old, and definitely by 5-years-old, children are
able to encode location relative to two landmarks in a smallscale continuous space. In contrast, 3-year-olds appear to
have a great deal of difficulty with this. The results of this
study also revealed a relationship between knowledge of the
words “middle” and “between” and the ability to encode
location as in the middle. Children who used those words
during the Midpoint Task were more successful at the task
than children who did not, a finding also reported by
McDonald et al. (2004). Additionally, knowledge of
“middle” and “between,” as assessed by the Language Task,
predicted performance on the Midpoint Task beyond what

195

search in the middle of two landmarks, they also had trouble
encoding location as between these landmarks. Four- and 5year olds, in contrast, did both.
In conclusion, this study suggests that children’s
proficiency with middle improved with age, and more
importantly, with relevant word knowledge. Further work is
needed to investigate exactly how language interacts with
the ability to encode location as in the middle and whether
language can be used as a tool to facilitate young children’s
spatial ability.

Jones, C. M., Braithwaite, V. A., and Healy, S .D. (2003).
The evolution of sex differences in spatial ability.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 117, 403-411.
Learmonth, A. E., Newcombe, N. S., & Huttenlocher, J.
(2001). Toddlers’ use of metric information and
landmarks to reorient. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 3, 225-244.
Linn, M. C. & Petersen, A. C. (1985). Emergence and
characterization of sex differences in spatial ability: A
meta-analysis. Child Development, 56, 1479-1498.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers: Close comparisons facilitate far mappings.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 2(2), 189-219.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.
MacDonald, S. E., Spetch, M. L., Kelly, D. M., & Cheng,
K. (2004). Strategies in landmark use by children, adults,
and marmoset monkeys. Learning and Motivation, 35,
322-347.
Newcombe, N., Huttenlocher, J., Drummey, A., & Wiley, J.
(1998). The development of spatial location coding: Place
learning and dead reckoning in the second and third years.
Cognitive Development, 13, 185-200.
Quinn, P. C., Adams, A., Kennedy, E., Shettler, L., &
Wasnik, A. (2003). Development of an abstract category
representation for the spatial relation between in 6- to 10month old infants. Developmental Psychology, 39. 151163.
Quinn, P. C., Norris, C. M., Pasko, R. N., Schmader, T. M.,
& Mash, C. (1999). Formation of a categorical
representation for the spatial relation between by 6- to 7month old infants. Visual Cognition, 6, 569-585.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249-273.
Spetch, M. L. & Parent, M. B. (2006). Age and sex
differences in children’s spatial search strategies.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 13, 807-812.
Thompson, R. K. R., Oden, D. L., & Boysen, S. T. (1997).
Language-naïve chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) judge
relations between relations in a conceptual matching-tosample task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 23, 31-43.
Uttal, D. H., Sandstrom, L. B., & Newcombe, N. S. (2006).
One hidden object, two spatial codes: Young children’s
use of relational and vector coding. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 7, 503-525.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF SLC Grant SBE0541957 to the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center
(SILC). The authors would like to thank David Uttal and the
Cognition and Language Lab for many helpful comments
and suggestions on this work. Many thanks also go to Jen
Hellige, Lauren Clepper, and the other Project on Children’s
Thinking staff who helped with recruitment, scheduling, and
data collection.

References
Blades, M. & Cooke, Z. (1994). Young children’s ability to
understand a model as a spatial representation. Journal of
Genetic Psychology, 155, 201-218.
Bushnell, E. W., McKenzie, B. E., Lawrence, D. A., &
Connell, S. (1995). The spatial coding strategies of oneyear-old infants in a locomotor search task. Child
Development, 66, 937-958.
Christie, S. & Gentner, D. (2007). Relational similarity in
identity relation: The role of language. In Vosniadou, S.
& Kayser, D. (Eds.). Proceedings of the Second European
Cognitive Science Conference.
Gentner, D. (1988b). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner & S.
Goldin-Meadow, Language in Mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gentner, D. & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D. & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P Byrnes (Eds.),
Perspectives on thought and language: Interrelations in
development. London: Cambridge University Press.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children's understanding: The
development of mental models. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P.(2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial memory
tasks. Cognition, 79, 263-299.

196

