UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Coherence in Causal-Based Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bc9r6cp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Rheder, Bob
Kim, ShinWoo

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Coherence in Causal-Based Categorization
Bob Rehder (bob.rehder@nyu.edu)
ShinWoo Kim (shinwoo.kim@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University
6 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003 USA
Abstract

previous studies might exaggerate the magnitude of one of
these effects (the coherence effect) at the expense of the
other (the causal status effect). We then present the results
of an experimental test of this claim.

When features of categories are linked by causal relations,
two different effects on classification judgments have been
documented. The first, the causal status effect, is that features
that appear earlier in a causal network (and thus are more
"causal") are weighed more heavily in classification than less
causal features. The second, the coherence effect, is that good
category members are those whose combination of features
make sense in light of causal laws (e.g., cause and effect feature both present or both absent). Recently, Marsh and Ahn
(2006) suggested that previous studies (e.g., Rehder, 2003b)
may have exaggerated coherence effects and minimized the
causal status effect by use of the word "normal" to describe
atypical feature values. We tested this hypothesis and found
the opposite result, namely, avoiding the "normal" wording
led to a larger coherence effect and a smaller causal status effect. Instead, coherence effects were extremely robust, never
accounting for less than half of the variance in classification
ratings induced by causal links.

Causal Status Effect
The causal status effect is the phenomenon in which, all else
being equal, features that appear earlier in a category's
causal network (and thus are "more causal") carry greater
weight in categorization decisions. For example, in Fig. 1 F1
is the most causal feature, F4 is the least causal, and F2 and
F3 are intermediate. As a consequence, F1 should be
weighed more than F2, which should be weighed more than
F3, which should be weighed more than F4. Of course, the
causal status effect does not imply that features' categorization weight is only determined by their causal status, because it is well known that those weights are also influenced
by features' salience (Sloman et al. 1998) and their cue validity (the extent to which they are diagnostic of that category versus another, Rosch & Mervis, 1975). But the claim
is that causal status will dominate when these factors are
equated.
One study that provides partial support for the causal
status effect was conducted by Rehder (2003b). Participants
were instructed on, for example, Myastars (a type of star)
that had four features causally related in causal chain. Par-

A key aim of the study of concepts is to identify how facts
we directly observe and theoretical beliefs involving explanatory and causal knowledge contribute to how we represent and use categories. Although early research into concepts focused on the effect of observations, subsequent research has shown that theoretical beliefs influence virtually
every type of category-based judgment (see Murphy, 2002,
for a review). This article is concerned with how one type
of category-based judgment, classification, is affected by
one type of theoretical knowledge, namely, causal knowledge that relates features of categories.
There are numerous examples of the causal relationships
between category features. People know that having claws
enables tigers to catch prey, having gills enables fish to
breathe, having a fan allows an automobile's engine to remain cool. Numerous studies have investigated how this
knowledge affects classification. Some studies have tested
real-world categories (e.g., Ahn, 1998; Sloman, Love, &
Ahn, 1998; Kim & Ahn, 2002), but in order to test alternative models, investigators have turned to artificial categories
that are subject to experimental control. In these studies,
participants are instructed on new types of objects and their
features and causal relations among those features. They are
then asked to judge the category membership of items displaying various combinations of features.
By testing different causal network topologies in this
manner, researchers have uncovered several important effects of causal knowledge on categorization. We first
describe two of those effects, namely, the causal status effect and the coherence effect. We then review recent evidence suggesting that unnatural stimulus materials in some

F1

F2

F3

F4

Figure 1
ticipants were then shown a series of stars and asked to rate
(on a 0-100 scale) if they were a Myastar. Rehder performed regression analyses to assess the influence that each
feature had on those ratings. The left panel of Fig. 2A presents the feature regression weights from that study. Consistent with a causal status effect, feature F1 was weighed more
heavily than feature F2. F1's weight of 9.6 meant that categorization ratings were about 10 points higher (all else being
equal), when a test item possessed F1 and 10 points lower
when it did not. In contrast, F2's weight of 6.2 meant that
ratings experienced a swing of only about 12 points depending on whether F2 was present or absent. But whereas F1
was weighed more than F2, the weights of features F2, F3,
and F4 were virtually identical, indicating that only a partial
causal status effect obtained. This result contrasted with
other studies reporting a full causal status effect (e.g., with a
three-feature chain network in Ahn et al. 2000).
In considering reasons for this partial causal status effect,
Rehder noted that participants were given very concrete in-

285

codes whether features F1 and F2 are both present or both
absent versus one present and the other absent. The regression weight on that interaction term represents the importance to participants' categorization ratings of dimensions F1
and F2 having the same value (present or absent) or not.
The right-hand panels of Fig. 2 indicate that in both
Expts. 1 and 2 participants were quite sensitive to whether
potential category members exhibit not just the right features considered individually but also the right combination
of features. In Fig. 2 interactions have been grouped into
two types, the direct interactions between features that are
directly causally related (F1F2, F2F3, and F3F4) and the indirect interactions between the features that are only indirectly related (F1F3, F2F4, and F1F4). Fig. 2 shows that both
types of interaction weights were greater than zero. The
direct interaction weight of 7.3 in Expt. 2 indicates, for example, that categorization ratings were about 7 points
higher (all else being equal), when a test item possessed
either both F1 and F2 or neither one, and 7 points lower
when it possessed one but not the other. That is, participants
were sensitive to the interfeature correlations one would
expect in light of the causal relations, so that an item was
more coherent and thus a better category member if it maintained the expected correlations between F1 and F2 (and F2
and F3, and F3 and F4). This interpretation is reinforced by
the finding of lower but still positive weights on the indirect
interaction terms, because one expects variables that are
indirectly causally related to be correlated, albeit not as
strongly as directly-linked variables (at least for probabilistic causal links). Apparently, good category members are
those that manifest the complex pattern of correlations one
expects to be generated by a causal network. This sensitivity
to coherence has been found in numerous studies (Marsh &
Ahn, 2006), including those testing other causal networks
(Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Rehder 2003a; Rehder & Kim,
2006).
Another notable result in Fig. 2 is that the coherence effect was larger in Expt. 2 than in Expt. 1. A straightforward
interpretation of this result is that, because participants
could give little weight to individual features in Expt. 2 (because of the absence of feature base rate information), coherence became the only factor available to determine their
categorization rating

A. Rehder (2003), Expt. 1
16
8

14

Weight

12

6

10
8

4

6
4

2

2
0

0
F1

F2

F3

F4

Direct

Indirect

Direct

Indirect

B. Rehder (2003), Expt. 2
16
8

14
12

6

10
8

4

6
4

2

2
0

0
F1

F2

F3

F4

Feature

Interaction

Figure 2
formation about features' base rates within the categories. For
example, participants were told that "75% of Myastars have
high temperature whereas 25% have a normal temperature,"
"75% of Myastars have high density whereas 25% have a
normal density," and so on. A partial causal status effect may
have obtained because subjects were reluctant to weigh the
features differently given the numerically identical base rates.
To test this possibility, a second experiment omitted base rate
information (e.g., "Some Myastars have a high density
whereas others have normal density."). The results presented
in the left panel of Fig. 2B indicate that feature weights were
close to 0, an expected result given that participants were
given no reason to think that a star with high density was
more likely to be a Myastar than one with normal density.
More importantly, there was no sign of a causal status effect,
as features were weighed equally. These results indicate that
the 75% base rate information provided in Expt. 1 was not
responsible for its lack of a full causal status effect. Later we
will discuss other variables that may have an effect on the
causal status effect, but we first turn to the second phenomenon, the coherence effect.

Questions About the Coherence Effect
Despite the considerable evidence in favor of the coherence
effect, questions about its robustness have been raised. Recently, Marsh and Ahn (2006) offered a critique of Rehder
(2003b) in which they questioned both the presence of large
coherence effects and the absence of a full causal status
effect, arguing those findings may have been due to an artifact of the experimental materials. As mentioned, in Rehder
(2003b) participants were told that Myastars could have
either high or normal temperature, high or normal density,
etc. Marsh and Ahn argued that the use of "normal" might
be problematic, for two reasons. First, although the intent of
the "normal" wording was to define Myastars with respect
to all stars, Marsh and Ahn argued that the use of "normal"
might have inflated coherence effects because participants
expected the "normal" values to appear together.
Second, Marsh and Ahn noted that Rehder's Expt. 2 pro-

Coherence Effect
Because Rehder (2003b) asked participants to rate all possible exemplars that could be formed on the category's binary
dimensions, he was able to assess not just feature weights
but also feature interactions, that is, how important certain
combinations of features are to category membership. This
was done by introducing interaction terms in the regression
equation for each pair of features (i.e., F1F2, F2F3, F3F4,
F1F3, F2F4, and F1F4). For example, the F1F2 interaction term
286

a markedly different pattern. First, the individual weights
were much larger and exhibited an almost full causal status
effect (F1 > [F2, F3] > F4). And, although both interaction
weights were positive, the effect of coherence was lower
than in the Ambiguous condition.
Marsh and Ahn interpreted these results as supporting
their claim that the absence of base rate information and the
use of the "normal" attribute values were responsible for the
equivocal causal status effect and strong coherence effect
found in Rehder (2003b). They concluded that
"…[Rehder's] results are methodological artifacts arising
from the unnatural wording of category attributes" [p. 561].

A. M&A (2006), Unambiguous
16
8

14

Weight

12

6

10
8

4

6
4

2

2
0

0
F1

F2

F3

Direct

F4

Indirect

Analysis of Marsh & Ahn (2006)

B. M&A (2006), Ambiguous

The possibility that reported effects of causal knowledge on
classification might be due to specific stimulus materials is
of course is an important one, and in this light Marsh and
Ahn's (2006) study is a welcome contribution to the literature. But do their empirical results warrant their negative
conclusion regarding Rehder (2003b)? To evaluate this
claim, it is important to remember that they tested conditions that differed in two ways: as compared to the Ambiguous condition, the Unambiguous condition provided
base rate information and avoided use of the "normal"
wording. Thus, to understand the theoretical significance of
their study, we must assess to which of these manipulations
the empirical findings should be attributed.
Regarding the base rate manipulation, we believe there is
no reason to doubt that people's classification performance
strongly depends on their beliefs about features' base rates.
Indeed, this has been a standard finding in the categorization literature for decades (Rosch & Mervis, 1985).
Moreover, the effect of base rates in the presence of causal
knowledge is already part of the literature; in fact, it is part
of the Rehder (2003b) study that Marsh and Ahn aimed to
criticize. Recall that whereas in Rehder's Expt. 1 participants were told that typical features occurred in 75% of
category members, no base information was provided in
Expt. 2. A comparison of Figs. 2A and 3A indicates that the
effect of this base rate information was almost exactly the
same as that seen by Marsh and Ahn. On the importance of
feature base rates then, there is no controversy.
However, Marsh and Ahn reached an additional conclusion, namely, that the differences between their conditions
were also due to the "normal" wording. Although this conclusion might seem puzzling given that the results of
Rehder's Expt. 1 (Fig. 2A) that used the "normal" wording
were so similar to their Unambiguous condition (Fig. 3A)
which did not, note that whereas Rehder's Expt. 1 found that
F1 > [F2, F3, F4], in the Unambiguous condition it was also
the case [F2, F3] > F4; that is, a more complete causal status
effect obtained. For Marsh and Ahn, this difference was
sufficient to conclude that the use of "normal" can suppress
the causal status effect: "We argue that [the results from
Rehder's Expt. 1] occurred because even with the high baserate information the non-prototype values were still described as "normal"…highlighting the violations of the correlated structure to the participants." (p. 566).

16
8

14
12

6

10
8

4

6
4

2

2
0

0
F1

F2

F3

Feature

F4

Direct

Indirect

Interaction

Figure 3
vided no information about feature base rates. In the absence of base rate information, items that had all "normal"
values (i.e., the "0000" item, where 0 = an uncharacteristic
value on a binary dimension) were given high categorization ratings. They argued that 0000's high rating was manifested in the form of unusually high two-way interaction
terms, that is, a large coherence effect. (Of course, this second point applies to Rehder's Expt. 2 but not Expt. 1, in
which base rate information was provided.)
To test these hypotheses, Marsh and Ahn tested participants in what they referred to as the Ambiguous and Unambiguous conditions. The Ambiguous condition was intended
to be a replication of Rehder (2003b), Expt. 2 ("ambiguous"
because of the ambiguous base rates). The Unambiguous
condition differed from the Ambiguous condition in two
ways. First, participants were given feature base rate information (e.g., "Myastars tend to have high density."). Second, the controversial "normal" wording was avoided. For
example, rather than to-be-rated stars having either a hot
temperature or a normal temperature, they had a hot temperature or a low temperature; rather than high density or a
normal density, they had high density or low density; and so
on. Participants then performed a classification rating task
essentially identical to the one in Rehder (2003b).
The regression weights from the Unambiguous and Ambiguous conditions are presented in Fig. 3. Fig. 3B indicates
that, despite some differences in the experimental procedure
(e.g., participants were tested on multiple categories, a diagram on the causal relations was presented on each classification test trial, etc.), the Ambiguous condition essentially
replicated the findings of Rehder (2003b), Expt. 2 (Fig. 2B).
Results in the Unambiguous condition, in contrast, showed

287

Overview of Experiment

Results

Is there an effect of using "normal" feature values and does
it influence either the causal status or coherence effects?
Despite Marsh and Ahn's (2006) claim, it is impossible to
say on the basis of their study. First, comparing their Unambiguous and Ambiguous conditions is of no help, because, as noted, those conditions also differed on the base
rate information provided. And comparing their Unambiguous condition with Rehder's Expt. 1 is problematic because
those studies also had numerous procedural differences
(within- vs. between subject design, base rates of "75%" vs.
"tend to have," a diagram was provided on the classification
test trial in one study but not the other, etc.).
To test what effect, if any, "normal" feature values have
on causal-based classification, we compared a Normal condition in which the non-typical values were described as
"normal" (as in Rehder, 2003b) and a Bipolar condition in
they were described as opposite to the typical value (as in
Marsh and Ahn's Unambiguous condition). The conditions
were otherwise identical. Feature base rate information was
provided in both conditions.

Following Rehder (2003b) and Marsh and Ahn (2006) category membership ratings were analyzed by performing a
multiple regression for each participant. The regression
weights averaged over participants in each condition are
presented in Fig. 4.
First consider the feature weights shown in the left panels
of Fig. 4. In the Normal condition, those weights were large
and exhibit a partial causal status effect in which feature F1
was weighed more heavily than the other features which in
turn did not differ. These results are qualitatively identical
to those found in Rehder (2003b), Expt. 1, which also used
"normal" as the atypical feature values (Fig. 2A).
The question of interest of course is how these results
compare with the condition in which "normal" was not
used, that is, in the Bipolar condition presented in Fig. 4B.
In fact, the figure indicates the complete absence of a causal
status effect in the Bipolar condition. That is, rather than
enhancing the causal status effect, use of an opposite value
as the atypical value (low vs. high density) eliminated any
tendency for participants to weigh more causal features
more heavily than less causal features. This of course is
exactly the opposite of the Marsh and Ahn (2006) claim.
The magnitude of the coherence effect in these conditions
(right panels of Fig. 4) tells a similar story. In the Normal
condition, both the direct and indirect interaction terms are
positive and about the same magnitude as in Rehder's Expt.
1 (albeit the direct term is a bit lower and the indirect term a
bit higher). In contrast, the interaction terms are over twice
as large in the Bipolar condition, indicating a much larger
coherence effect in that condition. That is, rather than the
"normal" wording exaggerating coherence effects in fact it
minimizes that effect. Again, this effect is precisely the reverse of what Marsh and Ahn argued.
These conclusions were supported by statistical analysis.
A 2 x 4 mixed ANOVA of the feature weights was conducted where the between-subject factor was condition
(Normal vs. Bipolar) and the within-subject factor was feature (1–4). There was a main effect of feature, F(3, 210) =
8.20, MSE = 21.8, p < .0001, reflecting different feature
weights, and an interaction between features and condition,
F(3, 210) = 8.20, MSE = 21.8, p < .0001, indicating that the
pattern of weights varied across condition. A separate
analysis of the Normal condition indicated that feature F1
was weighed more heavily than the other three features,
F(1, 35) = 21.65, MSE = 21.8, p < .0001, which in turn did
not differ from one another. In the Bipolar condition, feature weights were not significantly different. In addition, a 2
x 2 ANOVA of the interaction weights was conducted with
condition (Normal vs. Bipolar) and interaction term (direct
vs. indirect) as factors. There was a main effect of condition, F(1, 70) = 13.63, MSE = 41.1, p < .001, reflecting the
larger interaction weights in the Bipolar condition. There
was also a main effect of term, F(1, 70) = 6.46, MSE = 6.6,
p < .01, indicating that the direct terms were larger than the
indirect ones. The interaction was not significant.

Method
Materials. The six novel categories tested were the same
as those in Rehder (2003b) and Marsh and Ahn (2006). For
example, the features of Myastars were made of ionized
helium, hot temperature, high density, and large number of
planets. The base rate for each typical feature was described
as "most" and the non-typical value was described as "normal" in the Normal condition and as a value opposite to the
typical value in the Bipolar condition. For example, participants were told "Most Myastars have high density whereas
some have a normal density." in the Normal condition and
"Most Myastars have high density whereas some have low
density." in the Bipolar condition. All participants learned
three causal link arranged as in Fig. 1. Each causal relationship specified the cause and effect features (e.g., "Ionized
helium causes the star to be very hot.") and some detail regarding the causal mechanism (e.g., "Ionized helium participates in nuclear reactions that release more energy than
the nuclear reactions of normal hydrogen-based stars, and
the star is hotter as a result.").
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Rehder
(2003b). Participants first studied several screens of information about their assigned category at their own pace.
They were then required to pass a multiple-choice test to
ensure they learned the information. Participants then rated
on a 0–100 scale the category membership of all possible 16
objects that can be formed on four binary dimensions. On
each trial the four features were listed in dimension order
(1–4) on the computer screen. The order of the trials was
randomized for each participant.
Participants. 72 New York University undergraduates
received course credit for participating in this experiment.
They were assigned in equal numbers to the Normal and
Bipolar conditions and to one of the six categories.

Discussion
This experiment assessed whether use of "normal" for
atypical feature values affects causal-based classification.
The answer is that it does. As compared to bipolar dimen288

4

dimensions is to enhance the coherence effect and minimize
the causal status effect.
Note that Marsh and Ahn also tested two other causal
networks, namely, a common cause network (one feature
causes three others) and common effect network (one feature caused by three others) and found results analogous to
those with a chain network: low feature weights and high
interaction terms in the Ambiguous condition (replicating
Rehder, 2003a) and higher feature weights and lower interaction terms in the Unambiguous condition. But their conclusion that these results were partly due to the "normal"
wording ignores the fact that those conditions also differed
on the base rate information provided. Now that we know
that, all else being equal, "normal" increases coherence effects, it must be that the Marsh and Ahn's Unambiguous
condition's lower coherence effect was solely due to its
base rate information. Other differences between their Unambiguous and our lab's own common cause and common
effect conditions that provided base rate information (e.g.,
in Rehder & Hastie, 2001) are likely due to the procedure
differences that we have mentioned.

2

General Discussion

A. "Normal" Condition
16
8

14

Weight

12

6

10
8

4

6
4

2

2
0

0
F1

F2

F3

Direct

F4

Indirect

B. Bipolar Condition
16
8

14
12

6

10
8
6
4

The purpose of this research was to evaluate the claim that
previous findings regarding the causal status and coherence
effects in causal-based categorization were invalid due to
"methodological artifacts," namely the use of the word normal to describe atypical dimension values. According to
Marsh and Ahn (2006), use of "normal" was likely to have
exaggerated the importance of coherence and minimized the
importance of features' causal status. However, this conclusion was based on comparing conditions that differed in
ways other than the "normal" wording. We tested conditions
that differed only in the "normal" wording and found just
the opposite effect. That is, the use of "normal" minimizes
coherence effects and enhances the causal status effect, not
the other way around.
It is important to remember that Marsh and Ahn made
two claims, and with the second of those claims—that coherence effects will be larger when feature base rate information is omitted—we have no disagreement. It is clear that
if coherence is the only basis on which to make a categorization judgment, then participants will use most of the response scale to express how test items differ in their coherence and, as a result, the magnitude of the interaction terms
will be larger. We also agree that people usually have some
idea of what features are typical of a category. But recall
that Rehder (2003b, Expt. 2) omitted base rate information
as a follow-on to a first experiment to see if a full causal
status effect would emerge. Another study from our lab
omitted base rate information (Rehder, 2003a) to make a
detailed study of the feature interactions produced by more
complex causal networks. But of course real-world categories generally exhibit a family resemblance structure and to
mimic this structure all other studies in this line provided
base rate information (Rehder, 2003b, Expt. 1, Rehder &
Hastie, 2001; Rehder & Kim, 2006). Despite the presence
of this base rate information, coherence effects were found
in all of them. Of course, the present results suggest that had
bipolar dimensions been used instead of "normal," the coherence effects in those studies would have been larger still.

2
0

0
F1

F2

F3

Feature

F4

Direct

Indirect

Interaction

Figure 4
sions, use of "normal" enhances the causal status effect and
decreases the coherence effect. This of course is just the
reverse of Marsh and Ahn's (2006) claim regarding the effect of the "normal" values.
Why might bipolar dimensions lead to stronger coherence
effects? One possibility is that such dimensions might lead
participants to infer the existence of additional causal links.
For example, if you are told that Myastars have either high
or low temperature and either high or low density, and that
high temperature causes high density, you might take this to
mean that low temperature also causes low density. On this
account, a star with high temperature and low density violates two causal links rather than one. Or, you might treat
temperature and density as continuous variables, in which
case high temperature and low density is a more egregious
violation of the causal link than high temperature and normal density (which implies that density is at the midpoint of
the density scale). But whatever the reason, it is clear that
bipolar dimensions highlight rather than diminish the importance of the correlational structure among features.
The absence of a causal status effect in the Bipolar condition might seem puzzling in light of the results in Marsh and
Ahn's Unambiguous condition which also tested bipolar
dimensions. Recall, however, that there were numerous procedural differences between experiments: base rates conveyed as "tend to have" vs. "most," within- vs. betweensubjects designs, one study presented a diagram during the
classification trial, etc. Apparently, one or more of these
differences must have some effect on the causal status effect. The important point however is that when these sorts
of procedural variables are equated, the effect of bipolar

289

own data. Instead, Table 1 indicates that in these sorts of
experimental paradigms the most important factor influencing categorization judgments is whether an object displays a
configuration of features that make sense in light of the
category's causal laws. Compared to coherence, changes to
the importance of individual features (e.g., the causal status
effect) run second.

In summary then, there is no reason to think that the coherence effect is a "methodological artifact" of stimulus
materials. This finding is important because coherence has
been shown to affect every category-based judgment in
which it has been assessed. Coherence affects categorybased induction, with more coherent items supporting
stronger inductions (e.g., Patalano & Ross, 2007; Rehder &
Hastie, 2004). It affects learning, with more coherent categories being easier to learn (e.g., Murphy & Allopenna,
1984). Coherence also affects categorization even when
feature relations are neither explicitly causal nor provided as
part of the experiment (Wisniewski, 1995). In other words,
coherence is one of the most important manifestations of
knowledge-based (or "theory-based") categories.
Moreover, within causal-based classification coherence
can be shown to dominate other effects such as changes to
individual feature weights. To demonstrate this, we computed the proportion of the variance in categorization ratings attributed to it and the causal status effect. The total
variance induced by causal knowledge was taken to be the
variance explained by a regression model with separate predictors for each feature and each two-way interaction as
compared to a model with only one predictor representing
the total number of characteristic features. The variance
attributable to the causal status effect is the variance explained by the separate predictors for each feature in the full
model whereas that attributable to the coherence effect is
the variance explained by the interaction terms. The results
of this analysis are presented in Table 1. Even in our conditions in which a causal status effect was present, the coherence effect always accounted for more than 80% of the
variance. When no causal status effect was present, coherence accounted for over 99% of the variance. And despite
Marsh and Ahn's (2006) claim that "individual features'
causal status, rather than feature combinations, was the predominant determinant" of categorization performance in
their Unambiguous condition (p. 566), coherence accounted
for 56% of the variance in that condition as well. Indeed,
their suggestion that "a strong case for the role of interfeature links has yet to be made" (p. 566) is especially puzzling given that such a "strong case" was present in their

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for natural
kinds and artifacts? The role of causal status in determining feature centrality. Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J. (2000).
Causal status as a determinant of feature centrality. Cognitive
Psychology, 41, 361-416.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, N. S. (2002). Clinical psychologists' theorybased representation of mental disorders affect their diagnostic
reasoning and memory. Journal of Experiemental Psychology:
General, 131, 451-476.
Marsh, J., & Ahn, W. (2006). The role of causal status versus inter-feature links in feature weighting. In R. Sun & N. Miyake
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 561-566).
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts: MIT Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Allopenna, P. D. (1994). The locus of knowledge effects in concept learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 904-919.
Patalano, A. L., & Ross, B. H. (2007). The role of category coherence in experience-based prediction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 629-634.
Rehder, B. (2003a). Categorization as causal reasoning. Cognitive
Science, 27, 709-748.
Rehder, B. (2003b). A causal-model theory of conceptual representation and categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 1141-1159.
Rehder, B. & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and categories:
The effects of causal beliefs on categorization, induction, and
similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130,
323-360.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2004). Category coherence and category-based property induction. Cognition, 91, 113-153.
Rehder, B. & Kim, S. (2006). How causal knowledge affects classification: A generative theory of categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32,
659-683.
Rehder, B. & Kim, S. (2008). Causal status and coherence in
causal-based categorization. Submitted for publication.
Rosch, E. H., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblance: Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology,
7, 573-605.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature centrality
and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Science, 22, 189-228.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1995). Prior knowledge and functionally relevant features in concept learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 449-468.

Table 1
% Variance Explained
Study

Causal Status Effect Coherence Effect

Rehder (2003b)
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Marsh & Ahn (2006)
Unambiguous
Ambiguous
This study
Normal
Bipolar

17.8%
0.9%

82.2%
99.1%

43.6%
0.3%

56.4%
99.7%

30.1%
0.3%`

69.9%
99.7%

290

