UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Deliberate Practice in Expertise: Necessary but Not Sufficient

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tb2h12c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Gobet, Fernand

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Deliberate Practice in Expertise: Necessary but Not Sufficient
Fernand Gobet (fernand.gobet@brunel.ac.uk)
Centre for the Study of Expertise, Brunel University
Cleveland Road, Uxbridge UB8 3PH UK

Keywords: chess; deliberate practice; expertise; handedness;
intelligence; personality; seasonality of birth; talent.

Other Factors Mediating Expertise in Chess
If practice does not explain all of the variance, what are
the other factors that are involved in the development of
chess expertise? Gobet and Campitelli (2007) showed that
chessplayers’ degree of handedness is weaker than in the
population at large. Two studies have also shown a correlation between chess skill and intelligence (Bilalić et al.
2007a; Grabner, Stern & Neubauer, 2007), adding to a complex pattern of data (Didierjean & Gobet, in press). Personality differences exist as well (Bilalić et al., 2007b). Finally,
Gobet and Chassy (2008) discovered that expert chess players in the northern hemisphere tend to be born more often in
late winter and early spring than the overall population.
The results briefly reviewed here show that practice encompasses more varied training activities than argued by
Ericsson et al. (1993). They also highlight the importance of
individual variability and show that other factors play a role
in the acquisition of expertise. Practice is a necessary, but
not sufficient condition for reaching high levels of expertise.

The Deliberate Practice Framework
In an influential paper, Ericsson, Krampe, and TeschRomer (1993) proposed that expertise is acquired only
through practice deliberately designed to improve one’s own
skill. Deliberate practice (DP) consists of goal-directed and
repetitive activities that enable immediate feedback. These
activities, performed individually, are typically effortful and
not enjoyable, and cannot be carried out for more than a few
hours a day. Inherited factors are not excluded, but these
factors are limited to motivation and general activity levels,
with cognitive abilities being explicitly excluded. The DP
framework has had a considerable impact in the field of
expertise, and numerous studies have been carried out to
examine the role of practice in domains such as art, sports,
games, and professional activities.

New Data on Deliberate Practice in Chess
Much of what we know about expertise comes from chess
(Gobet et al., 2004) and it is therefore a good domain for
examining to what extent DP accounts for the development
of expertise. Gobet and Campitelli (2007) collected data
from a sample of 104 Argentinean players ranging from
weak amateurs to grandmasters. They found that, while DP
accounted for 34% of the variance in skill (measured by
players’ national rating), several results did not fit the DP
framework. Although the average amount of DP necessary
for reaching master level was considerable (11,053 hours),
there was also a substantial amount of variability, with the
slowest player (23,608 hours) taking nearly 8 times as long
as the fastest player (3,016 hours). Some players with more
than 25,000 hours of DP never reached the master level.
These results violate Ericsson et al.’s (1993) assumption
that DP yields monotonic benefits. In addition, group practice was a better predictor of skill than individual practice,
and the age at which players started playing chess seriously
correlated with current rating even after the number of hours
of practice was controlled for statistically.
Analyzing longitudinal data from the same sample, Campitelli and Gobet (in press) found that, after playing chess
seriously for three years, masters had a higher rating than
Experts although they had not practiced more. The Experts’
ratings did not improve much thereafter, in spite of substantial amounts of DP. This study also presented evidence that
practice in chess is more complex than previously thought
and is not limited to the kind of repetitive and feedback-rich
activities described in the DP literature.

References
Bilalić, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. (2007a). Does chess
need intelligence? A study with young chess players. Intelligence, 35, 457-470.
Bilalić, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. (2007b). Personality
profiles of young chess players. Personality and Individual Differences, 42, 901-910.
Campitelli, G., & Gobet, F. (in press). The role of practice
in chess: A longitudinal study. Learning and Individual
Differences.
Didierjean, A. & Gobet, F. (in press). Sherlock Holmes –
An expert’s view of expertise. British Journal of Psychology.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. Th., & Tesch-Romer, C.
(1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition
of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363406.
Gobet. F. & Campitelli, G. (2007). The role of domainspecific practice, handedness and starting age in chess.
Developmental Psychology, 43, 159-172.
Gobet. F. & Chassy, P. (2008). Season of birth and chess
expertise. Journal of Biosocial Science, 40, 313-316.
Gobet, F., de Voogt, A., & Retschitzki, J. (2004). Moves in
mind: The psychology of board games. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Grabner, R. H., Stern, E., & Neubauer, A. C. (2007). Individual differences in chess expertise: A psychometric investigation. Acta Psychologica, 124, 398-420.

823

