UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Conditional and Joint Probabilities in Segmentation of Dynamic Human Action

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9029r9sc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Meyer, Meredith
Baldwin, Dare

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Conditional and Joint Probabilities in Segmentation
of Dynamic Human Action
Meredith Meyer (mmeyer2@uoregon.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1227 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403 USA

Dare Baldwin (baldwin@uoregon.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1227 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403 USA
candidate for such a mechanism is sensitivity to statistical
regularities among small motion elements. By way of
example, imagine being asked to identify individual action
units performed by a person cooking a meal. Even without
extensive prior knowledge of cooking or food preparation,
bottom-up processing of the action stream could enable
detection of which elements tend to predict others. Elements
that are likely to follow each other (e.g., grasping a knife
and then cutting a potato) are probably parts of the same
overall action, whereas elements that are less likely to
follow each other (e.g., cutting a potato and then opening a
refrigerator) are likely parts of different actions motivated
by two different goals.
The fact that one element predicts another may link the
two as parts of a larger unit, enabling segmentation without
requiring top-down knowledge of intentions or goals. In the
current study, we report on two experiments that
investigated whether adults are able to compute one specific
type of statistical information present in a motion stream,
conditional probability. We further assessed whether they
are sensitive to joint probability information provided by
another statistical regularity in the action stream, namely cooccurrence frequency of the smaller motion units
comprising an action.
Conditional probability provides predictive information
relating one event to another. In the example above, the
probability that grasp knife predicts cut potato is higher than
the probability that cut potato predicts open refrigerator.
Thus the conditional probability between grasp and cut is
higher than between cut and open. Joint probability is
another distinct type of statistical information that is also
present in naturalistic action. Joint probability reflects the
frequency with which elements occur together; such
statistics provide information about the likelihood that
elements will co-occur across time. To expand the example
above, one could easily predict that across time, the overall
number of times a person sees grasp/cut in succession
exceeds the number of times a person sees cut/open in
succession.

Abstract
Segmentation of human action may be facilitated by
sensitivity to statistical regularities in the action stream. We
present two studies that examine the precise nature of adults’
statistical learning of human action. Across two studies,
adults were unable to reliably segment action based on
conditional probability among small motion elements.
However, they were robustly skilled at making use of joint
probability information provided by co-occurrence frequency
of these elements. These findings showcase possible
differences in ways in which statistical learning mechanisms
support segment discovery within human action as opposed to
other domains, such as language.
Keywords: statistical learning; action processing

People consistently and easily redescribe the human action
they observe into units that correspond with their judgment
of the intentions underlying that action (Baldwin & Baird,
2001; Hard, Tversky, & Lang, 2006; Zacks, 2004). The ease
with which we make these judgments, however, belies the
complexity of the action itself and by extension our ability
to analyze it. Careful consideration of human action
suggests that it is, in fact, a remarkably complex stimulus. A
person’s action frequently lacks pauses or other clear
markers of when a goal is completed and another initiated;
instead human action unfolds in a fairly fluid manner
(Newtson & Enquist, 1976). The dynamic and continuous
nature of action thus may pose a very real problem for
segmentation necessary for later analysis in terms of
underlying intentions and goals.
The ability to analyze human action in terms of intentions
likely draws heavily from top-down inferences of people’s
desires and beliefs as well as knowledge of object
affordances and one’s own past experience with action.
Top-down processes involved in action segmentation are
unlikely to account for the entire story, however. Baldwin
and colleagues (e.g., Baldwin et al., 2001; Saylor et al.,
2007), for example, found that even infants parse dynamic
human action in units corresponding to the completion and
initiation of intentions, despite the fact that infants probably
lack sophisticated theory of mind skills and knowledge of
the intentions that motivate even ordinary, everyday adult
activity.
Another possibility, then, is that action segmentation may
be partially supported by bottom-up mechanisms. One likely

Statistical Learning in Other Domains
An analogous inquiry in the domain of speech has already
established that people are sensitive to the conditional
probabilities among syllabic units. Present even in infancy,
333

this skill is believed to be one source of information that
helps infants segment the continuous speech stream into
words. Saffran, Aslin, and Newport (1996) exposed infants
to a series of syllables that occurred in word-like groups
(“words”) of three. After listening to these syllables
repeated in a continuous speech stream, infants were given
the opportunity to listen to sequences whose average
conditional probabilities were 1.0 (i.e., a word) or sequences
whose average conditional probabilities were less than 1.0.
Infants preferred to listen to the latter, suggesting that they
deemed these sequences more novel than the words they had
segmented during exposure. However, infants may also
have been responding to another statistical regularity,
namely co-occurrence frequency of syllables. Specifically,
because each word was presented an equal number of times
in the exposure corpus, words had not just overall higher
conditional probabilities among the syllables that comprised
them, but also occurred more frequently than any other trisyllabic sequence. Since frequency of co-occurrence for
syllables comprising words was higher than other
sequences, infants may have been responding to this
difference in joint probability rather than computing
conditional probabilities.
Aslin, Saffran, and Newport (1998) resolved this issue by
controlling for the frequency with which test sequences
were heard during exposure. They found that after exposure,
infants again preferred to listen to the sequences with lower
average conditional probabilities, replicating the original
Saffran et al. (1996) findings. Crucially, however, the
sequences that infants discriminated between had been
presented the same number of times during exposure. This
study thus unambiguously demonstrated that infants were
able to compute conditional probabilities across a
continuous speech stream and to discriminate sequences
whose conditional probabilities differed.
Related work has demonstrated that adults are also
capable of using statistical regularities to segment speech
(Saffran, Newport, & Aslin, 1996), musical tones (Saffran,
et al., 1999), visual patterns (Kirkham, Slemmer, &
Johnson, 2002), and visuomotor sequences (Hunt & Aslin,
1998). Although these studies did not directly address
whether adults were computing conditional probability,
joint probability, or both, other research suggests that adults
are indeed sensitive to conditional probability independent
of co-occurrence frequency. Adults compute conditional
probabilities both in spatial correlations of visual patterns
(Fiser & Aslin, 2001) and in shape sequences (Fiser &
Aslin, 2002a). Taken together with the infancy findings of
Aslin and colleagues (1998; Fiser & Aslin, 2002b; also see
Graf Estes et al., 2007 for replication in speech), research
suggests that sensitivity to conditional probability is a robust
mechanism that persists across development and can
function in many modalities.

et al. (2008) investigated adults’ ability to segment a novel
stream of action making use of a methodology similar to
that already used in speech (e.g., Saffran et al., 1996).
Because the current study employs very similar
methodology, a more in-depth description of their stimuli is
in order. They showed participants a sequence of continuous
human object-directed action featuring 12 small motion
elements (SMEs). SMEs were grouped into four actions,
with each action consisting of three SMEs (e.g., Action 1 =
stack/poke/drink; Action 2 = blow/touch/rattle). The
conditional probability among SMEs within an action was
1.0 (e.g., for Action 1, stack always was followed by poke,
which in turn always was followed by drink). However,
when adjacent elements crossed action boundaries, creating
a “part-action”, average conditional probability decreased
(e.g., conditional probability among rattle/stack/poke was
on average lower, as the probability of rattle followed by
stack was <1.0). Actions were randomly ordered in a
continuous fashion to construct the exposure corpus. During
test, participants were shown action/part-action pairs and
asked to determine which was more familiar. Participants
selected actions as more familiar, suggesting that they had
segmented the stream based on the statistical regularities
inherent in the action stream.
Baldwin et al. (2008) provided a clear demonstration that
people can use statistical learning to segment human action.
Baldwin et al.’s design, however, like that of many other
statistical learning studies, did not control for the frequency
of co-occurrence of small motion elements comprising the
actions vs. part-actions. Rather, sequences with higher
conditional probabilities (actions) also occurred more
frequently during exposure. It is thus ambiguous whether, in
making judgments between actions and part-actions, adults
were responding based on their computation of conditional
probability among small motion elements, or rather to the
higher co-occurrence frequency of the small motion
elements comprising the actions.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 precisely examines the type of statistical
information that adults can use in segmenting dynamic
human action. In order to control for small motion element
frequency, we created an exposure corpus that varied the
frequency of actions. This enabled selection of action/partaction pairs that had occurred an equal number of times
during exposure for use during test. This component of the
design is similar to that of Aslin and colleagues’ frequencybalanced control study examining infant segmentation of
speech (1998). An additional component of the current
design also asked participants to compare other
combinations of action/part-action pairs during test,
allowing us to assess the effect of small motion element cooccurrence frequency; namely, test pairs also featured
actions that had been 10, 5, and 2 times more frequent in the
exposure corpus than their comparison part-action.

Statistical Learning in Action
Work in the action domain has also demonstrated adult
sensitivity to statistical regularity in human action. Baldwin
334

The frequency difference between Actions 1 and 2 vs.
Actions 3 and 4 allowed us to control for SME cooccurrence frequency during test by selecting actions and
part-actions that had an equal frequency of occurrence
during exposure. Specifically, part-actions consisting of
elements from Actions 1 and 2 (e.g., clean/under/feel) were
seen equally as frequently as Actions 3 and 4, i.e., 60 times
each. Additional combinations of frequencies of actions and
part-actions were also possible, and we included these
comparisons during test in an attempt to discern the role of
SME co-occurrence frequency in segmentation. We
exhaustively paired every action with every part-action,
resulting in a total of 16 test trials and 4 co-occurrence
frequency differences (4 trials each for actions that were 10
times, 5 times, and 2 times more frequent than comparison
part-actions, in addition to the four frequency–balanced
pairs) (see Table 2).

In light of past research suggesting humans’ sensitivity to
conditional probabilities, our primary hypothesis was that
adults would be able to compute conditional probabilities
across exposure and to use this information to segment the
action stream. This ability would be reflected in adults
reporting actions as more familiar than their counterpart
frequency-balanced part-actions. We also hypothesized that
adults would show even greater learning on trials in which
sequence frequency (i.e., co-occurrence frequency of the
small motion elements) was higher for the actions in
comparison to the part-actions. Prior findings suggest that
across studies, learning is lower for frequency-balanced
sequences, and it has been suggested that they are harder to
learn than imbalanced sequences (Fiser & Aslin, 2002a;
Graf Estes et al., 2007).

Method
Stimuli Similar to the original studies of human action
segmentation (Baldwin et al., 2008), we filmed 12
individual object-directed motions, dubbed small motion
elements (SMEs). SMEs were grouped into four actions
with each action consisting of three SMEs. In order to make
the action stream appear more continuous, transitions
among individual SMEs (both within and across actions)
were smoothed using the Overlap transition in iMovie (v.
5.0.2). SMEs were also slightly sped using the FastForward
effect in order to create a corpus length that was manageable
by our participants. We then created a twenty-five minute
exposure corpus within iMovie that contained 120 tokens
each of Actions 1 and 2 and 60 tokens each of Actions 3 and
4 (See Table 1 and Figure 1). Actions were randomly
ordered with the exception that no action could follow itself.

Table 2: Small Motion Element Co-Occurrence
Frequency Trial Types

Empty Clean

Feel

Blow

5x

2x

SME co-occurrence
frequency for action

120

60

120

equal
60

In order to avoid concerns that certain sequences were,
just by chance, a priori more easily segmentable, we created
three more exposure corpora. Actions from Corpus 1 served
as part-actions in Corpus 2 and vice versa. We further
counterbalanced which actions appeared highly frequently
(120 times) and which appeared less frequently (60 times)
such that highly frequent actions in Corpus 1 were less
frequent in Corpus 3, and highly frequent actions in Corpus
2 were less frequent in Corpus 4. As well, it should be noted
that while the small motion elements themselves had clear
underlying intentions and were thus meaningful, the
sequences themselves were arbitrary and provided no
information that could be used by top-down mechanisms to
aid in the segmentation process.

Frequency
120
120
60
60
Frequency
60
60
12
12

Under

10 x

SME co-occurrence
frequency for part-action 12
12
60
60
__________________________________________________________

Table 1: Actions and Part-Actions for Corpus 1.
Actions
Empty/Clean/Under
Feel/Blow/Look
Drink/Twirl/Read
Rattle/Slide/Poke
Part-Actions
Clean/Under/Feel
Blow/Look/Empty
Read/Rattle/Slide
Poke/Drink/Twirl

Co-occurrence ratio of
action to part-action

Participants and Procedure Participants were 32
university students (12 male, 20 female) receiving class
credit for participation. Participants were randomly assigned
to 1 of 4 exposure corpora and instructed to watch the
corpus. They were told that they would be asked questions
about what they saw after the exposure, but no further
information was provided about the nature of the task. Upon
finishing the exposure corpus, participants judged whether
actions were more familiar than part-actions in a forcedchoice test format. Order of presentation of the actions and
part-actions within a trial was randomly determined, as was
the order of the 16 trials.

Look

Time
Figure 1: Still-Frames From Segment of Exposure Corpus.
Actions shown are empty/clean/under and feel/blow/look;
part-action clean/under/feel spans an action boundary.
335

Results Segmentation is demonstrated by greater-thanchance selection of actions as more familiar than partactions. Across all 16 test trials, participants indeed were
successful at discriminating actions from part-actions, M =
10.75 (SD = 2.97), t(31) = 5.23, p <.001. In order to
evaluate our primary hypothesis that adults could segment
based on conditional probabilities, we next restricted
analyses only to the four trials in which actions and partactions were equally frequent during exposure. Here we did
not find any evidence of segmentation; on the contrary,
participants were unsystematic (M = 2.19, SD = 1.26; t(31)
= .85, p >.05).
Instead, selection of actions as more familiar only
occurred for pairs where actions were seen more frequently
than part-actions, i.e., sequences whose SME co-occurrence
frequency was higher. When actions were seen 10 times
more often than part-actions, mean selection of actions out
of 4 trials was 3.13 (SD = .87), t(31) = 7.31, p <.001; for
actions that were 5 times more frequent, mean selection was
2.88 (SD = 1.07), t(31) = 4.63, p<.001; and for actions that
were 2 times more frequent, mean selection was 2.56 (SD =
1.08), t(31) = 2.96, p <.01 (See Fig 2). A repeated-measures
ANOVA revealed differences among action selection across
the four frequency groups, F(3, 93) = 6.49, p <.001.
Within-subjects contrasts showed that a linear trend best
characterized the data, F(1, 31) = 16.83, p <.001; no other
trends were evident.1
4
3.5
3
2.5
2

*

*

Discussion of Experiment 1
Results disconfirmed Hypothesis 1; contrary to our
prediction, participants were not able to segment based on
sensitivity to conditional probability. However, we did find
clear evidence that adults are able to segment based on cooccurrence frequencies of small motion elements,
suggesting that they are sensitive to joint probability.
Participants readily selected actions as more familiar than
part-actions as long as a particular action sequence had been
seen more times in comparison to a part-action sequence.
Further, the linear trend in performance suggests that as
action frequency in comparison to part-action frequency
decreases, the ability to differentiate action from part-action
suffers. In light of prior findings that people are able to
extract conditional probability information in other domains,
we considered alternative interpretations of the findings
from Experiment 1. A major concern was that our measure
was simply not sensitive enough to capture learning. Action
and part-action frequency were matched on only four test
trials, leading to the possibility that analysis of such a low
number of test trials might have missed a fragile but very
real ability to segment action based on conditional
probability. A second concern was that every participant
made comparisons between every combination of action
frequency to part-action frequency (i.e., participants made
judgments between actions that were 10, 5, and 2 times
more frequent than their comparison part-actions as well as
the frequency-balanced pairs). If adults are sensitive to both
overall frequency and conditional probability, participants
may have been led (most likely unconsciously) to employ a
“frequency-based” strategy in their responses, even on the
frequency-balanced trials where this would not have helped.
To address these two concerns, in Experiment 2 we only
included frequency-balanced test trials. We further doubled
the number of test trials from four to eight.

*

3.13
2.88

2.56
2.19

chance

1.5
1

Experiment 2

0.5

Method

0
10

5

2

equal

Stimuli Exposure corpora were identical to those used in
Experiment 1. The number of test trials consisting of
equally frequent actions and part-actions was doubled from
Experiment 1 by reversing the action/part-action
presentation order and including these trials. Other trials
were not included; thus test trials in the current experiment
consisted only of 8 frequency-balanced action/part-action
pairs.

Small Motion Element Co-Occurrence Frequency Ratio

*=different from chance at p <.01

Figure 2: Action Selection by Co-Occurrence Frequency
Trial Type (Ratios refer to co-occurrence frequency of
action SMEs in comparison to part-action SMEs.)

Participants and Procedure Participants were 16
university students (5 male, 11 female) receiving class credit
for participation. They had not participated in Experiment
1. As in Experiment 1, participants were randomly assigned
to one of four exposure corpora and instructed to watch the
corpus. Upon finishing the exposure corpus, participants
judged whether actions were more familiar than partactions. Order of the 8 trials was randomly determined.

1

Although test trials did not consistently feature
comparison sequences equated in either the probability of
appearance of each of the individual SMEs or in joint
probabilities of two SMEs co-occurring (as opposed to a
triplet), the pattern of data we obtained in Experiment 1
suggests that these sources of information were not used by
our participants in making their judgments. Thus we do not
report on how these statistics vary across test pairings.
336

number of words presented to infants in the frequencybalanced design examining speech segmentation of infants
(Aslin et al., 1998) as well as the number of shape triplets
presented to adults in examination of shape sequence
learning (Fiser & Aslin, 2002a). As well, participants
displayed strong learning for joint probability, suggesting
they were able to extract at least one type of higher-order
statistic from the stream. Despite our relatively lengthy
exposure corpus, however, adults still did not display
segmentation based on conditional probability.
We more seriously entertain two alternative possibilities.
First, perhaps our stimuli invited learning in ways that are
not representative of everyday action processing. Second,
maybe statistical learning plays out differently in action
processing than it does in other domains. To address the
first possibility, we note one important difference between
our stimuli and real-life action. Unlike naturalistic action,
our sequences were arbitrary. We took great care to use
sequences that appeared to have no a priori explanations
that might link certain motion elements together and thus
lead participants to segment them more readily. This was
necessary in order to rule out top-down clues to
segmentation, and thus successfully isolate statistical
learning as the source of adults’ segment discovery. This
feature of our design was deliberately analogous to the
arbitrary speech sequences in Saffran et al. (1996; 1999) and
Aslin et al. (1998). In real life, however, small motion
elements would usually be united by common underlying
goals. Perhaps the ability to compute conditional probability
in adulthood is only recruited when statistically predictive
actions are also related, either through cause-effect
associations or by common underlying intentions. Evidence
from the causal learning literature (e.g., Gopnik & Schulz,
2004) suggests that young children are indeed capable of
learning conditional probabilities relating cause-effect
events. Because our stimuli were artificially arbitrary and
unassociated, and participants had no reason to link actions
with one another (either implicitly or explicitly), normal
activation of learning based on conditional probability may
have been muted.
Our second alternative explanation is that action
segmentation truly does involve statistical learning
mechanisms differently than other domains. Conway and
Christiansen (2005) suggest that statistical learning is
unlikely to rely on a single, domain-general mechanism.
Based on different performance patterns across different
modalities, they suggest instead that people possess
multiple, modality-specific mechanisms that function
somewhat differently from one another. While our data
taken in the context of positive findings in other domains is
consistent with this account, we believe that it is premature
to argue for a domain-specific mechanism. Very little is
known about the structural regularities present in intentional
human action, and it is very likely that the nature of the
input in this domain is different from other domains such as
speech and vision. This would suggest the possibility for a
domain-general statistical learning mechanism that is

Results
Segmentation based on conditional probability alone would
be revealed by above-chance selection of actions in
comparison to frequency-balanced part-actions. Similar to
the results obtained in Experiment 1, we again did not find
evidence for segmentation. Mean selection of actions in
comparison to frequency-balanced part-actions was
unsystematic, M = 3.94, SD = 2.49, t(15) = -.1, p >.05.

General Discussion
Across two experiments, we demonstrated that adults
were able to segment dynamic human action; however, they
were only able to evidence this ability when co-occurrence
frequency of small motion elements comprising actions was
higher in comparison to elements comprising part-actions.
We found a linear trend suggesting that as action frequency
approached part-action frequency, learning declined. The
fact that higher frequency of small motion element cooccurrence aided segmentation was consistent with our
secondary hypothesis. Contrary to our primary hypothesis,
however, adults did not demonstrate sensitivity to
conditional probability among small motion elements,
evidenced by their inability to use this statistic to
differentiate actions from frequency–balanced part-actions.
Ample research in both speech and vision has suggested
that people are capable of learning conditional probabilities
and using this information in the service of segmentation
(e.g., Aslin et al., 1998; Fiser & Aslin, 2002a; 2002b; Graf
Estes et al., 2007). What, then, can explain our findings?
One possibility is that our stimuli were too complex, and
participants did not have enough exposure time to learn the
conditional probabilities. Motion elements such as the ones
we used unfolded over a longer period of time (on average,
1.09 seconds) than the syllables used in investigations of
speech (e.g., Saffran et al., 1996). Further, in naturalistic
speech, the syllables that create words possess no semantic
content themselves. Similarly, shapes used in studies of
visual learning (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2002) were fairly simple
and had no apparent function or name. However, this is not
the case in action; individual small motion elements such as
the ones we used have meaning in and of themselves;
further, one can decompose these motions into yet-finer
units corresponding to finer-grained goals (e.g., Zacks &
Tversky, 2001). Perhaps the small motion elements in our
research are less encodable as units than syllables or shapes
used in other research, making the task of tracking their
conditional probability more difficult and requiring more
time during exposure.
While it is possible that adults were not able to discover
conditional probabilities in our study due to an overly short
exposure time, we do not favor this explanation. Knowing
in advance that this task was potentially more complex than
syllable- or shape-sequence learning due to the complexity
of human action, we created exposure corpora that
contained a number of actions that well exceeded the
337

Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. (2002a). Statistical learning of higherorder temporal structures from visual shape sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28, 458-467.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2002b). Statistical learning of new
visual feature combinations by infants. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 99, 15822-15826.
Gopnik, A., & Schulz, L. (2004). Mechanisms of theoryformation in young children. Trends in Cognitive Science,
8, 8.
Hard, B. A., Tversky, B., & Lang, D. (2006). Making sense
of abstract events: Building event schemas. Memory and
Cognition, 34, 1221-1235.
Hunt, R.H. & Aslin, R.N. (1998). Statistical learning of
visuomotor sequences: Implicit acquisition of subpatterns. Proceedings of the twentieth annual conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Hillsdale, NJ
Kirkham, N.Z., Slemmer, J.A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: evidence of a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35B42.
Newtson, D., & Enquist, G. (1976). The perceptual
organization of ongoing behavior. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 435-450.
Saffran, J., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L.
(1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by human
infants and adults. Cognition, 70, 27-52.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Word
segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Saylor, M. M., Baldwin, D., Baird, J. A., & LaBounty, J.
(2007). Infants’ on-line segmentation of dynamic human
action. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 113128.
Zacks, J. (2004). Using movement and intentions to
understand simple events. Cognitive Science, 28, 9791008.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
3-21.

activated differently depending on the nature of the input as
well as the task demands. This latter interpretation suggests
that modification of the task might invite access to
conditional probability computation. Studies are currently
underway to address this possibility by assessing
segmentation through means other than requiring familiarity
judgments.
In summary, our studies did not show any evidence of
sensitivity to conditional probabilities in segmentation of
human action, though it did reveal a robust sensitivity to
joint probability information. Disentangling the reasons for
differences we observed between statistical learning in
action relative to other domains is an inviting focus for
future investigations.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Jenny Saffran for helpful comments
throughout the research process. We additionally thank
Baldwin Lab members Jeff Loucks, Eric Olofson, Lindsay
Henson and Jason Dooley for their help in stimulus creation.

References
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by 8month-old infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.
Baldwin, D., Andersson, A., Saffran, J., & Meyer, M.
(2008). Segmenting dynamic human action via statistical
structure. Cognition, 106, 1382-1407.
Baldwin, D., & Baird, J. (2001). Discerning intentions in
dynamic human action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5,
171-178.
Baldwin, D., Baird, J., Saylor, M., & Clark, A. (2001).
Infants parse dynamic human action. Child Development,
72, 708-717.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modalityconstrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Graf Estes, K., Alibali, M. W., Evans, J. L., & Saffran, J. R.
(2007). Can infants map meaning to newly segmented
words? Statistical segmentation and word learning.
Psychological Science, 18, 254-260.

338

