UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Use of Event-Related Potentials to Study the Development and Decline of Cognitive
Function

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2df2w29p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Mills, Debra L.
Luck, Steven J.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Use of Event-Related Potentials to Study the Development and Decline
of Cognitive Function
Debra L. Mills (debra.mills@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
532 Kilgo Circle, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA
Steven J. Luck (sjluck@ucdavis.edu)
Center for Mind & Brain and Department of Psychology
267 Cousteau Pl., University of California, Davis, CA 95618 USA
Keywords: ERPs;
cognition.

development;

neural

activity;

Topics
Topics to be covered include:
• An introduction to the ERP technique including what
ERPs are and where they come from.
• An overview of ERP components and their functional
significance in adults, children, and infants.
• Basic principles in recording ERPs.
• Signal averaging, artifact rejection and correction, and
the importance and problems with filtering ERP data.
• Experimental design and isolating specific ERP
components.
• Common pitfalls in ERP research: Detecting problems
when writing or reviewing ERP papers.
• What ERPs can tell us about the development and
nature of cognitive processes.
Across all of these topics we will address unique
challenges that pertain to testing infant, child, and aging
adult populations.

Overview of Tutorial
The event-related potential (ERP) technique is one of the
most widely used methods for studying neural activity
linked to perceptual, motor, and cognitive processes across
the lifespan. It is currently the most practical method for
studying developmental changes in brain activity in
individuals who are not readily tested using other brain
imaging techniques such as fMRI. With the recent
availability of easy-to-use packaged ERP systems, many
cognitive scientists who do not have significant training in
electrophysiology are setting up ERP labs. This tutorial is
designed to discuss some of the common pitfalls new ERP
researchers encounter when collecting, analyzing, and
interpreting ERPs, with a special emphasis on issues that
arise when studying developmental and adult populations.
The tutorial is an introduction to the ERP technique for
beginning and intermediate level ERP researchers and
consumers at any stage in their career. The goals of the
tutorial are to discuss the appropriate uses of ERPs in the
study of cognition across lifespan development and
introduce some of the most common problems that need to
be recognized and avoided in ERP research. The format of
the tutorial will be a series of lectures and discussions on
issues pertaining to developmental and adult ERP
studies. The tutorial will provide practical advice about
designing and interpreting ERP experiments. We will
explain the benefits and limitations of some common
practices in ERP research.

Biography of Instructors
Debra Mills is currently an Associate Professor in
Psychology at Emory University. She received her Ph.D. in
Psychology from the University of California at San Diego
with a post-doc in Cognitive Neuroscience at the Salk
Institute for Biological Studies. Her research includes ERP
studies of language acquisition and social cognition in
typical and atypical infants, children, and adults.
Steve Luck is a Professor in Psychology at the University
of California at Davis. He received his Ph.D. from the
University of California at San Diego in Neurosciences. He
is the author of the book “An Introduction to the EventRelated Potential Technique”, (2005) and hosts annual ERP
boot camps that are attended by ERP researchers from
around the world. For more information about ERP boot
camps: http:/erpinfo.org/

Participant Background
The tutorial is geared toward graduate students through
full professors who are interested in learning more about the
ERP technique. The tutorial is appropriate for individuals
with a beginning or intermediate level of experience with
the ERP technique. Prior experience with ERP data
collection and analysis is helpful but not necessary.
Participants should have a basic familiarity with literature
using the ERP technique.

Reference
Luck, S. J. (2005). An Introduction to the Event-Related
Potential Technique. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.

5

