UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Internal Information in the Spatial Learning Task through Path Integration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8zq302pr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Ohtsu, Kayoko

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Internal Information
in the Spatial Learning Task through Path Integration
Kayoko Ohtsu (id-ant@moegi.waseda.jp)
Waseda University, Graduate School of Education
1-6-1, Nishi Waseda, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan

representation underlying the navigation is differentiated
from what is referred to as the route and survey knowledge.
The representation consists only of the traveler’s updated
location and orientation, and the traveler cannot retrace the
route traveled or come back directly to any point along the
route other than its origin (Loomis et al., 1999).
While these processes have been investigated separately
in many cases, it is important to suppose that they are
combined. This is because the updated estimate might be
closely related to spatial learning. The estimate contains the
distance and orientation toward a start point, and thus, it
naturally provides us with the awareness of the relative
location between the current and start point. This awareness
in our immediate environment is intimately involved in
long-term spatial memory. Since we can update positions at
any point relative to any passing point and determine
relative locations, these estimates are possibly reflected in
forming survey knowledge, interconnections between
points. On numerous occasions, we navigate by way of path
integration in our day-to-day life: when we walk hallways
inside buildings, shopping malls or subway stations. We are
actually able to acquire the survey knowledge by walking
through streets or hallways even if we do not access some
other information like a map that indicates the relative
positions of the points in a route.

Abstract
Two experiments were conducted to investigate the role of
internal information. The path completion task revealed that
internal (vestibular and kinesthetic) information facilitates the
accuracy of the homing direction, especially when the number
of turns increases. The spatial learning task revealed that the
information enhances learning relative locations of points in
the path when tracing back on the path is needed to estimate
directions. It was concluded that internal information would
contribute to forming survey knowledge by providing the
homing directions through path integration.
Keywords: path integration; internal information; spatial
learning; survey knowledge

Introduction
One of the strategies for navigation and homing is path
integration, in which self-velocity and self-acceleration over
time are integrated to estimate one’s current position and
orientation relative to a start point (Mittelstaedt and
Mittelstaedt, 1982). In a situation where we travel through a
town of narrow streets and cannot see any landmarks, we
come to know our location by way of path integration. The
sensory sources used in path integration are classified into
internal and external information. The internal information
consists of physical senses from the vestibular system and
kinesthetic sense (proprioception and efference copy). The
external information is primarily visual, obtained from the
optic flow and the sequence of views that change with one's
movement in the environment. By processing the sequence
of views, humans can estimate displacements and heading
changes (Loomis, Klatzky, Golledge, & Philbeck, 1999).
Although previous studies on path integration have
evaluated the contribution of some of the sensory sources in
the path integration process, few have focused on how these
sources contribute to forming spatial knowledge. When we
acquire the knowledge (for instance, relative locations of
points on a route) by means of path integration, the process
should be linked to spatial learning. The present study is an
attempt to examine the role of internal information in both
path integration and spatial learning tasks.

Contribution of internal information
In path integration tasks, kinesthetic input above and
beyond the vestibular one has been presumed to enhance
homing accuracy to a varying degree. Sholl (1989)
compared vestibular-based and vestibular and kinestheticbased path integration, and she found that guided walks in
an outbound path resulted in much better homing accuracy
than did passive transport in a wheelchair. Allen, Kirasic,
Rashotte & Haun (2004) also found some contribution of
kinesthetic input to homing accuracy of younger adults.
Some studies have attempted to examine the contribution
of internal information as additional inputs to external ones
in spatial learning tasks in which path integration may be
involved. Chance, Gaunet, Beall, & Loomis (1998) found
that the information facilitates learning the locations of
objects in a path. They asked participants to travel a virtual
maze in several modes and indicate directions from the
terminal location to target objects. Waller, Loomis, & Haun
(2004) found that the information enhances spatial learning
in a large-scale environment. They asked participants to
indicate the direction to and from all possible pairs of
landmarks after traveling an 840-m path on a college

Spatial learning through path integration
It has been assumed that path integration is more a
process of navigation than spatial knowledge acquisition.
Models of path integration mostly employ moment-tomoment updating in which a traveler is continually
estimating current positions and orientations relative to a
start point in a history-free manner. In this updating,

845

parameters that have to be estimated to achieve this
particular degree of fit, by imposing a penalty for increasing
the number of parameters. Smaller values of AIC indicate
the preferred model, that is, the one with the fewest
parameters that still provides an adequate fit to the data.
(Sakamoto, Ishiguro, and Kitagawa, 1986)
Specifically, conditional models imply that data sets for
each factor-level combination are equivalently or differently
distributed, and they are compared with each other using
AIC. This method is similar to the cluster analysis, i.e., data
sets are partitioned into clusters, and the results are
interpreted based on statistics for the data sets and the
clusters. The statistical analysis will use two measures of
dispersion that decrease as dispersion increases: (1)“r”
reflects concentration around a mean angle and varies from
0 to 1 and (2)“v” reflects concentration around a correct
direction and varies from –1 to 1.

campus in one of the following modes; Walk (with a view),
Sit (only a view) and Smooth (with a view and body turns).
Since the participants could not see multiple landmarks on
the path at the same time, they figured out the layout by
estimating their position at one landmark relative to the
others.

The hypotheses and the tasks
The previous studies suggest that the additional internal
inputs resulted in the accuracy of homing direction (Allen et
al., 2004; Sholl, 1989) and the facilitation of spatial learning
(Chance et al., 1998; Waller et al., 2004). As yet, it is not
clear how the information enhances them and what its
intrinsic effect is. To deal with this problem, we need to
look at when and how the homing direction is impaired
during path integration along a path. As well as the
aforementioned studies, most previous studies that have
examined human path integration used paths consisting of
straight legs and turns. People are often moving along these
paths in a town or a building. In such a situation, especially
at corners, we may feel the necessity for the updating the
homing direction, and we are prone to make a large
estimation error that affects the success of navigation. This
is because the change of the homing direction is relatively
large and quick at turns, while the change is gradual and
slow in the legs. This idea that turns cause misestimating
correspond with the result of Sholl (1989) that found
directional judgments were widely scattered as the number
of turns increased.
Consequently, it can be hypothesized that the internal
information is primarily used for updating the homing
direction especially at corners, and thus it facilitates homing
accuracy. Then, comparing the internal information to the
external one in terms of the homing accuracy in path
completion performance after making a number of turns, we
can perform an efficient assessment of each contribution to
the updating. Experiment 1 uses paths consisting of three or
more turns to assess how well the homing accuracy can be
preserved at different levels of path complexity. In
Experiment 2, the relation between the homing accuracy and
spatial learning is examined. In two experiments, internal
inputs are isolated and compared to external visual inputs.
The turns are fixed at 90 degrees to observe errors in the
estimate rather than in the judgment of the turn angle.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 is conducted to test whether internal
information facilitates updating the estimate of the homing
direction at the turns. Participants perform the path
completion task with 3, 5, and 7 turns in either internal or
external traveling mode. If internal and external information
are equally used for the updating, the participants in both
conditions should perform equally in each path. On the
other hand, if internal information preserves the homing
accuracy better than the other, it would be the primary
resource for updating.

Method
Participants. The participants were 24 graduate and
undergraduate students (12 men and 12 women, mean age
21.1) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and normal
vestibular sensation.
Design. The experiment employed a combination of
between-subject and within-subject designs using two
factors: traveling mode (Internal or External) and path
segment (3 turns & legs, 5 turns & legs, 7 turns & legs).
Half of the participants were assigned to Internal
(kinesthetic and vestibular senses) and the other half to
External (optic flow and the sequence of views).
Paths. The three paths had constant 90-degree turns at the
ends of all legs including the last leg, while the length of
legs was either 1 m or 2 m (Figure 1). The participants
traveled the paths both clockwise and counterclockwise.
The start point of each path for clockwise travel was the end
of leg a, while the start points of the paths for
counterclockwise travel were the end of leg c (Path3), e
(Path5) and g (Path7). At the end of the paths, the
participants turned right for clockwise and left for
counterclockwise travel.
Materials. The videos shown in External were prerecorded
using half scale miniatures of 3 paths (Figure 2). During
taping, the experimenter pushed a small cart with a video
camera and walked inside the miniatures at the speed of
about 25 cm per second (about half the walking speed of

The method of analysis
Theoretically, angular data do not obey the normal
distribution and thus ANOVA is not suitable for angular
data. In the present study, to test the hypotheses, the fit of
several statistical models assuming von Mises distribution
(angular analogous of the normal distribution) are compared
in terms of the maximum likelihood principle and the AIC
(Akaike Information Criterion). AIC is a criterion for
selecting a statistical model and is defined by AIC = 2(maximum log likelihood of the model) + 2(number of free
parameters of the model). The criterion takes into account
both the statistical goodness of fit and the number of

846

Procedure. One experimenter tested each participant
individually. The participants were informed about the
pointing task (to indicate the start point after traveling on
the paths) and six different paths that had constant 90degree turns and different length of legs (they did not know
that the same path was used twice). Then each participant
practiced handling the measurement software. Participants
in Internal practiced walking blindfolded, where
participants walked slowly (at the speed of about 50 cm per
second) behind the experimenter with their right hand on the
experimenter’s shoulder and started or stopped at the call of
the experimenter (Figure 4). At the turns, the experimenter
put hands on the participants’ arms and rotated their body
either to the left or right. Then the participants were wheeled
to another room with the HMD and earphones with white
noise. After practice (triangle completion with 90-degree
turn and 2 m legs in both clockwise and counterclockwise
travel), the participants performed 6 trials randomly. At the
response positions, the participants sat on a wheelchair and
indicated the start points, and then they were spun and
wheeled zigzag to the next start points. Following their
practice with the software, the participants in External wore
the HMD and the earphones and performed 6 trials
randomly after the practice videos (Figure 4). After the
experiment, the experimenter asked them how they
estimated the homing directions.

participants in External). The camera faced the traveling
direction, so the videos were equivalent to the view from a
person traveling inside the miniatures. Two additional
videos were recorded for the practice path (90-degree turn &
two 2 m legs, clockwise and counterclockwise) in the same
way. Measurement software was designed to record
directional judgments and response latencies. The
participants handled the software on the computer screen
through HMD. Figure 3 is an example of an operation
screen that shows a bird's-eye view of a participant at the
end points. They indicated the start points by navigating a
pointer toward the judged direction.
Path3

Path5

c

d

b

e
c

a

b
e

d

a

f
g

c
Path7

b

a

Figure 1: Bird's-eye view of the paths
Correct angles: At the end points, the projecting points of
the icons represent participants’ frontal directions, and the
dashed lines represent correct angles.
Internal
External
Figure 4: Photographs of the experimenter and participants
in each traveling mode

Results
All judgments were adjusted such that correct angles be 0
degrees. Two judgments (clockwise and counterclockwise)
per person for each path were analyzed as individual data to
avoid cases where the mean angle haphazardly become the
correct angle (for instance, if two judgments are +120
degrees and –120 degrees, the mean angle would be 0
degrees, the correct angle). Figure 5 shows mean angles,
and values for r and v for distributions of factor-level
combinations. Overall, the values for r and v decreased as
the turns increased except in External-Path5. In each path,
the values for r and v were higher in Internal than External
especially in Path5. Figure 5 also shows the results of the
Rayleigh and V-tests. The Rayleigh test was designed to
determine whether a data set clustered around a mean angle,
while the V-test was around a correct angle (Batschelet,
1981). Five distributions except External-Path5 were
directional (not uniform) and clustered around the correct
angles.

Figure 2: Materials in Experiment 1
The right panel is a miniature of Path7. The left panel is an
image of the video.
Start Point？

Figure 3: An example of an operation screen

847

directions. In that case, the response latencies would differ
between the paths, but the influence is not observed from
ANOVA for the mean latencies.
The best-fitting model suggests 3 interpretations. First,
the traveling mode seems to have an effect mainly on Path5.
Two clusters in M86, [I3, E3] and [I7, E7, E5], show that in
Path3 and Path7, Internal and External data sets are judged
to be equivalent. Values for r and v increase as the homing
accuracy increases. The r and v for I3 and E3 are relatively
similar (Figure 5), and those for I7 and E7 are also similar.
Hence, it appears that Internal and External perform equally
in each path. Unlike these paths, I5 and E5 are judged to be
different. The r and v are much larger for cluster [I5] than
[I7, E7, E5], hence it appears that in Path5, Internal
performs better than External whose performance is as
inaccurate as in Path7. Second, the path segment seems to
have an effect on Path3 and Path7. Data sets of Path3 and
Path7 are judged to be different. The r and v are larger for
cluster [I3, E3] than [I7, E7, E5], hence it appears that both
Internal and External perform better in Path3 than in Path7.
Third, since the r and v are larger for cluster [I5] than [I3,
E3], it appears that the best performance is observed in this
condition. It is difficult, however, to conclude whether a
combination of Path5 and Internal enhances the accuracy
from the results.
The second best model suggests that the traveling mode
seems to have an effect on Path7 to some extent. In M82,
the data set of I7 is judged to be equivalent to those of I3
and E3. In M86, cluster [I3, E3] has a higher r and v than
[I7, E7, E5], hence it appears that Internal performs better in
Path7 than External. Comparing I7 with E7, I7 has smaller r
and v (Figure 5).
The results suggest that the performance in the path
completion of Internal is better in Path5 and Path7 than that
of External. Therefore, it can be concluded that internal
information contributes to preserving the homing accuracy
in the paths with more than 5 turns. These results indicate
that the internal information would be primarily used at the
turns and that it facilitates the updating of the homing
direction estimate.

Internal
Mean angle=

+3.50°

r=.71**
v=.71**
n=24

Mean angle

Path5

=+9.99°

Mean angle

r=.63**
v=.62**
n=24

Path7

=+19.94°

Mean angle

=+32.03°

r=.39*
v=.33*
n=24

r=.32
n=24

External
clockwise

=+15.06°

r=.48*
v=.47*
n=24

r=.89**
v=.89**
n=24

Path3
Mean angle

=+. 96°

Mean angle

*p＜.05 **p＜.01

counterclockwise

Figure 5: Circular scatter diagrams for the 6 conditions
Dashed-lines: correct angles, Direction of arrows: mean
angles, Length of arrows: magnitude of r
Table 1: Statistical models and values for AIC
M86
M82

I3

E3

E5

E7

I3
E3
I7
E5
I：Internal E：External

E7

r=.67 v=.67

I7

r=.39 v=.36

I5

AIC
412.69

I5

414.33

r=.89 v=.89

Table 2: Mean latencies
msec

P ath3

P ath5

P ath7

Ave.

Internal 5418 (3772) 5608 (5911) 4750 (2168) 5302
External 3627 (2245) 4777 (3043) 5255 (4507) 4553
Ave.

4522

5193

5003
(S D )

The best-fitting model was M86 among the 203 models
generated from all possible combinations that partitioned six
data sets into 1 to 6 clusters (Table 1). M82 was the second
best model. A two-way ANOVA with mean latencies (Table
2) revealed that there were no main effects and an
interaction. The participants’ strategies for the estimate were
classified into 3 types: (1) keep updating the homing
direction, (2) try to remember the shapes of the paths and
(3) both strategies (1) and (2) simultaneously. The number
of participants for each strategy was as follows: Internal (1)
8, (2) 2, (3) 2 and External (1) 7, (2) 2, (3) 3.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 is conducted to test whether the facilitation of
updating is related to spatial learning, using a task in which
participants learn the relative locations of 3 points along
Path5 in both traveling modes and then judge relative
directions. Since directional indications reflect a better
understanding of the locations, the indications can be a
measure of spatial knowledge status. If the facilitation is
related to the spatial learning task, the performance should
be better in Internal than in External.

Discussion
Since most of the participants kept updating the homing
directions during the task (strategy-type 1), the errors may
reflect the misestimating of the direction with increasing the
number of turns and frequency of its large changes, rather
than the memory load of the path complexity. The homing
accuracy would have influenced by the complexity if many
of the participants had tried to remember the path shapes
(strategy-type 2) and then recalled the shapes to indicate the

Method
Participants. The participants were 24 graduate and
undergraduate students (12 men and 12 women, mean age
19.9) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and normal
vestibular sensation.

848

Design. The experiment employed a within-subject design
using one factor, traveling mode (Internal or External).
Paths. Path5 was used twice (clockwise and
counterclockwise travel). Figure 6 shows the three points
(start-point, halfway-point and end-point) on Path5 in both
travels.
Path 5
end-point

Results
All judgments were adjusted to make them comparable
and analyzed individually in the same way as in Experiment
1. A total of 4 distributions were obtained crossing the
travel mode and question (Homing or Traveling) factors.
Figure 7 shows mean angles, values for r and v, and results
of the Rayleigh and V-tests for the distributions. The values
for r and v in External-Homing were lower than those for
the others. All the distributions were directional (not
uniform) and clustered around the correct angles.
The best-fitting model was M6 among 15 models
generated from all possible combinations that partitioned
four data sets into one to four clusters (Table 3). M2 was the
second best model. A two-way ANOVA with mean
latencies (Table 4) revealed that there were no main effects
and an interaction.

start-point

halfwaypoint

halfwaypoint

start-point

clockwise

end-point

Internal

counterclockwise

=
+12.75°
r=.74**
v=.72**
n=72

Mean angle

Figure 6: The points in Path5
Materials. Each video of Path5 (clockwise and
counterclockwise travel) was divided into two parts. The
first videos were from the start-point to the halfway-point,
and the second videos were from the halfway-point to the
end-point. The measurement software and HMD were the
same as those in Experiment 1.
Procedure. The basic procedure was the same as in
Experiment 1. The crucial difference was that the
participants were asked to learn the relative locations of 3
points in the paths during traveling in Experiment 2. The
experimenter stated the points verbally when the
participants stood at the start-point and turned at the
halfway- and end-point in Internal. In External, when the
first videos started and ended and when the second videos
ended, each point was called out. The participants were
asked to indicate the 6 relative locations of the three points
after learning the path3 times in each traveling mode and
then indicated 6 directions randomly. The participants who
traveled clockwise in Internal traveled counterclockwise in
External and vice versa. Learning orders and the traveling
directions were counterbalanced. The indications was
carried out as follows: (1) from the start-point, the
participants indicated the other points, as if they had stood
at the start-point facing the traveling direction, (2) from the
halfway- and end-point, they indicated the other points, as if
they had stood at the points after making turns. Six
questions asking the relative locations were classified into
the following 2 kinds: half of them were homing-questions
(asking to trace back along the paths, i.e. from the halfwaypoint to the start-point and from the end-point to the
halfway- and start-points) and the other half were travelingquestions (asking to trace the paths, i.e. from the start-point
to the halfway- and end-points and from the halfway-point
to the end-point).

Traveling -questions
=
+5.25°
r=.70**
v=.70**
n=72
Mean angle

=

Mean angle

+.18°
r=.70**
v=.70**
n=72

Homing -questions
Mean angle

=

-8.81°
r=.33**
v=.33**
n=72

External

*p＜.05 **p＜.01

Figure 7: Circular histograms for the 4 conditions
Table 3: Statistical models and values for AIC
AIC
M6
I・T
I・
H
E・T
E・H 792.45
r=.71 v=.71

M2

r=.33 v=.33

I・T
I・
H
E・T
E・H 797.25
T：Traveling-Q uestions H ：H om ing-Q uestions

Table 4: Mean latencies
msec Traveling-Q uestions H om ing-Q uestions Ave.

Internal 11689 (6224)
External 11018 (6102)
Ave.

11353

10424 (5511)
10926 (5287)
10675

11057
10972
(S D )

Discussion
The best-fitting model suggests an interpretation that an
effect of one factor depends on the levels of the other.
Specifically, the traveling mode seems to have an effect on
Homing-Questions, and the question factor seems to have an
effect on External. Cluster [I.T, I.H, E.T] in M6 shows that
these 3 data sets are judged to be equivalent. The r and v for
Internal-Traveling,
Internal-Homing
and
External-

849

that required retracing the path better than those who just
watched the video.
The contribution may also be reflected in forming survey
knowledge. As we acquire better understanding of
interconnections between points on a route, our spatial
knowledge becomes elaborated. For example, if we can
indicate the relative locations between points A and B bidirectionally, our knowledge is more elaborate than if it is
possible only from A to B. From this point of view, internal
information would contribute to forming the survey
knowledge by providing the multiple homing directions
through path integration.

Traveling are relatively similar to each other (Figure 7),
hence, it appears that these conditions perform equally. On
the other hand, cluster [E.H] shows that the data set is
judged to be different from the others. The r and v are
considerably smaller for [E.H] than for [I.T, I.H, E.T],
hence it appears that the performance under this condition
deteriorates markedly.
The results suggest that the performance in Internal is
better than External only when the participants answered the
homing-questions. If there is no significant difference of the
mean latencies between the questions, the homing-questions
should be more difficult than the other because they may
require the participants to both trace and retrace the path in
order to judge the directions to the passing points against the
movement of the participants during the learning phase.
These judgments correspond to the estimate of the homing
direction by way of path integration. In contrast, the
participants answered the traveling-questions that require
only tracing and not retracing the path equally accurate
regardless of the traveling mode. Therefore, it can be
presumed that the estimation of the homing direction is
related to the spatial learning task and that the internal
information enhances learning the relative locations that
need the accurate homing estimation during the learning
phase.

References
Allen, G. L., Kirasic, K. C., Rashotte, M. A., & Haun, D. B.
(2004). Aging and path integration skill: Kinesthetic and
vestibular contributions to wayfinding. Perception &
Psychophysics, 66, 170-179.
Batschelet, E. (1981). Circular statistics in biology. New
York: Academic Press.
Chance, S. S., Gaunet, F., Beall, A. C., & Loomis, J. M.
(1998). Locomotion mode affects the updating of objects
encountered during travel: The contribution of vestibular
and proprioceptive inputs to path integration. Presence, 7,
168-178.
Loomis, J. M., Klatzky, R. L., Golledge, R. G, & Philbeck,
J. W. (1999). Human navigation by path integration. In R.
G. Golledge (Ed.), Wayfinding behavior: Cognitive
mapping and other spatial processes. 125-151.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mittelstaedt, H., & Mittelstaedt, M. L. (1982). Homing by
path integration. In F. Papi, & H. G. Wallraff (Ed.),
Avian navigation, 290-297. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sakamoto, Y., Ishiguro, M., & Kitagawa, G. (1986). Akaike
information criterion statistics. Tokyo: KTK Scientific
Publishers.
Sholl, M. J. (1989). The relation between horizontality and
rod-and-frame and vestibular navigational performance.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 110-125.
Waller, D., Loomis, J. M., & Haun, D. B. (2004). Bodybased senses enhance knowledge of directions in largescale environments. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11,
157-163.

General Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 indicate that internal
information facilitates the preservation of homing accuracy,
especially when the number of turns increases. Hence, the
information might be vital to update the homing direction at
turns where we are prone to misestimate it. The results of
Experiment 2 indicate that this facilitation is related to the
performance of the spatial learning task, especially when the
estimate of the homing direction is necessary to judge the
relative locations. Considering the results together, it can be
concluded that the information contributes to spatial
learning through path integration by providing the homing
directions.
This contribution would explain how the information
enhanced spatial learning in the previous studies. This
explains why the participants who walked in Chance et al.
(1998) could learn and maintain relatively accurate multiple
homing directions to several objects in the path after making
turns. In Waller et al. (2004), the participants who walked
could figure out the layout by estimating relative locations

850

