UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Emergence of Rule Use: A dynamic neural field model of the DCCS

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92s6h86p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Buss, Aaron
Spencer, John P.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Emergence of Rule-Use: A Dynamic Neural Field Model of the DCCS
Aaron Buss (aaron-buss@uiowa.edu) and John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, 11 Seashore Hall East
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
developmental process, there is no neurally-based theory
that captures developmental changes in performance in this
task. The most comprehensive theory, the Cognitive
Complexity and Control theory (CCC), describes children’s
performance in terms of hierarchical rule-representation
(Zelazo et al., 2003; Bunge & Zelazo, 2006); however,
describing children’s behavior in terms of ‘rules’ raises
some critical questions about the nature of the cognitive
processes at work. It is unclear, for instance, how a
hierarchical rule structure could be implemented in real-time
in a nervous system. Similarly, ties to known changes in
neural development have remained largely at the descriptive
level. Morton and Munakata (2001) have made attempts to
move explanations of performance in the DCCS in a more
neurally plausible direction with a recent PDP model. This
PDP model has generated novel predictions which have
been empirically supported. However, this model has only
been used to capture a subset of the data and, therefore, does
not achieve the same degree of coverage as CCC theory.
In the present report, we describe a Dynamic Field Theory
of children’s behavior in the DCCS and present simulations
of core findings in this task that previously have only been
captured heuristically by CCC theory. In contrast to the PDP
model, we use a more neurally-grounded view of the
processes that underlie the representations of shapes, colors,
and space in this task using a generic two-layered neural
architecture. The proposed model provides an account of
children’s behavior and development that is couched in a
general framework originally proposed to capture the
integration of ‘what’ (i.e., ventral stream) and ‘where’ (i.e.,
dorsal stream) visual pathways.

Abstract
The Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) task has been
extensively used to study the development of executive
functioning in 3- to 5-year olds. Despite the interest in using
the DCCS to study neural development and cognitive deficits
in special populations, there has not been a formal neurallybased theory of children’s behavior and development in this
task. Here, we present a dynamic neural field (DNF) model
that captures children’s behavior, as well as development, in
the standard DCCS task. We also show simulations of two
other variants of the standard task—the Negative Priming
version and the Absolute Negative Priming version—that
highlight the extensive coverage of our new theory.
Keywords: neural network models; dynamic systems theory;
DCCS; executive function; perseveration

The DCCS and Neural Development
The Dimensional Change Card Sort task (DCCS) and other
rule-based card sorting tasks provide an index of executive
functioning both in early development and disordered
populations (Zelazo et al., 2003; Zelazo, 2006). In the
DCCS task, children sort cards either by the dimension of
shape or color and are then instructed to switch and sort by
the other dimension. Target cards are displayed on the trays
where children place their selections, and the test cards that
are sorted match each target card along one dimension (see
figure 1). Typically, 3-year-olds perseverate and continue
to use the first set of rules after they have been instructed to
switch. This task, then, measures aspects of cognitive
flexibility, and children’s behavior has been described in
terms of rule-representation (Zelazo et al., 2003), object redescription (Kloo & Perner, 2005), inhibitory or disinhibitory control (Zelazo et al., 2003), or attentional control
(Kirkham, Cruess, & Diamond, 2003).

Dynamic Field Theory
The Dynamic Field Theory was initially applied to issues
in behavioral development within the context of infants’
perseverative responses in the Piagetian A-not-B task
(Thelen et al., 2001). Next, this theory was extended to
explain decision-making and spatially-grounded behavior in
spatial working memory tasks (see Schutte, Spencer, &
Schöner, 2003; Simmering, Schutte, & Spencer, 2007).
More recently, this theory has been used to capture the
representation of objects in a way that links features to a
spatial frame of reference (Johnson, Spencer, & Schöner, in
press). Because the DCCS task requires children to make
decisions about what features should go where in the task
space, this theoretical framework provides a natural fit to
this task. Moreover, because the Dynamic Field Theory has
been used to capture a variety of phenomena in early
development, it provides a fertile foundation for probing the
neural processes that underlie the development of ‘rule’-like
behavior and perseveration in the DCCS task.

Figure 1: Example of cards used in the DCCS.
More recently there has been a growing interest in using
such tasks as an index of neural functioning. Specifically,
these tasks have been linked to the development of the
prefrontal cortex (Bunge & Zelazo, 2006; Crone et al.,
2006) and have been used to explore cognitive deficits in
children with autism (Zelazo et al., 2002; Colver, Custance,
& Swettenham, 2002) and ADHD (Mulas et al., 2006).
Despite this interest in neural functioning and
463

a red card in the task space as well as where that card is
located. Note that feed-forward input to the FWM fields are
typically precise along the feature dimension but imprecise
(broad) along the spatial dimension. This reflects the tuning
characteristics of neurons in many ventral stream areas
which are precise in their representation of features but have
broad spatial receptive fields.
Given the broad spatial tuning of ventral stream neurons,
how does our model solve the “binding” problem of vision?
That is, how would the model know that a “red” peak in the
color-space field should be matched with a “star” peak in a
shape-space field? The answer is through spatial coupling,
that is, the SWM and FWM fields are coupled along the
spatial dimension. This achieves distributed but coupled
peaks of activation across multiple cortical areas—our
implementation of an “integrated” object (for related ideas,
see Treisman & Gelade, 1980).
The final aspect of the model architecture highlighted in
Figure 2 is the contribution from frontal lobe areas. As we
discuss below, we hypothesize that dynamic neural
processes in the frontal lobe can selectively modulate the
resting level of populations of neurons in SWM and FWM
(e.g., boosting the excitability of color neurons). This
implements a neurally-plausible mechanism that might
underlie ‘rule’-like behavior (Egner & Hirsch, 2005).

Model Architecture
The basic architecture of the model and its mapping to
cortical pathways is displayed in Figure 2. The Dynamic
Neural Field (DNF) model proposed here utilizes a generic
two-layered architecture initially explored by Amari (1977)
and Amari and Arbib (1977) to capture the dynamics of
neural activity in visual cortex. This architecture consists of
a layer of self-excitatory working memory neurons (WM)
arranged by functional topography (e.g., neurons that code
for nearby spatial locations are neighbors in the network).
These neurons project activation (see green arrows in Fig 2)
to a layer of inhibitory interneurons (Inhib) which project
inhibition broadly back into WM (see red arrows). This
two-layered architecture achieves a form of locally
excitatory and laterally inhibitory interactions within WM
that can sustain “peaks” of activation in the absence of
input. In addition to these layers, we add a third long-term
memory (LTM) layer that is reciprocally coupled to the WM
layer. The WM and LTM layers implement a form of
Hebbian learning: peaks in WM leave traces of activity at
associated sites in LTM which, in turn, influence the
strength of activation in WM.

The DNF Model and the Standard DCCS
This framework provides useful machinery to capture the
underlying dynamics of children’s decision-making in the
DCCS task. Any combination of shape and color can be
represented in the model and the formation of peaks is a
means by which the model makes decisions, that is, forms
stable representations of ‘what’ should go ‘where.’
Empirical results have shown that 3-year-olds have little
difficulty using a particular feature dimension to sort the test
cards during the pre-switch trials. As traces of decisions
accumulate across multiple pre-switch trials, however,
children have trouble switching to different rules.
Conceptually, there is conflict on the switch trial between
children’s past behavior and the currently available
perceptual cues. In the model, this conflict is reflected in
competition between where LTM traces build up during the
pre-switch trials and where the model is seeing the features
on the target cards which mark the sorting bins. When faced
with this competition, data suggest that LTM traces win the
battle.
By 4 years of age, however, this is no longer the case.
What explains this developmental difference? As we will
see, our model suggests that a subtle boost in the excitability
of neurons within a particular neural field (e.g., the shapespace field) driven by the task instructions is sufficient to tip
the balance in favor of sorting based on perceptual cues
during the switch trial rather than using LTM.

Figure 2: Model architecture and mapping to cortical
pathways.
Dorsal stream processes, primarily devoted to encoding
spatial information, are captured in a 1-dimensional spatial
working memory (SWM) field (see top box in Fig 2).
Ventral stream processes are captured by 2D feature-space
working memory (FWM) fields with continuous feature
dimensions (e.g., color) along one dimension and space
along the other dimension. Activation peaks with the FWM
fields, therefore, capture both the presence of, for example,

Inputs to the Model
The full model is shown in Figure 4 (without the inhibitory
fields for simplicity). The top panel of this figure shows the
464

consistent with neurological evidence which suggest that the
brain resolves perceptual conflict by boosting activity for
the task relevant stimulus (Egner & Hirsch, 2005). One
suggested hypothesis for how this is accomplished is by
boosting the baseline level of activity in areas of the brain
that processes task relevant information.

model at the moment when the test card is shown in the
context of the two sorting bins and their associated target
cards. The bottom panel of this figure shows the model
generating a decision to place the card (the blue star) in the
right bin (i.e., sorting by color).
There are six simulation figures within each panel: (1)
activation in SWM with (2) its associated LTM layer (left
column of the fields); (3) activation in a color-space FWM
field and (4) its associated LTM layer (middle column); and,
finally, (5) activation in a shape-space FWM field and (6)
its associated LTM layer (right column). Note that the
spatial dimension is shown along the x-axis in these figures.
The y-axis for the spatial fields shows the strength of
activation at each site in SWM and its LTM. Because the
FWM fields are 2-dimensional, however, we indicate the
degree of activation using the color scheme shown to the
right, where red indicates strong activation.
There are two different kinds of input to the model. The
target input (see Fig 3) goes into both the SWM and FWM
fields. This sub-threshold input captures the spatial locations
of the sorting trays (input to SWM), as well as the features
located at each spatial position (input into the FWM fields).
In Figure 3 (see also, Fig 1 and 4) the target inputs are a red
star on the left and a blue circle on the right. Test inputs
(see Fig 4 at Time-1) capture the feature information on the
test cards presented to the model and only enter into the
FWM fields. In Figure 4, the model is presented with a blue
star test card. The test inputs are spread along the spatial
dimension to reflect the nature of the task—the model (i.e.,
the child) must decide where the test card should be placed
(i.e., where a peak of activation should be localized along
the spatial dimension). Because the working memory fields
are coupled along space and test inputs only come into
FWM, the SWM field can be seen as an output layer,
indicating where the model has decided to put the test input.
For instance, in the lower panel of Figure 4, there is a strong
peak of activation at a right location in the SWM field.
Thus, the simulation has decided to place the test card in the
right bin (i.e., the bin marked by the blue circle).

Figure 4: The full model (shown without the inhibitory
fields) sorting a blue star by color.
After boosting the color field by 0.03 units, we presented
a target card to the model to sort (see Time-1 in Fig 4). The
presentation of the target card created “ridges” of activation
at the specified feature values (blue, star) that spanned the
spatial dimension. Next, activation peaks start to grow due
to the locally excitatory/laterally inhibitory interactions in
the FWM fields at the locations where the test inputs
overlap with the target inputs. Because the color field
received a slight boost, activation grows more quickly in
this field. Once a self-stabilized peak in the color field
becomes sufficiently strong, it begins to send activation to
the SWM and shape FWM fields at the associated spatial
location of the color peak (i.e., the right location, see Fig 4
at Time-2). This tips the balance in the shape FWM field
such that activation begins to grow for that shape value at
the right location (even though the target input for that
feature is at the left location). The combination of the test
input and spatial input from the color FWM field conspire
with local interactions to build a peak in the shape field (see
shape-space field in the lower panel of Fig 4).
At the same time, activation takes hold in the SWM field
(which is now receiving robust spatial input at the right
location from the peaks in the two FWM fields). A peak,
then, grows at the right location in SWM and the model is
said to have placed the card in the right sorting bin. This
concludes the first trial. The same sequence of events plays
out as the model is given the other test input (a red circle)
which the model sorts in the left bin. Note that when the
WM peaks form during each trial, they leave traces in their
associated LTM layers (see Fig 4, lower panel). Such traces
play a critical role during the switch trials.

Figure 3: Target input to SWM and FWM for a red star on
the left and blue circle on the right.

Pre-Switch Trials
The simulation shown in Figure 4 began with the
presentation of target cards. This input pre-activated the
two circular “hot-spots” in the color and shape FWM fields
(see also Fig 3). In addition, we gave a slight boost to the
resting level within the task-relevant field (e.g., neurons in
the color field had a slightly higher resting level when the
model played the “color” game). This implementation is
465

shape FWM field. This, in turn, helps activation grow at the
location of LTM activation. Once the shape peak forms,
peaks in both FWM fields drive up activation in SWM and
the model makes its decision. The model was given the test
cards in the same order for the post-switch as in the preswitch.
As Figure 5b shows, the 3-year-old model
perseverates (as do 3-year-old children): it produces the
same spatial responses for the pre- and post-switch phases.

Post-Switch Standard Trials
Figure 5a shows the state of the color and shape FWM
fields going into the switch trials. Since the model
consistently sorted the cards by color during the pre-switch
trials, the LTM traces in color FWM are overlapping with
the target input (i.e., the red card was always placed in the
left bin; the blue card was always placed in the right bin).
The story is quite different in the shape FWM field,
however, because LTM traces in this field were always
formed at the opposite locations of the target input for each
feature. This sets up competition between LTM and the
target input within the shape field at the start of the switch
trials. It is this competition that ultimately will lead to
perseveration when the model switches and plays the
“shape” game.
The results of the full sequence of pre- and post-switch
trials for the 3- and 4-year-old models are shown in Figure
5b and 5c (the test cards are displayed at the bottom of the
figure at the time when they were presented to the model).
The maximum values in the SWM field at the left and right
target inputs are plotted over time. An above-threshold (>0)
peak of the red line indicates a decision to sort to the right
location, while a blue peak indicates a decision to sort to the
left location.

Development in the Standard DCCS Task Correct ruleswitching in the model is achieved through stronger
modulation of the resting level of the shape FWM field
during the post-switch. When the 4-year-old model is ‘told’
to sort by shape going into the post-switch, the shape FWM
field is boosted by 0.6 (as opposed to 0.03). Now, as the
inputs come in during the post-switch, the shape field has
enough excitatory energy to resolve the conflict created by
sorting decisions made during the pre-switch phase. Once a
peak builds where the test input overlaps with the target
input, spatial information is sent to the color FWM field as
well as SWM. As figure 5c shows, the 4-year-old model
produced opposite spatial responses in the post-switch,
indicating that the model switched its rule-use.

The Negative Priming Version
Interestingly, 3-year-olds still perseverate in a Negative
Priming (NP) version of this task (Müller et al., 2006;
Zelazo et al., 2003). For this version, the features for the
dimension that was relevant for the pre-switch are changed
for the post-switch sort. For example, if children sorted red
and blue stars and circles by color in the pre-switch, they
would then be asked to sort green and yellow stars and
circles by shape in the post-switch.

Pre- and Post-Switch NP Trials
For the NP version, the pre-switch portion of the task is
exactly the same as the simulations of the standard task.
Figure 6a shows the color and shape FWM fields at the start
of the post-switch phase. The color field now has target
inputs at new feature values: thus the target input and LTM
activation no longer overlap in color FWM. Importantly,
though, there is still competition in the shape FWM field for
each feature value. With competition still present in the
shape field and only a 0.03 boost during the post-switch (for
the 3-year-old model), this field continues to be delayed in
forming a peak and still allows the color field to build a
peak more quickly at the site where the test input overlaps
with the target input. Figure 6b shows the spatial responses
for the 3-year-old model. Again, the model perseverates
and the same pattern of spatial responses is produced for
both the pre- and post-switch phases. Even though the
localized activation in the color field is weaker now because
target input and LTM no longer overlap, the competition in
the shape field slows down peak formation sufficiently to
allow the color FWM field to form a stable peak first and
drive a perseverative response as in the simulations of the
standard task.

Figure 5: Simulation results for the standard version of the
DCCS
Going into the post-switch phase, the model is ‘told’ to
play the shape game. For the 3-year-old model, the resting
level of the shape field is boosted by 0.03 (the same amount
that the color FWM was boosted in the pre-switch). As
inputs come in for the post-switch test cards, peaks try to
form at two sites for the shape feature—at the target input
and at the site activated by input from LTM. Because two
peaks are trying to form in the shape field, they grow more
slowly due to laterally inhibitory interactions.
Critically, at the same time two peaks are trying to form
in the shape FWM field, a single peak is emerging in the
color FWM field at sites that match the target input. Just as
in the pre-switch phase, the local interactions in the color
field build a peak which sends spatial information to the
466

color FWM field, drives a peak where the color feature
value overlaps with the spatial information, and these FWM
peaks, in turn, drive a spatial response based on shape.
Figure 7b shows results of the simulation of a 3-year-old
model, which switches rules, of the ANP version.

Development in the NP Version Correct rule-switching,
again, comes from stronger modulation of the resting level
for the post-switch sort. For this version, though, the resting
level of the shape FWM field only needed to be boosted by
0.3 (as opposed to 0.6 for the standard task). There is less of
a boost required because of the lack of overlap in the color
FWM field. This means there is weaker spatially localized
activation in this field and, thus, it takes longer to form a
peak. In this sense, the shape FWM needs less of a headstart in order to localize a decision based on its target inputs.

Figure 7: Simulation results for the ANP version.

Conclusions and Future Directions
The model provided here demonstrates that the neural
mechanisms that underlie dorsal and ventral stream visual
pathways—when combined with a simple mechanism that
modulates the resting level of neural populations—can give
rise to emergent rule use. This provides the first formally
grounded theory of perseveration and development in the
DCCS task that is closely tied to known neural properties.
Ultimately, perseveration is captured as the competition
between the target input and the LTM memory traces that
are formed during the pre-switch. With two sites of
activation for the features that are relevant for the postswitch, extra inhibition is built-up, it takes longer for that
field to form a peak, and the other feature field forms a peak
sooner and drives a perseverative response.
Correct switching occurs through stronger boosting of the
post-switch feature field. This modulation of the resting
levels of the feature fields is thought to occur through frontal
lobe processes. Gaining an understanding of these processes
is the next step to providing a full account of perseveration
and task-switching. Ultimately, the boosting of the relevant
dimension should be mediated by the level of conflict
detected in the task environment and the trial-to-trial and
developmental history of the system. Over development, what
exactly is changing to allow correct switching? It is possible
that the conflict detection areas become better tuned to detect
perceptual conflict and thus improve on how it processes its
inputs. Perhaps the area of the frontal lobe responsible for
boosting the relevant feature field becomes stronger or more
efficient, thus allowing for differential modulation in the face
of varying levels of conflict. Further modeling will need to
determine how this modulation can be formally implemented
by capturing neural activity in areas of the prefrontal cortex,
such as the ventrolateral or rostrolateral prefrontal cortex, and
other frontal lobe regions that have been implicated in taskswitching.
The DNF model reported here is the first account of the
DCCS task that has implicated a role of the spatial layout of

Figure 6: Simulation results for the NP version of the
DCCS.

The Absolute Negative Priming Version
Zelazo et al. (2003) and Müller et al. (2006) further
explored the NP variant of the task by testing an Absolute
Negative Priming version (ANP). They showed that
perceptual competition during the pre-switch was required
in order for 3-year-olds to perseverate in the NP version. In
the ANP version, there is no perceptual competition during
the pre-switch phase because children sort test cards that
match the target cards along both dimensions. Now when
the features of the previously relevant dimension are
changed in the post-switch, 3-year-olds have little trouble
switching their rule-use.

Pre- and Post-Switch ANP Trials
The pre-switch phase for the ANP version is slightly
different from that of previous simulations. Now, there is no
competition established in any of the fields. Since the test
cards match the target cards along both dimensions, the
LTM activation overlaps with the pre-switch target input for
both FWM fields. Figure 7a shows the FWM fields at the
start of the post-switch phase. As in the NP version, the
feature values for the color field are changed. Going into
the post-switch phase, the shape field is only boosted by
0.03. With only this small boost and no competition for
spatial locations within the feature values, the shape FWM
field is now able to form peaks where the test input overlaps
with target input. It shares its spatial information with the
467

the dynamics of visual cognition. In F. Garzòn, A.
Laakso, T. Gomila (Eds.). Dynamics and Psychology
[special issue]. New Ideas in Psychology.
Kirkham, N. Z., Cruess, L., & Diamond, A. (2003).
Helping children apply their knowledge to their behavior
on a dimension-switching task. Developmental Science,
6(5), 449-476.
Kloo, D., & Perner, J. (2005). Disentangling dimensions in
the dimensional change card sort.
Developmental
Science, 8(1), 44-56.
Morton, J. B., & Munakata, Y. (2001). Active versus latent
representations: a neural network model of perseveration,
dissociation,
and
decalage.
Developmental
Psychobiology, 40, 255-265.
Mulas, F., Capilla, A., Fernández, S., Etchepareborda, M.
C., Campo, P., Maestú, F., Fernández, A., Castellanos, F.
X., & Ortiz, T. (2006). Shifting-related brain magnetic
activity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 59, 373-379.
Müller, U., Dick, A. S., Gela, K., Overton, W. F., & Zelazo,
P. D. (2006).
The role of negative priming in
preschoolers’ flexible rule use on the Dimensional
Change Card Sort. Child Development, 77(2), 395-412.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003).
Testing the dynamic field theory: working memory for
locations becomes more spatially precise over
development. Child Development, 74(5), 1393-1417.
Simmering, V. A., Schutte, A. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2007).
Generalizing the dynamic field theory of spatial cognition
across real and developmental time scales. In S. Becker
(Ed.), Computational Cognitive Neuroscience [special
issue].
Brain
Research.
doi:1031016/j.brainres.2007.06.081.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 1-86.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12,
97-136.
Zelazo, P. D. (2006). The Dimensional Change Card Sort
(DCCS): a method of assessing executive function in
children. Nature Protocols, 1(1), 297-301.
Zelazo, P. D. (2004). The development of conscious control
in childhood. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(1), 12-17.
Zelazo, P. D., Frye, D., & Rapus, T. (1996). An age-related
dissociation between knowing rules and using them.
Cognitive Development, 11, 37-63.
Zelazo, P. D., Jacques, S., Burack, J. A., & Frye, D. (2002).
The relation between theory of mind and rule use:
evidence from persons with autism-spectrum disorders.
Infant and Child Development, 11, 171-195.
Zelazo, P. D., Müller, U., Frye, D., & Marcovitch, S.
(2003).
The development of executive function.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 68(3).

the target cards in children’s perseveration. In this task,
children are not just sorting shapes and colors, but are tying
those features to space. Since the formal model uses space
as a critical binding dimension, it makes specific predictions
about the role space should play in children’s performance.
For example, switching the location of the target cards in the
post-switch of the NP version should elicit correct switching
in 3-year-olds (e.g., instead of the star on the left and circle
on the right, the star would be moved to the right with the
circle on the left). This would create overlap between the
target inputs and the LTM traces in the posts-switch, taskrelevant feature field. Thus, peaks would form in the shape
FWM field without competition. Similarly, 3-year-olds
should perseverate if the target cards switched locations in
the post-switch of the ANP version. The post-switch feature
field would then have competition between the target inputs
and LTM traces as is the case for the normal NP version.
We are currently testing these predictions.
Rule-use and executive function has long been thought to
require an intelligent director, a ‘central-executive’ that
coordinates behaviors or schemas, sets goals, and assesses
success/failure;
however,
with
little
further
implementations, the basic model developed to handle a
wide array of spatial and cognitive tasks can display rulelike behavior, perseveration, and development without a
central executive. In this framework, ‘rule’-like behavior is
emergent from dynamic interactions of fields of neurons
that are based in known neural properties.

Acknowledgements
Research funded by NSF HSD0527698 awarded to JPS.

References
Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateralinhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics, 27,
77-87.
Amari, S., & Arbib, M. A. (1977). Competition and
cooperation in neural nets. In J. Metzler (Ed.), Systems
Neuroscience. New York: Academic Press.
Bunge, S. A., & Zelazo, P. D. (2006). A brain-based
account of the development of rule use in childhood.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(3), 118121.
Colvert, E., Custance, D., & Swettenham, J. (2002). Rulebased reasoning and theory of mind in autism: a
commentary on the work of Zelzo, Jacques, Burack, and
Frye. Infant and Child Development, 11, 197-200.
Crone, E. A., Donohue, S. E., Honomichl, R., Wendelken,
C., and Bunge, S. A. (2006). Brain regions mediating
flexible rule use during development. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 26(43), 11239-11247.
Egner, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005).
Cognitive control
mechanisms
resolve
conflict
through
cortical
amplification of task-relevant information.
Nature
Neuroscience, 8(12), 1784-1790.
Johnson, J.S., Spencer J.P., and Schöner, G. (in press).
Moving to higher ground: the Dynamic Field Theory and
468

