UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Timing of Adults' Utterances and Interpretation of Word Meanings in a Discrepant Labeling
Situation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6w04b7h8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Yasuda, Tetsuya
Kobayashi, Harumi

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Timing of Adults’ Utterances and Interpretation of Word Meanings
in a Discrepant Labeling Situation
Tetsuya Yasuda (08udj01@ms.dendai.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Advanced Science and Technology, Tokyo Denki University
Saitama, 350-0394 JPN

Harumi Kobayashi (h-koba@i.dendai.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Advanced Science and Technology, Tokyo Denki University
Saitama, 350-0394 JPN

Abstract

experimenter enthusiastically looked at, pointed to, and
labeled either the interesting (coincident) or boring
(conflict) object. Children were later tested to choose the
referent of the novel object. The object-looking time of
each child in each condition was examined. The results
were that 19- and 24-month-olds looked at and chose the
socially intended object as a referent even when the object
was boring, but 12-month-olds tended to look at and choose
the interesting object as a referent regardless of the
existence of the social cue. Hollich et al. interpreted this
result that children make a shift in word learning from
relying on perceptual cues to relying on social intent cues.
In a discrepant labeling situation that Baldwin (1991,
1993) examined, infants would establish an incorrect wordobject mapping if they failed to recognize the significance
of cues such as line-of-regard for determining the speaker’s
reference. In this paradigm, an experimenter showed
infants two equally attractive novel toys and gave one to the
child to play with while the experimenter retained the other.
When the infants’ attention was focused on the toy, the
experimenter looked at and labeled her own toy, the
situation being a discrepancy between the infants’ focus and
that of the speaker at the time the label was uttered.
Without the ability to consult the speaker for cues to
reference, infants should fall prey to a mapping error
because of time contingency that would lead them to link
the new label with the toy of their own focus. On the other
hand, if infants appreciated the relevance of the speaker’s
non-verbal cues such as line-of-regard and body orientation
directed toward the speaker’s toy, they could use these cues
and establish the correct word-to-object link. According to
Baldwin, infants readily glanced up at the experimenter
when discrepant labeling occurred and followed her gaze to
the object of her focus. In a comprehension test, infants of
18 months or older did not link the new label with the toy
they were actually focused on when they heard the new
label. Eighteen- to nineteen-month-olds seems to have
established a stable mapping between the label and the
object of the speaker’s focus. These results suggest that
infants have the ability to appreciate that speakers provide
cues that are relevant to interpreting new words and consult
these cues when faced with discrepant labeling. Baldwin’s

Previous studies demonstrated that young children are
sensitive to the referential intentions of others and readily
relate a novel label to an intended novel object. However, the
movement of child’s line-of-regard in establishing joint
attention has rarely been closely examined. In the present
study, 13 2- and 15 4-year-olds were videotaped in a
modified discrepant labeling paradigm, in which the
experimenter looked at an object and said the novel label,
“Oh, muta!” immediately after the child took the other object
and started playing with it. The child’s line-of-regards were
examined in a frame-by-frame method. The results showed
that most children immediately looked at the experimenter’s
face. We compared the present data with our previous data of
labeling the other object after 10 seconds elapsed. In those
data, a substantial ratio of 4-year olds (nearly half) and that of
2-year-olds (nearly 40 percent) directly took the other object
that was out of their attention without checking the
experimenter’s eye gaze. We interpreted these results that
those children who directly looked at the other object made a
correct inference of the intended object considering the flow
of conversation. They may have thought that when the
experimenter said “Oh, muta!” she must be focusing on the
other object rather than the object the child was already
focused on for more than 10 seconds. The present study
showed that the timing of adults’ utterances may help young
children to interpret the adults’ referential intentions.
Key words: Discrepant labeling situation; Timing of adults’
utterances; Flow of conversation; Social pragmatic cues.

Introduction
Infants properly follow adults’ gaze direction (Brooks
& Meltzoff, 2002; Moll & Tomasello, 2004). Infants also
have an ability to actively consult cues that speakers
provide to know the reference of their utterances (Golinkoff
& Hirsh-Pasek, 1999; Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Hollich,
2000). Among different cues for word learning, cues of
adults’ social intent seem to be well established. For
example, Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, and Golinkoff (2000)
examined the effects of competing perceptual and social
cues on word learning in 12-, 19-, and 24-month-olds.
Children were presented with novel objects, one interesting
and one boring, and given the opportunity to explore each
one. Then the objects were placed on the board and the
675

We used the same discrepant labeling paradigm that we
used in Kobayashi and Yasuda’s (2007) study, except for
the timing of the experimenter’s utterance. In Kobayashi
and Yasuda‘s study and this study, a modified discrepant
labeling paradigm was used.
In these studies, an
experimenter placed down two unfamiliar objects on a
table, then asked the child to choose one of the objects and
play with it for a while rather than the experimenter simply
giving one of the objects to the child, a procedure used in
the usual discrepant labeling paradigm. We assumed that
children focus on the object of their choice more than the
object that was simply given by the experimenter. Because
focusing on one object and being concentrated on playing
with it before hearing the experimenter’s utterance were
very important to test our hypothesis, we chose to use this
modified discrepant labeling paradigm. Unlike Kobayashi
and Yasuda’s study, after the experimenter noted that the
child took and started manipulating the chosen object, the
experimenter of this study immediately said “Oh, (child’s
name), muta!” and looked at the other object that the child
had not manipulated. We intended to test whether the
timing of the adult’s utterance about the Out-of-Attention
object may affect the movement of line-of-regard of young
children. To test this hypothesis, we compared the data of
the two conditions of timing, 0 seconds or immediately
after the experimenter’s labeling, and after 10 seconds
elapsed. The 10 second elapsing data were taken from
Kobayashi and Yasuda (2007) and reanalyzed with a
gesture analyzing software that we used in the present study.

studies successfully showed infants’ sensitivity to know the
others’ direction of attention by confirming the nonverbal
cues of eye gaze and face or body direction of others, but
children seem to have abilities to use relevant cues that are
beyond such physical cues.
In our previous study, Kobayashi and Yasuda (2007)
tested two-, four-year-olds and adults in this discrepant
labeling paradigm and were surprised with unexpected
results. We expected that most 2-year-olds would readily
check the experimenter’s face in the experiment of the
discrepant labeling paradigm. However, despite of our
expectation, nearly 40 percent of the 2-year-olds who had
previously looked at their chosen object at their hand (InAttention-Object) immediately changed their focus of
attention and took the other object that they did not choose
(Out-of-Attention Object) WITHOUT looking at the
experimenter. Among the 4-year-olds, this tendency was
more distinct. About half of the children who previously
looked at their chosen object similarly changed their focus
of attention and took the other object that they did not
choose without looking at the experimenter. We tested
adults in virtually the same paradigm and found that about
70 percent of the adults similarly changed their focus of
attention when they heard a label without checking the
experimenter’s face or body direction. Why these children
and adults did not seem to check the direction of the
experimenter’s eye gaze? We speculated that they were
likely aware that the experimenter may not necessarily say
the name of the object the participant was attending. Even
young children seem to think that the label must be the
referent of the other object which is not the present focus of
the child. If they heard the experimenter label something
after they had already played with the object for 10 seconds,
they seem to think that the object they have at hand is not
the object the adult labeled. However, if the children heard
the experimenter immediately labeled something after they
took it, they seemed to think that they needed to check the
adult’s line-of-regard to know what was labeled. If this is
the case, young children certainly rely on social pragmatic
cues in a sense, with a more sophisticated way than simply
checking the adults’ line-of-regard.
A stronger test of this hypothesis may be to contrast
children’s responses in two alternative situations:
modifying the amount of time elapsing between when the
child began playing with object, and when the experimenter
labelled the other novel object. Thus, in one situation, the
child hears the novel word immediately after she touches
the object she chose, and in another situation, the child
hears the novel word after 10 seconds elapsing after her
touching the object. If children look at the Out-of-Attention
Object immediately after touching the chosen object only in
the 10 second-elapsing condition, the social pragmatic
explanation can be more strongly validated. In this study,
we tested our hypothesis of social pragmatic cues in this
more stringent test.

Method
Participants
Thirteen 2-year-olds (range 2;0~3;4), and 15 4-year-olds
(4;1~5;0) participated in the study. Children were tested at
their preschool room in Saitama Prefecture in Japan that
was a part of a greater Tokyo area.

Materials
Each participant saw four pairs of objects that were all
unfamiliar to young children. One pair included a wrench
and a white handle, the other pair included a float valve and
a sponge grip. The criteria for selection of the objects were
that the objects be novel, visually distinct from one another,
balanced in salience within a pair, and manipulable for twoyear-olds (Figure 1). Some of the materials were different
between the two timing conditions due to the advice of the
children’s teachers who suggested safer materials for 2year-olds. For example, a roller handle was replaced by a
triangle wrench. We replaced some objects keeping the
distinctness of the materials similar between the conditions.
The novel labels used were muta, heku, ruchi, and omi that
were used in Kobayashi (1998)’s study.

676

anvil) with a frame-by-frame method at the rate of 29.97
frames per second. First, an experienced coder observed the
direction of the child’s gaze who looked at each of the
objects during the selection period. The direction of the
child’s gaze was used for further analysis. The frame of the
video data in which the first sound of “Oh, muta!” occurred
was specified. Then the coder coded the object of the
child’s line-of-regard immediately before and after hearing
the novel label. Two additional moves of the line-of regard
following the immediately-after-move were coded to
provide more information about the movements of line-ofregard. The looked at object was coded into four categories;
Experimenter, In-Attention Object, Out-of-Attention Object,
and Other.
The child’s line-of-regard was coded
Experimenter when the child looked at the experimenter’s
face or body. The child’s line-of-regard was coded InAttention Object when the child looked at the object that
the child chose and was focused on. It was coded Out-ofAttention Object when the child looked at the other object
that the experimenter looked at. It was coded Other when
the child looked at anything that was not included in the
already defined three categories, such as looking at other
objects in the room or any part of the room such as the floor.
Another coder independently coded 15% of the video data.
The agreement between the two coding results was 91%
and this was reliable enough (Cohen’s kappa κ=0.87), The
first coder’s coded data was taken for further analysis.
Kobayashi and Yasuda’s (2007) data were used as the data
in the 10 seconds elapsing condition.

Figure 1: An example of a set of experimental objects

Procedure
Figure 2 shows the experimental situation. The child and
the experimenter sat on a table face-to-face. An assistant
recorded the experiment using two digital video cameras
(29.97frame/sec). One of the video cameras focused on the
table and the child’s face. The other video camera took the
experimental situation. On the table, the experimenter
placed the two novel objects in front of the child. The two
objects were at an equal distance from the child (Scene 1).
The experimenter said to the child, “Which do you like?
You can play with the one you like.” Then the child took
one of the objects and manipulated it (Scene 2). When it
was confirmed that the child was focused on the chosen
object, the experimenter immediately looked at the other
object that the child did not choose and said, “Oh, (child’s
name), muta, muta!” (Scene 3). The child’s response was
noted. Immediately after each trial of labeling, the
experimenter presented the two previously shown objects
and asked the child, “Which is muta?” The child’s
responses, both verbal and nonverbal were noted. The
experimenter accepted any kind of response from the child,
saying “I see!” without any feedback of right or wrong.

Results
We first report the data of 0 seconds. The mean ratio of
change of line-of-regard from one category to the other
category was calculated for each movement. Figure 3-6
show the data of the young children for the two conditions.
The moves that occurred in less than 5% of the all moves
from one category to the other category were omitted as
infrequent moves. In addition, moves after the child’s eye
gaze reached Out-of-Attention Object were also omitted
assuming that the child recognized the intended object.
These decisions were made to simplify the figures.
Figure 3 shows the movement of the line-of-regard of 2year-olds when the novel label was heard immediately after
the child-chosen object was taken. Immediately before
hearing the novel label, 80% of two-year-olds looked at the
In-Attention-Object. Among these children, 64% of them
immediately looked at the Experimenter and then 77% of
them looked at the Out-of-Attention Object. Whereas 33%
of the children who previously looked at the In-AttentionObject immediately looked at the Out-of-Attention Object
without checking the experimenter’s eye gaze.
Figure 4 shows the movement of the line-of-regard of
four-year-olds when the novel label was heard immediately
after the child-chosen object was taken. Immediately before
hearing the novel label, 96% of four-year-olds looked at the

Figure 2: The experimental situation
An experiment video data were analyzed using a gesture
analyzing software “Anvil” (http://www.dfki.de/~kipp/
677

In-Attention-Object. Among these children, 68% of them
immediately looked at the Experimenter and then 82% of
them looked at the Out-of-Attention Object. Whereas 27%
of the children who previously looked at the In-AttentionObject immediately looked at the Out-of-Attention Object
without checking the experimenter’s eye gaze.
Figure 5 shows the movement of the line-of-regard of
two-year-olds when the novel label was heard after 10
seconds of the child-chosen object was taken. Immediately
before hearing the novel label, 75% of two-year-olds looked
at the In-Attention-Object. Among these children, 59% of
them immediately looked at the Experimenter and then 86%
of them looked at the Out-of-Attention Object. Whereas
37% of the children who previously looked at the InAttention-Object immediately looked at the Out-ofAttention Object without checking the experimenter’s eye
gaze.
Figure 6 shows the movement of the line-of-regard of
four-year-olds when the novel label heard after 10 seconds
of the child-chosen object was taken. Immediately before
hearing the novel label, 71% of four-year-olds looked at the
In-Attention-Object. Among these children, 48% of them
immediately looked at the Experimenter and then 94% of
them looked at the Out-of-Attention Object. Whereas 46%
of the children who previously looked at the In-AttentionObject immediately looked at the Out-of-Attention Object
without checking the experimenter’s eye gaze.

Figure 4: Movement of line-of-regard of 4-year-olds (0
sec condition)

Figure 3: Movement of line-of-regard of 2-year-olds
when the novel label was heard immediately after the
child-chosen object was taken (0 sec condition)

Figure 5: Movement of line-of-regard of 2-year-olds
when the novel label was heard when 10 seconds
elapsed after the child-chosen object was taken
(10 sec condition)

Notes. Exp means the experimenter. IA means the In-Attention
Object or the object the child attended. OA means the Out-ofAttention Object that the experimenter looked at and said “Oh,
muta!”Other means other objects (The frequency was small so not
shown). The moves that occurred in less than 5% of the all moves
from one category to the other category were omitted as infrequent
moves. Moves after the child’s eye gaze reached Out-of-Attention
Object were also omitted.

678

Discussion
This study examined the movement of line-of-regard of
2-, and 4-year-olds in a discrepant labeling situation.
Unlike the usual discrepant labeling paradigm, the children
chose the first object of their own choice so that they could
concentrate more on the first object. The experimental
situation was videotaped and the movement of the
participant’s line-of-regard was recorded with a frame-byframe method. We think the most interesting result of this
study was the fact that the children did check the
experimenter’s eye gaze when the experimenter looked at
and labeled the Out-of-Attention Object immediately after
the child took the object of her choice. When we compare
the present data of the 0 second condition and our previous
data of 10 second condition, we can say that young children
do not always check the direction of the line-of-regard
when they hear a novel word, if they have a good reason to
associate the given label to a certain object. If they hear the
experimenter label something after they had already played
with the object for 10 seconds, they seem to think that the
object they have at hand is not the object the adult labeled.
However, if the children hear the experimenter immediately
label something after they took it, they seem to think that
they need to check the adult’s line-of-regard to know what
was labeled. It may be argued that there are some
alternative explanations for our findings. The child may
detect the direction of the experimenter’s voice or the child
may see the direction of the experimenter’s body by her
peripheral vision even when the eye gaze is directed at
something other than the experimenter. However, these
alternative explanations hold both for the 0 and the 10
second condition, so they cannot explain the difference
between the two conditions. Our interpretation of the
phenomenon of the absence of direct look at the speaker is
that the child had knowledge of the flow of conversation. If
the speaker wanted to comment on the object that the child
chose and manipulated, she should have commented earlier.
Because she commented after 10 seconds had passed since
the child had started to manipulate the object, she must have
intended to make an inference about the object which had
not been the already chosen object.
The result of this study supports the recent contention of
the importance of the flow of conversation proposed by
Tomasello and colleagues (Tomasello & Akhtar, 1995;
Tomasello & Haberl, 2001). In several studies Tomasello
and Akhtar demonstrated that young children have the
ability to know the referential intentions of adults even
when seeing an object and hearing the label of it do not
occur simultaneously. One of the most important thing for
children to know in learning object names is knowing the
adult’s desire and hopes and how such internal information
may appear in facial expressions and tone of the voice. We
think the present study added a new insight to this concept
of the flow of conversation by examining the effect of
immediate labeling and comparing immediate labeling and

Figure 6: Movement of line-of-regard of 4-year-olds
(10 sec condition)
A two-way ANOVA was computed with Age (two-yearolds or four-year-olds) and Timing (0 seconds or 10
seconds) as independent variables. Age and Timing were
between-subjects variables. The dependent measure was
the frequency of the child’s line-of-regard from the InAttention Object to the Experimenter after the child took
the object (out of 4 trials). All responses that were not this
movement (e.g. the child first looked at the Experimenter
and then looked at the Out-of-Attention Object) scored zero.
There was a significant main effect of Timing,
F(1,51)=6.895, p<.05.
The children looked at the
experimenter’s eye gaze more frequently in the 0 second
condition (M=2.392, SD=1.065) than in the 10 second
condition (M=1.615, SD=1.061). The main effect of Age
and the Age x Timing interaction effect were not significant.
Figure 7 shows the mean frequency of line-of-regard to the
experimenter immediately after or after 10 seconds elapsed.

Figure 7: The mean frequency of the line-of-regard to
the experimenter immediately after or after 10
seconds elapsed
679

References

labeling after 10 seconds elapsed. Even the consecutive
manipulation of only 10 seconds may be enough for
children to conclude that the already manipulated object
must not be the object that the adult commented on with a
nuance of excitement. The result of this study also partly
supports the recent contention of a social shift in word
learning proposed by Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, and
colleagues (Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, 1999; Hirsh-Pasek,
Golinkoff, & Hennon, 2000). They state that children come
to rely on social intent as a more reliable cue than other
cues such as perceptual saliency in word learning after
around 18 months of age. This study provides evidence that
children may further develop to use two different types of
social cues depending upon the situation, i.e., line-of-regard
of other people (a perceptual social cue) and timing of
utterances (a pragmatic social cue). As children get older,
this kind of sensitivity to social cues that reflect adult intent
are sharpened and used for further word learning. Thus, we
don’t have to look at the face of another to know the
direction of their attention when the flow of conversation
provides sufficient cues. Here, looking at an anothers’ face
may give some additional information such as the
emotional states or exchanging emotional information,
other than just knowing the direction of the others’ attention.

Baldwin, D. (1991). Infants’ contribution to the achievement of
joint reference. Child Development, 62, 875-890.
Baldwin, D. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants’
ability to recognize referential acts for what they are.
Developmental Psychology, 29, 832-843.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2002). The importance of eyes:
How infants interpret adult looking behaviour. Developmental
Psychology, 38, 958-966.
Golinkoff, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1999). How babies talk:
The magic and mystery of language development in the first
three years of life. New York: Penguin, Dutton.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hollich, G. (2000). An
emergentist coalition model for word learning: Mapping words
to objects is a product of the interation of multiple cues. In R.
M. Golinkoff, K. Hirsh-Pasek, L. Bloom, L. B. Smith, A. L.
Woodard, N. Akhtar, M. Tomasello, & G. Hollich (Eds.),
Becoming a word learner: A debate of lexical acquisition
(pp.179-186). New York: Oxford University Press.
Hollich, G., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff R. M. With Hennon, E.,
Chung, H. L., Rocroi, C., Brand, R. J., & Brown, E. (2000).
Breaking the language barrier: An emergentist coalition model
for the origins of word learning. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 65, (3, Serial No. 262).
Kobayashi, H. (1998). How 2-year-old children learn novel part
names of unfamiliar objects. Cognition, 68, B41-51.
Kobayashi, H., and Yasuda, T. (2007). A flow-of-conversation
plays a role: Examining line-of-regard of young children and
adults in a discrepant labeling situation. Proceedings of the
Second European Cognitive Science Conference, 107－112.
Kipp, M. (2004). Gesture Generation by Imitation - From Human
Behavior to Computer Character Animation, Boca Raton,
Florida: Dissertation.com.
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2004). 12- and 18-month-old infants
follow gaze to spaces behind barriers. Developmental Science,
7, F1-F9.
Tomasello, M., & Akhtar, N. (1995). Two-year-olds use pragmatic
cues to differentiate reference to objects and actions. Cognitive
Development, 10, 201-224.
Tomasello, M., & Haberl, K. (2001). Understanding Attention: 12and 18-Month-Olds Know What Is New for Other Persons.
Developmental Psychology, 39(5), 906-912
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hennon, E.
A.(2006). The birth of words: Ten-month-olds learn words
through perceptual salience. Child Development, 77, 266-280.

Conclusion
Young children are equipped with the ability to know
others’ referential intentions without looking at their lineof-regard. Children seem to use the flow of conversation as
an important cue to know the referent in the given situation.
They do look at the adults’ face if there are not sufficient
cues to relate the label and the referred object. Children
may develop this ability from early on and through
childhood to quickly and correctly learn the meaning of
words.

Acknowledgement
We thank the children who participated in this study, and
their teachers who gave us precious comments on our
experimental material. We thank Eri SUETAKE for data
collection. This study was partly supported by the Grant-inAid for Scientific Research (C), Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan.

680

