UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
To See or Not to See: The Visual Component of Complex Mental Arithmetic

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5294j1bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Deslauriers, Wendy Ann
Ouellette, Gene P.
Barnes, Martin
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

To See or Not to See: The Visual Component of Complex Mental Arithmetic
Wendy Ann Deslauriers (wadeslau@connect.carleton.ca)
Centre for Applied Cognitive Research, Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Gene P. Ouellette (gouellette@mta.ca)
Psychology Department, Mount Allison University, Sackville, NB E4L 1C7 Canada

Martin Barnes (mbarnes@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Jo-Anne LeFevre (jlefevre@connect.carleton.ca)
Centre for Applied Cognitive Research, Institute of Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology
Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Abstract

components of Baddeley’s model. Adopting this framework
is not meant to dismiss the relevance of alternate accounts
of working memory. For a comprehensive discussion and
comparison of working memory models, the reader is
directed to Miyake and Shah (2004). We begin with a brief
overview of research that has explored the role of
Baddeley’s specific working memory components in
complex mental arithmetic.
The majority of research into working memory
involvement in mental arithmetic has relied upon dual-task
interference paradigms. For instance, Logie et al. (1994)
investigated the effects of various concurrent tasks on
adult's addition of two-digit numbers. The most pronounced
effect was found for a concurrent task that required the
generation of random letters, a task commonly assumed to
tap into the central executive (LeFevre, DeStefano,
Coleman, & Shanahan, 2005). Lesser, yet significant,
interference was also evident when the original addition
equation was presented visually for concurrent tasks of
articulatory suppression and presentation of irrelevant
pictures. These results suggest involvement of both the
phonological loop (as reflected by influence of articulatory
suppression) and the visual-spatial sketchpad (as reflected
by influence of irrelevant pictures), when addition problems
are presented visually.
In a series of studies, Heathcote (1994) evaluated the roles
of both phonological and visual components of working
memory in mental arithmetic. Importantly, by manipulating
the presence of carries in 3-digit addition problems,
Heathcote found that interference from presentation of
irrelevant visual stimuli was restricted to equations
involving carries. Conversely, articulatory suppression
interfered with performance regardless of the presence of
carries. Interestingly, Heathcote also manipulated the visual
similarity of the digits involved in the addition problems
and found no clear effects on response time. Heathcote thus
concluded that the visual-spatial sketchpad is important for
the retention of carries only, whereas the phonological loop
is needed for subvocal rehearsal.
Together, the experiments of Logie et al. (1994) and
Heathcote (1994) seem to establish a major role of the

Does visual processing influence mental arithmetic? The
relationship between high and low visual similarity and
horizontal versus vertical presentation was examined in threedigit addition problems with two carries (ex. 518 + 294).
Adults (20 female, 20 male) solved vertically presented
problems faster than horizontally presented problems and
solved problems with low visual similarity faster than those
with high visual similarity. Similar main effects were found
for accuracy, but these were qualified by a significant
interaction between presentation format and visual similarity,
as the advantageous effects of vertical presentation were
negated by high visual similarity. These results suggest that,
in contrast to the findings of Noel et al. (2001), there is a role
for visual processes in mental addition.
Keywords: mathematics, numerical cognition, arithmetic,
visual processing, working memory, presentation format,
education

Introduction
Psychologists have assumed for some time that complex
mental arithmetic relies upon an individual’s working
memory. Intuitively, mental arithmetic appears to require
working memory to encode the problem, hold interim
results and carries, and for computational processes and
response retrieval (DeStefano & LeFevre, 2004; Hitch,
1978, 2000; Heathcote, 1994; Logie, Gilhooly, & Wynn,
1994; Noël, Desert, Aubrun, & Seron, 2001; Seitz &
Schumann-Hengsteler, 2000, 2002; Trbovich & LeFevre,
2002). Despite this intuitive appeal, and the importance of
arithmetic in daily life, only recently has empirical research
begun to focus on the role of working memory in complex
mental arithmetic. The present study adds to this relatively
new body of literature, in examining the specific role of a
visual working memory component in multi-digit addition.
To date, research on working memory in mental
arithmetic has referenced Baddeley’s (1986) multicomponent model; in particular, research has focused on
delineating the roles of the phonological loop, visual-spatial
sketchpad, and central executive. For consistency, the
present study will also be discussed with respect to these

241

central executive and phonological loop in mental arithmetic
(see also Imbo, Vandierendonck, & Vergauwe, 2007), and a
minor involvement of the visual-spatial sketchpad. It must
be noted, however, that these studies have been criticized on
methodological grounds (see Noël et al., 2001), including
small sample sizes. Further, other research has challenged
the conclusion that mental arithmetic relies upon a visual
component of working memory at all. Specifically, Noël et
al. (2001) followed the procedure of Heathcote (1994), and
investigated the effects of manipulating the visual similarity
between digits used in complex addition equations. In
contrast to Heathcote, Noël et al. did not find an effect of
visual similarity on either the response time or accuracy of
adding two 3-digit numbers, regardless of the presence or
number of carries. Conversely, the phonological similarity
of the digits affected both speed and accuracy. Noël et al.
(2001) thus concluded that the visual-spatial sketchpad of
working memory is not involved in mental addition.
In interpreting the results of Noël et al (2001), attention
must be directed towards presentation format. That is, Noël
et al. presented all equations one addend at a time, and thus
the entire equation was never present simultaneously. In
addition, the presentation duration was only 1500 ms per
operand. This presentation format may force participants
into relying more on a phonological rehearsal strategy
(DeStefano & LeFevre, 2004; Hitch, 2000) and less on
visual memory, than may be the case in typical arithmetic
solving where the entire equation is visible.
In summary, previous research has suggested major roles
of the central executive and phonological loop in the
performance of mental calculations. The role of the visualspatial sketchpad however, is not clear. The present study
thus attempts to elucidate the role of a visual component of
working memory in mental arithmetic. In particular, the
present study incorporates the paradigms used by Heathcote
(1994) and Noël et al. (2001), in contrasting complex
addition equations with high versus low visual similarity,
but with an additional condition of presentation format: half
of the equations were presented in horizontal format and
half in vertical format with one addend under the other (see
Table 1). As such, the present study provides a more
thorough evaluation of the involvement of a visual working
memory component in mental arithmetic, with special
consideration given to presentation format.
Previous research on mathematical computations has
indeed suggested an important influence of presentation
format and related involvement of visual processes.
Trbovich and LeFevre (2002) for instance, showed that
performance on simple addition problems was both faster
and more accurate when the equations were presented
vertically as opposed to horizontally (see also Heathcote,
1994). Trbovich and LeFevre further argued that horizontal
presentation of mathematical equations increases the
phonological demands of the task, as a secondary task with
a high phonological load interfered with performance on
horizontal equations more so than it did with vertically
presented equations. Conversely, a visual-spatially loaded

task negatively influenced performance on vertically
presented equations more so than for equations presented
horizontally. The visual load associated with visually
similar equations may therefore be presumed to interfere
only with the processing of vertically presented equations.

Hypotheses
Based on previous research, it was hypothesized that
participants would solve problems presented vertically
faster and more accurately than problems presented
horizontally. It was also reasoned that, due to a visual
memory component of mental arithmetic, participants would
solve problems with low visual similarity faster and more
accurately than those with high visual similarity. Further, it
was hypothesized that vertical presentation would maximize
visual processing demands, thus resulting in increased
involvement of visual working memory and an interaction
between visual similarity and presentation format. That is,
the benefits of a vertical format would be negated by
additional visual processing demands associated with a
higher visual similarity between the digits.

Method
Participants
A total of 40 participants (20 female, 20 male) voluntarily
took part in this study. Participants were undergraduate
students enrolled in Psychology courses at a large university
in a Canadian urban centre. Participants ranged in age from
18 to 34 years, with a median of 21.5 years.

Tests and Measures
Participants solved 20 experimental trials involving threedigit by three-digit addition problems with two carries, that
were presented on a laptop computer. Problems were
presented either horizontally or vertically and were also
subdivided according to high or low visual similarity,
calculated according to a 7-point scale developed by
Campbell and Clark (1988). Participants also solved multidigit addition problems from one subtest of the Kit of
Factor-Reference Cognitive Tests (French, Ekstrom, &
Price, 1963) as a measure of addition fluency. The Visual
Patterns Test (Della Sala, Gray, Baddeley, & Wilson, 1997)
was also administered to all participants as a measure of
visual working memory.
Addition Equations The equations used by Noël et al.
(2001) to examine the influence of visual similarity on
mental arithmetic were obtained. In order to simplify the
investigation, only problems with two carries were used for
this study.
Equations were classified as high or low in visual
similarity by Noël et al. (2001), according to a 7-point scale
(1 = low visual similarity; 7 = high visual similarity)
developed by Campbell and Clark (1988). For example, 1
and 8 have a visual similarity index of 1.00, whereas 3 and 8

242

have a visual similarity index of 6.00. Identical digits were
assumed to be very highly visually similar and assigned an
index of 7.00. Although Campbell and Clark found that the
visual similarities between digits varied according to the
order of presentation, these differences were assumed to not
affect this stimuli, which included six digits presented
simultaneously, and the similarity matrix was, therefore,
adjusted to use the means between symmetrical digit
pairings. For example, 2 to 9 has a visual similarity index of
2.88, whereas 9 to 2 has a visual similarity index of 3.25;
for consistency then, both 2 to 9 and 9 to 2 were given the
mean value of 3.065. The visual similarity index for each
arithmetic problem was determined by calculating the mean
of the visual similarities between every pair of digits in the
problem. For example, the visual similarity index of 13 + 28
is 2.66, the mean of the similarity index of 1 to 3, 1 to 2, 1
to 8, 3 to 2, 3 to 8, and 2 to 8. Calculating the visual
similarity indices in this manner was also consistent with
Noël et al. (2001). Table 1 illustrates examples of three-digit
problems with both low and high visual similarity indexes.

not used in this study. Across participants, assignment of
sets of problems was counterbalanced with presentation
format. To ensure that the high and low visual similarity
equations did not differ in terms of phonological similarity
in English, an ANOVA was run contrasting all four
experimental conditions with respect to phonological
similarity. No significant effects were found F(3,15) < 1,
p = .982, thus confirming that phonological similarity did
not differ across conditions.
The 20 trials for each of the two protocols were then
arranged in pseudo-random order according to two
constraints. Experimental trials were preceded by two
practice trials. Consecutive problems did not end with the
same number and there were never more than two
consecutive problems from within the same group. To
control for possible practice effects, two additional testing
protocols were created by reversing the order of
presentation for both of the existing testing sequences. Thus
in all, four different testing protocols were used, carefully
counterbalancing presentation format and controlling for
practice effects.

Table 1: Example equations, by presentation format
and visual similarity.

Addition Fluency The addition subtest of the Kit of FactorReference Cognitive Tests (French et al., 1963) was
administered to determine participants’ addition fluency.
Sixty multi-digit addition problems with three addends were
presented on each page. Before beginning the test,
participants were given ten practice problems and
encouraged to use them to practice for speed.

Presentation Format
Visual Similarity

Horizontal

Vertical

High

439 + 386

398
+ 536

Low

518 + 294

495
+ 317

Visual Span The Visual Patterns Test (Della Sala et al.,
1997) is a standardized test that measures visual working
memory with patterns that cannot be verbally nor spatially
encoded. The patterns are checkerboard grids on which half
of the squares are black and half are white. The stimuli
include three pattern trials for each grid size and the grids
progress in size from a 2 x 2 matrix (with two black
squares) to a 5 x 6 matrix (with 15 black squares) by adding
two more squares at each level.

Because Noël et al. (2001) found that phonological
similarity influenced accuracy rates and response times, it
was important that phonological similarity be controlled in
the present study. Given that Noël et al. used Frenchspeaking participants, the original phonological balance was
assumed to have changed. Phonological similarity was thus
calculated, in English, using a method originally developed
by Lhermitte & Desrouesné (1974). The phonologicalsimilarity index was obtained by counting the number of
identical phonemes within each pair of numbers and then
dividing by the total number of phonemes. The higher the
phonological-similarity index, the more acoustically similar
the pair of numbers is assumed to be.
Within each visual similarity classification (high vs. low)
the problems were randomly assigned to one of two sets,
balanced for phonological similarity. Thus, the problems
were divided into four conditions: horizontal presentation
and high visual similarity, horizontal presentation and low
visual similarity, vertical presentation and high visual
similarity, vertical presentation and low visual similarity.
Each condition contained five equations. In order to obtain
phonological and visual similarity balance within each
condition, four of Noël et al’s (2001) original stimuli were

Procedure
The addition fluency measure was administered first.
Participants were then shown the 3-digit by 3-digit
arithmetic problems, presented on a computer screen and
asked to compute a solution and respond orally. Following
completion of the 20 trials, the visual pattern test was
administered.
Addition Equations Stimuli were presented on a laptop
computer with a liquid crystal display. All stimuli were
presented in white in the centre of a black screen and were
preceded by a fixation point to indicate the coming trial.
Both addends were presented simultaneously and remained
on the screen until participants responded. Experimenters
clicked the mouse to record response times (ms) when the
participant completed their answer. A second mouse click
triggered the next trial. Participants were asked to respond

243

Accuracy Rates

with a complete numerical answer from left-to-right since
all but one participant in a pilot study had chosen left-toright responses when offered a directional choice. The
accuracy of each response was evaluated and recorded by
the experimenter on a clipboard as correct or incorrect.

The proportion of correct trials were analyzed with a 2
(visual similarity: low, high) x 2 (presentation format:
horizontal, vertical) repeated measures ANOVA. Congruent
with the hypotheses, participants responded more accurately
to vertical stimuli than to horizontal stimuli (.813 vs. .762),
F(1,39) = 4.89, MSE = .02, p < .05. There was no significant
main effect of visual similarity F(1,39) = .836, MSE = .02,
p = .366. However, presentation format and visual similarity
interacted, F(1,39) = 4.47, MSE = .12, p < .05. Figure 1
shows accuracy rates separated by condition. The advantage
for vertical over horizontal format occurred only when the
problems were low in visual similarity. The orientation
advantage disappeared completely when the problems were
high in visual similarity.

Addition Fluency Participants were given two minutes to
complete each page of addition problems. They were
instructed to work as rapidly as they could without
sacrificing accuracy and to answer problems by first
working across the first row of ten problems and then
moving to the next row. Total problems correct across both
pages was used as a measure of addition fluency.
Visual Span Participants were shown each pattern, on a
stimulus card, for three seconds, and then asked to respond
by sketching the pattern on a blank grid of the same shape
as the stimulus. There was no response time limit, and
participants received feedback on their success after every
trial. Patterns were considered correctly recalled if all
squares were marked in the correct positions. A stop
condition was reached when a participant was unsuccessful
with all three trials at a given level. The mean of the
complexity of the last three patterns recalled correctly was
used as each participant’s raw visual span.

Results
Response Time Data
Response-time data were analyzed in a 2 (visual similarity:
high, low) x 2 (presentation format: horizontal, vertical)
repeated measures ANOVA. As hypothesized, there was a
significant
main
effect
of
presentation
format
F(1,39) = 7.29, MSE = 9,147,204, p < .01. Participants
responded more rapidly to vertical stimuli than to horizontal
stimuli (12,640 ms vs. 13,930 ms). There was also a
significant main effect of visual similarity F(1,39) = 21.26,
MSE = 10,651,890, p < .001. Participants responded more
slowly to problems classified as high in visual similarity
than to those low in visual similarity (14,475 ms vs.
12,095 ms).
There was no significant interaction in response times
between presentation format and visual similarity
F(1,39) < 1, MSE = 7,225,987, p = .516.

Figure 1: Interaction between presentation format and
visual similarity for accuracy rate.

Addition Fluency & Visual Span
Table 3 shows the correlations of addition fluency and
visual span to all measures along with the appropriate
descriptive statistics. Note that addition fluency was
moderately correlated with response time for all equation
conditions, while the visual span was correlated only with
response times from vertically presented equations.
Response times were negatively associated with accuracy
rate.

Table 2: Mean response times and accuracy by
presentation format and visual similarity.
Vertical
Low
High
Response
Time (ms)
(SD)
Accuracy
Rate
(SD)

Discussion
The current study examined the influences of visual
similarity and presentation format on response time and
accuracy for complex mental addition. Congruent with the
original hypotheses, a vertical presentation format was
associated with reduced response times and increased
accuracy, relative to horizontal presentation. There was also
an apparent advantage in response times for equations with
low visual similarity (relative to equations with high visual
similarity). Also in accord with the original hypotheses,

Horizontal
Low
High

11,589

13,689

12,601

15,260

(829)

(1,289)

(874)

(1,276)

.850

.775

.745

.779

(.023)

(.031)

(.032)

(.027)

244

Table 3: Correlations between individual difference variables (addition fluency and visual span) and experimental measures.
Response Time

Fluency
VSpan

Accuracy Rate

Fluency

Vspan

HH

HL

VH

VL

HH

HL

VH

VL

-

.25

-.58***

-.51***

-.57***

-.64***

.01

.03

.17

.03

-.27

-.25

-.41*

-.36*

-.05

-.02

-.23

-.09

-

Note. * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001; Fluency = addition fluency; VSpan = visual span; HH = horizontal presentation, high similarity;
HL = horizontal presentation, low similarity; VH = vertical presentation, high similarity; RL = vertical presentation, low similarity.

there was a significant interaction between presentation
format and visual similarity for participant accuracy. These
results are suggestive of an important role of visual factors
in complex mental arithmetic. Item analyses, treating the
chosen equations as a random variable, confirmed the
generalizability of these findings.
The present results are interpreted as support for an
important role of visual working memory in mental
arithmetic. This interpretation is in part based upon
Trbovich and LeFevre (2002), who demonstrated that
vertically presented mathematical equations are solved
faster than horizontally presented equations and are subject
to interference from a secondary task that taps visual
working memory. It is interesting to note that in the present
findings, vertical presentation resulted in faster response
times, regardless of visual similarity. Thus, vertical
arrangement of digits facilitated the visual processing
demands, presumably by lining up the appropriate addends.
This facilitative effect on response times suggests that visual
working memory involvement is beneficial in completing
mental addition. Response times were also slower overall
for equations with higher visual similarity, indicating that a
visual memory component is active regardless of the
presentation format. That is, problems with higher visual
similarity required longer response times in both
presentation formats, suggesting that the solving of complex
addition problems is subject to influence from the visual
characteristics of the digits involved.
Performance accuracy in the present findings also
supports an important role of visual working memory in
mental addition. The main effect of presentation format
again indicates a facilitative effect of vertically lining up the
addends of an equation; further, the hypothesized interaction
demonstrates that the advantage associated with such a
vertical presentation format can in fact be negated by the
increased visual processing demands brought about by
higher visual similarity among the digits. It is proposed that
high visual similarity amongst digits increases the visual
processing and memory load, thus negating the beneficial
effects of a vertical presentation format.
This importance attributed to visual processing and
working memory in mental addition, is in accordance with
Logie et al. (1994), yet in contrast to the conclusions of
Noël et al. (2001) and Heathcote (1994). The apparent
discrepancies between studies can be reconciled given the

manipulation of presentation format in the present research
design. That is, by manipulating presentation format, the
importance of visual similarity was revealed. In addition, it
is important to note that the methodology incorporated here
involved the entire equation being presented simultaneously,
which may further encourage reliance on visual working
memory.
The finding that vertical presentation of equations results
in faster and more accurate responses warrants further
discussion. It may be that vertical presentation is easier
because it assists solvers in lining up interim results and
carries visually, directly above or below the corresponding
digits of the problem. This explanation would also account
for why vertical presentation may involve visual working
memory more so than does horizontal presentation. In fact,
it may well be the increased involvement of visual working
memory that makes vertical equations apparently easier to
solve, effectively distributing the working memory demands
across the two slave systems. In contrast, horizontal or
sequential presentation creates a heavy phonological load
that, for these complex problems, quickly overwhelms the
capacity of the phonological loop and stresses the central
executive. On this view, the vertical format used in
mathematics textbooks and associated with the ‘standard’
solution algorithm (adding the columns right-to-left) may be
designed to minimize processing demands on the cognitive
system by sharing the load across the working memory
complex.
Although the present research provides important
information about the role of visual-spatial working
memory in mental calculation, it must be acknowledged that
the present study included only a small number of equations
per condition (five). Therefore it was important to reanalyze
the data treating the equations as random variables as a test
of generalizability over the “population” of all possible
equations. Despite the loss of statistical power associated
with this type of analyses, the overall pattern of results was
replicated. It is also important to note that the present
design did counterbalance the high and low visual similarity
equations across presentation formats. Thus all equations
were presented in both formats.
The pattern of correlations among measures reported here
also warrant further attention. In particular, the addition
subtest of the Kit of Factor-Reference Cognitive Tests
(French, et al., 1963) was significantly correlated with

245

response time for all conditions, thus confirming the
relevance of this test as a measure of addition fluency.
Interestingly, the visual span from the Visual Patterns Test
(Della Sala, et al., 1997) was significantly correlated only
for response times from vertical presentations, again
highlighting the substantial visual memory involvement in
solving such presented equations.
Although not directly addressed in the present study, it is
also important to consider whether visual working memory
is important for particular elements or processes involved in
solving equations. That is, it is suggested above that visual
working memory may be relevant for holding interim results
and carries. In this respect, the present study did not
specifically examine the effect of varying the number or
complexity of carries. As suggested by the results of
Heathcote (1984), however, there may be an interaction
between the number of carries and visual similarity. This is
an area for future research to consider in more depth.
Noël et al. used Belgian participants and this replication
was conducted with Canadian undergraduates. Educational
standards and approaches vary between these environments
and there may be cross-cultural differences in the use of
visual-spatial working memory during arithmetic. Future
research should examine whether varying presentation
format elucidates a similar effect of visual similarity among
Belgian participants.
Finally, it is of interest to note that the present study used
stimuli previously developed by Noël et al. (2001) rather
than examining the entire population of visual similarities.
Future research should consider comparing stimuli from
various points within the population distribution for visual
similarity in order to investigate at which point a problem’s
visual similarity begins to interfere with processing.
In summary, the present study extended previous research
on the role of visual processing in mental arithmetic. By
manipulating both visual similarity and presentation format
within a carefully planned experimental design, the present
study uncovered a potentially important role of visual
working memory in solving mental addition. These results
suggest that, to better understand mental arithmetic, it is
important to consider both presentation format and visual
similarity amongst digits.

Della Sala, S., Gray, C, Baddeley, A., & Wilson, L. (1997)
Visual Patterns Test: A Test of Short-Term Visual Recall.
London, UK: Thames Valley Test Company.
DeStefano, D., & LeFevre, J. (2004). The role of working
memory in mental arithmetic. EJCP, 16, 353-386.
French, J. W., Ekstrom, R. B., & Price, I. A. (1963). Kit of
reference tests for cognitive factors. Princeton, NJ: ETS.
Heathcote, D. (1994). The role of visuo-spatial working
memory in the mental addition of multi-digit addends.
Current Psychology of Cognition, 13, 207–245.
Hitch, G. J. (1978). The role of short-term working memory
in mental arithmetic. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 302-323.
Imbo, I., Vandierendonck, A., & Vergauwe, E. (2007). The
role of working memory in carrying and borrowing.
Psychological Research, 71, 467-483.
LeFevre, J., DeStefano, D., Coleman, B., & Shanahan, T.
(2005). Working memory and mathematical cognition.
In J.I.D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of Mathematical
Cognition. New York: Psychology Press.
Lhermitte, F. & Desrouesné, J. (1974). Paraphrasies et
jargon-aphasies dans le langage oral avec conservation du
langage écrit: Genèse des néologismes [Paraphrasia and
jargon aphasia in oral language with preserved written
language: Origins of neologisms]. Revue Neurologique,
130, 21-38.
Logie, R. H., Gilhooly, K. J., & Wynn, V. (1994). Counting
on working memory in arithmetic problem solving.
Memory & Cognition, 22, 395-410.
Miyake, A., Shah, P. (Eds.). (1999). Models of Working
Memory: Mechanisms of Active Maintenance and
Executive Control. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Noël, M. P., Désert, M., Aubrun, A., & Seron, X. (2001).
Involvement of short term memory in complex mental
calculation. Memory & Cognition, 29, 34-42.
Seitz K., & Schumann-Hengsteler, R. (2000). Mental
multiplication and working memory, EJCP, 12, 552-570.
Seitz, K., & Schumann-Hengsteler, R. (2002). Phonological
loop and central executive processes in mental addition
and multiplication, Psychologische Beitrage, 44, 275–
302.
Shek, D.T., & Spinks, J.A., (1986). A study of the
attentional changes accompanying orienting to different
types of change stimuli. Acta Psychologica 61, 153– 166.
Smith, E.E., & Jonides, J. (1999). Storage and executive
processes in the frontal lobes. Science, 283, 1657-1661.
Towse, J.N., Hitch, G.J., & Hutton, U. (2000). On the
interpretation of working memory span in adults, Memory
& Cognition, 28(3), 341-348.
Trbovich, P. L., & LeFevre, J. (2002). Phonological and
visual working memory in mental addition. Memory &
Cognition, 31, 738-745.
Wagner, R.K., Torgesen, J.K., & Rashotte, C.A. (1999).
Comprehensive Test Of Phonological Processing. Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.

Acknowledgments
Support for this research was funded, in part, by an Ontario
Graduate Scholarship to W. A. Deslauriers and by a grant
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada to J. LeFevre.

References
Baddeley, A. (1986) Working memory. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Clark, J. M. (1988). An encoding
complex view of cognitive number processing: Comment
on McCloskey, Sokol and Goodman (1986). JEP:
General, 117, 204-239.

246

