UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards a Cognitive Science of Social Inequality: Children's attention-related ERPs and
cortisol vary with their socioeconomic status

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7c26j9hc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
D'Angiulli, Amedeo
Weinberg, Joanne
Grunau, Ruth
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Towards a Cognitive Science of Social Inequality: Children’s Attention-related
ERPs and Salivary Cortisol vary with their Socioeconomic Status
Amedeo D’Angiulli (amedeo@connect.carleton.ca),
Carleton University, Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies & Department of Psychology, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Joanne Weinberg (joannew@interchange.ubc.ca),
The University of British Columbia, Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, 2350 Health Sciences Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3 Canada
Ruth Grunau (rgrunau@cw.bc.ca),
The University of British Columbia, Department of Pediatrics, 4480 Oak St.
Vancouver, BC V6H 3V4 Canada
Clyde Hertzman (clyde.hertzman@ubc.ca)
The University of British Columbia, Department of Health Care & Epidemiology, 5804 Fairview Avenue
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3 Canada

Pavel Grebenkov (pgrebenk@connect.carleton.ca),
Carleton University, Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
SES children generally live in environments that are more
crowded, chaotic, noisy and dangerous (e.g., Evans, 2004)
than high-SES children and thereby they experience more
stressful, unpredictable life events and less sense of control
(McLoyd, 1998). Research attempting to clarify how SES
may exert its influence on health and well-being shows that
stress and SES are associated (Baum, Garofalo & Yali,
1999). Form example, compared to high-SES individuals,
low-SES individuals are more likely to be exposed to
environmental challenges that elicit hyper-vigilance
(Kristenson et al., 2004). If low- and high-SES children live
in environments with different characteristics, this may be
regarded as a particular instance in which children develop
different ways of integrating cognitive and emotional
aspects involved in adaptation and self-regulation (Blair,
2002). Accordingly, it is reasonable to expect children from
different SES backgrounds to develop experience-dependent
patterns of neural activity and self-regulation that are
differentially associated with attention and executive
cognitive processes depending on the types of
environmental challenges they normally encounter.
Although the relationship between SES and
development may influence some of the most important,
and evolutionarily recent functions associated with frontal
brain activity such as selective attention and executive
control (Farah, Noble, & Hurt, 2004), there has been little
direct study of the brain processes that mediate the effects of
childhood experiences associated with living conditions, as
reflected by proxy SES indicators, on executive
performance.
Like other cognitive abilities required at school, at
home, or in the community, children’s selective attention
may be expected to be subject to the potent influences of

Abstract
We investigated the relationships between socioeconomic
status (SES) and the neural correlates of selective attention
by comparing event-related potentials (ERPs) in low- and
high-SES preadolescents during an auditory selective
attention task. Salivary cortisol levels were also determined
before and after the task. ERP difference waveforms
between attended and unattended auditory stimuli (Nd,
difference negativity) were significant in the high-SES
group but not in the low-SES group. However, post-ERP
cortisol levels were elevated only for low-SES children and
there were no differences between the groups in reaction
times and accuracy. We conclude that low-SES children
have reduced attentional selectivity, but at the cost of
heightened executive control which allows them to inhibit
responding to attended distracters and perform the task as
well as high-SES children.
Socioeconomic status reflects living conditions associated
with differences or “inequalities” in a series of outcomes
during different periods of the life-course (e.g., Graham &
Power, 2004). In the last 30 years, research has established
that family income and other indicators of socioeconomic
status of origin (SES), such as parental occupation or
education, are highly associated with cognitive and
achievement outcomes in childhood (review in Bradley &
Corwyn, 2002).
Several environmental variables, including physical
health, home environment, early education and
neighbourhood characteristics, co-vary systematically with
SES and are likely to influence the SES gap in children’s
cognitive performance and achievement. In particular, low-

211

attention task would be associated with changes in cortisol
pre- versus post-ERP measurements. Our predictions were
that basal cortisol levels of low-SES children would be
higher compared with the high-SES children and that the
former would have higher post-ERP cortisol levels.

family SES (Bradley & Corwin, 2002). A few studies (e.g.,
Ardila & Rosselli, 1994; Lupien et al., 2001) have indeed
shown a correlation between SES and children’s
performance on behavioural tests of selective attention.
Other research has shown correlations between SES and
other executive cognitive processes that are indirectly
connected to selective attention, (Breznitz & Norman, 1998;
Noble, McCandliss, & Farah, 2007; Waber, et al., 2006).
One limitation of this research is that it employed composite
variables that were not designed to characterize which
specific underlying neural processes might be involved in
the observed outcomes. Without evidence from
neuroimaging of subjects’ concurrent task performance,
inferences on the relationship between SES and brain
functions are indirect.
There has been very little investigation of the
relationship between SES and the neural responses
underlying selective attention in childhood. Preliminary
ERP reports (e.g., Lauinger, Sanders, Stevens, & Neville,
2006) suggest that, while high-SES children “filter out”
irrelevant information, low-SES children of various ages
attend to it as much as they attend to the relevant
information, without apparent differences or consequences
in terms of task performance. The primary purpose of the
present ERP study was to further investigate the pattern of
relationships between SES and ERP performance in
preadolescent children. Specifically, we examined the
possibility that the level of selectivity in auditory attention
in low- and high-SES children may be associated with the
ability to regulate cognitive resources as well as the
behaviour required for correctly carrying out an attention
task. In the paradigm we used, the challenge for the children
was controlling and monitoring attentional allocation as
well as response inhibition to distracters that are partially or
fully attended; hereafter, we will refer to these components
of self-regulation as executive control.
Posner and Rothbart (1998) have argued that the anterior
attention system, which includes areas of the midprefrontal
cortex, underlies executive control capabilities. The
electrical brain activity in the range of 4 to 8 Hz, also
known as theta activity, is generally believed to be reflective
of processes of selective attention, focused attention,
expectancy and attentional orienting (Onton, Delorme &
Makeig, 2005). Its appearance over the frontal cortical
regions has been especially correlated with performance on
tasks requiring complex information processing. Therefore,
in addition to ERP analysis of the EEG signal we also
conducted power analysis to confirm the involvement of
midline frontal areas. This system is believed to be involved
in the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis, which secretes the hormone cortisol in response
to stress. Research has shown that low-SES individuals
generally have higher basal concentrations of the hormone,
believed to reflect higher sensitivity of these individuals to
the acute stress response as a result of greater exposure to
adverse environmental challenges. Accordingly, we
examined patterns of salivary cortisol over the school day
and tested the extent to which the performance of the

Method
Participants. Twenty-eight preadolescent children (mean
age = 13.2, SD = 1.4) half with low-SES and half with highSES background, all Caucasian, with no hearing
impairments, were recruited from two different schools: one
attended predominantly by students with high SES and the
other attended predominantly by students with low SES. All
of the participants were typically-developing children with
no history of medication or referral to disability assessment
or services. The two groups did not differ significantly in
average school grade.
SES measurement. For each student, SES scores were
computed using an adapted version of Hollingshead’s
(1975) four-factor index of social status. The highest
occupation of either parent was rated using the Hollingshead
categories 1-4, ranging from ‘higher executives’ to
‘laborers/menial workers’. On the composite SES scale
(highest = I, lowest = V), the high-SES parents ranked II
(corresponding
to
college
graduates
and
managers/professionals) whereas the low-SES parents
ranked IV (corresponding to high school graduates and
skilled workers). The percentage of single parents was 40%
in the low-SES group versus 16% in the high-SES group.
The percentage of unemployed parents was 35% in the lowSES group versus 0% in the high-SES group. The
percentage of developmental vulnerability (as defined by
Kershaw et al., 2005) in the low-SES versus the high-SES
neighbourhood was 43% versus 7%. The low-SES
neighbourhood ranked first for vulnerability, whereas the
high-SES neighbourhood ranked last in the context of a
large urban area.
Design. Children were seen individually across an entire
ordinary school day. Saliva was collected six times, four
times before and two after the ERP experiment. To exclude
possible confounds (food intake, sleep patterns and intense
physical activity), children completed a diary – there were
no systematic reliable differences in relation to these
confounding variables between the two groups.

EEG/ERP data collection
Stimuli. The stimuli were four pure tones, two frequencies
(800 Hz and 1200 Hz) by two durations (100 ms and 250
ms). EEG was recorded during 2 blocks in which both 800and 1200-Hz tones and durations were presented. In a block,
the children were instructed to attend to tones of either 800
or the 1200 Hz, which defined the “attended channel”, and
to ignore tones with the other frequencies. There were 30
(10%) attended target-duration (250 ms) tones (targets), 30
(10%) unattended target-duration tones with the same
duration as targets but the other frequency (distracters), 120
(40%) attended non-target duration tones with the same
frequency as targets but the other duration (150 ms), and
212

applied the basic bootstrap percentile method (Efron &
Tibshirani, 1993) with 1024 bootstrap samples to compute
the 99% confidence interval for the latency and amplitude
difference between the conditions averaged across the
baseline interval. The difference in the post-stimulus
waveform was considered significant when the difference
waveform exceeded the confidence interval. Tests were
therefore assessed at critical significance levels of pcrit <
0.001.
Cortisol sampling. Basal cortisol patterns were determined
from saliva samples collected over the course of the school
day, before (8:20am, 12:10pm, 12:45pm, 1:15pm) and after
(1:45pm, 2:45pm) the ERP session and completion of the
attention task. The first sample was taken within a few
minutes after arrival at school (8:20am). Four samples were
taken after lunch (lunch period was from 11:45 am to 12:30
pm) at 30 minute intervals (12:10 pm, 12:45 pm, 1:15 pm;
1:45 pm) in relation to the ERP session. The first two of
these post-lunch samples were obtained to evaluate cortisol
changes due to putting on the EEG cap and being in an
experimental session, as reported in previous neuroimaging
studies (e.g., Tessner, Walker, Hochman & Hamann, 2006).
The second two of these samples assessed cortisol responses
pre- vs. post-ERP testing. These target samples were those
collected at 1:15 pm, immediately before starting the
attention task, and at 1:45 pm, immediately after completion
of the 30 min ERP task. Saliva was also obtained before the
children went home (2:45pm) to measure possible
differences between low- and high-SES groups in returning
to baseline after the ERP session, as well as to assess more
fully the expected decrease in cortisol levels over the school
day.
To collect saliva, the child was asked to spit into a small
plastic test tube. Saliva samples were stored at 4oC until
sampling was completed. The samples were then brought to
the laboratory, where they were stored at -20 C0 until
assayed by radioimmunoassay using the Salimetrics High
Sensitivity Salivary Cortisol Enzyme Immunoassay Kit
(Salimetrics LLC, Philadelphia, PA). The interassay and
intraassay variation were both below 10%.
Data analysis. Cortisol data were examined for outliers,
defined as any value more than ±3 SD from the mean. Two
children had outlier values for cortisol. These values were
‘winsorized’ (Tukey, 1977). To compare pre- and post-ERP
cortisol levels we computed residualized change scores (as
in Zumbo, 1999) based on standardized residuals.

120 (40%) unattended non-target duration tones with the
other frequency and duration.
The four types of tones were presented binaurally with
an inter-stimulus interval of 1 second. Stimulus presentation
followed different random orders for each block of trials and
for each child; the different orders were randomly assigned
to a given block and child, except that they were preselected so that a target tone would not appear immediately
after the next in the presentation sequence. Children were
asked to press a button as fast and as accurately as possible
to the longer (250 ms) tones (i.e., targets) of one of the two
presented frequencies, which was designated as the attended
channel. For half of the children within each SES group, in
the first block the attended channel was 800 Hz whereas in
the second block it was 1200 Hz. For the other half, the
order was reversed. Reaction times and accuracy were
measured for behavioural analyses.
Data acquisition and recording procedures. EEG
recordings were made at F3, F4, Fz, FC3, FC4, Cz, and Pz
sites during a binaural standard selective attention task
(Hillyard, Hink, Schwent & Picton, 1973). All electrodes
were referenced to nose tip. Impedances were kept below 5
kOhms. Vertical electrooculogram was recorded from a split
bipolar electrode on the left supraorbital ridge and the left
zygomatic arch. The data from all channels were digitized
on-line at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. Ocular artifact
reduction was based on the eye movement reduction
algorithm devised by Semlitsch, Anderer, Achuster and
Presslich (1986).
ERP processing. Each participant’s EEG was epoched (100
ms pre-stimulus and 900 ms post-stimulus) and averaged
with respect to the onset of each tone. Averages were
computed to both relevant and irrelevant tones, separately
for 800 Hz and 1200 Hz. Analyses showed no significant
differences as a function of type of pure tone, therefore, the
ERPs were averaged across the two types of tones to yield
relevant and irrelevant pure tone averages for each subject.
The effect of selective attention was operationalized by
computing negative difference waveforms as in previous
work in children of comparable ages (Berman & Friedman,
1995). Event-related potential (ERP) differences between
attended tones (same frequency but different duration
compared to the target tone) and unattended tones (different
frequency and duration compared to the target tone) were
calculated. That is, we subtracted averaged ERP responses
to 800 Hz (1200 Hz) tones when unattended from averaged
ERP responses to 800 Hz (1200 Hz) tones when attended.
Note that these trials did not require manual responses.
Amplitudes of the attention-related Nd (difference
negativity) wave were calculated as the maximum negative
deflection at two intervals: 100-400 ms (classified as the
early Nd) and 500-800 ms (classified as the late Nd) in the
ERP difference waveforms between attended and
unattended tones. Analyses of variance were used to
determine significant differences of the early and late Nd
peak amplitudes and latencies between low- and high-SES
groups. Additionally, to test for significant response
differences between attend and unattend conditions, we

Results
EEG/ERP and behavioral data. There were no
significant differences between low and high SES children
in mean reaction times (579 ms vs. 616 ms) or in mean
accuracy (73% vs. 76%). In contrast, the early Nd
amplitudes were more negative for high- than low-SES
children (based on bootstrap sampling of the baseline
difference waveform, p < .001). The effects were evident
centro-frontally but were best seen at site FC3, with a mean
difference at maximum peak of ~ 1.1 µV (t (26) = -2.17, p <
.05). No significant effect was found at Pz (t < 1, for

213

maximum peak). There were no ERP latency differences
between the two groups (median t (26) = 1.11, p = .28). In
sum, children’s Nd brain response, which reflects selective
attention, varied with SES and seemed associated with a
gross location of mid-frontal areas.
The small or absent Nd in the low-SES children means
that attentional resources reflected by evoked responses
were allocated about equally to both the unattended and the
attended channel. However, because these children
performed similarly to children with high SES, they must
have used neurocognitive processes other than those used by
their high-SES counterparts. To investigate this possibility,
we conducted a spectral power analysis of the single-trial
EEG recordings in the theta band (4-8 Hz). This analysis
revealed non-phase-locked activity concurrent with Nd. The
results showed that low-SES children had significantly
greater event-related theta power to the unattended than
attended tones between 200-700 ms, whereas high-SES
children showed very small or no differences in theta power
between the tones (p < .001). Thus, the results from the
power analysis confirm that low-SES children probably
used neural pathways different from those used by high-SES
children to attend and respond selectively.
Cortisol data. A 2 x 6 (SES x Cortisol Collection Time)
mixed-design ANOVA was computed with repeated
measures on the last factor using Greenhouse-Geisser
adjustment as required. There was a main effect of Cortisol
Collection Time (F(3, 62) = 6.57, MSE = .04, p = .001) and
a marginal effect of SES (F(1, 23) = 3.72, MSE = .01, p =
.07), but no interaction effect (F > 1). Overall, cortisol
levels in low-SES children were marginally higher than
levels in high-SES children. Polynomial ANOVA contrasts
revealed that cortisol levels over time followed a similar,
typical linear pattern in low- and high-SES children, with
highest levels in the morning, and levels progressively
declining over the day (F(1, 23) = 7.86, MSE = .04, p = .01).
To test the hypothesis that low-SES children exerted
more effort to inhibit their responses to the unattended tones
in order to performance as well as high-SES children, we
examined individual differences using a simple hierarchical
regression model that emulates ANOVA contrasts, and
relative levels of between-subjects and repeated-measure
factors, with adjusted degrees of freedom (Sackett & Wu
Shortt, 1995). The model regressed positive increase in
selectivity of attention as reflected by the Nd (the inverse
linear transformation of Nd amplitudes) against pre-post
ERP cortisol residualized change scores. This analysis
revealed the expected difference between the low- and highSES groups (F(2, 25) = 3.69, MSE = 1.60, p < .05, R2 = .23).
Specifically, for low-SES children, an increase in selectivity
of attention corresponded to an increase in post-ERP
cortisol levels (R2 = .27) whereas no such relationship
existed for high-SES children (R2 = .002) as confirmed by a
significant slope difference (t(1, 25) = -2.43, SE = .49, p <
.05). This association between selectivity of attention and
cortisol levels appear to support the hypothesis that lowSES children exerted additional executive control to inhibit

their responses to the unattended tones in order to
performance as well as high-SES children.

Discussion
There are three major and novel findings in this study. First,
children’s Nd brain response, which reflects selective
attention, varied with SES. The Nd effect was present in the
high-SES children but not in the low-SES children, which
suggests that the latter group attended to irrelevant
information about as much as they attended to relevant
information. These results agree with those of Lauinger,
Sanders, Stevens, & Neville (2006) who found that children
of various ages in their low-SES group attended equally to
distracters as much as to target stimuli. Furthermore, just
like
these
investigators,
who
found
no
behavioural/performance differences between their low and
high SES participants, the children from both groups in our
study did not differ in their performance. Taken together,
these findings indicate that there may be attention
processing differences as a function of SES level even in the
absence of reliable performance differences, which suggests
that behavioural measures alone may not be sufficient to
uncover the effects of social context on cognition. Second,
cortisol levels in low-SES children were marginally higher
than levels in high-SES children. Third, for low-SES
children, an increase in selectivity of attention corresponded
to an increase in post-ERP cortisol levels, whereas no such
relationship existed for high-SES children, suggesting that
the processing of irrelevant tones caused low-SES children
to exert greater executive control to inhibit their responses
to the unattended tones in order to performance as well as
high-SES children.
If our interpretation of the Nd differences between lowand high-SES children is correct, it would appear that lowSES children did not use the selective attention mechanisms
that are customarily associated with the evoked Nd
waveform in the same way that high-SES children did. This
conclusion is further supported by the finding of a different
pattern of theta activity in the two groups of children. LowSES children had significantly greater event-related theta
power to the unattended than the attended tones, whereas
high-SES children showed very small or no differences in
theta power between the two types of information.
Consistent with previous data on theta activity (Ishii et al.,
1999), these findings suggest that low-SES children used
additional frontal executive resources to control for the
greater processing of irrelevant information compared to the
high-SES children.
Although, the electrophysiological method in our study
had limited spatial resolution, based on the results of other
studies that used more complex integrative ERP-fMRI to
make inferences about localiation (Opitz, Mecklinger,
Friederici, & von Cramon, 1999) with similar auditory
selective attention tasks, suggests that the observed
differences between low- and high-SES children involve
frontal lobe structures, which continue to undergo extensive
development well into childhood. Thus, our findings
support the hypothesis that the influences of SES on

214

executive control to perform as well as the high-SES
children.
Differences between low- and high-SES children in our
study may also have been due to differences in IQ, nutrition
and/or exposure to dangerous chemicals. Although it is
unclear what the exact causal relationship may be between
various intrinsic and extrinsic factors associated with the
results in the present study, it does not detract from them the
fact that they are reflective of real effects of SES on
cognition.
From the point of view of developmental psychobiology,
the present findings challenge the view that low SES should
necessarily have a negative influence on children’s
performance. We have provided evidence that differences in
neural processes in low- and high-SES do not necessarily
imply a performance gap, but may instead be interpreted as
part of different regulatory systemic responses enabling
children to adapt to environments that present different
types of information-processing challenges. Given that low
and high SES children live in very different environments,
from a neural selectionist-constructivistic perspective
(Quartz & Sejnowski, 1997) it makes sense that these two
groups would develop experience-dependent patterns of
neural activity and self-regulation that would be
differentially and preferentially associated with selective
variations in attention and executive cognitive processes.
Accordingly, the hypothesis that low-SES children may
have an attentional style characterized by learned sustained
vigilance or general “alarm” suggests that these children
may be better than high-SES children at performing tasks
that require sustained attention. We are currently working
on testing this possibility in our laboratory.

selective attention may be associated with the way
experience-dependent neural connectivity shapes the course
of postnatal development of frontal brain regions (Noble,
Norman & Farah, 2005).
The frontal areas of concern are likely part of the
extensive network known as the anterior attentional system
which includes areas of the midprefrontal cortex. The chief
function of this system is to integrate processes of
perception and selection of environmental information with
the processes that regulate effortful control and execution of
actions (Posner & Rothbart, 1998). Accordingly, in
conjunction with the results from the power analysis, the
finding of differential patterns of relationship between
selective attention and cortisol in our two groups suggests
that low-SES children used more executive resources to
control for the processing of irrelevant information than did
the high-SES children.
Also, the components of the anterior attentional system
are believed to be involved in the regulation of reactive,
emotion-related system, such as the HPA axis. Of interest
here is a study by Davis, Bruce & Gunnar (2002) that
assessed the performance of six-year-old children on
neuropsychological tasks known to involve the brain
regions that comprise the anterior attentional system.
Surprisingly, they found that greater accuracy on the
neuropsychological tasks was associated with higher, not
lower, cortisol levels. However, cortisol levels were well
within the normal baseline range, and thus did not reflect a
stress response. Thus, they suggested that associations
between higher cortisol and better performance may be in
accord with the well-documented inverted U-shaped
relationship between cortisol and many cognitive functions
(Lupien & McEwen, 1997). More recently, Blair, Granger,
& Razza (2005) found better self-regulation was associated
with greater cortisol responses in preschool children. If so,
this could mean that low SES children may filter out less
information but at the same time, their ability to compensate
for this additional processing is at the cost of higher
cognitive effort as indexed by greater cortisol secretion.
Why would low-SES children, but not their high-SES
counterparts, attend to and process irrelevant information?
One possible explanation is that this may be the
manifestation of learned sustained vigilance or general
‘alarm’ associated with the particular living conditions and
experiences which characterize low SES (Ursin & Eriksen,
2004). As noted, low-SES children generally live in
environments that are more crowded, chaotic, noisy and
dangerous (e.g., Evans, 2004) than those of high-SES
children, and thereby experience more stressful,
unpredictable life events and less sense of control (McLoyd,
1998). Hence, these low-SES children may learn to
constantly keep “an ear to the ground” attempting to process
a broad set of information, relevant or irrelevant to current
goals, and anticipate potentially challenging, negative or
threatening situations. Transposing the real life situation to
our study situation, we can speculate that the low-SES
children divided their attention between task-relevant and
irrelevant information and then engaged additional

References
Ardila, A., & Rosselli, M. (1994). Development of
language, memory, and visuospatial abilities in 5- to 12
year-old children using a neuropsychological battery.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 10(2), 97-120.
Baum, A., Garofalo, J. P., & Yali, A. M. (1999).
Socioeconomic status and chronic stress: Does stress
account for SES effects on health? In N. E. Adler & M.
Marmont (Eds.), Socioeconomic status and health in
industrial nations: Social, psychological, and biological
pathways (pp. 131-144). New York: New York
Academy of Sciences.
Berman, S., & Friedman, D. (1995). The development of
selective attention as reflected by event-related brain
potentials. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
59, 1-31.
Blair, C. (2002). School readiness: Integrating cognition and
emotion in a neurobiological conceptualization of child
functioning at school entry. American Psychologist,
57(2), 111-127.
Blair, C., Granger, D. & Razza, R. P. (2005). Cortisol
reactivity is positively related to executive function in
preschool children attending head start. Child
Development, 76(3), 554-567.

215

McLoyd, V.C. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and
child development. American Psychologist, 53(2), 185204.
Noble, K. G., McCandliss, B. D. & Farah, M. J. (2007).
Socioeconomic gradients predict individual differences
in neurocognitive abilities. Developmental Science, 9,
642-654.
Noble, K. G., Norman, F. M., & Farah, M. J. (2005).
Neurocognitive correlates of socioeconomic status in
kindergarten children. Developmental Science, 8(1), 7487.
Onton, J., Delorme, A., & Making, S. (2005). Frontal
midline EEG dynamics during working memory.
Neuroimage, 27. 341-356.
Opitz, B., Mecklinger A., Friederici, A. D. & von Cramon,
D. Y. (1999). The functional neuroanatomy of novelty
processing: Integrating ERP and fMRI results. Cerebral
Cortex, 9, 379-391.
Posner, M. I. & Rothbart, M. K. (1998). Attention, self
regulation and consciousness. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 353, 19151927.
Quartz, S. R., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1997). The neural basis of
cognitive development: A constructivist manifesto.
Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 20, 537-596.
Sackett, G. P., & Shortt, J. W. (1995). Hierarchical
regression analysis with repeated-measure data. In J.M.
Gottman (Ed.), The analysis of change (pp. 67-82).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Semlitsch, H., Anderer, P., Schuster, P., & Presslich, O.
(1986). A solution for reliable and valid reduction of
ocular artifacts, applied to the P300 ERP.
Psychophysiology, 23, 695–703.
Tessner, K. D., Walker, E. F., Hochman, K., & Hamann, S.
(2006). Cortisol responses of healthy volunteers
undergoing magnetic resonance imaging. Human Brain
Mapping, 27(11), 889-895.
Tukey, J.W., 1997. Exploratory data analysis. Don Mills,
Ontario: Addison-Wesley.
Ursin, H., & Eriksen, H. R. (2004). The cognitive activation
theory of stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 29(5), 567592.
Zumbo, B. D. (1999). The simple difference score as an
inherently poor measure of change: Some reality, much
mythology. In Bruce Thompson (Ed.), Advances in
Social Science Methodology, Volume 5, (pp. 269-304).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Bradley, R. H., & Corwin, R. F. (2002). Socioeconomic
status and child development. Annual Review of
Psychology, 53, 371–399.
Breznitz, Z. & Norman, G. (1998). Differences in
concentration ability among low- and high-SES Israeli
students: A follow-up study. Journal of Genetic
Psychology, 159(1), 82-93.
Davis, E. P., Bruce, J. & Gunnar, M. R. (2002). The anterior
attention network: Associations with temperament and
neuroendocrine activity in 6-year-old children.
Developmental Psychobiology, 40(1), 43-56.
Efron, B. & Tibshrani, R. J. (1993). An introduction to the
bootstrap. New York: Chapman and Hall.
Evans, G. W. (2004). The environment of childhood
poverty. American Psychologist, 59, 77-92.
Farah, M. J., Noble, K. G. & Hurt, H. (2005). Poverty,
privilege and brain development: Emprical findings and
ethical implications. In J. Illes (Ed.), Neuroethics in the
21st Century. New York: Oxford University Press.
Graham, H. & Power, C. (2004). Childhood disadvantage
and health inequalities: A framework for policy based on
lifecourse research. Child: Care, Health and
Development, 30, 671-679.
Hillyard, S. A., Hink, R. F., Schwent, V. L., & Picton, T. W.
(1973). Electrical signs of selective attention in the
human brain. Science, 182, 177-180.
Hollingshead, A.B. (1975). Four factor index of social
status. New Haven: Yale University Department of
Sociology.
Ishii, R., Shinosaki, K., Ukai, S., Inouye, T., Ishihara, T.,
Yoshimine, T., Hirabuki, N., Asada, H., Kihara, T.,
Robinson, S.E., & Takeda, M. (1999). Medial prefrontal
cortex generates frontal midline theta rhythm.
Neuroreport, 10, 675-679.
Kershaw, P., Irwin, L., Trafford, K., & Hertzman, C. (2005).
The British Columbia atlas of child development.
Vancouver, BC: Human Early Learning Partnership and
Western geographical Press.
Kristenson, M., Eriksen, H. R., Sluiter, J. K., Starke, D., &
Ursin, H. (2004). Psychobiological mechanisms of
socioeconomic differences in health. Social Science &
Medicine, 58(8), 1511-1522.
Lauinger, B., Sanders, L., Stevens, C., and Neville, H.
(2006). An ERP study of selective auditory attention and
socioeconomic status in young children. Cognitive
Neuroscience Society, 13.
Lupien, S. J., King, S., Meaney, M. J. & McEwen, B. S.
(2001). Can poverty get under your skin?: Basal cortisol
levels and cognitive function in children from low and
high socioeconomic status. Development and
Psychopathology, 13, 653-676.

216

