UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two Eras in Learning Theory: Implications for Cognitively Faithful Models of Language
Acquisition and Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wn7k908

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Niyogi, Partha
Berwick, Robert C.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two Eras in Learning Theory: Implications for Cognitively Faithful Models of
Language Acquisition and Change
Partha Niyogi (niyogi@cs.chicago.edu)
Department of Computer Science & Department of Statistics, 1100 E. 58th Street
Hyde Park, Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Robert C. Berwick (berwick@csail.mit.edu)
Department of EECS and Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 32D-728, 77 Mass Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract

accounts. We have now obtained statistics from the PennHelsinki corpus of Old and Middle English that permits estimation of historical parameter values. Specifically, we have
analyzed the competition between two grammatical systems
in Middle English, (one primarily verb-final (OV-type) and
the other verb-initial (VO-type)).
In this setting we assume two grammars with corresponding languages L1 and L2 . g1 speakers produce expressions
with probability P1 over L1 and g2 speakers, probability P2
over L2 . Parameter a = P1 (L1 ∩ L2 ) and b = P2 (L1 ∩ L2 ).
a and b are the probabilities with which speakers of pure
g1 and g2 produce “ambiguous” expressions. If xt is the
proportion of g1 -type grammars in the tth generation, then:
t
xt+1 = (1−a)xt(1−a)x
+(1−b)(1−xt ) . This has bifurcations as a − b continuously changes. We estimate a and b at a single time point,
using a − b to predict which grammatical type dominates in
successive generations. However, given data from a mixture distribution P = xP1 + (1 − x)P2 , can we even estimate
a and b? Yes: we collect data from the Penn-Helsinki corpus
by sampling a few individuals at the same time point. This
is nontrivial, because only surface forms of writers’ expressions are available; one cannot always uniquely decode underlying grammars. We overcome this by “tying” parameters
in a novel way. Importantly, this new estimation procedure
permits empirical tests of this class of models for language
change using data from historical corpora for the first time,
and again validates the need for a fullly population view of
language acquisition, evolution, and change.

We review recent advances towards more cognitively-faithful
models of language acquisition and change that parallel conceptual shifts in computational learning theory, and how these
new models can yield improved empirical accounts in actual
corpus case studies of English historical language change.

Introduction
Formal approaches to language acquisition fall roughly into
two historical periods. The first, dating from Gold to the mid
1980s, focused on language learning using recursive function
theory techniques. The second, dating from Valiant’s PAClearning model to this day, shifted the focus from effective to
efficient computability, echoing computer science’s shift from
computability to complexity theory. While these advances
moved to more cognitively faithful assumptions — inexact
learnability and learnability relative to sample size complexity — and provided useful insights, they retained a key cognitive limitation: a single target grammar/language. Over the
last decade, a new class of learning models has been developed (Niyogi & Berwick, 1997) explicitly embracing the cognitive reality that learners are situated in heterogeneous populations, with potentially many grammars. This viewpoint,
“Social Learning,” embraces the more fully Darwinian picture of variation across both parental and offspring generations. However, if one restricts oneself instead to a narrower
single parent–single learner setting, as in many simulationbased methods e.g., the “Iterated Learning” model of Kirby,
Dowman, & Griffiths (2007), the resulting systems reduce to
Markov chains. These frameworks cannot exhibit certain empirically observed phase transitions, which demand nonlinear
dynamics.

References
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. (2007). Innateness
and culture in the evolution of language. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science, 104, 5241-5245.
Lightfoot, D. (1999). The development of language. Malden,
MA: Blackwells Publishers.
Niyogi, P. (2004). Phase transitions in language evolution. In
L. Jenkins (Ed.), Variation and universals in biolinguistics.
New York: Elsevier.
Niyogi, P. (2006). The computational nature of language
learning and evolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Niyogi, P., & Berwick, R. (1997). A dynamical systems
model for language change. Journal of Complex Systems,
11, 161-204.

New Results for Learnability Theories
Importantly, modeling based on this shift to a more
cognitively-faithful picture yields improved empirical predictions. First, historically attested phase-transitions in the evolution of English, as outlined in Lightfoot (1999), are better
described. Furthermore, until now there have been no previous studies that have actually estimated from historical corpora the parameters of the dynamical systems corresponding
to such models, in order to verify whether the attested patterns of change are indeed those predicted by the theoretical

537

