UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Qualitative Reasoning for the Attribution of Moral Responsibility

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d6950x2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Tomai, Emmett
Forbus, Ken

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Qualitative Reasoning for the Attribution of Moral Responsibility
Emmett Tomai

Ken Forbus

Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University, 2133 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL 60208
{etomai,forbus}@northwestern.edu

formal office. Blame is moral condemnation that follows
from responsibility for a morally reprehensible outcome.
Shaver’s attribution process begins with a negative
outcome and assigns responsibility to an involved agent by
sequentially evaluating five dimensions: causality,
intentionality, coercion, appreciation, and foreknowledge.
Causal involvement in the negative outcome is a
prerequisite for any responsibility to be assigned. Shaver
characterizes intention as a scale of deliberateness with
intentional at one end and involuntary at the other, such
that the highest degree of intention should result in the
strongest judgment of responsibility. Intention, however,
can be moderated by coercion and appreciation. Coercion
captures the force exerted by another agent which limits
the available choices, from a social standpoint, for the
agent in question. This could be through some direct threat
or via an authority relationship. An agent who is coerced
is assigned less responsibility than one who acts
intentionally in the absence of coercion. Appreciation
concerns the perceiver’s judgment as to whether the agent
in question has the capacity to understand that the outcome
in question is morally wrong. If the agent does not have
such capacity, they still bear some responsibility but are
held exempt from blame. Foreknowledge is defined as the
extent to which the agent was aware that an action would
result in the outcome, prior to execution. Again, it is the
perceiver’s judgment of the knowledge the agent possessed
that is evaluated. In the absence of intentionality, Shaver
attributes responsibility based on foreknowledge.
In Shaver’s model foreknowledge may be what the agent
is thought to know (epistemic) or what the perceiver thinks
the agent should have known (expected). However, it says
little about the contribution of expected foreknowledge.
This is not surprising as his model focuses on the
perception of the agent’s deliberative process. Weiner’s
model [Weiner 1995], by contrast, focuses on attribution of
responsibility in cases of achievement and failure. In the
case where an agent has failed to have expected
foreknowledge, this model predicts that the perception of
causal controllability over that failure determines the
degree of responsibility attributed.
Blame in Shaver’s model follows from responsibility
unless there is a justification or excuse. Justification does
not deny responsibility; instead it is an argument about
why blame should not be assigned despite responsibility.
An example would be when someone shot someone else
dead, but did it in self-defense.
Excuses deny
responsibility by appealing the judgments of the
dimensions (e.g. “I didn’t know”, “I didn’t mean it”).
Successful intervention by an excuse alters the assignment
of responsibility.

Abstract
We present a computational model, based on Attribution
theory, of responsibility judgment for negative events. Our
model uses Qualitative Process theory to reason over the
continuous parameters involved in attribution, avoiding the
need for ad-hoc assignment of quantitative values.
Qualitative reasoning allows our model to infer relative
amounts of responsibility for a situation in a manner that is
consistent with relative amounts of blame attributed in a
psychological experiment by Mao and Gratch [Mao &
Gratch 2005].

Who is to blame?
Bad things happen, and blame quickly follows. From
the affairs of nations to personal misfortunes,
accountability is an important part of how we understand
the world around us. But how does one go from
perceiving situations to judging responsibility? This
question has been the topic of much research in social
psychology. Recently, efforts have been made to create
computational models that capture the process of
responsibility judgment.
This paper describes how Qualitative Process theory
[Forbus 1984] can be used in such modeling. We briefly
summarize aspects of Attribution theory relevant to
responsibility and blame judgments, then discuss the Mao
and Gratch computational model [Mao & Gratch
2005][Mao 2006]. We present an alternative model for
attribution of blame based on QP theory, which we claim
better represents the underlying theory. Experimental
results using data collected by Mao show that our model
captures that data better, and makes additional
predictions.

Attribution Theory
The goal of Attribution theory [Heider 1958] is to
identify the conditions that will lead a perceiver, through
an attribution process, to attribute some behavior, event or
outcome to an internal disposition of the agent involved, as
opposed to an environmental condition. Attributions
depend on the perceiver’s knowledge. Attribution of
blame has been addressed by Shaver [1985] and Weiner
[1995]. Shaver distinguishes cause, responsibility and
blameworthiness. For a given negative outcome, cause is
defined as being an insufficient but necessary part of a
condition, which is itself unnecessary but sufficient for that
result. The theory only covers causes which represent
human agency. Responsibility is “moral accountability”,
distinct from legal responsibility or the responsibilities of a

149

foreknowledge in the judgment of the perceiver. Given a
scenario involving a negative outcome and some number
of agents involved, our model attributes qualitative values
and constraints to these variables according to evidence
from observable events in the scenario.
A significant distinction is made between evidence of
act and outcome intention, following [Weiner 2001]. It is
assumed that an agent intends any action that they
perform or orders performed. If the action is known by
the agent to have only one outcome, then that outcome is
also intended.
There is considerable philosophical
discussion on whether foreknowledge of multiple
outcomes implies intention of all those outcomes. Shaver
claims a judgment of intention presupposes epistemic
foreknowledge, but not the other way around [Shaver
1985].
Conversely, Bratman argues that epistemic
foreknowledge combined with action must imply
intention [Bratman 1990].
Acknowledging these
different positions, our model makes the weaker inference
that when an agent is certain of an outcome and performs
or authorizes the action, it implies only some non-zero
level of intention. When an agent orders an action that
has multiple alternative outcomes and the performing
agent is allowed to choose between them, outcome
intention is entailed only for the performing agent.
The distinction between action and outcome intent
applies to coercion as well.
Where an imperative
command to act is given by an agent in a position of
authority, some amount of action coercion is inferred. It
may or may not be effective – this is known only by
comparison with later actions. Outcome coercion is
inferred by the same logic as outcome intention: both
agents must have foreknowledge of the outcome at the
time of the coercion and other outcome options must not be
equally available to the coerced agent. Furthermore, an
agent with prior intention is not coerced by being ordered
to do what he or she already intended.
Explicit communication of an expected future outcome
entails attribution of some amount of foreknowledge of
that outcome to the speaker and the hearer. This
foreknowledge may be accurate or not. When the
communicated claim is unqualified, our model infers
equality to an upper limit point of certainty. We do not
address the issue of deception.
These attributions are temporally bounded.
An
attribution holds over an interval that contains or is
overlapped by the interval of the event that provided
evidence for the attribution. Attributions are assumed to
persist until they meet an event that provides evidence for a
different value for that variable.

Mao and Gratch Computational Model
Mao, in collaboration with Gratch [Mao 2006][Mao &
Gratch, 2005] developed a computational model of
responsibility assignment which models the judgments of
attribution variables based on the dimensions of causality,
intentionality, coercion and foreknowledge, and the
attribution of blame1 following from those judgments. It
does not deal with justifications and excuses, thus blame
follows directly from responsibility.
Mao’s work is an important step towards modeling
blame attribution. However, there are three limitations we
address here. First, as [Mao 2006] observes, it uses
Boolean values for attribution variables, whereas
Attribution theory describes the dimensions of
responsibility in terms of scalar values. Second, all blame
is assigned to a single agent (or group of agents in a joint
action). This is inconsistent with the human data in Mao’s
own experiment. Third, the degree of blame assigned by
the system is limited to a value of high for intentional
action and a value of low in the absence of intention.
These assignments also do not match up with her data.

Qualitative Model of Attribution
We claim that these limitations can be addressed by
encoding Attribution theory in Qualitative Process (QP)
theory [Forbus 1984]. We claim that this model makes
more informative distinctions between blame assignments
both within and across scenarios.
While physical domains have been a major focus of QR
research, researchers are increasingly finding QR
techniques useful in fields where theories are expressed in
continuous parameters more generally, including
organization theory (cf. [Kamps & Peli, 1995]), economics
(cf. [Steinmann, 1997]), and political reasoning (cf.
[Forbus & Kuehne 2005]). Qualitative reasoning, we
believe, provides an especially appropriate level of
representation for reasoning about social causality.
Theories typically are expressed in terms of continuous
parameters, such as “amount of intention” and “degree of
foreknowledge”, but there tend to not be principled ways to
move to quantitative models and numerical values for such
parameters. In those circumstances, qualitative modeling
is a more rigorous way to proceed, and ordinal fitting with
human data becomes the most robust measure.

Attributing dimensions of responsibility
We represent attribution variables for intentionality,
coercion and foreknowledge as nonnegative continuous
parameters. Judgments of causality remain Boolean, as
that is the extent of their impact in Shaver’s model. The
dimension of appreciation is not addressed by this model.
A value of zero is a lower limit point indicating the
absence of responsibility, intentionality, coercion or

Judging responsibility
We represent judgments of responsibility as nonnegative
continuous parameters whose values are constrained by
ordinal relationships. These constraints may involve
qualitative values on a totally ordered scale (e.g., some,
none) as well as comparisons with other agents (e.g., agent
X is more responsible than agent Y). These values and
constraints are derived in our model from the attributions
along the dimensions of responsibility.

1

Social psychological research cited in [Mao 2006] indicates that
there are differences in the processes used for responsibility for
positive events and negative events, hence the exclusive focus on
negative events here.

150

View: IntentionalButCoerced
Conditions:
responsibleByActionFor(?agent, ?action, ?outcome) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent, ?action, ?outcome),
?action) > 0 ∧
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer, ?agent, ?coercion-action,
?action, ?outcome),
?action) > 0
Consequences:

Causality constrains eligibility for responsibility. The
agent that performed the action that caused the outcome is
eligible of course. Where an agent is in a position of
authority over the action that caused the outcome, that
agent is also eligible. Authority is inferred based both on
domain knowledge of organizational structure and the
negotiation structure of the discussion. In both cases, the
agent is responsible by action. In the case of coercion, the
coercing agent is responsible by coercion and is also
eligible for responsibility for the outcome. An agent in a
position of authority who coerces is considered responsible
by coercion rather than action.
Given our omission of the more special-case dimension
of appreciation, Shaver’s attribution process displays four
distinct modes of judgment: causal without foreknowledge,
causal without intent, intentional but coerced and
intentional in the absence of coercion. Responsibility is
strictly increasing across these modes, in that order.
Within each state, responsibility is qualitatively
proportional (∝Q+) to a different attribution variable.
We claim that the causal without foreknowledge mode is
better understood as a case of achievement failure, making
responsibility qualitatively proportional to causal
controllability. The causal without intent and intentional
but coerced modes also rely on attribution variables that
impact causal controllability (foreknowledge and coercion,
respectively) and thus ordering constraints cannot be
placed between them and the achievement failure mode.
The intentional in the absence of coercion mode, by
contrast, assumes causal controllability and thus can be
attributed higher responsibility.
These modes are formalized by six model fragments
(views) consisting of conditions and consequences. The
first two modes translate directly into two views. The third
and fourth modes each translate into two views based on
whether the agent being considered is responsible by action
or coercion. Intention and foreknowledge are measured at
the time of the action or coercion. Formal details of the
views are provided in predicate calculus below. Due to
space limitations, only the four views relevant to the
experiment are included.

ResponsibilityFn(?agent, ?outcome) ∝Q+
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer, ?agent, ?coercion-action,
?action, ?outcome),
?action)
View: Intentional
Conditions:
responsibleByActionFor(?agent, ?action, ?outcome) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent, ?action, ?outcome),
?action) > 0 ∧
¬ ∃ ?coercer, ?coercion-action(
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer, ?agent, ?coercion-action,
?action, ?outcome),
?action) > 0)
Consequences:
ResponsibilityFn(?agent, ?outcome) ∝Q+
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent, ?action, ?outcome),
?action)
View: IntentionalByCoercion
Conditions:
responsibleByCoercionFor(?agent, ?coercion-action,
?action, ?outcome) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent, ?action, ?outcome),
?coercion-action) > 0 ∧
¬ ∃ ?coercer2, ?coercion-action2(
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer2, ?agent, ?coercion-action2,
?action, ?outcome),
?coercion-action) > 0
Consequences:
ResponsibilityFn(?agent, ?outcome) ∝Q+
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent, ?action, ?outcome),
?coercion-action)

For each scenario with a negative outcome and some
number of agents, our model infers which agents bear
some level of responsibility, what mode of judgment they
fall into and what qualitative proportionalities constrain
their amount of responsibility. Given a number of such
scenarios, our model is able to infer ordinal constraints on
responsibility for pairs of agents both within and across the
scenarios, although, given the qualitative nature of the
constraints, total orderings may not always be possible.
For situations where two responsibility judgments fall into
different modes, the inference is straightforward. For
judgments within the same mode, relative amounts of
responsibility are inferred when ordinal relationships
between the control parameters are known.
As in Mao’s model, the strength of coercion is
determined by evidence of intention prior to the coercing.
An agent who is known to have not intended the action or
outcome prior to being ordered to do it is attributed greater
coercion than an agent whose prior intention is unknown.
Formally, the ordinal constraint is inferred as:

View: AchievementFailure-Foreknowledge
Conditions:
responsibleByActionFor(?agent, ?action, ?outcome) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
ForeknowledgeFn(?agent, causes(?action, ?outcome)),
?action) = 0
Consequences:
ResponsibilityFn(?agent, ?outcome) ∝Q+
CausalControlFn(?agent, ?action, ?outcome)

151

R1: ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer1, ?agent1, ?coercion-action1,
?action1, ?outcome1),
?action1) > 0
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent1, ?action1, ?outcome1),
?coercion-action1) = 0 ∧
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer2, ?agent2, ?coercion-action2,
?action2, ?outcome2),
?action2) > 0 ∧
¬(ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent2, ?action2, ?outcome2),
?coercion-action2) = 0)
⇒ ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer1, ?agent1, ?coercion-action1,
?action1, ?outcome1), ?action1) >
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?coercer2, ?agent2, ?coercion-action2,

R3: causes(?action, ?outcome) ∧
performedBy(?action, ?underling) ∧
authorizedBy(?action, ?authority) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
ForeknowledgeFn(?authority,
¬causes(?action, ?outcome)),
?action) > 0 ∧
¬ ∃ ?coercion-action(
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?authority, ?underling,
?coercion-action,
?action, ?outcome),
?action) > 0)
⇒ abdicatedAuthority(?authority, ?underling,
?action, ?outcome)
R4: abdicatedAuthority(?authority, ?underling,
?action, ?outcome) ∧
¬ ∃ ?sit(
ValueDuringFn(
ForeknowledgeFn(
?authority,
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?underling, ?action, ?outcome),
?sit) > 0)
?sit) > 0 ∧
overlaps(?sit, ?action)
⇒ ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?underling, ?action, ?outcome),
?action) >
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?authority, ?action, ?outcome),
?action)

?action2, ?outcome2), ?action2)

In the view of achievement failure with regard to
foreknowledge, there is a chain of communication of
incorrect information. Agents that are further down that
chain from the source of the information are attributed less
control than agents closer to the source. Formally, the
ordinal constraint is inferred as:
R2: responsibleByActionFor(?acting-agent, ?action,
?outcome) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
ForeknowledgeFn(?acting-agent,
¬causes(?action, ?outcome)),
?action) > 0 ∧
sourceOfForeknowledge(
?agent1,
ForeknowledgeFn(?acting-agent,
¬causes(?action, ?outcome))) ∧
¬sourceOfForeknowledge(
?agent2,
ForeknowledgeFn(?acting-agent,
¬causes(?action, ?outcome)))
⇒ CausalControlFn(?agent1, ?action, ?outcome) >
CausalControlFn(?agent2, ?action, ?outcome)

Finally, the outcome intention of an agent who chooses
not to coerce, even one in authority, must be considered
less than that of an agent who chooses to coerce. Formally:
R5: responsibleByAction(?coerced,
?action1, ?outcome1) ∧
ValueDuringFn(
CoercionFn(?agent1, ?coerced, ?coercion-action,
?action1, ?outcome1),
?action1) > 0 ∧
abdicatedAuthority(?agent2, ?underling,
?action2, ?outcome2)
⇒ ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent1, ?action1, ?outcome1),
?action1) >
ValueDuringFn(
IntentionFn(?agent2, ?action2, ?outcome2),
?action2)

Shaver argues that in causality, omission is just as
blameworthy as commission. In our model we extend this
allowance to the dimension of coercion. As stated in rule
R2, an agent who is in a position of authority over a causal
action is considered eligible for responsibility. If the
authority is aware of a possible negative outcome from the
subordinate’s actions, yet does not coerce the subordinate
away from that outcome, then they are guilty of abdicating
authority. Under these circumstances the authority is
subject to the same evaluation of intention as the underling.
However, if the authority is unaware of the underling’s
actual intention to cause that outcome, then his or her
outcome intention is constrained to be less than the
intention of the underling. Formally, these inferences are:

Experiment
Mao presents an evaluation of her system against human
data collected in a survey of 30 respondents. The survey
presented four scenarios, variations starting with the
“company program” scenario used by Knobe [Knobe
2003], replicated below. The scenarios involve two agents,
a chairman and a vice president, and a negative outcome of
environmental harm. Each scenario was followed by a set
of Yes/No questions intended to validate the judgments of
intermediate variables, including the attribution variables,
and a final question asking the respondent to score the
blame each agent deserved on a scale of 1-6. Due to space
limitations, we refer the reader to [Mao 2006] for details
on the data collection process.

152

language understanding system (EA NLU) [Kuehne &
Forbus 2004]. This required extending EA NLU in several
ways, including handling tense and aspect, modal
statements,
explicit
utterances
and
identifying
communication events in texts. EA NLU utilizes a
knowledge base based on ResearchCyc2 contents,
augmented with our own representations for QP theory.
Processing of sentences and constructing predicate calculus
representations is automatic, but experimenters are
expected to provide choices when the system constructs
multiple interpretations due to ambiguities. While fully
automatic processing would be preferable, given the state
of the art in NLP, that is impractical. Using an NLU
system and off-the-shelf knowledge base contents greatly
reduces the degree of tailorability and simplifies stimulus
construction.

Corporate Program Scenarios
Scenario 1. The vice president of Beta Corporation goes
to the chairman of the board and requests, “Can we start
a new program?” The vice president continues, “The new
program will help us increase profits, and according to
our investigation report, it has no harm to the
environment.”
The chairman answers, “Very well.”
The
vice president executes the new program.
However, the
environment is harmed by the new program.
Scenario 2.
The chairman of Beta Corporation is
discussing a new program with the vice president of the
corporation. The vice president says, “The new program
will help us increase profits, but according to our
investigation
report,
it
will
also
harm
the
environment.”
The chairman answers, “I only want to
make as much profit as I can. Start the new program!”
The vice president says, “Ok,” and executes the new
program. The environment is harmed by the new program.
Scenario 3.
The chairman of Beta Corporation is
discussing a new program with the vice president of the
corporation. The vice president says, “The new program
will help us increase profits, but according to our
investigation report, it will also harm the environment.
Instead, we should run an alternative program, that will
gain us fewer profits than this new program, but it has
no harm to the environment.”
The chairman answers, “I
only want to make as much profit as I can. Start the new
program!”
The vice president says, “Ok,” and executes
the new program.
The environment is harmed by the new
program.
Scenario 4.
The chairman of Beta Corporation is
discussing a new program with the vice president of the
corporation.
The vice president says, “There are two
ways to run this new program, a simple way and a complex
way.
Both will equally help us increase profits, but
according to our investigation report, the simple way
will also harm the environment.” The chairman answers,
“I only want to make as much profit as I can. Start the
new program either way!” The vice president says, “Ok,”
and chooses the simple way to execute the new program.
The environment is harmed.

Qualitative model results
Figure 1 shows the ordinal constraints inferred by our
model on the amount of responsibility for the agents across
all four scenarios, together with labels indicating the
average blame attributed to each by the survey
respondents.

chm1 < vp1

vp4

3.73

3.00

5.20

< chm4 < chm2
4.13

vp3 < vp2
3.77
3.23

Mao and Gratch results
Human Data
Chair
VP

Mao Model
Chair VP

Scenario1
3.00
3.73
Scenario2
5.63
3.77
Y
Scenario3
5.63
3.23
Y
Scenario4
4.13
5.20
Table 1. Mao and Gratch results

Y

chm3
5.63

Degree

(

Low

Low

separates modes of judgment)

Figure 1. Ordinal constraints on responsibility and average
participant attribution numbers

Low

Y

5.63

High

The eight agents being considered fall into three of the
four modes of judgment. By the ordering constraints on
the modes, all agents in the intentional mode of judgment
are attributed more responsibility than the agents in the
other two. The chairman and vice president in scenario 1
fall into the AchievementFailure-Foreknowledge view.
Within this view, the responsibility of each agent is
qualitatively proportional to the amount of causal control
each agent is judged to have over the outcome. The
chairman is judged to have less control by rule R2 and thus
less responsibility. The vice president in scenario 2 and
the vice president in scenario 3 fall into the
IntentionalButCoerced view. Their respective degree of
responsibility is qualitatively proportional to the amount of
applied coercion. There is no indication of the outcome
intention of the vice president in scenario 2 prior to the

Table 1 shows, for each scenario, the average blame
attributed to each agent by the survey respondents, the
single choice of the blameworthy agent made by Mao’s
system and the degree of responsibility for that agent
asserted by Mao’s system. In each scenario, Mao’s model
correctly selects the agent who receives the higher degree
of blame, but with the incorrect implication that the other
agent involved is free of responsibility. The assignments
of degree of responsibility in Mao’s model do not match
the human data.

Our experiment
In order to reduce tailorability, we semi-automatically
encoded the scenarios using our Explanation Agent natural

2

153

www.cycorp.com

coercion action, while the vice president in scenario 3
clearly shows lack of outcome intention prior to being
coerced. The vice president in scenario 3 is therefore
judged to have a higher degree of coercion by rule R1 and
thus a lower degree of responsibility. The chairman and
vice president in scenario 4 fall into the Intentional view
while the chairmen from scenarios 2 and 3 fall into the
IntentionalByCoercion view. Responsibility for all three
is qualitatively proportional to their outcome intention.
The chairman in scenario 4 abdicated authority to the vice
president, as captured by rule R3. But since the outcome
was not coerced and there was no prior knowledge of the
vice president’s intention, he is constrained to have a lower
degree of intention than the other three by rules R4 and R5.
This results in lower responsibility, while the other three
remain unordered.
In 21 of the 28 possible comparisons between agents our
model infers which agent should receive more blame. All
of these 21 comparisons match the results from the human
respondents. In 3 of the 7 remaining comparisons, our
system establishes a constraint between the degree of
responsibility and the value of an attribution variable for
each agent, but cannot infer an ordinal relation between the
control variables. In the remaining 4 cases, comparing
agents in the achievement failure mode to agents in the
intentional but coerced mode, the interaction between the
control variables is undefined.
The impact of the
perception of coercion on the perception of causal control
cannot be compared to the impact of achievement concerns
such as ability and effort. We suspect that the effort
displayed by the vice president in scenario 3 contrasts with
the clear lack of effort by the vice president in scenario 2
and a presumed lack of effort on behalf of the vice
president in scenario 1. Nevertheless, this interaction is
not accounted for by the current model.
Based on the 3 cases where our model infers a
constraint with a free variable, we can make predictions
about additional constraints in the attribution variables.
Given that the respondents attributed equal blame to the
chairmen in scenarios 2 and 3, our model predicts that they
would judge the outcome intention of the chairmen as
being equal as well. This is consistent with the implicit
claim in attribution theory that, while coercion mitigates
the responsibility of the coerced, it has no such effect on
the responsibility of the coercer. Finally, since respondents
attributed less blame to the vice president in scenario 4
than to the chairmen in scenarios 2 and 3, our model
predicts that they would judge the outcome intention of
that vice president to be less than the outcome intention of
either chairman.

example, deciding whether or not someone was
blameworthy enough to report an action – our evaluation
suggests that qualitative modeling captures an important
level of reasoning about social situations.
This work represents part of a larger effort to model and
reason about culturally-sensitive moral decision-making.
In that context, we are expanding the capabilities of the EA
NLU system to capture a broader range of narratives about
real world situations. By utilizing natural language we
reduce the tailorability of our representations and increase
the contextual details encoded for each scenario. We plan
to expand the factors that go into making attribution
judgments beyond simple action-outcome sequences and
order negotiation speech acts. In doing so we will be able
to further evaluate of the validity of those judgments and
the predictions made by this model regarding the
attribution of blame.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research. We thank Jon Gratch for useful
conversations.

References
Bratman, M. 1990. What is intention? In P. Cohen, J. Morgan
& M. Pollack eds., Intentions in Communication. MIT Press.
Forbus, K. 1984. Qualitative Process Theory. Artificial
Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Forbus, Kenneth D. & Sven Kuehne. 2005. Towards a
qualitative model of everyday political reasoning. Proceedings of
the Nineteenth International Qualitative Reasoning Workshop.
Heider, F. 1958. The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations.
John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Kamps, J. and Peli, G. 1995. Qualitative reasoning beyond the
physics domain: The density dependency theory of organizational
ecology. Proceedings of the Ninth International Qualitative
Reasoning Workshop.
J. Knobe. 2003. Intentional Action and Side-Effects in
Ordinary Language. Analysis, 63:190-193.
Kuehne, S. and Forbus, K. (2004). Capturing QP-relevant
information from natural language text. Proceedings of QR04,
Evanston, Illinois, August..
Mao, W. 2006. Modeling Social Causality and Social
Judgment in Multi-Agent Interactions. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
Mao, W. and Gratch, J. 2005. Social Causality and
Responsibility: Modeling and Evaluation. Fifth International
Conference on Interactive Virtual Agents.
K. G. Shaver. 1985. The Attribution Theory of Blame:
Causality, Responsibility and Blameworthiness. Springer-Verlag.
Steinmann, C. 1997. Qualitative reasoning on economic
models. Proceedings of the Eleventh International Qualitative
Reasoning Workshop.
B. Weiner. 1995. Judgments of Responsibility: A Foundation
for a Theory of Social Conduct. Guilford Press.
B. Weiner. 2001. Responsibility for Social Transgressions: An
Attributional Analysis. In B. F. Malle, L. J. Moses and D. A.
Baldwin eds. Intentions and Intentionality: Foundations of Social
Cognition, pp. 331-344. MIT Press.

Conclusion and Future Work
We have shown that QP theory can be used to formally
encode a model for attributing responsibility for negative
outcomes, based on attribution theory. Our model explains
the corporate scenario data better than Mao’s model does,
due to our use of qualitative representations instead of
categorical, Boolean values. While a purely qualitative
model would not be sufficient for all purposes – for

154

