UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ways of Explaining Properties

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6j9613wn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Heussen, Daniel
Hampton, James A.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ways of Explaining Properties
Daniel Heussen (D.Heussen@city.ac.uk)
James A. Hampton (J.A.Hampton@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University, Northampton Square
London, EC1V 0HB, UK

Abstract

From event to property explanations
Most explanations are either about events (why things
happen), or about properties (why objects have the enduring
characteristics that they do). Explanations of events have been
studied extensively in philosophy and psychology, whereas
the explanations of properties have received little or no
attention in the literature. The present study is an exploration
of the ways in which we explain various types of properties.
Ten participants provided explanations of 45 properties by
completing sentences of the form: “Xs have p because…”
where p is a property of the concept X. When coded into three
traditional kinds of explanation (i.e. causal, purposive,
categorical), nearly half of the explanations did not fit into
any of these categories and were classified as “other”.
Different patterns of preference for explanations emerged
across the various property types for each domain. A
qualitative analysis of the other kind revealed that the most
frequent form of explanation involved another property of the
object, as in ‘Xs have property p because they have property
q”. Explanations of properties showed a homeostatic
character. Simply relating two properties of a concept seems
sufficient as an explanation of a property.

Events are mainly explained in three distinct ways; causally,
teleologically and principle-based (Keil, 2006; Keil &
Wilson, 2000). Causal explanations are story-like
descriptions of a causal sequence of events. The unification
of Germany may be explained by a sequence of events that
led to the fall of the Berlin wall and subsequent diplomatic
talks between Gorbachev and Kohl resulting in the
unification. Teleological explanations are most common for
behavioral events. These explanations are framed in folk
psychological terms like beliefs, desires and intentions,
often referred to as the “intentional stance” (Dennett, 1987).
Behaviors of others and our own are explained by the
consequences that we intend to achieve with the particular
behavior. A friend’s choice to go to Peru on holiday may be
explained by her newly developed interest in Inca culture,
her desires to learn more about it and her beliefs that first
hand experience will best achieve that. Principle-based
explanations are less prevalent in everyday explanations but
are rather more common in scientific explanations. Based on
Hempel’s deductive-nomological model, events are
explained by subsuming them under some principle or
general law. The falling of an apple from a tree is explained
by two facts. One is the general law, that an object with a
larger mass attracts another object with the smaller mass
with a force proportional to the product of their masses, and
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between
them. And the other is that the earth and the apple are such
objects.
Thus based on event explanations we can distinguish
three main kinds of explanations1 that may apply to
properties: causal, teleological and principle-based. The
causal explanation makes reference to the way a property
came about, whereas the teleological account would provide
an explanation by reference to what the property does either
for the object itself or for some agent using the object.2
Sparrows have wings because their DNA determines the
growth of wings in their ontogeny. Or sparrows have wings
in order to be able to fly. Principle-base explanations may
account for a property by reference to a category. One might
say that sparrows have wings because they are in the

Introduction
An event is something that happens. A property in contrast
is an enduring characteristic of an object in the world.
Humans are very good at partitioning the continuous flow of
time into small components with distinct beginnings and
ends. This process provides structure, enables us to talk and
think about these components of time as individual entities
and helps reduce the complexity of our experiences (Zacks
& Tversky, 2001). Events usually have clear-cut temporal
boundaries, with somewhat less clear spatial boundaries. It
always makes sense to ask when an event occurred, but not
always where. Properties, in contrast, are exemplified in
objects, which are clearly defined spatially, but less so
temporally. Objects have more of a where and less of a
when. People think of properties as the stable characteristics
of objects that can range from the very concrete (having a
blade as a property of a knife), to the very abstract (being a
democracy as a property of a state).
These simple differences in character suggest that humans
may think about and process events and properties
differently. If so, it is surprising that the literature on
explanations has focused almost exclusively on explanations
of events and very little to no attention has been given to
explanations of properties. This paper provides a first
exploration into the way we explain properties of natural
kind and artifact objects.

1

For clarity of exposition, the term kind will be used for
explanations and the term type for properties without implying any
theoretical commitments for either explanations or properties.
2
A more detail characterizations for each kind of explanation will
be given in the method section under the coding instructions.

143

average familiarity rating of 5.6 on a 9-point scale, with 9
being the highest familiarity, were selected from McRae,
Cree, Seidenberg, and McNorgan’s (2005) property norms.
For each concept the norms contain a number of properties
classified into 25 different property types (Wu & Barsalou,
2002). Across the 16 concepts, 9 properties were selected
for each of 5 different property types resulting in 45 items.
The selected properties had a significantly higher production
frequency than those properties not selected (Selected: M =
13.9, SD = 7.4; Omitted: M = 10.1, SD = 5.6; t(212) = 3.8, p
< .001). The 5 property types selected were the 4 most
frequent and the 7th most frequent in the norms (external
surface feature: mushrooms are white; function: axes are
used for chopping; external component: mugs have a
handle; superordinate: ants are insects; and location:
flamingos live on water). Table 1 shows the distribution of
items across property type and domain. The percentage of
items of that property type in the norms is given in brackets.
The property types with rank 5 & 6 (entity behavior and
made of respectively) were not chosen because entity
behavior was almost exclusively a type found in natural
kinds, and made of was likewise confined to artifacts.

category of birds and all birds have wings. The proposition
that all birds have wings takes the role of the general law in
Hempel’s model with sparrows being birds fulfilling the
necessary precondition for the explanation to work.
Principle-based explanations will be termed categorical
to reflect that in property explanations categories take the
role of the general law or principle. Similarly teleological
explanations will be termed purposive. Properties are better
characterized by functions than goals and thus the term
purposive was more appropriate than teleological for
property explanation.
Intuitively the applicability of these different kinds of
explanation will depend on both the property that needs to
be explained and the domain of the object that the property
belongs to. Categorical explanations, for instance, might
only work with properties that are at least generally
associated with the category, whereas purposive
explanations might not work for properties of non-living
natural kinds like clouds because there is no mechanism by
which the function could influence the occurrence of the
property (McLaughlin, 2001). Even if the color of the sky
had a particular function, it is difficult to see how that
function could be the reason for it having that color. In
contrast, the evolutionary advantage that a function of a
property would bring for a living natural kind may be
considered sufficient to explain the existence of the
property. Causal explanations might be more prominent
than purposive explanations for features of natural kind
objects, whereas the reverse is probably true for artifacts
given that they are generally created to fulfill a function.

Table 1:
Number of items for each property type across domains.
Property Types:
External Surface Feature
Function
External Component
Superordinate
Location

Study

Natural Kinds
4
3
4
5
7

(17%)
(12%)
(12%)
(11%)
(11%)

Artifacts
5
6
5
4
2

(15%)
(25%)
(14%)
(9%)
(6%)

Note: Percentage of items in the norms for each property type
are given in brackets

The current study was designed to explore the different
ways in which we explain properties. A qualitative approach
was used to allow participants to freely express their views
of why certain objects have the properties they do. Five
different property types were combined with different
natural kind and artifact concepts to create 45 partial
sentences for use in a sentence completion task. The
explanations elicited from participants were then classified
by independent judges in a qualitative analysis.

Procedure & Design All participants completed the full set
of 45 explanations in their own time. The questionnaire
contained a description of the study, a consent form and a
page asking for demographic information. Two random
orders of items were used.
Coding procedure Three independent judges (one of whom
was the first author) classified the explanations into four
kinds (causal, purposive, categorical and other). Judges
were instructed to classify explanations that made explicit
reference to something that brought about the property as
causal explanations. These included stating some process or
mechanism, such as an evolutionary process, that lead to the
property (e.g. Coconuts grow on trees because that is the
way they evolved; Pepper makes you sneeze because it
activates sensitive parts in your nose), some constituent of X
that results in the property (e.g. Olives are black because of
the pigments in their flesh) and sometimes the lack of
something that results in the property (e.g. Cellars are damp
because they are not cared for).
Explanations were to be classified as purposive in case
they made reference to something that the property does for
either an end user or the object itself (e.g. Bedrooms have

Method
Participants Ten participants (4 male, 6 female; average
age of 28 years) took part in the study. Two participants
were fluent bilinguals, one was a competent speaker of
English as her second language and the rest were native
English speakers. There were no systematic differences in
explanations across the different language competencies.
Materials Participants were presented with 45 items on a
sentence completion task. Each item was the beginning of a
sentence of the form: ‘Xs have p because…’ where p is a
property of the concept X. Participants were asked to
complete the sentence by providing an explanation that
would satisfy them as a recipient of that explanation.
Sixteen concepts (8 natural kinds and 8 artifacts) with an
144

kinds of explanation and were coded as other. The next
most common way of explaining natural kind properties was
purposive (22%) followed by causal (15%) and categorical
(12%) explanations. For artifact items purposive (46%)
explanations were the most common, closely followed by
other (39%). Less than ten percent of artifact items were
explained causally (8%) and even fewer items by reference
to a superordinate category (6%).
Analyses of variance (ANOVA) by subject (F1) and item
(F2) were carried out with the proportion as dependent
variable and Kind of explanation (three levels: causal,
purposive, categorical)3 and Domain (two levels: natural
kinds, artifacts) as factors. The main effect of Domain was
non-significant indicating that the probability of using the
other kind was not significantly different between the two
domains (F1(1, 9) = 9.75, p < .05, F2(1, 43) = 1.33, p = .26,
MinF’(1, 51) = 1.17, p = .29). However the interaction
between Kind of explanation and Domain was significant
(F1(2, 18) = 22.31, F2(2, 86) = 7.56, MinF’(2, 100) = 5.65, p
< .01). Separate analyses for each domain revealed no effect
of Kind of explanation for natural kinds (F1(2, 18) = 2.05, p
= .16, F2(2, 44) = .83, p = .44, MinF’(2, 62) = .59, p = .56),
but a significant effect for artifacts (F1(1, 18) = 99.94, F2(1,
42) = 24.28, MinF’(1, 57) = 19.53, p < .01)4. Post hoc tests
on the artifact items using Bonferroni adjustments revealed
that significantly more purposive than either causal or
categorical explanations were used (t(9) = 9.4, p < .05, t(9)
= 20, p < .05, respectively).
Figure 2 shows the proportion of the different kinds of
explanation for each domain broken down by the type of
property being explained. Each type of property showed a
different pattern of preference for the various kinds of
explanation. Domain only influenced the preference for a
particular kind of explanation in surface features and
superordinates. For component properties the two domains
showed a similar distribution across the different kinds of
explanation with purposive explanations being the most
common. In contrast surface features of natural kinds were
explained most often by causal explanations, whereas for
artifacts the preferred explanation was purposive. For both
functional and location properties, the two domains were
roughly similar in distribution of the different kinds of
explanation. Functional properties were mainly explained by
the other kind, whereas those for locations were somewhat
equally distributed across purposive, categorical and other.
Explanations for superordinate category membership were
almost exclusively in terms of the other kind of explanation
for natural kinds, but roughly equally distributed between
the other and the purposive for artifacts.
Three-way ANOVAs by subject (F1) and item (F2) with the
proportion of explanation as dependent variable and Kind of
explanation (three levels: causal, purposive, categorical),
Type of property (three levels: component, surface feature,
superordinate) and Domain (two levels: natural kinds,

walls because they keep the draft out; Penguins have
feathers because they keep them warm), something that X
does (e.g. Projectors have a light inside them because they
project films on screens), something that X needs the
property for (e.g. Goldfish have gills because they need
them to breath; Rockets are large because they need to store
a lot of equipment) or something that X was made to do or
that it enables us to do (e.g. Accordions have keys because
they were made to play music; Pens have ink because they
enable us to write).
Categorical explanations were those explanations that
made clear reference to the category membership of X. This
could be in form of a superordinate category (e.g. Avocados
have pits because they are fruit), a subclass of the
superordinate (e.g. Sparrows live on trees because they are
birds that can fly) or a general claim about the superordinate
category (e.g. Bedrooms have walls because all rooms have
walls). Judges were instructed to classify the explanation
into these three kinds. A fourth kind—other—was used for
any item that did not fit into one of the above three.

Results
Coding Results Cohen’s Kappa and percentage agreement
were calculated for each of the three possible pairings of the
independent raters. Raters were consistent on at least three
quarters of the items (75%, 80%, 92%) with substantial
(Landis & Koch, 1977) Kappa values (.62, .69, .87). The
majority of disagreement between raters (95%) involved one
of the judges choosing the fourth kind (i.e. other). Kappa
increased considerably (.94, .95, .99) when omitting the
other option indicating that the judges were able to classify
the causal, purposive and categorical explanations with a
very high consistency. The observed disagreement for
classification as other was owing to differences between the
judges in strictness when classifying an explanation as
causal, purposive or categorical.

Percentage of items

100%
90%

Natural Kinds

80%
70%

Artifact

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Causal

Purposive

Categorical

Other

Figure 1: Percentage of items across kinds of explanation
within each domain. Error bars indicate 95% confidence
intervals.
Frequency Analysis One participant failed to give an
explanation to one of the items. The remaining 449
explanations were coded into the four kinds. Figure 1 shows
the percentage of explanations for the four kinds of
explanation in each domain. Half of the explanations for
natural kind items did not fall into one of the traditional

3

The other kind of explanation was omitted to avoid violating the
independence assumption of ANOVA.
4
Degrees of freedom for artifacts were adjusted to the lower bound
of 1 due to a significant Mauchly’s test of sphericity.

145

artifacts) as factors were carried out. Location and function
as type of property were not included in these analyses due
to unequal sample sizes for the two domains in the item
analysis. The three-way interaction between property,
explanation and domain was significant (F1(4, 36) = 7.87,
F2(4, 42) = 4.91, MinF’(4, 76) = 3.02, p < .05). Separate
analyses for components, surface features and
superordinates were carried out. Significant two-way
interactions between Domain and Kind of explanation were
found for surface features (F1(2, 18) = 37.64, F2(2, 14) =
16.05, MinF’(2, 25) = 11.25, p < .01) and superordinates
(F1(2, 18) = 13.91, F2(2, 14) = 7.17, MinF’(2, 27) = 4.73, p
< .05) but not for components (F1(2, 18) = 1.48, p = .25,
F2(2, 14) = 1.51, p = .25, MinF’(2, 32) = .75, p = .48). The
pattern of preference for a particular kind of explanation
differed across types of property depending on the domain
of the object.
In this analysis the main effect of Domain measured
differences between the two domains in the use of the other
kind of explanation. There was no significant effect for
surface features or components (F < 1, in both cases) but a
significant effect was found for superordinates (F1(1, 9) =
35.24, F2(1, 7) = 6.81, MinF’(1, 10) = 5.71, p < .05).
Natural kind superordinates were more often explained by
using the other kind of explanation than artifacts. Thus
domain only had an effect on the way surface features and
superordinates were explained.
The data for function and location properties were
collapsed across domains and included in a 2 x 3 ANOVA
for Type of property (two levels: function, location) and
Kind of explanation (three levels: causal, purposive,
categorical) as factors. The two-way interaction between
Property and Explanation was not significant (F < 1). A
marginally significant main effect for property type (F1(1, 9)
= 9.7, F2(1, 16) = 7.4, MinF’(1, 24) = 4.19, p = .052)5
indicated that the other explanation was chosen significantly
more often to explain function than location properties.
Qualitative Analysis The other kind contained a diverse set
of explanations, which were further analyzed to identify
characteristic similarities and establish coherent categories.
In the set of 204 explanations a further 5 distinct types were
identified. In addition there were 4% of explanations of a
non-serious nature and a residual class of idiosyncratic
explanations (< 9%). To take the least common of the 5
types first, around 3% of the explanations used the authority
of nature or cultural history to explain a particular property.
For example, ‘it is natural for that object or animal to have
that property.’ Some 4% of items made reference to
intentionality, explaining the property by pointing out that
people in general “like” it. Also around 4% had a
counterfactual structure, whereby it was argued in the
explanation that if the object did not have that property
some other characteristic, mostly some unpleasant
consequence, would be the case.

Figure 2: Separate graphs for property types show the
percentage of items in each domain across the four types of
explanation. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

5

The degrees of freedom were adjusted to the lower bound of 1
due to a significant Mauchly’s test of sphericity.

146

Discussion

Table 2: Examples of ‘Xs have p because they have q’

People’s preference for a particular kind of explanation was
found to depend on the type of property that was to be
explained. Domain only had an effect for surface features
and superordinates. A large proportion of explanations
could not be classified into the traditional kinds of
explanation. The majority of those took the form ‘Xs have p
because they have q,’ where p and q are both properties of
the concept X. On second consideration though, this form of
explanation also seems to be prevalent in the traditional
explanations. In both causal and purposive explanations, one
property of a concept was explained by reference to another
property. Flamingos are pink because of their pigments
(causal). Catfish live in lakes because they need water
(purposive). The difference between the traditional kinds of
explanation and the majority of the other kind was therefore
not the form per se, but the lack of a clearly identifiable set
of relations between q and p for the other kind. For
purposive explanations for example there was a clearly
identifiable functional relation between the two properties.
For instance, ‘Ants have antennae because they need to feel
where they are going’ clearly states the functional role of
the property ‘needing to feel where they are going’ that the
property ‘having antennae’ fulfills for ants. In contrast for
explanations of the other kind there was no homogenous set
of relations between the two properties. In the explanation
‘Dolphins are mammals because they give birth to live
young’ the relation between the two properties is clearly
different from the relation in the explanation ‘Catfish live in
water because they can swim.’ The only common ground
that these explanations have is their form.

Component:
Flamingos have feathers because…
they can fly.
Mugs have a handle because…
they can be too hot to hold.
Surface feature:
Mushrooms are white because…
they grow in the dark.
Bagpipes are plaid because…
they are Scottish.
Function:
Axes are used for chopping because…
they are sharp.
Mushrooms are eaten in salads because…
they can be eaten raw.
Location:
Flamingos live on water because…
they eat fish.
Sailboats are found on water because…
they can float.
Superordinate:
Bananas are fruit because…
they are sweet.
Bagpipes are musical instruments because…
they can produce a range of notes.
Fourth, about 10% of explanations had the following form:
Xs have p because p has q,
where p is the property to be explained and q is a property
of p. For instance, ‘flamingos live on water because the
water contains their food.’ The water has the property of
containing food, which explains why flamingos have the
property of living on water. ‘Mugs have patterns because
they (the patterns) are pretty.’ Being pretty is a property of
the patterns that explains why mugs would have them. Apart
from q being a property of p, there was a wide variety of
possible relations between q and p in these explanations.
The most common set of explanations in the other
category with nearly 70% took the form:
Xs have p because they have q,
where p and q are both properties of the concept X.
‘Emeralds are expensive because they are rare.’ The
rareness of emeralds explains why they are expensive.
‘Cranes are used for lifting because they have a heavy base
and good leverage.’ The properties of having a heavy base
and good leverage explain why cranes are used for lifting. In
contrast to the other kinds, in these explanations the relation
between the two properties was underspecified. The
relations were neither clearly causal, nor functional, nor of
logical entailment. As with the fourth form of explanation
above there was no clearly identifiable set of relations
between q and p in these explanations (see table 2).

General Discussion
Explanations of properties are notably different from
explanations of events. Events are generally explained in
three distinct ways; causally, teleologically and principlebased (Keil, 2006; Keil & Wilson, 2000). In contrast,
although explanations of properties are also causal,
purposive and category-based, a large proportion does not
clearly fall into those categories. Property explanations do
not have the narrative form that event explanations
generally show. They rather show what one might call a
homeostatic character (cf. Boyd, 1999, on the concept of
species). Properties of objects stand in various relations to
one another enabling them to provide an explanation for
each other. Having wings, being small, living on trees and
having feathers are all interrelated properties of birds. Wing
size and body weight need to stand in a particular ratio to
enable flight. Flight in turn makes living on trees a lot more
advantageous. Living on trees though is only viable for
birds up to a particular size. Each property is intertwined
with a number of other properties in various relations. In
event explanations the explanandum and the explanans
stand in causal, functional or logical relation to one another
and generally in a sequential manner. In property
explanations this is not always the case. Often the relation
between the explanandum and the explanans is
underspecified or not clearly stated. The question then is,
147

might be. A friend might tell you that a film is worth
watching because it is funny. And politicians tell us that
diesel cars incur higher tax because they are more
polluting. What relations have to hold between these
properties for one to be explanatory for the other requires
further work. The hypothesis here is that shared, implicit
knowledge represented in our concepts provides the
coherence necessary to make these explanations plausible.

what makes these explanations plausible despite the lack of
a clear causal, functional or logical relation between
explanandum and explanans?

Concepts as the core for property explanations
“People’s theories of the world embody conceptual
knowledge and their conceptual knowledge organization is
partly represented in their theories” (Murphy & Medin,
1985, pp. 289). We represent the world in our minds using
concepts. Concepts consist of properties and the relations
between them. Possessing the concept of emerald involves
knowing that they have properties such as being green,
precious, rare, expensive, and so on. All these bits of
knowledge are represented in a large net of interconnected
beliefs (Quine, 1960). This net of beliefs is shared and
public. Thus, we believe that emeralds are rare and
expensive and that these two properties are related and this
knowledge is represented in semantic memory. In providing
an explanation for a property, we tap into this conceptual
knowledge, find a property that is closely related—be it
causally, functionally, or in some other way related—to our
target property and state it as the explanation. Emeralds are
expensive because they are rare. We don’t explicitly state
how the two properties are related because that is an implicit
part of our concept of emeralds. It is implicit because the
link between the two properties may be embedded in a
complex theory involving other properties and concepts like
supply, demand and commodity. Thus making the link
explicit may require going beyond the explanation at hand.
Based on Gricean (1975) co-operative principles of
conversation people may assume that our shared knowledge
will fill the gap between the rareness and the value of
emeralds so that making the link explicit would make the
explanation more informative than it needs to be. One might
also argue that our understanding of how the properties are
related might be too patchy to provide a complete
explanation (Wilson & Keil, 2000). Indeed often we might
not even be aware of the lack of our explanatory
understanding (Rozenblit & Keil, 2002). We may only
know that there is a relationship between rarity and value
that is modulated by market force, but lack the deeper
knowledge of how it actually works. Despite some research
in causal reasoning (Ahn & Kalish, 2000) that suggests that
mechanisms are a vital part of inferring causal relations
from covariation information, the current study has shown
that people are willing to provide an explanation of a
property by simply stating another property of the concept
without clearly stating a mechanism that links the two
properties.

References
Ahn, W., & Kalish, C. (2000). The role of covariation vs.
mechanism information in causal attribution. In R.
Wilson, & F. Keil (Eds.) Explanation and cognition (pp.
199-225). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boyd, R. (1999). Homeostasis, species, and higher taxa. In
R. A. Wilson (Ed.), Species: New interdisciplinary essays
(pp.141-185). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Grice (1975/1989). Logic and conversation. In H. P. Grice
(Ed.), Studies in the way of words (pp. 22-40).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hempel, C., & Oppenheim, P. (1948). Studies in the logic of
explanation. Philosophy of Science, 15, 135–175.
Keil, F. C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual
Review of Psychology, 57, 227-254.
Keil, F., & Wilson, R. (2000). Explaining explanation. In F.
Keil & R. Wilson (Eds.), Explanation and Cognition.
MIT Press.
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 33,
159-175.
McLaughlin, P. (2000). What functions explain: Functional
explanations and self-reproducing systems. Cambridge
University Press.
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research
Methods, 37, 547-559
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Quine, W. (1960). Word and object. MIT Press.
Rozenblit, L. R., & Keil, F. C. (2002). The misunderstood
limits of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth.
Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Wilson, R.A., & Keil, F.C. (2000). The shadows and
shallows of explanation. In F. C. Keil and R. A. Wilson
(Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp.87-114).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wu, L. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (2002). Grounding concepts
in perceptual simulation: Evidence from property
generation. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
3-21.

Conclusion
The present study has explored the way we explain
properties. Unlike the narrative sequential way of explaining
events, property explanations have a homeostatic character.
People use one property of a concept to explain another,
often without specifying the relation or mechanism between
them. This form of explanation is not uncommon.
Advertisers, for example, say: Yogurt drinks are good for
you because they contain good bacteria, whatever those
148

