UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What You Do Is What You Set: Semantic Representations of Tasks and the Capture of
Awareness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02q3s6vv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Tiwathia, Anirudh
Livingston, Kenneth

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What You Do Is What You Set: Semantic Representations of Tasks
and the Capture of Awareness
Anirudh Tiwathia (antiwathia@alum.vassar.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, 333 E 43rd St. Apt 412,
New York, NY, 10017

Kenneth Livingston (livingst@vassar.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, Box 479, 124 Raymond Ave,
Poughkeepsie, NY, 12604
Gronau, Cohen, & Ben-Shakhar (2003) demonstrated that
personally-significant stimuli (such as the observer’s name)
and task-relevant stimuli capture attention differently, and
Mack & Rock (1998) themselves found a significant
difference in IB when the unexpected stimulus was a
smiley-face icon compared to a sad-face icon.
Work along these lines has benefited from Most et al.’s
(2005) research on attentional sets. Their work demonstrates
that increased levels of capture occurred when the
unexpected stimulus shared visual features with the
expected stimulus. Koivisto, Hyona, & Revonsuo (2004)
also demonstrated that unexpected stimuli that share a
semantic category with the expected stimuli show high
probabilities of entering awareness. This last finding is,
however, complicated by the fact that their unexpected and
expected stimuli also shared visual characteristics.
In this paper, we report two studies designed to
disambiguate the relationship between stimulus meaning
and the capture of awareness under conditions known to
cause IB. In both studies, we replicated the conditions of
Mack & Rock’s (1998) “Seeing Your Name” experiment.
Participants were asked to attend to a cross presented for
200ms and to judge which arm of the cross was longer. At
the last trial, an unexpected word was presented. The taskassociation of this unexpected word was manipulated across
different groups: the word was either task-associated
(“horizontal” or “vertical”), related to a task-associated
word (“diagonal”), or task-unassociated (“helicopter”,
“vitamin” or “dictate”). However, the unexpected word was
always irrelevant to the performance of the task, was
emotionally neutral, and shared neither a common semantic
category nor common visual features with the expected
stimuli. Since the primary task was perceptual in nature, the
task should not require the inclusion of any semantic
information in the attentional set of the participant.
These studies allowed a direct test of the hypothesis that
the probability for detection and awareness is increased
when a task-irrelevant stimulus is meaningful. The effect of
task instructions on the capture of awareness was also
measured. One group of participants was read instructions
that contained repeated occurrences of the task-associated
words, whereas another group was read instructions that
strictly avoided any mention of the task-associated words. It
was hypothesized that the use of task-associated words in
the task instructions could result in the fine-tuning of

Abstract
We designed two experiments in order to disambiguate the
impact of meaning on the detection and awareness of an
unexpected stimulus under conditions of inattentional
blindness (IB). The key variable was the meaning of the
unexpected stimulus. The meaning was either task-associated
or task-unassociated. The unexpected stimulus was also
always irrelevant to the performance of the task and shared no
features with the expected stimuli. In both experiments, we
found that an unexpected stimulus with task-associated
meaning, independent of stimulus features and stimulus
categories, enjoyed low levels of IB as well as high
probability for entering conscious awareness. The results
indicate that meaning is a prime determinant for the capture
of conscious awareness. Our results also suggested that
attentional sets encode a broad semantic instantiation of the
current task, even if the task is entirely perceptual in nature.
Keywords: inattentional blindness; meaning; attentional set;
awareness; detection; conscious perception.

Introduction
Numerous studies have confirmed that an individual focused
on a task can often fail to consciously perceive the
appearance of an unexpected stimulus – a phenomenon
known as ‘Inattentional Blindness’ (IB) (Mack & Rock,
1998; Most et al., 2005). This failure to notice an
unexpected stimulus has been attributed to the failure of that
stimulus to capture attention. Some striking examples of IB
have been demonstrated in recent studies. For example, a
majority of movie watchers who were performing a task
while watching the movie failed to notice a man in a gorilla
suit walking across the screen (Simons & Chabris, 1999). A
plethora of clinical and real-world evidence points to the
robustness of the phenomenon and emphasizes its relevance
to theories of attention, perception, and consciousness.
There is some debate as to which features of an
unexpected stimulus can cause it to enter conscious
awareness. Earlier research into IB has shown that the
observer’s name and a happy face icon are some of the few
stimuli that consistently capture awareness under conditions
known to cause IB (Mack & Rock, 1998; Mack et al.,
2002). Mack et al. (2002) attribute the capacity of these
stimuli to capture awareness to the stimuli’s
meaningfulness. Other results, however, support the need
for additional work to investigate the relationship between
meaningfulness and the capture of awareness. For example,

95

attentional sets to recognize the semantic relationship
between the word and the task, and thereby increase the
probability for detection and awareness for this category of
unexpected words.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants One hundred and thirty one participants (52
men, 79 women) were tested from a pool of undergraduate
students at Vassar College. All participants ranged between
the ages of 18 to 24, had normal or corrected to normal
vision, and were screened for diagnosed attentional
disorders. The participants were recruited either via an email
informing them about an opportunity to participate or
through an online posting available to the Introductory
Psychology students, who participated for course credit.
Stimuli and Apparatus Participants were presented stimuli
on a computer monitor 30 cm wide and 24 cm tall (Dell
D1025TM), which was set to a resolution of 1024 x 768 and
a refresh rate of 85 Hz. All stimuli were presented using
SuperLab Pro v.1.75 on a Macintosh running OS 9.
All presented stimuli were black and white. The stimuli
included: a) a small fixation-cross (0.4° x 0.4°) presented at
the center of the screen, b) a larger task-cross centered 2°
from the center of the fixation-cross at an oblique (45°)
trajectory, c) a visual mask and d) a black screen. In all
trials, the task-cross had one of the following four
dimensions: 3.7° x 3.1°, 3.2° x 3.6°, 3.8° x 3.6°, 3.5° x 3.8°
and was presented in one of the four quadrants of the
fixation-cross. In order to maintain the same visual angle for
all participants, a chin rest was positioned 65 cm from the
computer screen, thereby replicating Mack & Rock’s (1998)
visual angles. The type and location of task-cross presented
during any given trial were selected randomly by the
stimulus presentation program.
In each trial the first event was the presentation of the
fixation-cross at the centre of the screen for 1500 msecs.
After the 1500 msecs fixation interval, the task-cross was
presented in one of the four possible oblique locations for
200 msecs. The task-cross presentation was followed by the
onset of a visual mask that covered the entire screen for 500
msecs. After the mask, a black screen remained for 2500
msecs before the next trial began. Thus, each trial took 2200
msecs and there was an inter-trial-interval of 2500 msecs.
Trial time and inter-trial-interval were constant for all trials
and participants.
The participants were given a 3200 msecs window to
register a response before it was counted as a miss. The
response window began immediately following the
presentation of the task-cross and ended with the beginning
of the next trial (i.e. onset of the fixation cross).
Each participant saw 8 non-critical trials, followed by a
9th critical trial. For a non-critical trial, the initial fixationcross persisted on the screen during the presentation of the
task-cross. For a critical trial, a word replaced the fixation-

Figure 1: Sequence of Stimuli
cross exactly at the onset of the task-cross. The word was
centered at the original location of the fixation cross. Thus,
in the critical trial, both the task-cross and the unexpected
word were presented for 200 msecs (see Figure 1).
The unexpected word was one of the following: a)
“vertical”, b) “horizontal”, c) “diagonal”, d) “vitamin”, e)
“helicopter” and f) “dictate”. The words “vertical” and
“horizontal” were the task-associated stimuli. They refer to
the arms of the task-cross and are therefore meaningful in
the context of the task. The word “diagonal” was selected
because it is semantically related to the task-associated
stimuli. The words “vitamin”, “helicopter” and “dictate”
served as task-unassociated counterparts of “vertical,”
“horizontal,” and
“diagonal,” respectively. Each
unassociated word begins with the same letter, is of equal
length, and is used with equal frequency in the English
language as its task-associated counterpart. All words were
chosen to have low emotional loading. The words
“helicopter” and “horizontal” were both 1.16° long,
“diagonal” and “dictate” were both 1.07° long, and
“vertical” and “vitamin” were also 1.07° long. All words
were presented in lower case, 11 point font, and “Times
New Roman” font type.
One difference between Mack & Rock's (1998) study and
ours arose as a consequence of software randomization
constraints in our study. Mack & Rock presented 3 noncritical trials prior to a 4th critical trial, while we presented 8
non-critical trials followed by a 9th critical trial. We know of
no reason to expect that this difference in procedure should
affect outcomes.
96

what they saw. After determining what the participants
noticed during the task set, they were thanked and debriefed.

Procedure The study utilized a 2 (Task instructions: Primed
/ Unprimed) x 2 (Meaningfulness: Task-associated / Taskunassociated) x 3 (Word type: H-word / V-word / D-word)
tier design, for a total of 12 groups. All participants were
assigned randomly to one of two different groups: ‘primed’
and ‘unprimed’. Participants within both of those groups
were then randomly assigned to either a ‘task-associated’ or
‘task-unassociated’ condition. Participants in the ‘taskassociated’ condition were then further randomly assigned
to a ‘word’ condition where they would be either presented
the word “horizontal”, “diagonal”, or “vertical” during the
critical trial. Similarly, participants in the ‘taskunassociated’ condition were assigned to one of the
following three ‘word’ conditions: “helicopter”, “dictate”,
or “vitamin”. Participants in the “horizontal” and “vertical”
conditions were balanced across ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’
conditions, where the number of unexpected word stimuli
that provided the correct answer was balanced with the
number that provided the incorrect answer within both the
primed and unprimed condition.
Participants were tested individually in a small, well-lit,
sound-attenuated room. For participants in the ‘primed’
group, the instructions repeatedly used the words
“horizontal” and “vertical” to describe the task. This was
done to prime the participants to the task-associations of
those words. For the unprimed group, the words
“horizontal” and “vertical” were never mentioned in
connection with the task. Instead the experimenter pointed
to the cross-arms while explaining the task.
In both instruction conditions, the participants were asked
to complete nine length-discrimination trials. For each trial,
the primary task required participants to determine which of
the two arms of the task-cross was longer and to press the
appropriate keyboard button to register an answer. The
importance of both reaction time and accuracy were
emphasized to the participants and they were asked not to
sacrifice one for the other.
In accordance with the task-instructions used by Mack &
Rock in their “Seeing Your Name” studies (1998), all
participants were instructed to look directly at the fixationcross at all times while performing the experiment.
Although there was no practice sequence prior to
beginning the task, participants were shown pictures of all
the stimuli that would be presented (excluding the
unexpected word) and given substantial time to clarify any
questions about the nature of the task. The experimenter left
the testing room prior to the beginning of the task to
eliminate possible experimenter effects during testing.
Immediately after the completion of the task, the
investigator asked participants whether they had noticed
anything unusual. If they answered ‘no’ or mentioned some
other aspect of the task they considered unusual, then the
investigator prompted them by asking whether they noticed
any words appearing on the screen during the task. If the
answer was still ‘no’ then the participants were thanked and
debriefed. If participants answered ‘yes’ to the question
about noticing anything unusual, they were asked to identify

Results
Dependent Measures The attentional capture data for all
participants fell into one of three categories: a)
Identification, i.e. the participant noticed something
unexpected, and correctly identified the unexpected
stimulus; b) Detection, i.e. the participant noticed something
unexpected, but could not correctly identify it; c)
Inattentional Blindness, i.e. the participant did not notice the
presentation of the unexpected stimulus.
In entertaining the possibility that consciousness may not
be an all-or-nothing phenomenon (e.g. Most et al., 2005;
Overgaard et al., 2006), we grouped the three categories
described above to measure two aspects of capture of
awareness: detection rate and identification rate.
Detection rate measures the frequency with which
participants reported the presence of the unexpected
stimulus. Hence, the detection rate is a comparison between
the IB group (as defined above) and the Non-IB group (sum
of detection and identification groups, as defined above).
Identification rate measures the frequency with which
participants became conscious of the unexpected stimulus
and could report its identity. The identification rate
compares the identification group with the nonidentification group (sum of detection and IB groups, as
defined above).
The identification rate and detection rate measure
“blindness” with two different thresholds. For detection
rate, the participant must simply notice the presence of an
unexpected stimulus (same as IB definition in Mack &
Rock, 1998), whereas for identification rate, the participant
must extract its identity and be able to explicitly report it
(same as IB definition in Most et al., 2005).
Primary Task In order to establish that participants were
engaged in and attentive to the task, we examined the
performance data across all trials prior to the critical trial.
Overall accuracy was 70.19%, and average reaction time
was a very rapid 303 msecs, which indicates very effective
task engagement.
Task-Association and Awareness Having ascertained that
participants were actively engaged in the primary task, we
analyzed the attentional capture results with a Chi-square
test when possible; however, when any expected cell
frequency was lower than five for a 2x2 test, or when more
than one cell had a lower expected frequency than five for a
2x3 test, a Fisher’s Exact Probability Test was used. All
statistical tests were two-tailed.
For the task associated conditions (primed and unprimed)
participants were randomly assigned to either correct or
incorrect association of word to longer line. Because this is
not a variable of interest, we performed a pretest to
determine whether we could collapse the data across this

97

distinction. A Fisher’s EPT revealed no significant effects of
this manipulation (all p > .50), so data were collapsed.
We also found no difference between the attentional
capture data for primed task-associated (N = 33) and
unprimed task-associated (N = 32) conditions, and found
that priming during task-instructions had absolutely no
effect on the level of attentional capture: p(two-tailed)
approached 1.0. The data from the primed task-associated
and unprimed task-associated conditions were therefore
collapsed into the task-associated condition. It should be
noted that since “diagonal” was never used to describe the
task in the primed-instructions (only “vertical” and
“horizontal” were used), the above-mentioned data for
primed and unprimed did not include any data from the
“diagonal” condition. The collapsed task-associated data,
however, do include data from the “diagonal” condition.
Finally, we compared the data from the task-associated
condition with the data from the task-unassociated
condition using 2 Chi-square tests, one each for detection
rate and identification rate. There was no difference in the
detection rate between the task-associated condition (N =
81, 14.8% IB) and the task-unassociated condition (N = 50,
18.0% IB), χ2(1, N = 131) = 0.23, p = 0.63. However, there
was a significant difference in identification rate between
the task-associated condition (N = 81, 76.5% ID) and the
task-unassociated condition (N = 50, 54.0% ID), χ2(1, N =
131) = 7.21, p < 0.01. Thus, task-associated meaning
increased the probability for conscious awareness and
identification of the unexpected stimulus, but did not impact
the probability of detection (see Table 1).

capture of awareness. We found that meaning had an effect
on identification rate but did not affect detection rate.
Priming (via task-instructions) affected neither detection nor
identification. The results thus support the view that
meaning is a powerful factor in whether IB occurs. The
unusually low rate of IB as compared with Mack & Rock’s
results (1998) presents something of a puzzle, however,
which we set out to explore in a second study.

Experiment 2
One possible explanation for the low IB rate in the first
experiment is that doubling the number of non-critical trials
before the occurrence of the critical trial might have altered
patterns of attention by making the critical event seem more
anomalous when it did finally occur. In order to test this
hypothesis we conducted another study using the same
number of trials as Mack & Rock’s (1998) original design.
The major procedural difference between Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2 was the number of non-critical trials (see
Methods).
If Experiment 2 were to result in higher levels of IB, it
would then be of interest to look for any difference in the
effects of task-association under conditions of high-IB.
Similarly, it was of interest whether priming would have an
impact on capture levels under conditions of high-IB.

Methods
Participants One hundred and three participants (37 men,
66 women) were tested from a pool of undergraduate
students at Vassar College. Recruitment conditions were the
same as Experiment 1.

Table 1: Experiment 1 - Meaningfulness and Awareness
(Chi-Square Percentage Deviations Noted Below Actual)
Identification

Detection

TaskAssociated

62 (76%)
(+12.7%)

7 (9%)
(-46.1%)

Inattentional
Blindness
12 (15%)
(-7.6%)

Task
UnAssociated

27 (54%)
(-20.5%)

14 (28%)
(+74.7%)

9 (18%)
(+12.3%)

Procedure Besides the number of non-critical trials, all
stimuli and other experimental procedures of this
experiment were identical to those used in Experiment 1.
However, unlike the first experiment, there were only two
word conditions. For the task-associated conditions (primed
and unprimed), participants were either presented the word
“horizontal” or vertical” on the critical trial, and for the
task-unassociated condition, participants were either
presented the word “helicopter” or “vitamin”. Each of the
four different task-crosses was presented to all subjects, and
each of the four task-crosses appeared on a critical trial for
at least four participants in each condition. Thus, task-cross
type was still balanced within participants, within
conditions, and across conditions. The number of taskassociated words that provided the correct answer was
balanced with the number of task-associated words that
provided incorrect answers within both the primed and
unprimed task-associated conditions. The major change
from Experiment 1 was the decrease in number of noncritical trials from eight to three.

Low Levels of Inattentional Blindness One surprising
result to emerge from this study was the extremely low
levels of IB. Since the task conditions in this study were
meant to replicate those in the “Seeing Your Name” study
by Mack & Rock (1998), it was expected that the levels of
IB for the non-target words should match those for the
control words in the Mack & Rock study. They reported an
IB level of 55% (22 of 40 participants). In the present study
the observed IB rate witnessed for the task-unassociated
condition was only 18% (9 of 50), significantly lower than
the rate observed in Mack & Rock (1998): χ2(1, N = 90) =
13.47, p < 0.001.

Results and Discussion

Discussion

Dependent Measures All dependent measures were the
same as Experiment 1.

The aim of this study was to examine whether the meaning
of an unexpected stimulus was a key determinant in the

98

Table 3: Difference between Capture of Awareness for
Task-Unassociated - Experiment 1 and Experiment 2
(Chi-Square Percentage Deviations Noted Below Actual)

Primary Task For the all non-critical trials, the overall
accuracy was 68.77% and the average reaction time was
331.91 msecs, which indicates very effective task
engagement. The minor difference in averages between the
two experiments was attributed to the increased weight of
the first trial in the average for Experiment 2. Having
determined that participants were actively engaged in the
primary task, we analyzed the attentional capture data using
the same statistical tools as Experiment 1.
IB Rates A 2x2 Chi-square test revealed no difference in
the levels of IB between the task-unassociated condition in
Experiment 2 and the control condition in the “Seeing Your
Name” study by Mack & Rock (1998), χ2(1, N = 78) = 0.07,
p = 0.79.

Task
Associated

45 (69%)

4 (6%)

Inattentional
Blindness
16 (25%)

Task
UnAssociated

13 (34%)

3 (8%)

22 (58%)

Exp. 1
Task
UnAssociated

27 (54%)
(+18.8%)

14 (28%)
(+44.9%)

Inattentional
Blindness
9 (18%)
(-48.9%)

Exp. 2
Task
UnAssociated

13 (34%)
(-24.7%)

3 (8%)
(-59.1%)

22 (58%)
(+64.3%)

Our experimental conditions provided a unique opportunity
to examine the impact of meaning on the capture of
awareness. Prior studies have shown that if unexpected
stimuli shared visual features with the expected stimuli, the
unexpected stimuli produced negligible levels of IB (Most
et al., 2005). Work published after the completion of our
studies showed that unexpected stimuli that share semantic
categories with the expected stimuli show high levels of
capture, even if they do not share visual features with the
expected stimuli (Koivisto & Revonsuo, 2007). While this
work demonstrated a possible role for semantic
considerations in attentional allocation, their explicit taskinstructions to attend to a particular semantic category could
have primed the observer’s attentional set to include
semantic category information as task-relevant. Thus, the
effect of semantic considerations on the capture of
awareness remained unclear for broader contexts.
The studies reported here benefit from three experimental
design components: a) the unexpected stimulus (a word) is
categorically different from the expected stimulus (a
Cartesian cross); b) the unexpected stimulus was taskassociated yet task-irrelevant; and c) the primary task was
perceptual in nature and thus should not have primed any
semantic content as task-relevant. This allows the results
reported here to extend the previous body of work by
isolating the impact of meaning from feature-based,
category-based, or expectation-based attentional biasing.
We found that the meaning of the unexpected stimulus,
independent of stimulus features and stimulus category,
determined the level of capture of conscious awareness.
Unexpected words with task-associated meaning were far
more likely to be detected and correctly recalled than
unexpected words with task-unassociated meaning.
In Experiment 1 (low-IB condition), the task-associated
meaning of the unexpected word affected the rate of
conscious identification but did not affect the rate of
detection. In Experiment 2 (high-IB condition), the taskassociated meaning of the unexpected word affected both
the rate of detection as well as the rate of conscious
identification. Although it is beyond the scope the current
report, we note here that this difference is most likely due to
factors outside mechanisms for attentional allocation.

Table 2: Experiment 2 - Meaningfulness and Awareness
(No Percentage Deviations Noted Due to Exp. Freq. < 5)
Detection

Detection

General Discussion

Task-Association and Attentional Capture A 2x3 Fisher’s
EPT revealed that there was no difference in attentional
capture levels between the primed task-associated condition
(N = 33) and the unprimed task-associated condition (N
=32), p = 0.24. We collapsed the task-associated primed and
unprimed conditions into the task-associated condition.
A significantly lower number of participants showed IB in
the task-associated condition (N = 65, 24.6% IB) than in the
task-unassociated condition (N = 38, 57.9% IB), χ2(1, N =
103) = 11.41, p < 0.001. Similarly, a significantly higher
number of people experienced conscious capture in the taskassociated condition (N = 65, 69.2% ID) than in the taskunassociated condition (N = 38, 34.2% ID), χ2(1, N = 90) =
11.95, p < 0.001 (see Table 2). Thus, under conditions of
high-IB, meaning modulated both IB and conscious
awareness.

Identification

Identification

Comparison between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2
Across Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, words with taskassociated meaning were detected at the same rate, χ2(1, N =
146) = 2.23, p = 0.14, and identified at the same rate, χ2(1,
N = 146) = 0.98, p = 0.3.
On the other hand, within the task-unassociated condition,
there was a significantly lower level of IB in Experiment 1
(N = 50, 18.0% IB) than in Experiment 2 (N = 38, 57.9%
IB), χ2(1, N = 88) = 15.06, p < 0.0001. However,
identification rate approached but did not reach statistical
significance, χ2 = 3.41, p < 0.06. Thus, the main difference
between the two studies was a decreased level of IB for
task-unassociated words in Experiment 1 compared to
Experiment 2 (see Table 3).

99

Our current results also reinforce the need for a broader
understanding of the types of information that can be
encoded in attentional sets. Our studies show that
unexpected task-irrelevant stimuli that do not share visual
features or semantic categories with expected stimuli can
still capture attention due to their semantic relationship to
the task. For this to be the case, task-comprehension must
also result in a broader semantic instantiation of the task
itself, rather than just encoding a collection of stimulus
features that relate to the task.
While other researchers have considered the possibility of
the attentional set as an explicit goal state of the observer
(Atchley, Kramer, & Hillstrom, 2000; Most et al. 2005), to
our knowledge, this is the first study to gather data to
effectively demonstrate that attentional sets can include such
a higher-level semantic instantiation of the current task.
We propose describing attentional sets as a collection of
constraints deriving from a combination of multiple
competing influences, including the semantic instantiation
of the overall task (cf. Experiment 1, Experiment 2), task
strategy (e.g. Smilek, Dixon, & Merikle, 2006),
environmental context (e.g. Sawaki & Katayama, 2006),
immediate task demands (e.g. Triesch et al., 2003),
experience (e.g. Leber & Egeth, 2006), as well as potentially
a “default” attentional set, which includes a disposition
towards certain features such as sudden onset, unless
overwritten by task-instruction (e.g. Prinzmetal & Taylor,
2006).

Koivisto, M., Hyona, J., & Revonsuo, A. (2004). The effects
of eye movements, spatial attention, and stimulus features
on inattentional blindness. Vision Research, 44, 3211 –
3221.
Koivisto, M., & Revonsuo, A. (2007). How Meaning
Shapes Seeing. Psychological Science, 18(10), 845 – 849.
Leber, A. B., & Egeth, E. E. (2006). It’s under control: Topdown search strategies can override attentional capture.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(1), 132-138.
Mack, A., & Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional Blindness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mack, A., Pappas, Z., Silverman, M., & Gay, R. (2002).
What we see: Inattention and the capture of attention by
meaning. Consciousness and Cognition, 11, 488 – 506.
Most, S. B., Scholl, B. J., Clifford, E. R., & Simons, D. J.
(2005). What you see is what you set: Sustained
inattentional blindness and the capture of awareness.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 217 – 242.
Overgaard, M., Rote, J., Mouridsen, K., & Ramsoy, T. Z.
(2006). Is conscious perception gradual or dichotomous?
A comparison of report methodologies during a visual
task. Consciousness and Cognition, 15(4), 700-708.
Prinzmetal, W. & Taylor, N. (2006). Color singleton popout does not always poop out: An alternative to visual
search. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(4), 576-580.
Sawaki, R., & Katayama, J., (2006). Stimulus context
determines whether non-target stimuli are processed as
task-relevant or distractor information. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 117(11), 2532-2539.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our
midst: Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic
events. Perception, 28, 1059-1074.
Smilek, D., Dixon M. J., & Merikle, P. M. (2006).
Revisiting the category effect: The influence of meaning
and search strategy on the efficiency of visual search.
Brain Research, 1080(1), 73-90.
Triesch, J., Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M, & Sullivan, B. T.
(2003). What you see is what you need. Journal of Vision,
3, 86–94.

Acknowledgements
We sincerely thank Carol Christensen for her role in the
development, implementation, and outcome of these studies.

References
Atchley, P., Kramer, A. F., & Hillstrom, A. P. (2000).
Contingent Capture for Onsets and Offsets: Attentional
Set for Perceptual Transients. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 26(2),
594-606.
Gronau, N., Cohen, A., & Ben-Shakhar, G. (2003).
Dissociations of personally significant and task-relevant
distractors inside and outside the focus of attention: A
combined behavioral and psychophysiological study.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132(4),
512 – 529.

100

