UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Tunes Accessibility of Referring Expressions in Task-Related Dialogue?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7pp0t4wh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Bard, Ellen Gurman
Hill, Robin
Foster, Mary Ellen

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Tunes Accessibility of Referring Expressions in Task-Related Dialogue?
Ellen Gurman Bard (ellen@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Linguistics and English Language, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9LL, UK
Robin Hill (r.l.hill@ed.ac.uk)
Human Communication Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
Mary Ellen Foster (foster@in.tum.de)
Informatik VI: Robots and Embedded Systems, Technische Universität, München, Germany
referent. This paper discusses two such conditions, task
related movements and the roles of the players in a
collaborative task.
Our questions about these conditions hinge on the
information which human interlocutors might use in
determining how to refer. Ariel’s notion of accessibility
appears to depend on what the speaker supposes is the case,
not on what is genuinely easier for the listener. While some
approaches to dialogue assume that speakers carefully
model their interlocutors, so that initial forms of expression
could arise from the interlocutors’ needs (Brennan & Clark,
1996; Clark & Krych, 2004; Schober, 1993), there is
increasing evidence that we have limited ability to construct,
recall, or deploy any such model in a timely fashion (Bard et
al., 2007; Horton & Gerrig, 2002, 2005a, 2005b; Horton &
Keysar, 1996). Interlocutors may behave egocentrically
(Bard et al., 2000; Bard & Aylett, 2004; Horton & Keysar,
1996), adopt a global account of affordances of a situation,
(Anderson, Bard, Sotillo, Newlands, & Doherty-Sneddon,
1997; Brennan, Chen, Dickinson, Neider, & Zelinsky, In
press), or observe information indicative of the listener’s
knowledge, but fail to act on it (Bard et al., 2007; Brennan
et al., In press).
The situation for form of referring expressions is mixed.
While accessibility of referring expressions is more
sensitive to the knowledge of the listener than is clarity of
articulation (Bard & Aylett, 2004), other studies show that
tendencies to match nomenclature to listener’s history or
current situation are quite variable (Brennan & Clark, 1996;
Horton & Gerrig, 2002, 2005a; Horton & Keysar, 1996;
Keysar, Lin, & Barr, 2003). So-called conceptual pacts are
actually lexical pacts (Brennan & Clark, 1996), agreements
to call objects by certain names, and are the result of
negotiation over time, across which accessibility of the
referring expression naturally rises. If speakers do track one
another’s internal states, the accessibility of even
introductory mentions will suit the interlocutor’s current
needs, rather than the speaker’s.
The evidence may be inconclusive because the typical
paradigms for dialogue studies restrict cooperation to
disjointed episodes. In typical tasks, one participant instructs
another to act on or select from an array of potential
referents, while the other follows instructions relative to an
identical or partially overlapping set. Both responsibilities
and activities are clearly distinct; the channels for

Abstract
Ariel (1988) proposes that the grammatical form of any
referring expression can be predicted from the deemed
accessibility of its referent to the intended audience. The term
‘deemed’ is critical: it allows the speaker an egocentric
perspective and frees choice of expression from the actual
contingencies of the situation in which it is uttered. We
analyze 1775 first mentions of visible objects within a multimodal corpus of cooperative task-related dialogues (Carletta et
al., under revision) for effects of situation (communication
modalities, actions involving the named entity) and of
responsibilities assigned to speakers and listeners.
Accessibility distributions show statistically significant effects
of three kinds: circumstances readily available to the listener
(concurrent movement of the named object); circumstances
private to the speaker (hovering the mouse over the object,
when the listener cannot see the mouse), and speakers’
assigned roles.
Keywords: reference, accessibility, corpus experimental
studies, pragmatics, situated dialogue

Introduction
The question of what a thing will be called engages
everyone interested in the interpretation and generation of
referring expressions. One very wide-ranging approach,
(Ariel, 1988, 1990, 2001) attempts to key elaboration of the
form of referring expressions to the ‘deemed’ a priori
accessibility of the referent, that is, to how difficult the
producer of the expression estimates it will be to access the
referent concept, discourse entity, or extra-linguistic object.
Expressions introducing entities deemed completely
unfamiliar to the audience should be maximally detailed, as
in, for example indefinite NPs including modifiers of
various kinds (‘a former Republican governor of strongly
Democratic Massachusetts’). Expressions of intermediate
accessibility might be definite NPs, deictic expressions, or
personal pronouns in that order. Expressions making
reference to a unique, just mentioned entity in focus can be
as minimal as so-called clitics, unstressed and all but deleted
pronouns (‘/z/ in the garage’). Accessibility theory provides
a unified framework for predicting how forms of referring
expressions will respond to givenness, discourse focus,
inferrability from local scenarios and the like. As a general
notion, accessibility ought to include effects of any available
conditions which might draw attention to the correct
945

the first case can a player see the mouse ‘hovering’ over a
tangram part which is not actually moving.
If moving a part draws attention, it should also draw
referring expressions of greater accessibility. Since pointing
is associated with shorter, less detailed referring expressions
and pointing to closer targets has an even stronger effect
(Kranstedt, Lücking, Pfeiffer, Rieser, & Wachsmuth, 2006),
touching and moving should have a very marked effect on
the form of expression. Like Kranstedt et al., we note the
association of the ‘hand’ location and verbal deixis: in our
case a larger proportion of verbal deictics (this square;
these, mine) than of other forms coincide with mousereferent overlap (Foster et al., 2008). To go further, we will
divide overlaps by whether players actually move parts.
If the listener’s knowledge is of concern, moving parts
should have different effects on accessibility from merely
leaving the mouse hovering over them. Since movements of
objects will always be visible to the listener in the Joint
Construction Task, a speaker adjusting to listener
knowledge could use deictic forms to refer to currently
moving parts. In contrast, visibility of the mouse cursor
should determine whether hovering is shared information:
referring expressions with a visibly hovering mouse should
be made more accessible in form than those with an
invisibly hovering mouse. In fact, a speaker might even
increase the accessibility of an expression referring to a part
which the listener is touching or moving. Again, responses
should depend on what is visible. If the listener’s
knowledge is less important than the speaker’s, however,
the speaker’s own hovering movements should attract
higher accessibility forms regardless of what the listener can
see.
The players’ roles suggest further questions. Managers
have a primary role in setting the dyad’s agenda. They
should have more power to designate discourse focus and to
change it, for example. If the choice of a level of
accessibility is an overt designation on the speaker’s part,
then managers should have special powers of designation.
And, as we suggested earlier, managers might have less
reason to track or adjust to the needs of their partners than
role-less or assistant players do. Alternatively, assistants
may feel obligated to conform to patterns established by
managers more that equal partners would.
In all cases the answers to our questions should be
reflected in distributions of referring expressions across
ordered levels of accessibility. Though accessibility bears
on the relationships between earlier and later mentions of an
entity, it ought to be important to determining the form of
introductory mentions, too. By restricting our investigation
in this way, and by controlling the objects available for
naming, we can test our hypotheses about how a thing shall
first be called.

communication are purposely limited; and the knowledge
shared between instructor and listener is altered trial by trial
in an unpredictable way. To discover whether more robustly
cooperative behaviour appears in more cooperative tasks,
we have created a corpus of dialogues centered around a
shared task which demands joint attention and joint
planning.
The JAST project, which studies joint action in the hopes
of finding human models for cooperation in robots, has
developed a Joint Construction Task, in which two human
players cooperate to construct a tangram in a shared
workspace represented on their yoked screens (Figure 1a).
Each player can manipulate the component parts by mouse
actions. Each dyad works under one of two role conditions:
either one player is assigned to manage the task and the
other to assist or no roles are assigned. Mouse actions draw
attention both because they are integral to the construction
process, and because, to mimic the industrial risks of
working with robot partners, they are dangerous. If both
mice grasp the same object, it breaks and must be replaced.
If two objects overlap, both break. Because players act on
the tangram parts and sub-constructions, the activity of
grasping or moving the named object adds a haptic or praxic
modality to spoken forms. Even ‘hovering’ the mouse over
a part without grasping it offers a chance to make a part
accessible.
To discover how well keyed any change in form of
referring expression is to the perceptions of the interlocutor,
the design contrasts situations in each players’ mouse cursor
is cross-projected onto the other’s version of the shared
screen and situations in which each player see only the
movement of the object which the other ‘grasps’. Only in
a)
CollaboratorÕ
s mouse

target

ViewerÕ
s mouse

b)
Collaborator’s mouse hovers

Viewer’s mouse grabs triangle

Figure 1 Joint Construction Task shared screen a) at
outset; b) during construction (detail)

946

experimental conditions produced by the factorial
manipulation of three communication modalities: speech,
gaze (each player’s current eye-track cross-projected onto
the other’s screen twice within each 42 ms cycle), and
mouse cursor (also cross-projected). Participants could
always see their own mouse cursor. Without no additional
communicative modalities they saw only the moving parts.
Gaze and mouse conditions were pseudo-randomised
following a latin square. Speech was allowed in the first
four presented conditions for half the dyads and in the
second four for the rest. Only conditions with speech are
analyzed here.
In 16 dyads one participant was randomly designated
Manager and the other Assistant. The manager was asked to
maintain “Quality Control”, in speed, accuracy, and cost,
and to signal the completion of each trial. The assistant was
to help. The remaining dyads were assigned no roles but
otherwise had the same working instructions. Trials ended
when one player declared the construction complete by
pressing the keyboard spacebar and the other confirmed. An
accuracy score reflecting similarity between the built and
the target tangrams then appeared across the built exemplar.
Each dyad reproduced 16 different target tangrams, 2 for
each condition. No tangram resembled a nameable object.
Each contained 11 parts. At the beginning of each trial, the
same set of 13 parts was available, comprising 2 copies of
each of 6 shape-color combinations (squares or right-angle
isosceles triangles differing in size and colour) and a single
yellow parallelogram. The 13 parts appeared in 4 different
layouts counterbalanced across experimental items. The
extra pieces differed from trial to trial.

Corpus Collection And Coding
Task
The Joint Construction Task or JCT (Carletta et al., under
revision) offers to two collaborating players a model
tangram (see Figure 1a, top right), geometrical shapes for
reproducing it (center right), a work area (center screen), a
counter for breakages (top left), a set of replacement parts
(bottom of the screen), and a clock measuring elapsed time
(top center). The players’ task is always to construct a
replica of the model tangram as quickly, as accurately, and
as cheaply in terms of breakages as possible. An accuracy
score is provided at the end of each trial.
Participants manipulate objects by left-clicking and
dragging them or by right-clicking and rotating them.
Carefully timed collaboration is required. Any part or
partially constructed tangram ‘held’ by both players will
break and must be replaced from the spare parts store to
complete the trial. Objects can be joined only if each is held
by a different player. Moving an object across another
breaks both. Objects join permanently wherever they first
meet. Inadequate constructions can be purposely broken and
rebuilt from spare parts, incurring a cost in parts and time.
Figure 1 shows the shared portrayal of the game state but
includes objects that may be visible to only one player. At
start of play (Figure 1a), the viewer’s and the collaborator’s
current mouse positions are represented by an orange cursor
and a green cursor respectively. A small blue circle marks
the collaborator’s current gaze position.
In a magnified view of a later point in a different trial,
Figure 1b shows how grasping an object is distinguishable
from mere superimposition (hovering). The viewer’s mouse
cursor retains its original colour while hovering over a
partially constructed tangram, but the listener’s cursor is
shown in black when it has grabbed a green triangle.

Leve
l

Table 1 Accessibility Coding Scheme
Definition
Examples

0

Indefinite NP

I’m grabbing a purple one
one of the nearest blue pieces

0.5

Bare nominal

Pink one ?
Triangles

1

Definite NP

I’ll put the red bit on.
The other purple one.

2

Deictic NP

Okay now just those two little
kids.

Apparatus
Each participant sat approximately 40cm from a separate
CRT display in the same sound-attenuated room.
Participants faced each other, but direct eye contact was
blocked by the two projection computers between them.
Participants were eye-tracked monocularly via two SRResearch EyeLink II head-mounted eye-trackers, but
Eyetracking results are not relevant to the current report.
Headworn microphones captured speech on individual
channels. Continuous audio and video records were kept,
including a full record of locations and movements of
individual parts, constructed objects, and cursors.
Composite Camtasia videos recorded all movements and
audio.

2.5

3
4

Participants, design and materials
Sixty-four
participate,
never met
because of

Deictic
Poss

⎫
⎬Pro
⎭

Do you see where mine’s
moving now?
Now we need to fit these.

Other pronouns

Can you hold it?
You wanna just bring it up?

Clitic/inaudible

/s/ not going to fit.

Coding referring expressions

Edinburgh University students, paid to
were paired into 32 same-sex dyads who had
before. Four further dyads were discarded
technical failures. Each dyad participated in 8

Dialogues were transcribed orthographically. Each referring
expression was time-stamped for start and end points. Then,
each expression referring to any on-screen object was coded
947

differences in action and communication change the
tendency to produce indefinite referring expressions relative
to the each other category.
The calculations are describe odds ratios, but for
interpretability, we display simple proportions of cases. To
eliminate empty cells, accessibility categories were
collapsed into four levels: Indefinite NPs (including bare
nominals), Definite NPs, Deictics (including deictic NPs,
deictic pronouns and possessive pronouns) and Other
Pronouns (including clitics). Uninterpretable or disfluent
items (less than 1% of the data) were omitted.
Separate equations were prepared for the Mouse Cursor
Cross-Projected (n = 836) and No
Mouse Cursor
conditions (n = 939). The predictors included the
experimental variable Roles Assigned, the participants’
mouse actions (the speaker/listener moving part being
mentioned, or ‘hovering’ the mouse over it), and the
interactions of Roles Assigned with each of the movement
variables. Gaze cross-projection was not included, as it had
proved an ineffective predictor in earlier exploratory
regressions. Table 2 shows the significant outcomes. Each
effect listed is essentially independent of any effect from
any concurrent predictor variable.
No effect of the listener’s actions reached significance.
Instead there were effects of the speaker’s actions and of
Role Assignment As predicted (Figure 3), visibly moving
the referent increased deictic expressions (31 v 46%) at the
expense of indefinites (18 v 12%) whether or not the
speaker’s mouse was visible. Other mouse movements also
affected accessibility: A visibly hovering mouse cursor
(Figure 4) accompanied a significant shift to deictics (39 v
51%) from pronouns (15 v 6%), while an invisibly hovering
mouse decreased both indefinites and pronouns in favor of
deictics. Role assignment influenced the effects of invisible
mouse gestures: Only in Manager-Assistant dialogues, did
introductory mentions shift markedly away from indefinites
(22 v 8%) toward deictics (25 v 40%) with hovering, much
as they did with visible mouse gestures. In No-role
dialogues definites predominate in either case.

with a referent identifier linking it to the object. Coders had
access to the video and audio track and were allowed to use
any material within a dialogue to determine the referent of
any expression. All referring expressions were coded for
accessibility on the scale given in Table 1. This system
represents a modest expansion of a system applied to an
earlier corpus of task-related dialogues (Bard & Aylett,
2004) and yielding negligible disagreement between coders.

Results
Overall outcomes
Figure 2 presents the overall distribution of first mentions
across the accessibility scale. Despite the fact that all but
one of the original parts had an identical competitor and
might invite an indefinite referring expression (‘a small red
triangle’), only 16% of first mentions were indefinite NPs.
The remaining 84% were of higher accessibility.
Very accurate tangrams were built in all conditions. The
cross-projection of mouse location was helpful. Trials with
cross-projection were significantly shorter on average
(187sec v 205sec: F = 11.45, df = 1,30, p = .002) and
incurred significantly fewer breakages (1.8 v 2.3; F = 4.52,
df = 1,30, p = .008) while achieving equal accuracy (92.1 v
91.9).
Managerial structure was neutral in ultimate
outcome. While Manager-Assistant trials were significantly
longer than No Role trials (216sec v 175sec; F = 10.67, df =
1,30, p = .003), they gave similar performance (Accuracy:
93.8 v 91.2; Breakages: 2.0 v 2.1).

Modalities, knowledge, and accessibility
Method. The conditions critical to our predictions were
coded for a multinomial logistic regression which modelled
the distribution of first mentions across accessibility
categories. This statistic can test the capacity of category
variables (like Mouse v No Mouse) to influence ordinal
variables (like accessibility). It does so by constructing
regression equations both for the whole ordinal series and
for the comparison of each level in the series to some
reference level. We will use it to ask which of the critical

0.6
Proportion of cases

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Indef NP

Def NP

Deictic

Other
Pron

Indef NP
Deictic

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

No Move

Move

No Mouse Cursor

Accessibility (low to high)

Def NP
Other Pron

No Move

Move

Mouse Cursor

Figure 3. Accessibility of first mentions: Effects of speaker
moving referent object

Figure 2. Accessibility of first mentions

948

Table 2 Significant predictors of accessibility. For individual levels of accessibility, df = 1.
* = p < .05; ‡ = p < .01; § = p < .001
No Mouse Cursor Cross-Projection
-2 Log Likelihood
268.07

df
27

χ2
105.00§

Speaker Move

Speaker Hover

χ2
Definites
Deictics

B

Wald

-0.814

4.78*

B
-1.137

Wald
10.85§

Cox & Snell
0.106
Speaker Hover x Roles
Assigned
276.00
7.42*
B
Wald
1.075
4.99*
1.275
6.17*

Mouse Cursor Cross-Projected
-2 Log Likelihood
258.00

df
27

χ2
61.34§

Speaker Move

Speaker Hover

χ2
B
-0.722

Deictics
Pronouns

Wald
5.05*

B

Wald

1.264

6.95‡

At the same time, we suggested that if accessibility is an
expression of opinion, it should be manipulated by managers
in particular. In the event, Manager-Assistant dialogues
showed more egocentric use of private gestures than No-role
dialogues. Such gestures accompanied a shift to deictic
expressions, as they did when mouse cursor projection made
them visible.
Though the results support the general predictions, they
invite further interpretation. We see three major issues.
First, the results fall some way short of a clear case for
managerial insensitivity. The Role Assignment results were
based on expressions produced by both participants. Analyses
comparing managers with assistants are made difficult by
small or empty cells. Both show that the pattern shown in
Figure 4. Accordingly, we have no particular evidence
contrasting managers with their assistants, though we can
distinguish them from the dyads who had no assigned roles.
As we suggested earlier, however, one result of social
inequalities is to give precedence to one individual. The
manager decided what should happen next. To cooperate, the
assistant had to conform to the manager’s choices.
Conforming to the manager’s referential habits, for social
reasons, or through structural priming, could make the
assistant designate with invisible gestures, too. In essence, the
assistant can achieve a tendency toward use of definites or
deictics where they might otherwise appear to be unwarranted
and then employ private gestures to accompany these
instances. In contrast, role-less dyads might follow a mixture
of styles or compete to control the task plan or the naming
habits.

Discussion
This paper asked whether the association between handling
a thing and using an accessible format to name it was linked
to the speaker’s own knowledge or to the knowledge expected
to reside with the listener. There are two reasons to believe
that the listener is not in charge. First, we found no significant
effects of the listener’s manipulation of tangram parts on the
speaker’s form of referring expression, even when the
listener’s movements were fully visible to the speaker.
Second, we did find effects of speakers’ mouse gestures
which invisible to the listener.

Indef NP
Deictic

Proportion of Cases

0.6

Def NP
Other Pron

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

No
Hover

Hover

No
Hover

Hover

No Roles
Mouse Cursor

No
Hover

Cox & Snell
0.071
Speaker Hover x Roles
Assigned
266.00
7.77*
B
Wald

Hover

Man-Asst

No Mouse Cursor

Figure 4. Effects on accessibility of hovering mouse
over referent, by mouse cursor visibility and assigned
roles.

949

Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M., DohertySneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000). Controlling the
intelligibility of referring expressions in dialogue. Journal
of Memory and Language, 42, 1-22.
Bard, E. G., & Aylett, M. P. (2004). Referential form, word
duration, and modeling the listener in spoken dialogue. In J.
C. Trueswell & M. K. Tanenhaus (Eds.), Approaches to
studying world-situated language use: Bridging the
language-as-product and language-as-action traditions.
(pp. 173-191). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brennan, S. E., Chen, X., Dickinson, C., Neider, M., &
Zelinsky, G. (In press). Coordinating cognition: The costs
and benefits of shared gaze during collaborative search.
Cognition.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 14821493.
Carletta, J., Nicol, C., Taylor, T., Hill, R., de Ruiter, J. P., &
Bard, E. G. (under revision). Eyetracking for two-person
tasks with manipulation of a virtual world. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers.
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50, 62–68.
Foster, M. E., Bard, E. G., Guhe, M., Hill, R., Oberlander, J.,
& Knoll, A. (2008). The roles of haptic-ostensive referring
expressioins in cooperative task-based human-robot
dialogue. Paper presented at Human Robot Interaction,
Amsterdam.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2002). Speakers' experiences
and audience design: knowing when and knowing how to
adjust utterances to addressees. Journal of Memory and
Language, 47(4), 589-606.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005a). Conversational
common ground and memory processes in language
production. Discourse Processes, 40(1), 1-35.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005b). The impact of
memory demands on audience design during language
production. Cognition, 96(2), 127-142.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Keysar, B., Lin, S., & Barr, D. J. (2003). Limits on theory of
mind use in adults. Cognition, 89, 25–41.
Kranstedt, A., Lücking, A., Pfeiffer, T., Rieser, H., &
Wachsmuth, I. (2006). Deictic Object Reference in Taskoriented Dialogue. In G. Rickheit & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),
Situated Communication, (pp. 155-207). Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Prince, E. F. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given-new
information. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical Pragmatics (pp. 223256). New York: Academic Press.
Schober, M. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47(1), 1-24.

Second, though it is clear that speakers’ private and public
actions associate with particular levels of accessibility, it is
not clear that their effects are all increases in accessibility. For
example, Figures 3 and 4 show a tendency, significant only
for hovering, for speaker actions not to collocate with the
highest levels of accessibility in first mentions: pronominal or
clitic introductory mentions are used less often when the
mouse overlaps the referent part than when it does not.. Thus,
the haptic or ostensive functions of mouse movements
literally designate objects: they turn a triangle into this but
they do not turn this into it. For this reason, the single
accessibility continuum can be viewed as a set of referential
phenomena, for example, demonstration or givenness in
context, bearing on speakers’ choices with different degrees
of force.
Finally, there is the issue of the discourse history within
which the introductory mentions are set. Clearly, some first
mentions do not refer to totally discourse-new or completely
unpredictable entities (Prince, 1981). There is no doubt that
other forces work on the choice of referring expressions.
Whether the choice of referring expression is always to some
degree an indication of the speaker’s view of accessibility we
do not know. What seems likely in domains where public and
privileged actions have similar effects is that it can certainly
be a case of listener-insensitive designation at times.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by EU Project JAST (FP6-003747-IP).
The authors are grateful to the JCT programmers, Tim Taylor
and Craig Nicol, Joe Eddy and Jonathan Kilgour for their
contributions to the software, to Jean Carletta who managed
the program development, to the reference coders for
guessing what the speaker had in mind, and to JAST
colleague J.P. de Ruiter for inspiring this exploration of the
JCT corpus..

References
Anderson, A. H., Bard, E. G., Sotillo, C., Newlands, A., &
Doherty-Sneddon, G. (1997). Limited visual control of the
intelligibility of speech in face-to-face dialogue. Perception
and Psychophysics, 59(4), 580-592.
Ariel, M. (1988). Referring and accessibility. Journal of
Linguistics, 24, 65-87.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents.
London.: Routledge/Croom Helm.
Ariel, M. (2001). Accessibility theory: An overview. In T.
Sanders, J. Schilperoord & W. Spooren (Eds.), Text
representation:Linguistic and psycholinguistic aspects. (pp.
29-87). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Chen, Y., Nicholson, H. B. M.,
Havard, C., & Dalzel-Job, S. (2007). Let’s you do that:
Sharing the cognitive burdens of dialogue. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57(4), 616-641.

950

