UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why Spatial-Numeric Associations Aren't Evidence for a Mental Number Line

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56f5w2k1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Landy, David H.
Jones, Erin L.
Hummel, John E.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why Spatial-Numeric Associations Aren’t Evidence for a Mental Number Line
David H. Landy (dlandy@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
Champaign, Illinois USA

Erin L. Jones (eljones3@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
Champaign, Illinois USA

John E. Hummel (jehummel@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
Champaign, Illinois USA
numerical magnitude (as in Dehaene et al. (1993) and in the
current paper, where the task was to determine whether the
number was even or odd), people respond more rapidly to
large numbers with their right hand, and more rapidly to
small numbers with their left hand. The direction of this
effect (termed the Spatial-Numeric Association of Response
Codes, or SNARC effect) seems to correspond to typical
writing direction (Zebian, 2005), suggesting that the
association is acquired (but see Hubbard et al., 2004).
The usual explanation of the SNARC effect takes the
system of linearizing numbers utilized in keyboards and in
number lines and cognitively reifies it, by assuming that
numbers are represented spatially, i.e., along a mental
number line. Thus, the mental representation of ‘9’ includes
the property “right of 2”. Note that the posited code is
relative—9 is represented as being more right than, say, 2,
but leftward of 20.
The SNARC effect, then, results from the fact that the
representation of a large number overlaps more with the
representation of a right-hand response than it does with that
of a left-hand response. This account—which we will call a
‘representational overlap account—has been used to explain
a wide variety of effects relating to sides of space and
numerical magnitude (e.g., Fischer, 2001; Casarotti et al.,
2007). A very similar representational overlap account has
been used to explain the well-known Simon effect (Simon,
1990). In a typical experiment illustrating the Simon effect,
participants respond to non-spatial properties of simple
stimuli, such as color, using a right-hand and a left-hand
response. Responses are facilitated when the side of correct
response corresponds to the side of presentation, even
though side of presentation is formally irrelevant to the task.
As in the mental number-line account of the SNARC effect,
the stimulus-response compatibility arises from the
overlapping spatiality in representation of stimulus and
response.
Recently, a different kind of account has been proposed
that explains the SNARC effects along with the Simon
effect under a framework that does not involve
representational spatial overlap. With this account, called

Abstract
In the well-known SNARC effect, people are shown to be
faster at responding to relatively large numbers with their
right hands, and to relatively small numbers with their left
hands, on magnitude-irrelevant tasks. It is typically assumed
that both the SNARC effect and the Simon effect—in which
right-hand responses are facilitated when stimuli appear on
the right-hand side—are explained by spatial mappings of
stimulus to response; where the former is the result of
representing numbers spatially (i.e. along a mental number
line) and mapping right-hand responses to large numbers
and left-hand responses to small numbers, and the latter is
the result of responding to stimuli on the right side of visual
space with the right hand and vice-versa. However, the
principle of polarity correspondence can also account for
these findings; this theory asserts that in binary
representations of dimensions, one pole is dominant and
tasks are facilitated when dominant stimulus values are
mapped to dominant response values. In previous studies,
dominance and spatial mapping have been confounded. The
current paper uses non-spatial responses (spoken “yes” and
“no”
responses)
to
consider
whether
polarity
correspondence can account for the SNARC effect.
Keywords: Mathematical Cognition; SNARC
Stimulus-Response Compatibility; Simon Effect.

effect;

Introduction
The number keys on a typical American or European
keyboard are laid out with small numbers on the left, and
larger numbers on the right. On a telephone keypad, the
numbers are arranged with small on the left, and large on
the right. In school students are taught to reason using a
“number line”, which arrays the numbers in linear order,
with (guess what?) small numbers on the left, and large
numbers on the right.
Dehaene, Bossini, and Giraux (1993) demonstrated that
people respond to small numbers in a spatially asymmetric
way. Even when the task requires minimal processing of
357

quite unmotivated. For any pair of salient stimulus and
response dimensions, there should be a potential mapping
interference.
If the polarity correspondence account is correct, then
responses to number should benefit from mappings onto
dominant responses, regardless of whether those responses
are spatial. On the other hand, if the SNARC effect is really
the result of a mental number line, then there is no good
reason to expect a comparable effect along non-spatial
dimensions. The goal of this paper is to un-confound the
role of spacing and polarity dominance in the SNARC effect
by replicating one of Dehaene et al.’s original experiments
demonstrating the existence of the SNARC effect, but
replacing left- and right-hand responses with a responses
along a non-spatial but asymmetric response dimension
(spoken ‘yes’ and ‘no’ responses).
The polarity
correspondence principle predicts that the results will be
analogous to the SNARC result: participants should be
faster to respond when responding ‘yes’ to larger numbers,
and ‘no’ to smaller numbers. While the mental number line
theory makes no prediction about this case, to the extent that
the correspondence principle is supported, the mental
number line is not useful in explaining the original SNARC
effect.
In this experiment, there are actually (at least) two
relevant stimulus dimensions: magnitude and parity. We
will explore the data then, by looking for both a spatialresponse alignment and a parity-response alignment.

Polarity Correspondence (Cho and Proctor, 2006; see also
Chase and Clark, 1971; Seymour 1973), both the Simon
effect and the SNARC effect result from a fundamental
principle of stimulus-response mapping. This principle
posits that in binary representations of dimensions, across
both stimuli and response properties, one value of the
dimension (here called the dominant value), is generally
more available than the other. Operationally, dominant
values can be detected because people are generally faster to
evaluate dominant values than non-dominant values.
Linguistically, furthermore, non-dominant values are often
marked, and come second in comparatives. It is typical to
use values from the dominant end of a dimension as
examples of the dimension. In the introduction of this
paper, for instance we notice that we followed this typical
practice by principally using the values “right”, “large”, and
‘9’ as default examples of the spatial and numerical
dimensions, non-dominant terms appeared only immediately
after a dominant term. The principle of polarity
correspondence, then, is this:
Polarity Correspondence Principle: Tasks will be
facilitated whenever dominant values of varying stimulus
dimensions are mapped onto dominant response values.
The amount of facilitation should correspond to the
degree to which the dimension in question is encoded in the
process of accomplishing the task.
This principle explains the SNARC effects as a special
case: because large is positive with respect to magnitude
and right-hand responses dominate left-hand responses,
responding should be facilitated when large numbers align
with right-hand responses. The principle also explains a
wide swath of related literature such as the vertical SNARC
(Ito and Hatta, 2004) and Simon and vertical Simon (e.g.,
Lippa and Adam, 2001) effects, the MARC effect (Willmes
& Iversen, 1995), the spatial-musical association of
response codes (Lidji et al, 2007), and many others (e.g.,
Fisher, 2001). The principle also explains the role of pole
alignments in children’s construction of opposites (Sheya,
2003).
The Polarity Correspondence Principle is not without its
weaknesses, however. Unlike the mental number line
account of SNARC, it gives no obvious causal explanation
of why compatible value dominance should yield nonadditive facilitation.
Why should mapping dominant
stimulus properties onto non-dominant response values
yield interference? The polarity correspondence account is
silent, taking such interference as an assumption.
Moreover, it provides no general account of why binary
dimensions should have a dominant value at all (though see
Cho and Proctor, 2007, for one factor). What properties of
the dimension or of human experience should make one
value more available than another?
A second problem for polarity correspondence is that
while it does predict many previously reported stimulusresponse compatibility effects, it also predicts a host of
novel effects, some of which may seem otherwise to be

Experiment Methodology
The experiment consisted of three sectioned tasks, with the
same materials and methodology. Only the instructions
differed between sections. In each task, the participant
looked at a number, made a simple decision about that
number, and then made a response. In the first two tasks,
the decision was about the parity of the number, and the
response was either spatial (left-right button-press) or
valued (‘yes’ versus ‘no’, spoken aloud). In the third task,
the verbal ‘yes’-‘no’ response was paired with an explicit
magnitude decision.

Method
Participants 33 undergraduates at the University of Illinois
received partial course credit in exchange for participation
in the experiment.
Materials In each section of the experiment, participants
viewed a new instruction set, and then saw and responded to
160 stimuli. Each stimulus consisted of a number in the
range 0-9, displayed centrally as an Arabic numeral on a
computer monitor for 750ms. After this time, the stimulus
was removed and replaced by a blank screen for 1750ms,
and then a new stimulus was presented. In all three
sections, instructions emphasized both speed and accuracy.
Each section was divided into four blocks of 40 stimuli:
each block of 40 contained 4 instances of each of the digits
between 0 and 9, presented in a random order. These

358

Results
Accuracy was much lower for the number zero (77%) than
for all other items (95.4%-97.5%), a significant difference
(F(9, 288)=3.26, p<0.001). Several participants asked the
experimenter whether to treat 0 as even. For this reason,
responses to zero stimuli were removed from response time
analyses in sections 1 and 2. Including these items did not
affect the character of the results.

Section 1: Spoken Parity
Following the analysis of Dehaene et al. (1993), median
RTs for correct responses were computed for each target
number, response code, and subject. These data were
analyzed in a 2 (parity) × 2 (expected response: ‘yes’ or
‘no’) ANOVA using magnitude as a linear variable.
Following, Dehaene, 1 magnitude was collapsed across digit
pairs: 0-1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-7, 8-9 (All results were also run
without collapsing across digit pairs. Both the qualitative
patterns and the statistical significance were unaffected;
recall that zero items were not included).
Figure 1 displays the mean benefit for a ‘yes’ response in
accurate response times as a function of number magnitude.
Since the vertical axis is a difference, negative values
indicate that participants responded more quickly on trials
for which ‘yes’ was the correct response than on ‘no’ trials
(when they answered correctly). It can be seen that,
particularly for even numbers, the effect of response type
interacted with numerosity.
The full ANOVA revealed both a SNARC and a MARC
effect: magnitude interacted with correct response
(F(1,32)=12.05, p<0.01), as did parity (F(1,32)=13.12m,
p<0.001). There was a tendency, apparent in Figure 1, for
the effect to be stronger for even than for odd numbers, but
this tendency was only marginally significant (F(1,32)=3.4,
p~0.075).
The primary goal of this study was to establish the
existence of a relationship between stimulus magnitude and
verbal response valence. Since it was possible that spatial
responding on the manual task might affect the verbal task,
we also analyzed just the participants who performed the
verbal task first. As in the full set, there was a significant
interaction between magnitude and correct response:
(F(1,16)=12.9, p<0.01), and also between parity and correct
response: (F(1,16)=22.7, p<0.001).

Figure 1: Mean difference between per-participant median
response times for “yes” responses and “no” responses,
collapsed across digit pairs, on the spoken parity task (all
errors are standard errors).

experiments were programmed in DMDX (Forster and
Forster, 2003), and analyzed using CheckVocal (Protopas,
2007).

Procedure
In the first section, participants were asked to respond to
the parity of the presented digit. Responses were the words
“yes” and “no” spoken aloud. Instructions alternated by
block between asking participants to respond “yes” to even
digits and “no” to odd digits, and asking participants to
respond “no” to even digits and “yes” to odd digits. In all
three sections, the initial mapping was counterbalanced
across subjects.
In the second section, participants were asked to respond
to parity again. However, unlike section one, participants in
this section responded spatially.
Now instructions
alternated by block between asking participants to respond
by pressing the right shift key to even digits and the left
shift key in response to odd digits, and asking participants to
respond with the left shift key to even digits, and the right
shift key to odd digits. Participants were instructed to keep
their left index finger on the left shift key, and their right
index finger on the right shift key at all times.
The order of the first two sections was counterbalanced;
since the intention of the task is that magnitude be implicit,
the explicit magnitude task was always presented last.
In the final section, participants were asked to respond to
numerical magnitude.
Instructions alternated between
asking participants to respond “yes” to numbers 5 and larger
and “no” to numbers 4 and smaller, and asking participants
to respond “no” to numbers 5 and larger, and “yes” to
numbers 4 and smaller.

Section 2: Manual Parity
Again, median RTs for correct responses were computed for
each target number, response code, and subject. These data
were analyzed in a parity × expected response (left or right)
× magnitude ANOVA. Figure 2 displays the mean
difference in accurate response times as a function of
number magnitude.
As in Section 1, there was a
significant interaction between parity and response type
(F(1,32)=4.7, p<0.05), as well as an interaction between
magnitude and response (F(8.07), p<0.01).
An ANOVA comparing the magnitude-response and
parity-response interactions across section revealed that
there were significant 3-way effects of order: both the
359

‘no’ responses. In principle, in order to determine the parity
of the number 4, one has to engage in the same process
regardless of how one will subsequently respond to it.
Nevertheless, the experiments performed here do not rule
out an algorithmic level account for the observed ‘yes’
benefit. It may be, for instance, that people tend to engage
in a confirmation strategy by (in essence) listing all the
elements of the target “yes” set. So if ‘yes’ is mapped to
‘even’, then people might tend to evaluate the stimulus
against the set 0, 2, 4, 6, 8. Since rejection would occur
after comparison was done, acceptance (and consequently,
‘yes’ responses) would be relatively faster. Although Cho
and Proctor (2007) argue that the stated task can influence
which pole is dominant, it is still unclear why corresponding
polarity should facilitate responding, and why dimensions
have dominant values in the first place.
This experiment also demonstrated the known MARC
effect for verbal tasks, but this is not terribly surprising.
The effect of parity-task alignments was first demonstrated
in a non-spatial context (Hines, 1990). In that instance,
participants pressed a button (on the left) to designate that
the two numbers were the ‘same’; a right-hand button
indicated ‘different’. In that task, participants made ‘same’
responses more quickly to even than to odd numbers, in line
with the polarity correspondence account. While the current
work corroborates this result, it does not in our view
contribute to it. What the current research provides is a
compelling case that the influential mental number line
theory requires something like the polarity correspondence

Figure 2: Mean difference between per-participant median
response times for “yes” responses and “no” responses,
collapsed across digit pairs, on the manual parity task.
magnitude-response interaction and the parity-response
were larger in the modality tested first (magnitude-response:
F(1,30)=9.96, p<0.01, parity-response: F(1,30)=11.13,
p<0.01). neither effect differed between section (magnituderesponse:
F(1,30)=0.42,
p~0.5,
parity-response:
F(1,30)=0.02, p~0.89).

Section 3: Spoken Magnitude
Finally, each subject completed an explicit magnitude task,
in which ‘yes’ and ‘no’ responses mapped onto whether the
number was less than or equal to 4, or greater than or equal
to 5. Again, median RTs for correct responses were
computed for each target number, response code, and
subject. These data were analyzed in a parity × correctness
× magnitude ANOVA. Figure 4 displays the mean
difference in accurate response times as a function of
number magnitude.
The full ANOVA revealed a significant interaction of
correct response and magnitude (F(1,32)=19.1, p<0.001),
such that participants responded more quickly when saying
‘yes’ to large numbers and ‘no’ to small numbers. This
pattern held across both even and odd numbers, and, indeed,
there were no significant main effect of parity, nor
interactions of parity with the other factors.
Figure 4: Mean difference between per-participant
median response times for “yes” responses and “no”
responses, collapsed across digit pairs, on the spoken
magnitude task.

Discussion
Across two different tasks, numerical magnitude showed a
significant interaction with verbal yes/no polarity: dominant
responses (‘yes’) facilitated responses to large numbers,
non-dominant responses (‘no’) facilitated responding to
small numbers. This result supports the polarity
correspondence account of the SNARC effect, and
demonstrates that spatial responses are not essential to the
mapping of large numbers onto positive valence.
It is worth remembering that formally speaking, there is
no reason for ‘yes’ responses to be faster, in general, than

principle in order to explain compatibility effects involving
the number line. The reverse is not obviously the case. This
is made particularly strong by the fact that, while previous
research has used polarity correspondence post-hoc to
explain the SNARC effect (Proctor and Cho, 2006), the
current research used the principle to predict a novel and
otherwise surprising effect.
360

work or the existing literature indicates that representations
of space are more fundamental than other representations.
If every kind of response, and every kind of stimulus must
be assumed to include a ‘spatial’ code, then the code in
question is, we suggest, better thought of as not spatial, but
as just a generic polarity. At the broadest level, then what is
in question in this work is the fundamentality of space in
abstract and formal reasoning.

Nothing in either the polarity correspondence account or
the current experiment is incompatible with the existence of
a mental number line—it might be that numbers are
somehow spatially encoded, and that this encoding is
causally efficacious for some cognitive processes.
However, the SNARC effect in most or all of its many
manifestations does not seem to result from the mental
number line. There are at least two ways that the conclusion
‘SNARC implies mental number line’ might be saved. The
first is a general failure of the polarity correspondence
principle. As mentioned in the introduction, the principle
predicts not only the results reported here, but many others.
Stimulus-response compatibility effects should be both
ubiquitous, and more-or-less consistent. This might turn out
not to be the case. If the general principle is falsified, both
spatial and yes/no interactions with numerical magnitude
will require special explanation. The only way to evaluate
this possibility is to explore a range of predictions made by
the general principle, and see whether other predictions are
born out. Second, it might be that the mental number line
makes predictions that are not already predicted by polarity
correspondence. One potential instance is that it might be
that the interaction between space and magnitude is stronger
than the interaction between yes/no and magnitude (and that
that difference cannot be accounted for by the generic
strength of the polarity of the two dimensions). No such
effect was found here: on the verbal response task, the mean
benefit for compatible responses (i.e., saying ‘yes’ to large
numbers, or ‘no’ to small ones) was 12ms; on the spatial
response task, the mean compatibility benefit was 17ms, and
the difference was not significant. However, such a
difference might well exist. In that case, numbers might turn
out to be especially spatial. In order to defend the SNARC
effect as evidence for a specifically spatial representation of
numbers, evidence needs to be produced that is not already
predicted by the polarity correspondence account.
.
Of course, one possible explanation for the
compatibility effect shown here is that, like number, the
affirmation dimension is also spatially coded, and the
overlap between these codes yields the affirmation-numeric
association. In our view, such a move is unmotivated and
obfuscatory. If the effects reported in this study were
generated by an implicit coding of “yes” as rightward, then
we might expect an attenuation of the effect when compared
to a literally leftward or rightward response. No such
attenuation is immediately apparent. Previous experiments
exploring stimulus-response compatibilities have generally
used either a spatially varying stimulus dimension or a
spatially varying response dimension (see Cho and Proctor,
2006 for an overview; though see Glass, Holyoak, and
O’Dell, 1974). This experiment demonstrates that stimulusresponse compatibilities typically attributed to that spatial
component do not require explicitly spatial stimuli or
responses
It is probably true that yes-responses and right-hand
values are compatible (see Chase and Clark, 1971, for a
vertical case). Indeed, the polarity correspondence principle
predicts just this. However nothing in the experimental

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by AFOSR Grant # FA955007-1-0147. The authors would like to thank Adam Sheya
Robert Goldstone, and Greg Murphy for valuable comments
and suggestions on this line of research.

References
Casarotti, M., Michielin, M., Zorzi, M., Umilta. C. (2007).
Temporal order judgment reveals how number magnitude
affects visuospatial attention. Cognition, 102, 101-117.
Chase, W. G. & Clark, H. H. (1971). Semantics in the
perception of verticality. British Journal of Psychology,
62, 311–326.
Cho, Y.S. & Proctor, R.W. (2007) When Is an Odd Number
Not Odd? Influence of Task Rule on the MARC Effect for
Numeric Classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 33(5),
832-842.
Dehaene S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Fischer, M.H. (2001). Number processing induces spatial
performance biases. Neurology, 57 (1), 822-826.
Forster, K. L., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavioral
Research Methods Instruments and Computers, 35, 116 –
124.
Glass, A. L., Holyoak, K. J., & O’Dell, C. (1974).
Production frequency and the verification of quantified
statements. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 13, 237-254.
Hines, T. M. (1990). An odd effect: Lengthened reaction
times for judgments about odd digits. Memory &
Cognition, 18, 40-46.
Hubbard, E. M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between number and space in parietal
cortex. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(6), 435-48.
Ito, Y., & Hatta, T. (2004). Spatial structure of semantic
representation of numbers: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Memory & Cognition, 32, 662– 673.
Lidji, P., Kolinsky, R., Lochy, A., & Morais, J. (2007)
Spatial associations for musical stimuli: A piano in the
head?. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 33(5), 1189-1207.
Lippa, Y. & Adam, J. J. (2001). Orthogonal stimulus–
response compatibility resulting from spatial
transformations. Perception & Psychophysics, 63, 156 –
174.

361

Sheya, A. (2003 April) The Role of Perceptual Features in
Conceptual Development. Presented at The biennial
meeting of the Society for Research on Child
Development, Tampa, FL.
Simon, J. R. (1990). The effects of an irrelevant directional
cue on human information processing. In R. W. Proctor &
T. G. Reeve (Eds.), Stimulus–response compatibility: An
integrated perspective (Vol. 65, pp. 31– 86). Amsterdam,
the Netherlands: North-Holland.
Zebian S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts,
spatial thinking, and directionality of writing: The
SNARC effect and the REVERSE SNARC effect in
English and Arabic monoliterates, biliterates, and illiterate
Arabic speakers. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 5 (12), 165-190.

Notebaert, W., Gevers, W., Verguts, T., & Fias, W. (2006).
Shared spatial representations for numbers and space: The
reversal of the SNARC and the Simon effects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 32 (5), 1197-207.
Proctor, R.W. & Cho, Y.S. (2006) Polarity Correspondence:
A General Principle for Performance of Speeded Binary
Classification Tasks. Psychological Bulletin 132(3), 416442.
Protopapas, A. (2007). CheckVocal: A program to facilitate
checking the accuracy and response time of vocal
responses from DMDX. Behavior Research Methods, 39
(4), 859-862.
Seymour, P. H. K. (1973). Judgments of verticality and
response availability. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society,
1, 196 –198.

362

