UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Will It Float? How Invariance Affects Children's Understanding of Object Density

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92f3w9w1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Kloos, Heidi

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Will it float?
How Invariance Affects Children’s Understanding of Object Density
Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
409A Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Abstract

Naïve Understanding of Density
A variety of methods have been used to study children’s
naïve understanding of density. In Piaget’s classical studies,
children were presented with a variety of household objects,
including metal utensils, candle wax, and tin foil, and they
were asked to predict whether an object would sink or float
(Inhelder & Piaget, 1958). Other methods include presenting
children with pairs of blocks and asking them to determine
the heavier kind of stuff (e.g., Smith, Carey & Wiser, 1985),
or to ask them to predict the faster sinking object (e.g.,
Penner & Klahr, 1996; Kloos & Van Orden, 2005).
Most findings suggest that children have pronounced
difficulty with the concept of density. From preschool age to
adulthood, participants seem to ignore differences in
objects’ density and instead respond in terms of an object’s
mass. These findings led to the well-known claim that
children cannot differentiate between mass and density
(Smith et al., 1985). A way of alleviating this problem and
help students differentiate between mass and density would
then be to demonstrate that mass and density have unique
outcomes.
However, there are some findings that show density
competence even in preschool children. Most notable is
Kohn’s (1993) study because it used a widely common
method: Participants had to determine whether an object
would sink or float. No feedback was provided, and no
object was ever placed in water during the experiment. Yet,
4-and 5-year-olds performed better than what would be
predicted by chance alone (see also Kloos & Van Orden,
2005).

The density of materials and objects is an important topic in
physics instructions. However, the extent to which children
naïvely understand this concept is still unclear. Some
findings suggest that children cannot differentiate between
an object’s mass and its density, whereas other findings
show competent density performance even in preschoolers.
The goal of the current study is to bridge these conflicting
results. The specific hypothesis is that children can
distinguish among different densities if – and only if –
density is an invariant property in the set of stimuli. Data
with 2- to 6-year-olds and adults provide support for this
hypothesis. Children 4 years and older, as well as adults,
were affected by the distribution of density in the set of
objects presented to them, in that they could tune into
density spontaneously when density was invariant, and less
so when mass and volume were invariant. Theses results
have important implications for our understanding of
children’s problem solving, as well as on how the concept
of density could be taught to young children.
Keywords: preschoolers; naïve physics;
development; task context; reasoning.

cognitive

Introduction
Density is an intensive property of materials, quantifiable
as an object’s mass over its volume. In simple terms, the
more mass is packed into a volume, the denser the object
is. Density affects the behavior of objects in crucial ways,
most notably in relation to objects’ buoyancy. An object
that is less dense than water will float, while an object
denser than water will sink. And among sinking objects,
the denser object will sink faster than the less dense object
(assuming the shape stays the same). Given these practical
applications, the concept of density is often a standard unit
in physics instruction.
Yet, teaching children about density is not as
successful as one might hope. Even 12-year-olds tend to
ignore explicit demonstrations, for example about sinking
objects, in favor of their pre-existing beliefs about how
mass and volume should affect objects’ sinking behavior
(e.g., Hewson & Hewson, 1983; Penner & Klahr, 1996).
Clearly, children tend to hold onto their naïve beliefs
about
physical
relations,
ignoring
classroom
interventions (e.g., McDermott & Redish, 1999; Pfundt &
Duit, 1991; Schauble, 1990). The current study looks at
what exactly is it that children naïvely know about the
concept of density.

Explaining Discrepant Results
How can these conflicting findings be reconciled? A
common way is to postulate the existence of two different
types of knowledge, an implicit kind of knowledge and an
explicit kind of knowledge. A task that yields successful
performance might tap into implicit knowledge, while a task
that yields unsuccessful performance might tap into (the
lack of) explicit knowledge. Children might have an implicit
understanding of density, but not an explicit one (e.g.,
Kohn, 1993).
Yet, this explanation does not only have theoretical
problems of testability and generalizability, it also has
practical problems of applicability. Claiming that children
687

(e.g., distance between dots, size of dots), with the number of
dots being the invariant property. During dishabituation,
children were shown an array of a new number of dots (e.g.,
three dots). Children’s looking pattern suggested that these
very young children dishabituated (i.e., they regained
attention) to the new number. They were able to ignore the
varying features and tune to the invariant feature of number.
The same process of extracting the invariant property from
the set of stimuli may have taken place in Kohn’s (1993)
study, when children were asked to predict whether an object
would sink or float. Recall that findings in Kohn’s study are
in stark contrast with other density study: Even preschoolers
could ably distinguish objects in term of their density. Indeed,
the set of stimuli used in Kohn’s study differed markedly
from studies that show density difficulties. Uniform cubes
were created that differed in mass and volume in many small
increments, while they differed in density in few and large
increments. Being presented with a categorization task,
neither mass or volume served as a reliable invariant
property. Cubes differed on six levels of mass (and on five
levels of volume), with no clear distinction between heavy
and light cubes (or between large and small ones). Density,
on the other hand, was invariant: half of the objects had a
density below that of water, and half of the objects had a
density above that of water.
Like in the adult judgment tasks described above
(Crawford et al, 2000; Huttenlocher et al, 2000), children in
Kohn’s task never compared objects side by side. This made
it difficult for children to differentiate objects in terms of their
mass and volume, and it might have helped children assess
the distribution of the invariant feature density. In contrast,
studies that show difficulty with the concept of density
present children with pairs of objects that differ markedly in
mass and volume. In such a pair-situation, mass or volume
becomes the invariant property. Children can distinguish and
hence categorize objects in terms of their mass, for example).
Density being a feature that can be detected only across
distributions becomes hidden in such a pair task.
In sum, it seems plausible that children might base their
physics judgment on the invariant property of the
experimental stimuli. They might perform well when density
is the invariant property of the set, compared to condition in
which this is not so. The current study tests this possibility
explicitly.

have an implicit understanding of density, but not an
explicit one, provides little information about what might be
a successful instructional approach. Can instructors take
advantage of something like children’s implicit knowledge
of density? And why do commonly used instructional
approaches fail?
The current study tests an alternative explanation for what
might cause the discrepant findings in children’s naïve
understanding of density. It is based on the idea that
children’s performance, rather than merely reflecting their
knowledge (or the lack of), reflects their interaction with the
immediate task context (Gigerenzer & Richter, 1990; Kloos
& Van Orden, 2008). Children’s predictions about the faster
sinking object, for example, might be a function of what
kinds of objects children are presented with.
These ideas are anchored in basic-research findings about
categorization and learning (e.g., Smith, Jones, & Landau,
1996; Sloutsky, 2003). Children and adults quickly detect
correlational patterns in the immediate task context and
make use of it in their performance. More specifically, they
detect how features are distributed in the set of objects and
base their categorization judgment on what they perceive as
the invariant property. Differences in performance (such as
those described above with the concept of density) might
therefore be due to differences in structural properties of the
task, rather than due to what children know about the
specific concept.

Invariance in Density Tasks
The invariant property in a set of objects pertains to a feature
that allows for most systematic performance. In a
categorization task, for example, the invariant property is the
feature that divides objects most reliably into two categories.
In a feedback task, the invariant property is the feature that
stays the same across trials (and thus allows for correct
performance).
A variety of findings have shown the importance of
invariant features in perception and action (e.g., Runeson,
Juslin & Olsson, 2000). More importantly, invariance was
also shown to affect adults’ categorization (e.g., Crawford,
Huttenlocher & Engebretson, 2000; Huttenlocher, Hedges &
Vevea, 2000). When asked to estimate the size of a figure
that was presented to adults but then disappeared from view,
their errors were systematically related to the distribution of
size in the entire set of figures. This was the case even though
participants never saw (or were asked to pay attention to) the
entire set of figures juxtaposed. Adults automatically kept
track of how the figures varied in size.
Could children be sensitive to the distribution of density in
a set of objects? Suggestive evidence comes from research
with neonates on their understanding of numerosity (Antell &
Keating, 1983). Newborn infants were presented with a set of
visual stimuli, each showing an array of dots. In a
habituation/dishabituation looking paradigm, children were
first presented a specific number of black dots (e.g., two
dots). That is to say, arrays differed in a variety of features

Overview
The goal of this study was to test the effect of feature
distribution on children’s and adults’ naïve understanding of
density. Two within-subjects conditions were contrasted that
differed in how objects were arranged. In particular, in the
density condition, children were presented with one object at
a time, the set of which had density as the invariant property.
Conversely, in the mass\volume condition, children were
presented with pairs of objects that differed in mass and/or in
volume (as well as density), making mass and volume
invariant properties. In both conditions, participants could
688

As can be seen from Table 1, the ten cubes comprised of
seven masses (ranging from 30 g to 503 g) and six volumes
(ranging from 39 cm3 to 405 cm3), but only two densities (one
being about 2 g/cm3, and one being about 0.5 g/cm3). Objects
with a density of 2 g/cm3 sink in water (water having a
density of 1 g/cm3), while objects with a density of 0.5 g/cm3
float. Note that cubes were constructed in such a way that
neither mass nor volume was predictive of the cube’s sinking
behavior. For three masses (77g, 123g, and 197g), cubes of
the same mass could sink or float. And for four volumes (64
cm3, 104 cm3, 166 cm3 and 262 cm3), cubes of the same
volume could either sink or float.
Cubes were hollowed out and filled with lead and wood
putty until the desired mass was obtained. Care was taken to
distribute mass as equally as possible throughout a cube.
Once the cube was filled and closed, it was painted in bright
colors, identical across cubes.
Stimuli were identical across the two conditions, with only
the arrangement of cubes changing as a function of condition.
In the density condition, cubes were presented to participants
one at a time, because density was the invariant property in
the entire set of objects. Conversely, in the mass\volume
condition, cubes were arranged into pairs in such a way that
mass and/or volume varied within a pair (in addition to
density). The cubes that were combined into a pair are
connected with a line in Table 1. Note that each pair consisted
of a sinker and a floater, with the sinker always being the
lighter and/or smaller of the two cubes. In other words,
density was pitted against mass within a pair. The rationale
was to create a setting in which both mass and density could
form the basis for categorization judgment. Pitting mass
against density made is possible to determine whether
children focus on mass or on density in their decision on
whether a cube would sink or float.

manipulate the objects for as long as they like, after which
they had to decide whether an object would sink or float.
To obtain a developmental progression in children’s naïve
understanding about density, participants included 2- to 6year-olds as well as adults. The prediction was that children
will be sensitive to the differences in density sometime during
preschool age (in line with Kohn’s findings), and that
participants will perform better in the density than the
mass\volume condition.

Method
Participants
Children were recruited from suburban middleclass
preschools, and adults were recruited from the subject pool of
Introduction to Psychology classes at the University of
Cincinnati. Adults received course credit in return for their
participation. The final sample consisted of 7 2-year-olds (5
girls and 2 boys; M = 31.7 months, SD = 2.6 months), 9 3year-olds (3 girls and 6 boys; M = 41.6 months, SD = 3
months), 10 4- to 6-year-olds (6 girls and 4 boys; M = 65.1
months, SD = 11.7 months), and 11 adults (6 women and 5
men; M = 20.2 years, SD = 2.4 years).

Stimuli
Ten wooden cubes were created that differed along mass and
volume, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Dimensions of Cubes
(with volume given in cm3)

Mass (g)

2 g/cm3

Density

0.5 g/cm3

30

Procedure
The experiment was administered on a computer and
controlled by SuperLab Pro 2.0 software. Participants were
tested in a quiet room (either in their preschool or in the lab)
by female hypothesis-blind experimenters.
The cover story involved a character named Wump who
found some special rocks on a far-away planet and now wants
to know if the rocks would sink or float in earth water. Note
that throughout the experiment, there were no practice trials,
and no cube was ever placed in water.
The two conditions were administered in a within-subject
design, with the mass\volume condition always being
presented first. This is because better performance was
predicted in the density condition when participants had to
extract the invariant property density from the entire set of
stimuli. Given that participants were not provided with any
feedback, possible learning effects from the mass\volume
condition to the density condition were unlikely. Conversely,
were the density condition presented first, children extracting
the invariant property of density might have inflated their
performance in the ensuing mass\volume condition.

48
77
123

197

314
503

689

function of condition, paired-sample ts > 2.5, p < 0.05. In
other words, children 4 years and older as well as adults were
affected by the manipulation of how the cubes were arranged.
Even though these participants were presented with the very
same cubes during the density condition and the mass\volume
condition, they performed better when they were presented
with cubes one at a time than when they were presented with
pairs of objects.

During the first part of the experiment (mass\volume
condition), participants were presented with the five unique
pairs of cubes, one pair at a time, in random order, with each
pair being presented twice (for a total of 10 trials). Within a
trial, the two cubes were placed into the participants’ hands in
random left-right arrangement, and he or she was encouraged
to feel them. Participants had to decide for each cube whether
it would sink or float. The prediction for this condition is that
participants will perform below optimal, their judgment being
affected by misleading differences in mass.
During the second part of the experiment (density
condition), participants were presented with the ten unique
cubes, one cube at a time, in random order, with each cube
being presented twice (for a total of 20 trials). Within a trial,
the cube was placed in front of the participant, and he or she
had to decide whether it would sink or float. Having cubes
presented one at a time allowed participants to base their
judgment on how features are distributed across the entire set
of cubes (as opposed to across a pair of objects). As argued
above, the only invariant property across the entire set of
objects is density. It is therefore expected that participants
perform better in this second part of the experiment.
Note that no feedback was provided during the entire
duration of testing. This rules out the possibility that
improved performance across trials could be due to learning.

Mean Proportion Correct

1
0.9

Condition
Density

0.8

Mass\Volume

0.7
0.6
0.5
2-year-olds

3-year-olds

4- to 6-year-olds

Adults

Age

Figure 1: Mean accuracy of participants’ performance as a
function of age and condition. Chance performance is at 0.5.
Error bars represent standard errors.
To assess whether the difference in performance between
condition is due to having to make a judgment about one vs.
two cubes, a new group of 4- to 6-year-olds was tested with
pairs only (n = 10; 5 girls and 5 boys; M = 63.2 months, SD =
10 months). For critical pairs (identical to the ones used in the
mass\volume condition above), mass and volume were pitted
against density, in that the lighter and smaller cube was the
denser one. Conversely, for non-critical pairs, the heavier
cube was also the denser one. The task was identical to the
mass\volume condition above, with children being presented
with 10 critical and 10 non-critical pairs in random order.
Results show a significant difference between pair types,
paired-sample t(9) = 4.3, p < 0.05, which children performing
better with non-critical pairs (M = 0.82, SE = 0.06) than with
critical ones (M = 0.71, SE = 0.06). This finding rules out the
possibility that the difference in condition reported above is
driven by the superficial difference in having to made a
judgment about one vs. two cubes.

Results
Performance was scored in terms of whether a cube was
identified correctly as a sinker or floater or not (i.e., the
floater was determined to be a sinker, or vice versa).
Preliminary analyses pertained to performance on
individual pairs of cubes (mass\volume condition) and on
individual cubes (density condition) to determine whether any
particular pair of cubes (or any particular cube) was more
difficult than another. Two one-factor ANOVAs, one for
pairs (with levels being the unique pairs), and one for
individual cubes (with levels being the unique cubes),
revealed no significant difference on mean proportion of
correct performance (ps > 0.33). These findings suggest that
any effect of condition or age group is not driven by
performance on an individual pair of cubes, or on an
individual cube.
Figure 1 shows the mean proportion of correct performance
as a function of age group and condition. A 2-by-4 mixed
design ANOVA was conducted with condition as the withinsubject factor and age group as the between-subject factor. It
revealed a significant main effect of age, F(3, 31) = 3.4, p <
0.03, with older children and adults (M = 0.81, SE = 0.04)
performing better than the younger children (M = 0.66, SE =
0.05). Notably, 2-year-olds did not perform better than what
would be predicted by chance, single-sample t(6) = 0.89, p >
0.8), while participants 3 years and older performed above
chance across condition, single-sample ts > 3.3, p < 0.05.
More importantly, the ANOVA revealed a significant
interaction, F(1, 31) = 2.8, p < 0.05, with older children and
adults, but not younger children, performing differently as a

Discussion
The goal of the current study was to test whether young
children’s naïve understanding of density is affected by the
immediate task context in which children act. Of particular
interest was the degree to which the distribution of features in
the stimuli matters in children’s task performance. The
speculation was that children can successfully tune into
differences in density when density is the invariant property
in the set of objects – that is, when differences in density
yield clear categories. Conversely, children were expected to
base their judgment on mass and volume when differences in
these features – rather than in density – were made salient.

690

Acknowledgments

The results confirm the speculations. To sum them up, 4- to
6-year-olds and adults performed better when density was the
only invariant property (mass and volume could not be
juxtaposed), than when the objects differed saliently in mass
or volume. In the latter case, while still showing above
chance performance, their judgment was anchored by
differences in mass and volume.
Could the difference in performance between conditions be
explained by extraneous factors such as fatigue, practice, or
attentional demands? This is not likely, for the following
reasons. First, as discussed above, children were not given
any feedback during the task, ruling out the possibility of
practice. Second, 3-year-olds performed above chance in both
the density and the mass\volume condition (with no
difference between conditions). Extraneous factors such as
fatigue should have affected the younger children more than
the older children. Yet, finding above chance performance in
the younger children with no change in condition rules out
this possibility. Finally, the results obtained with a second
group of preschoolers rule out the possibility that the
mass\volume condition had a higher attentional demand than
the density condition. These children performed worse in the
mass\volume condition than a condition with similar
attentional demands that did not pit mass differences against
density.

The author thanks Ahn Thu Inman, Adrienne Frazier, and
Daniel Baum for help with the stimuli, and Anna Silverman,
Becky Fenstermaker, and Cathy Odar for their help with data
collection. This work was supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation (DRL # 723638) to the author.

References
Antell, S. E., & Keating, D. P. (1983). Perception of
Numerical Invariance in Neonates. Child Development,
1983, 54, 695-701
Crawford, L. E., Huttenlocher, J., & Engebretson, P. H.
(2000). Perceptual and category bias in reproducing visual
stimuli. Psychological Science, 11, 284-288.
Gigerenzer, G., & Richter, H. R. (1990). Context effects and
their interaction with development: Area judgments.
Cognitive Development, 5, 235-264.
Hewson, M. G., & Hewson, P. W. (1983). The effect of
instruction using students’ prior knowledge and
conceptual change strategies on science learning.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 20, 731-743.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V. & Vevea, J.L. (2000). Why
do categories affect stimulus judgment? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 1-22.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York:
Basic Books.
Kloos, H., & Van Orden, G. C. (2005). Can a preschooler’s
mistaken beliefs benefit learning? Swiss Journal of
Psychology, 64, 195-205.
Kloos, H., & Van Orden, G. (2008). The meaning of models
in developmental psychology. In J. P. Spencer, M.
Thomas, & J. McClelland (Eds.). Toward a new grand
theory of development? Connectionism and dynamic
systems theory re-considered. In press by Oxford
University Press
McDermott L.C., & Redish, E. F. (1999). Resource letter:
PER-1: Physics education re-search. American Journal
of Physics, 67, 755-767.
Penner, D. E., & Klahr, D. (1996). The interaction of
domain-specific knowledge and domain-general
discovery strategies: A study with sinking objects.
Child Development, 67, 2709-2727.
Pfundt, H. & Duit, R. (1991) Bibliography: Students’
alternative frameworks and science education (3rd Ed.)
Kiel, Germany: Institute for Science Education.
Runeson, S., Juslin, P, & Olsson, H. (2000). Visual
perception of dynamic properties: Cue heuristics versus
direct-perceptual competence. Psychological Review,
107, 525-555.
Smith, C., Carey, S., & Wiser, M. (1985). On
differentiation: A case study o the development of the
concept of size, weight, and density. Cognition, 21,
177-237.

Implications for Education
The larger goal was to bridge conflicting results on
children’s naïve understanding of density as a means of
improving instructional methods. Rather than having to
postulate an implicit vs. explicit type of knowledge to account
for discrepancy in children’s competence, the current results
provide a viable alternative with important implications for
education. They suggest that children’s difficulty with density
are tied to a task context in which objects can be compared in
terms of mass and volume. Once objects differ saliently in
mass and volume, children might use these features are
anchor points – as invariant properties – to make systematic
judgments. Indeed, teaching methods that emphasize mass
and volume are rather unsuccessful at teaching children about
the concept of density. Conversely, being presented with
objects that differ saliently in density might allow children to
gain an intuitive senses of the relevant physical property, after
which a more formal understanding might be construed (cf.,
Smith, Maclin, Grosslight & Davis, 1997; Smith, Snir, &
Grosslight, 1992).
Of course, the findings do not pertain merely to density but
can be extended to learning of other the physical concepts and
knowledge development in general. Rather than treating
knowledge as a static entity, the current results demonstrate
the importance of the immediate task context in children’s
judgment. They shows that children are engaged in an active
sense-making of the immediate task context that is controlled
by simple attention to structure.

691

Smith, L. B., Jones, S. & Landau, B. (1996) Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Smith, C., Maclin, D., Grosslight, L., & Davis, H. (1997).
Teaching for understanding: A study of students' preinstruction theories of matter and a comparison of the
effectiveness of two approaches to teaching about matter
and density. Cognition and Instruction, 15, 317-393.

Smith, C., Snir, J., & Grosslight, L. (1992). Using
conceptual models to facilitate concep-tual change: The
case of weight-density differentiation. Cognition and
Instruction, 9, 221-283.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.

692

