UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Words, Actions, Objects, and Abstractions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5vr5g96z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Words, Actions, Objects and Abstractions
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN, 47405 USA

Abstract

language learning through developmental changes in visual
object recognition.
At a broader level this talk is about the
fundamentally constructive nature of developmental process
itself: how development creates new forms of behaviors
and abilities from interaction of multiple processes, engaged
in different assemblies in overlapping tasks; how every
developmental cause is itself a consequence of
developmental process; how development is made of weird
loops of causes and consequences with far-reaching and
expected developmental dependencies.
A summary of the developmental story we will tell
is provided by Figure 1: Learning object names increases
children’s attention to shape, which in turn speeds up object
name learning. Learning object names also changes how
children perceive object shape, which facilitates learning
and generalizing object names and of actions. Acting on
objects, in turn, refines and tunes –making even more
abstract – the representation of object shape. Along the
way, we will suggest, and provide evidence for the idea, that
the abstract representation of object shape is the critical link
between object name learning and object substitutions in
play.

Development is fundamentally a constructive process,
creating new forms. This is certainly so at the level of the
body; after all, we begin as a single cell, become a mass of
identical cells, and then these differentiate into exquisite new
structures with new higher level organizations. This talk is
about the fundamentally constructive nature of processes of
cognitive development: how development creates new forms
of behaviors and abilities from interaction of multiple
processes, engaged in different assemblies in overlapping
tasks; how every developmental cause is itself a consequence
of developmental process; how development is made of weird
loops of causes and consequences with far-reaching and
expected developmental dependencies. The talk will focus on
one empirical example: the dramatic changes that occur in 3dimensional visual object recognition between 18 and 24
months of age -- changes that appear deeply related both to
children's actions on objects and also to their learning of
object names.
Keywords: embodiment, object recognition, word learning,
development.

Human beings are remarkably inventive, able to solve
problems and to create things never created before. This
chapter is about one early form of inventiveness that has
long intrigued developmentalists –what is some times
symbolic play, but more narrowly, is also known as “object
substitution in play.” The specific phenomenon consists of
young children using some object –not for what it is --but
as a “stand in” for something else in play – a banana as a
phone, a box as a doll bed, a shoe as a toy car. Piaget
considered object-substitution in play – the using of a
banana as phone, for example – as “symbolic” because the
substituted object could be interpreted as as “standing for”
the real thing. This view that object-substitution is a form
of symbolizing (whatever precisely that means) has been
disputed. Regardless on one’s stand on this issue, object
substitution in play remains a signal developmental
achievement, emerging at the same time (18 to 24 months)
as children’s spoken vocabulary also expands. Perhaps
most critically, object substitution in play is strongly linked
to individual children’s language development with the lack
of this behavior is a strong predictor of significant
subsequent language delay. At one level, this talk is about
how and why these object substitutions may be linked to

25

