UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Model Theory of Deontic Reasoning About Social Norms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9k42z786

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Model Theory of Deontic Reasoning About Social Norms
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
This paper outlines a model theory of deontic reasoning.
It proposes that social norms form the basic concept on
which deontic inferences operate. The theory unifies and
extends current deontic approaches. Empirical findings
from the deontic selection task will be presented which
support the theory.

Introduction
Deontic reasoning is thinking about which action a person may or must perform with respect to a social rule.
Imagine an officer who has to administer the admission
to an event. The promoter has given him the rule “If a
person has a ticket, then this person may enter.” Lisa has
no ticket. May she enter? The officer answers: “No, Lisa
must not enter. She does not fulfill the entry condition.”
Although intuitively plausible, this answer is in conflict
with standard conditional logic. The antecedent of a
conditional ‘If P then Q’ denotes a sufficient but not necessary condition. If ‘P’ does not hold then one can not
decide whether ‘Q’ holds. Thus, the officer should rather
ask his promoter what to do with Lisa instead of refusing the entry. Why is it, that his answer nevertheless
seems right? The goal of this paper is to introduce a new
theory of deontic reasoning which explains such phenomena. It will be compared to alternative approaches
and backed up with findings from the deontic “microlaboratory” of the selection task (Wason, 1966).

The Deontic Mental Models Theory (DMM)
The model theory assumes that reasoning requires the
construction of mental models which represent the
meaning of, for example, verbal premises or a person’s
background knowledge (Johnson-Laird, 1983; JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 1991). Their structure and content capture semantic relations of the situations they refer to. To
make an inference, reasoners first extract a putative conclusion from an initial model and then validate it or, if
necessary, revise it by fleshing out alternative models.
Of which structure and content are the models that
underlie deontic reasoning? In this article, it is proposed
that the underlying models represent social norms.

Normative Models and Deontic Inferences
Social norms constitute constraints on actions but they
do not really restrict a person’s freedom of action. A
person may follow a norm or violate it. Consequently,

two types of models must be distinguished: factual models and normative models.
Factual models describe which conditions hold or
which actions are taken. A condition (C) is viewed as a
state of affairs that can be fulfilled or not (symbolized as
C vs. ¬C). Actions are taken by a person on a certain
occasion; not performing an action is notated by negation (Action vs. ¬Action); a more detailed analysis is
given by von Wright (1963). The fact, for example, that
a person with a ticket is entering an event can be represented by the following factual model:
(1) Normative

Factual
[entering] [ticket]

Normative models cannot describe which actions persons really take. They describe constraints on actions,
that is, under which conditions actions are forbidden or
obligatory. In a consistent system of norms an action
cannot be forbidden and obligatory at the same time,
otherwise the person is trapped in a dilemma. In the following, ‘bans’ are taken as the basic normative concept
and represented as forbidden(Action). In accordance with the axiom of definitional equivalence in
modal logics ‘must X ≡ must-not ¬X’ (e.g., Chellas,
1980), an obligation can also be represented as a ban:
the obligation to take an action means that the omission
of the action is forbidden (forbidden(¬Action)).
With regard to the relation between a ban and its conditions, two assumptions are made: First, people represent each ban together with all conditions that put the
ban into force (closed world assumption). Second, people treat the relation between a banned action and the
conditions as an equivalence (which is justified under
the closed world assumption): If the conditions are met,
then the action is forbidden, otherwise it is allowed.
Taking both assumptions together, the basic schema of a
norm (concerning one action) takes the following
explicit standard form:
(2) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Factual
[Conditions]

[¬forbidden(Action)] [¬Conditions]

Each line denotes a separate model. Since all conditions concerning this action are considered (closed
world assumption), the representation is exhaustive (indicated by square brackets). In the simplest case, there is
one norm with one condition. Having a ticket, e.g., is
often the only condition to be admitted to an event:

(3) Normative

Factual

[forbidden(entering)] [¬ticket]
[¬forbidden(entering)]

[ticket]

Sometimes, however, several conditions have to be
considered in combination. Necessary conditions may
be treated by a conjunctive model, alternative conditions
by a disjunction of models. Spectators of German soccer
matches, for example, are often examined not only for
their tickets but additionally for weapons. The normative models then contain two disjunctive conditions: A
person is not allowed to enter, if (and only if) he or she
has no ticket or has a weapon:
(4) Normative
[weapon]

[forbidden(entering)]

[¬ticket]

[forbidden(entering)]

[¬ticket] [¬weapon]

[forbidden(entering)]

[ticket]

[weapon]

[ticket] [¬weapon]

[¬forbidden(entering)]

Of course, there may be additional norms concerning
other actions as well. Their representation, however, follows the same schema. Deontic inferences connect normative and factual models. If a person fulfills the
conditions (Cs) associated with a forbidden action then
one can assert “the action must not be taken” and –
according to the axiom of definitional equivalence –
“the action must be omitted”. Thus, two inferences can
be drawn from the corresponding set of models1:
(5) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Factual
Cs

...

[Cs]
∴ must-not Action
∴ must ¬Action

If an action is taken which is potentially forbidden,
then it follows that the conditions Cs must not be fulfilled or else the norm would be violated. Equivalently,
it must be the case that the conditions are not fulfilled:
(6) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Factual
[Cs]

[Action]
∴ must-not Cs
∴ must ¬Cs

While the modals must not and must correspond to the
notions of ban and obligation, the modals may and need
not are related to the concepts of permission and release
from obligation. Both pairs, ban and permission as well
as obligation and release, are contradictories. In a consistent system of norms, exactly one of each pair is true:
an action is either forbidden or allowed; it is either
1

For reasons of simplicity, the action side of the norm is represented exhaustively: all banning conditions are subsumed
under Cs. The condition side in model (5) is not represented
exhaustively because there may be other bans under the
same conditions.

obligatory or not. One can infer that something may be
the case if it is not forbidden, and that something need
not be the case if it is not obligatory. Finally, a norm is
violated if a person takes an action while fulfilling at
least one condition under which the action is banned:
(7) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Factual
[Cs]

[Action] [Cs]
∴ violation

To illustrate the application of the theory, let’s reconsider the introductory example. An officer was given the
rule: If a person has a ticket, then this person may enter.
It mentions one condition for the action of entering.
Since norms constitute constraints on actions, the officer
can map the rule to norm (3) which expresses that entering is not forbidden with a ticket, but it is forbidden without one. For Lisa who has no ticket, model (5) applies
which allows the officer to answer: “She must not enter”.

“Why a New Theory of Deontic Reasoning?”
... one may ask since a number of well-established proposals already exist. While each of the current
approaches emphasizes a different aspect, the proposed
DMM theory tries to unify their main characteristics.
DMM theory takes up two previous ideas: (1) Modal
terms gain their deontic meaning by referring to deontic
norms (Johnson-Laird, 1978) which represent (2) permissible and impermissible situations (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1992). DMM theory goes beyond these ideas by
proposing a concrete representation of norms and relating deontic modals to it. Manktelow and Over (1991;
1995) claimed that social roles and utilities need to be
incorporated. These factors are indeed important since
social roles distinguish between the parties affected by a
social rule and utilities influence its negotiation. They
seem not necessary, however, for deontic inferences
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1992). Once a social rule has
been established, it defines the normative constraints on
each parties’ actions, and the corresponding normative
models determine the possible deontic inferences.
Thompson (2000) argued that a theory of reasoning
should not only specify the inferential procedures that
operate on a given representation; it must also specify
the interpretative processes that set up this representation. As her experiments show, the interpretation of conditional reasoning tasks is affected by two factors: by
the perceived necessity and sufficiency relations and by
the pragmatic relation (deontic vs. factual). DMM theory integrates necessity and sufficiency relations on the
condition-side of norms and it considers the characteristics of the deontic domain she condensed from her studies: the normative character of the models which gives
relevance (Sperber, Cara & Girotto, 1995) to the notion
of norm-violation. In addition, DMM theory may be
used to analyze the interpretation of normative statements by exploring how they are related to norms.
The theory of pragmatic reasoning schemas (PRS;

Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Holyoak & Cheng, 1995) proposed two deontic inference schemas – one for permission and one for obligation – each consisting of four
rules which are applicable when their appropriate content is present. The rules of the permission schema are:
P1:
P2:
P3:
P4:

If the action is to be taken,
then the precondition must be satisfied.
If the action is not to be taken,
then the precondition need not be satisfied.
If the precondition is satisfied,
then the action may be taken.
If the precondition is not satisfied,
then the action must not be taken.

The two deontic schemas are sufficient to explain many
findings with deontic reasoning tasks (see, e.g., Holyoak
& Cheng, 1995). As a theory of deontic reasoning, however, the PRS approach is faced with two problems.
First, with regard to terminology the two schemas are
not clearly distinguishable – both include a permission
rule (e.g., P3) and an obligation rule (e.g., P1) – and the
modal terms defining the schemas are themselves undefined (Manktelow & Over, 1995). The idea of a domainspecific representation of norms is adopted by DMM
theory but it uses a single normative concept (bans)
instead of different schemas and defines the modals by
reference to norms, actions, and conditions. This approach encompasses both PRS schemas (Beller, 1997).
Second, the scope of PRS theory is quite restricted: It
does not cover some deontic inferences that people easily draw. For example, from the entry-rule “If a man has
no ticket, then he must not enter” people easily infer that
without a ticket “he must stay out”. A corresponding
inference rule is available in neither schema; the inference is supported, however, by DMM theory (model 5
applied to norm 3). By considering relations of modal
logics the range of covered deontic inferences is
extended beyond the PRS schemas.
“What is the origin of domain-specificity in reasoning?” is the question posed by evolutionary approaches.
Are domain-specific concepts learned as assumed, for
example, by PRS theory or do they reflect innate evolutionary adaptations (e.g., Cosmides, 1989; Cummins,
1996)? DMM theory stresses which information persons
represent in their models and how these affect reasoning. It is open with respect to the origin question.
Having justified the theoretical relevance of the new
theory, it is now applied to Wason’s (1966) selection
task. Since the discovery of content effects in the 1970s,
this prominent paradigm has developed into a microlaboratory of deontic reasoning with findings that each
deontic theory must be able to explain.

Touchstone “Deontic Selection Task”
How does DMM theory fit the basic findings with deontic task versions? For reviews of the vast selection task
literature see, for example, Beller (1997), Evans, Newstead and Byrne (1993), or Newstead and Evans (1995).
The Deontic Task: In the original, non-deontic task
(Wason, 1966) persons are shown four cards with a let-

ter on one side and a number on the other side. One side
is visible: “A”, “K”, “5”, and “8”. A rule is given: “If
there is an ‘A’ on one side, then there is a ‘5’ on the
other.” The task is to select all cards which need to be
turned over to find out whether the rule is true or false.
Since a conditional ‘If P, then Q’ is false only if the
antecedent ‘P’ holds and the consequence ‘Q’ is false,
exactly two cards can prove the rule: the ‘P’-card (“A”)
and the ‘not Q’-card (“8”). This answer is usually given
by less than 10 % of the participants (e.g., Evans, Newstead & Byrne, 1993). Now, consider the following
deontic version (adapted from Griggs & Cox, 1982):
Imagine that you are a police officer on duty. It is your job
to ensure that people conform with certain rules. The
cards in front of you have information about four people.
On one side of a card is a person’s age and on the other
side is what the person is drinking. Here is a rule: If a person is drinking beer, then he or she must be over 19. Select
the card(s) that you need to turn over to determine whether people are violating the rule.

The cards show: “drinking beer”, “drinking Coke”,
“22 years”, and “16 years” (‘P’, ‘not P’, ‘Q’, and ‘not Q’
with respect to the rule ‘If P, then must Q’). As in the
abstract task, ‘P’/‘not Q’ should be selected because
these cards indicate a rule violation: a person under 19
drinking beer. Deontic tasks often yield solution rates of
about 70-90 % (Dominowski, 1995). Different from the
abstract task, people need not to evaluate the truth of the
conditional. According to DMM theory they can construct normative models that tell them which persons
(cards) they have to check. With the closed world
assumption and the equivalence assumption, the drinking age rule can be mapped to norm (8):
(8) Normative
[forbidden(drinking_beer)]

[¬over_19]

[¬forbidden(drinking_beer)]

[over_19]

The norm is violated (model 7 applied to 8) by a person under 19 (‘not Q’) who is drinking beer (‘P’) which
can be checked for by selecting the cards ‘P’/‘not Q’.
It was this “facilitation effect” that necessitated a
deontic theory. Subsequent experiments revealed several
factors that are of particular relevance for the deontic
solution. Besides the use of the deontic term must (e.g.,
Platt & Griggs, 1993) and a “detective” scenario (van
Duyne, 1974) – both strengthening the deontic interpretation – three factors received particular attention: the
instruction, the type of negation used, and the rule form.
Instruction: While the abstract version asks for testing the truth of the conditional, the deontic task requires
to detect cases of rule violation thereby making clear
that each card has to be examined independently from
the others (Stenning & van Lambalgen, in press). The
high rate of ‘P’/‘not Q’ in deontic tasks decreases when
the testing instruction is used (e.g., Noveck & O’Brien,
1996; Yachanin, 1986). This is exactly what one would
expect from the perspective of a deontic theory, because
the testing instruction is not applicable in the deontic

case. Different from indicative conditionals, the truth of
a deontic rule is independent from individuals who may
conform to the rule or not. Its truth cannot be determined by simply observing persons’ behavior – little
astonishing that the solution rate decreases.
Negation: The use of explicit negation turned out to
be crucial for the solution of tasks with abstract deontic
rules like “If one is to take action ‘A’, then one must first
satisfy precondition ‘P’ ” (e.g., Cheng & Holyoak,
1985). An explicit negation of the fact that a person “has
taken action ‘A’ ” would be “has not taken action ‘A’ ”
while the statement “has taken action ‘B’ ” can be
regarded as an implicit negation. Typically, the proportion of ‘P’/‘not Q’ decreases when implicit negation is
used on the cards (e.g., Jackson & Griggs, 1990; Noveck
& O’Brien, 1996). But again, this is consistent with a
deontic theory as Holyoak and Cheng (1995) pointed
out. Two actions need not exclude each other; they can
take place at the same time. If a reasoner does not know
whether taking action ‘B’ and action ‘A’ are mutually
exclusive there is no basis to interpret the two “implicitly negated” cards ‘not P’ and ‘not Q’ as really negated.
Rule Form: Persons’ apparent insensitivity to syntactic modifications of the conditional rule used in the tasks
has been taken as an argument against a purely “syntactic” view of reasoning. Cosmides (1989), for example,
reversed conditionals from ‘If P then must Q’ in the
‘standard’ form to ‘If Q then (may) P’. From a syntactic
point of view, one may expect that the cards to be
selected should switch correspondingly from ‘P’/‘not Q’
to ‘not P’/‘Q’. From a deontic point of view, the
reversed rule cannot be violated at all (in the sense of
doing something forbidden) because the consequence
(by using the modal may) does not express a behavioral
constraint a person could offend. Consequently, none of
the cards should be selected. In either case the predominant selection should change. Empirically, the opposite
has been found: 60-70 % keep choosing ‘P’/‘not Q’
(e.g., Cosmides, 1989). What is the reason for that?
Consider two drinking-age rules: The standard form “If
a person is drinking beer (P), then he or she must be over
19 (Q)” and the reversed one “If a person is over 19 (Q),
then he or she may drink beer (P)”. According to DMM
theory, both rules can be mapped to the same norm (8)
although they describe different aspects. The norm is
violated by a person drinking beer who is not over 19
(‘P and not Q’). By assuming that people derive their
answer from this norm and not from the conditionals,
DMM theory accounts for the insensitivity to their form.
The related effect of perspective change (e.g., Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992; Manktelow & Over, 1991) can be
explained in a similar way (Beller & Spada, 2000).
Deontic Tasks Without Deontic Solution? The previous results can all be brought in line with DMM theory. Cosmides (1989), however, reported findings that
seem to rule out a deontic explanation categorically. She
demonstrated that non social contract (non-SC) versions
of deontic standard rules produce significantly less facilitation than equivalent social contract (SC) versions

although both are said to trigger the same deontic solution. One of her examples is the ‘school problem’ about
assigning students to either Grover High or Hanover
High. Both versions mention the deontic conditional: “If
a student is to be assigned to Grover High School, then
that student must live in Grover City”. However, while
the SC problem (task 9) specifies that the cards should
be checked for cheating, the non-SC version (task 10)
leaves the subjects with an incomplete deontic interpretation. In this latter task it is said that “There are rules to
determine which school a student is to be assigned to,
the most important of these rules is …”. Rule violations
are attributed to an “… old lady … who often made mistakes when categorizing student documents” (p. 270).
The first quotation implies that several normative rules
have to be applied in the categorization process but not
all of them are known (the closed world assumption is
violated). The term “mistakes” leaves open whether the
old lady incorrectly assigned students to Grover High or
Hanover High. – Experimental manipulations that
weaken the deontic interpretation or end up with an
inconsistent or incomplete interpretation may result in a
decrease of the deontic solution but they cannot be taken
as an argument against a deontic explanation.

Rule-Change Revisited
The DMM explanation of the deontic selection task
assumes that persons do not rely on the conditional rule
itself but on normative models that tell them which
cards to check. The finding with switched rules corroborates this hypothesis. Nevertheless, persons could also
have derived their solution from the conditional rule
since there is a rule available in both the standard and
the switched version. A stronger argument in favour of
the “normative-models hypothesis” would be, if (1) people kept choosing the same cards in a “rule-free” selection task – like those that have been used recently to
back up the effect of knowledge about causal relationships (Beller & Spada, 2000) and about promises (Beller
& Spada, 2000; Fiddick, Cosmides & Tooby, 2000). The
rule-change effect seems to show subjects’ insensitivity
to the form of deontic conditionals. Although both the
standard and the switched form are consistent with one
and the same norm, the switched rule cannot be violated
deontically as argued above. Thus, if (2) a task does not
allow persons to construct a normative model but
requires to evaluate the conditional itself, then they
should state correctly which conditional can be violated.
Both hypotheses are examined in the following experiment (Beller, 1997).
Materials: The materials comprised six tasks: five
versions of selection tasks and one rule evaluation task.
Four deontic conditionals were used:
R1:
R2:
R3:

If a child is drinking Coke,
then he or she must be over 12 years of age.
If a child is over 12 years of age,
then he or she may drink Coke.
If a child is over 12 years of age,
then he or she need not drink juice.

R4:

If a child is drinking Coke,
then he or she must not be under 12 years of age.

R1 denotes a standard rule (‘If P then must Q’ with
“drinking Coke” symbolized as ‘P’ and “over 12 years”
as ‘Q’) while R2 is reversed (‘If Q then may P’). R3 and
R4 are corresponding rules using the other two deontic
operators. All rules are derived from norm (9) that forbids drinking Coke if a child is younger than 12 years:
(9) Normative
[forbidden(drinking_coke)]

[¬over_12]

[¬forbidden(drinking_coke)]

[over_12]

The selection tasks started with an introductory part:
In a particular country there are two beverages popular
with children: Coke containing caffeine and a particular
sort of juice. A scientific study has shown that the circulatory system of children younger than 12 years is often affected by drinking Coke. Therefore, the government
passed a rule permitting to drink Coke dependent on age.
A dispenser offers both beverages, the juice and Coke. The
children of a school class are standing in front of the dispenser together with their teacher. Some of the children
are already over 12 years of age, some are under 12 years.
The teacher reminds her pupils of the correct behavior.
[She mentions the following beverage rule].

The five versions differed in the rule following right
after this part: Four tasks mentioned one of R1-R4; the
fifth task comprised no conditional (and omitted the sentence in square brackets). The instruction continued:
The cards below represent four children who took a beverage from the dispenser. On one side of each card it is written whether the child is drinking Coke or juice, the other
side shows whether he or she is over 12 years. Your task:
Please indicate all the cards that you would have to turn
over (i.e., all of which you need to know the information
on the back) in order to find out whether the child has violated the beverage rule.

The cards read: “is drinking Coke”, “is drinking
juice”, “is over 12”, and “is under 12” (‘P’, ‘not P’, ‘Q’,
and ‘not Q’). Since all tasks can be mapped to one and
the same norm (9), the model theory predicts that people
choose the same cards ‘P’/‘not Q’ that may indicate a
violation of this norm (model 7 applied to 9) by children
under 12 (‘not Q’) who are drinking Coke (‘P’).
The instruction of the rule evaluation task required to
evaluate the deontic conditionals (R1-R4) without reference to an underlying norm:
Please read carefully through the following if-then-statements. Check for each statement whether it expresses a behavioral rule that can be violated by a child.

Only the obligation and the ban (R1 and R4) can be
violated by doing something forbidden: drinking Coke
under 12 years of age. R2 and R3 do not express a
behavioral restriction and hence cannot be violated.
Participants: 168 students from various disciplines
(excluding psychology, mathematics, and philosophy)
of the University of Freiburg volunteered for the study
and were paid for participating. They were untrained in
logic and had no prior experience with selection tasks.

Table 1: (a) Selection tasks: Frequency of ‘P’/‘not-Q’
responses depending on rule version (n each 28). (b) Rule
evaluation tasks: Frequency of selecting a rule as one that
can be violated (n = 28, multiple selections possible).
Rule
R1 ‘If P, then must Q.’
R2 ‘If Q, then may P.’
R3 ‘If Q, then need-not not-P.’
R4 ‘If P, then must-not not-Q.’
R5 None

(a)
27
27
22
26
26

(b)
24
9
3
25

Design and Procedure: The participants were randomly assigned to one of six groups (n = 28). Each
received one of the six tasks together with other tasks
analyzed elsewhere (Beller & Spada, 2000). The treatment was administered in small groups. Each participant
received a booklet with a general instruction on the first
page and the various tasks each on a new page. Each
booklet presented the tasks in a new random order. The
order of the conditionals in the rule evaluation task and
of the “cards” in the selection tasks was also determined
randomly for each participant.
Results: The results of the selection tasks are shown
in Table 1(a). As predicted, changing the conditional
had only a marginal effect (χ2(4, n = 140) = 7.84;
p = 0.10). Most participants (m = 91.4 %) selected the
predicted cards ‘P’/‘not Q’, even in the task without an
explicit conditional. Table 1(b) shows the frequency of
selecting each conditional as a rule that can be violated
(rule evaluation task). Summed up over individual combinations, the predicted conditionals R1 and R4 were
selected 49 times while R2 and R3 were selected 12
times (80.3 % vs. 19.7 %; p < 0.01, based on the binomial distribution with n = 61 and r = 1/2). The combination of R1 and R4 was selected by 16 participants.

Summary and Discussion
The experimental results show how violation checking
is affected task-specifically by the possibility of constructing normative models. (1) Given the possibility to
construct a norm, as in the selection tasks, persons rely
on this norm and appear to be insensitive to the form of
the conditional rule describing the norm. This replicates
the effect of changing the rule from ‘standard’ to
‘switched’ and extends it to other rules. The rule-free
version demonstrates that an enriched deontic context
(as it is used in many other deontic selection tasks as
well) is sufficient to elicit this effect. Since the participants do not regard the conditional rules as relevant premises, their insensitivity to the syntactic form of the
rules should not be attributed to illogical reasoning. In
fact, persons’ answers are in accordance with the logic
of social norms. (2) If a task does not allow persons to
construct normative models but requires to evaluate
deontic conditionals directly, then their answers are
indeed quite sensitive to the deontic form. Together,

these findings strongly support the dual source argument
(Beller, 1997; Beller & Spada, 2000): in order to understand human deductive reasoning it is necessary to integrate inferences from two sources, namely from the
syntactic form of an argument and from conceptual
knowledge associated with its content or context.
A mental models notation was used to describe the
representation and inferential use of norms (although it
is assumed that the deontic principles may be adapted to
a mental logic framework as well). The course overview
of selection task findings demonstrated how a finegrained analysis of the domain can guide the interpretation of experimental results. The next step will be to
apply DMM theory to findings from other tasks, for
example, reformulation tasks or conditional syllogism
tasks (e.g., Thompson, 1995), in order to assess its full
potential. Two assumptions characterize the proposed
representation of norms: the closed world assumption
(all norms are known to the reasoner) and the equivalence assumption (concerning the relation between a
ban and its conditions). The selection task data are consistent with both. However, they only provide indirect
evidence. Reformulation tasks or sufficiency and necessity ratings could prove both assumptions more directly.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to Keith Stenning
(University of Edinburgh) as well as to Andrea Bender,
Gregory Kuhnmünch, Nikol Rummel, and Hans Spada
(Freiburg) for encouraging discussions and helpful comments. This work was supported by a grant from the
German Research Foundation (DFG) within the graduate program GK MMI at the University of Freiburg.

References
Beller, S. (1997). Inhaltseffekte beim logischen Denken.
Lengerich: Pabst.
Beller, S., & Spada, H. (2000). The logic of content
effects in propositional reasoning: The case of conditional reasoning with a point of view. Under review.
Chellas, B. F. (1980). Modal logic: An introduction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Cummins, D. D. (1996). Evidence for the innateness of
deontic reasoning. Mind & Language, 11, 160-190.
Dominowski, R. L. (1995). Content effects in Wason’s
selection task. In S. Newstead, & J. St. B. T. Evans
(Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and reasoning. Hove:
Erlbaum.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). Human reasoning. Hove: Erlbaum.
Fiddick, L., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). No interpretation without representation: The role of domainspecific representations and inferences in the Wason
selection task. Cognition, 77, 1-79.

Gigerenzer, G., & Hug, K. (1992). Domain-specific reasoning: Social contracts, cheating, and perspective
change. Cognition, 43, 127-171.
Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1982). The elusive thematicmaterials effect in Wason’s selection task. British
Journal of Psychology, 73, 407-420.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (1995). Pragmatic reasoning about human voluntary action: Evidence from
Wason’s selection task. In S. Newstead, & J. St. B. T.
Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and reasoning.
Hove: Erlbaum.
Jackson, S. L., & Griggs, R. A. (1990). The elusive
pragmatic reasoning schemas effect. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42A, 353-373.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1978). The meaning of modality.
Cognitive Science, 2, 17-26.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction. Hove: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1992). Modal
reasoning, models, and Manktelow and Over. Cognition, 43, 173-182.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1991). Social roles and
utilities in reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition, 39, 85-105.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deontic reasoning. In S. Newstead, & J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and reasoning. Hove: Erlbaum.
Noveck, I. A., & O’Brien, D. P. (1996). To what extent
do pragmatic reasoning schemas affect performance
on Wason’s selection task? The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 463-489.
Newstead, S., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (Eds.) (1995). Perspectives on thinking and reasoning. Hove: Erlbaum.
Platt, R. D., & Griggs, R. A. (1993). Darwinian algorithms and the Wason selection task: A factorial analysis of social contract selection task problems.
Cognition, 48, 163-192.
Sperber, D., Cara, F., & Girotto, V. (1995). Relevance theory explains the selection task. Cognition, 57, 31-95.
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (in press). Semantics
as a foundation for psychology: A case study of
Wason’s selection task. Journal of Logic, Language
and Information.
Thompson, V. A. (1995). Conditional reasoning: The
necessary and sufficient conditions. Canadian Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 49, 1-58.
Thompson, V. A. (2000). The task-specific nature of
domain-general reasoning. Cognition, 76, 209-268.
van Duyne, P. C. (1974). Realism and linguistic complexity
in reasoning. British Journal of Psychology, 65, 59-67.
von Wright, G. H. (1963). Norm and action: A logical
enquiry. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.),
New horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Yachanin, S. A. (1986). Facilitation in Wason’s selection
task: Content and instructions. Current Psychological
Research and Reviews, 5, 20-29.

