UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Potential Limitation of Embedded-Teaching for Formal Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7zk693xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Chen, Mei

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Potential Limitation of Embedded-Teaching for Formal Learning
Mei Chen (MeiChen@Vax2.Concordia.Ca)

Department of Education, Concordia University
1455 Maisonneuve Boulevard W., Montreal, Canada, H3G 1M8
Abstract
This paper presents a study that investigated the
effects of two forms of “embedded teaching” on
students’ formal learning of high-school-level
algebra. The term “embedded teaching” here refers to
the presentation modes in which algebraic concepts,
procedures, strategies, and principles are taught
within the context of solving specific problems. Two
forms of “embedded teaching” (i.e., program control,
and learner-control) were compared to a conventional
presentation mode in which various forms of
algebraic representations were taught as a coherent
system before students were introduced to problems.
The three instructional modes were implemented in
three versions of a computer algebra tutor. Three
groups of high-school students (N=27) were
randomly assigned to one of the three experimental
conditions. Pre- and posttests were administered to
measure changes in students’ ability to construct
different forms of algebraic representations, and their
ability to make estimates using these different
representations. A multivariate analysis of the preand posttest results indicates that overall student
performance in all three conditions improved
significantly on the two measures used (F (2, 23) =
46.6, p < 0.01). However, students in the conventional
teaching condition achieved higher posttest scores
(group mean = 86, and 93 on the measures of students'
ability to construct algebraic representations and
their ability to make estimates, respectively) than
students in the two embedded-teaching conditions
did (group mean for the two measures = 65 and 57 for
the program-controlled condition; and group mean =
67, 59 for learner-controlled condition, respectively).
Furthermore, all students in the conventional
teaching
condition
completed
the
posttest
successfully, compared to only 56% of students did
so in each of the two embedded teaching conditions.
Despite an overall disadvantage, 3 out of 9 students
in each of the two embedded-teaching conditions
received perfect scores whereas only 1 student in the
conventional teaching condition did so. It seems that
the conventional presentation mode provided an
instructional context that enabled the majority of
students to succeed whereas the embedded-teaching
modes offered the conditions for certain students to
reach their greatest potential but left others far
behind.

This paper presents a study that investigated the effects
of two presentation modes of “embedded teaching” on
students’ formal learning of high-school-level algebra.
The term “embedded teaching” can be defined broadly
or narrowly, depending on the purpose of the study. In
the broad sense, most situated approaches that

emphasize the learning of domain knowledge through
expert-like activities and authentic problem solving in
rich social, cultural and functional contexts can be
thought as “embedded teaching.” For example, the
cognitive apprenticeship model (e.g., Collins, Brown,
& Norman, 1989), problem-based learning (e.g.,
Barrows, & Tamblyn, 1980), goal-based scenarios
(Collins, 1994; Schank, 1995), and case-based
reasoning (Schank, 1995; Kolodner, 1994) can be all
considered as “embedded teaching” (Hmelo, &
Narayanan 1995). Although they can be characterized in
many different ways and a wide array of features can be
identified, situated approaches typically (a) focus on illdefined, authentic problem solving tasks; (b) embed the
learning of domain knowledge within a rich social and
cultural context; (c) organize learning content and
activities around problems or cases. Consequently,
concepts, procedures, strategies, and principles are
taught within the context of solving specific problems,
as opposed to being taught as a coherent symbol
system independently. Studies of “embedded teaching”
in the past have often focused on the central role that
social and cultural context played in learning, thus
reflecting research traditions in anthropology and
sociology.
The examination of social context is necessary for
forming theories and good practice of situated learning.
However, the focus of the study presented in this paper
was placed on investigating the effects of "embedded
teaching" from an instructional design perspective. That
is, “embedded teaching” is defined as a narrow term
that signifies the instructional techniques by which
concepts, procedures, strategies, and principles are
taught within a specific problem-solving context. The
“embedded teaching” examined in this study represents
merely an instructional feature but not the social and
cultural characteristics of the situated learning
approaches described above. The exclusive focus on the
instructional feature of the "embeddedness" of the
situated approaches in a study is justified for the
following two reasons. First, as human beings and lifelong learners, we have to complete a large part of our
learning under solitary conditions due to the many
practical limitations of getting together and learning
with other people. Therefore, it is important to
investigate what characteristics of instructional
applications can effectively support the development of
the individual knowledge in situations where rich social
interaction and resources are lacking. Secondly, there is
a formal system of symbols, or a structured body of
scientific knowledge in a formal knowledge domain
such as mathematics, physics, or chemistry. Therefore,

it is necessary to find out whether teaching concepts,
procedures, strategies, and principles within the context
of solving specific problems is more effective than
teaching such knowledge as a coherent, representational
system before introducing students to problems, as
teachers often do in classroom teaching. The answer to
this question is needed in order to design instructional
applications, especially computer tutoring systems that
effective foster individual learning in formal knowledge
domains.

The Theoretical Background
A primary focus of analysis in cognitive science over
the past three decades has been the processing structures
of the brain and the symbolic representations of mind
(Norman, 1993). Norman further characterizes such a
research paradigm
as
studies
of
symbolic
representations (Norman, 1993). Cognitive researchers
have shown that structured, principle-based knowledge
representation is a function of expertise (Chi, Feltovich,
& Glaser, 1981). Therefore, one important goal of
instruction is to help students form coherent and
structured knowledge representations of the domain
being studied (Glaser, 1989). Although they specify
neither the elements of which instruction should be
composed, nor the sequence in which the different
instructional elements should be arranged, some
cognitive theories seem to support an instructional
approach by which the knowledge elements are
structured and coherent, preferably proceeding from a
declarative stage to a procedural stage. Kintsch’s
Construction-Integration (CI) model of discourse
comprehension (Kintsch, 1988, 1998) and Anderson’s
ACT-R theory of cognitive skills represent two central
tenet of this research paradigm.
It is apparent that Kintsch’s CI model is a cognitive
model of discourse comprehension rather than an
instructional model, however, this model explains the
ways that the mental representations are constructed
when learning from text. According to Kintsch,
comprehension (i.e., an important form of learning) is
an interactive process between the learning materials
and the mental models that learners formed on the basis
of their prior knowledge. Kintsch suggests that the
process of building a coherent mental representation
from text depends on the learner’s ability to recognize
the structure of the text (Kintsch, 1998). Many studies
have shown that the structural features of a text (e.g.
coherence, the use of the outlines, headings) can help
learners identify the structure of the text thus having a
significant
impact
on
learners’
memory,
comprehension, problem solving, and transfer (Kintsch,
1997, in Kintsch 1998; Mayer, 1989; 1997). It is
postulated that the structural features of a text may
enable learners to form a coherent knowledge
representation of the material to be studied, the coherent
representation formed, in turn, can guide the processes
of selecting, interpreting, organizing, and integrating

the subsequent information to be studied (Mayer,
1989). As a result, the structure feature of text can has
impact on learning, especially for learners who lack
prior knowledge of the domain (Kintsch, 1997, in
Kintsch 1998).
Furthermore, Anderson’s ACT-R theory asserts that the
acquisition of cognitive skills proceeds from a
declarative stage to a procedural stage (Anderson, 1983,
1993). Although both Kintsch and Anderson state that
learning should be embedded in the context of
meaningful activities, their theories seem to support a
pedagogical approach in which learning proceeds from
instruction that focus on the structured knowledge
representations, to problem-solving activities that
emphasize the use of the knowledge learned — a
method that is frequently employed by teachers in their
classroom teaching.
In contrast to the emphasis on the structured knowledge
representations and rigid instructional sequence,
situated learning approaches give great importance to
the functional use of knowledge thereby the learning
materials and activities are organized around problems
or cases. The theoretical assumption underlying such
approaches can be refered to as situated theory. From
the situated perspective, thinking, knowing, and
learning are situated within a particular context of
intentions, social partners, and tools (Resnick, Levine,
& Teasley, 1991; Greeno, 1997). Therefore, internal
cognitive activities such as perceiving, understanding,
remembering and reasoning are shaped and given
significance within the context of activities (Greeno,
Collins, & Resnick, 1996). The situative view
challenges standard pedagogical practice for paying too
little attention to the processes employed by experts to
solve complex, realistic problems (Collins et al., 1989;
Resnick et al., 1991). Situative theorists criticize
learning opportunities provided to students within the
scope of typical school activities as mostly involving
memorization of factual knowledge and the rote
manipulation of symbols and equations. As a result,
the kind of knowledge that students acquire in
conventional teaching often remains "inert” and can't be
applied to other relevant problem-solving situations
(Collins et al., 1989; Resnick et al., 1991). It is
asserted that “embedded teaching” can facilitate
students’ development of problem-solving skills and
reasoning strategies more effectively. It can also
enhance students’ conceptual understanding because
knowledge is immediately used within a relevant
context (Collins et al., 1989). A variety of pedagogical
approaches that have been developed emphasize such
situative nature of learning and cognition (e.g., Collins
et al., 1989; Collins, 1994; CTGV, 1993; Schank,
1995; Kolodner, 1994).
An interesting phenomenon occurred in the debate over
symbolic representations versus situated action is that,
as Norman points out, the cognitive and situative
researchers find different sets of observations to be

interesting and important (Norman, 1993). The same
statement may also apply to the argument over
conventional school teaching versus situated approaches
to learning. Conventional teaching normally focuses on
the understanding of symbolic representations and the
command of symbolic manipulations whereas situated
approaches typically places their focus on the
development of students' ability to formulate and solve
ill-structured, authentic problems. It is important to
keep in mind that, in a knowledge domain such as
mathematics, physics, or chemistry, there is a formal
system of symbols, or a structured body of scientific
knowledge. Therefore, an expert model of knowledge in
such domains may consist not only of the strategies
that are used in expert-like performance, but also of
structured, principle-based knowledge representations of
symbolic systems. Correspondingly, students should
be encouraged and required to develop the full range of
knowledge and skills in the domain, including the
ability to understand the symbol systems correctly and
manipulate symbols intelligently, the ability to
communicate ideas scientifically, the ability to
formulate and solve ill-structured problems proficiently
and, ultimately, the ability to participate in expert
practice in the real world. Therefore, an important
question concerning “embedded teaching” is to
understand whether it is indeed a more effective
technique than the conventional method for teaching
formal knowledge. The study presented in the paper
attempts to find out whether the embedded teaching as
a presentation mode is more effective than conventional
teaching for computer-assisted learning of high-schoollevel algebra.

Methods
This study compared the effects of two presentation
modes of “embedded teaching” (i.e., program control,
and learner-control) to that of a conventional
presentation mode. The three experimental modes were
implemented in three versions of a computer tutor that
was designed to teach linear functions to grade ninth
students. Several features of the computer tutor are
important for interpreting the results of the study. First,
a cognitive task analysis was conducted to identify the
specific elements of knowledge that students need in
order to (a) construct multiple forms of algebraic
representations (i.e., tables of values, graphs, and
equations), and (b) make estimates using such
representations (e.g., finding the price of ordering a
given number of music CDs based on the relations
expressed in a graph of linear functions). Second, the
computer tutor employed a basic instructional model
that consisted of instruction, demonstration, and
practice. In addition, everyday-life scenarios were
incorporated into the instruction, demonstration, and
practice whenever possible, to help students make
connections between their knowledge of the everyday
life and the formal algebraic representational system

that they were to learn. Furthermore, various media
formats (text, graphics, and animations) were combined
to describe some complex concepts, principles, and
procedures. Finally, all three versions of the computer
tutor utilized the same instructional materials, practice
exercises, and media formats, varying only in terms of
the “embeddedness” and "learner control". The
following is a brief description of these conditions.
The first version of the tutor was designed as a base
line for making the comparison (Condition 1). In this
version, the computer tutor first presented instruction
about the different forms of algebraic representations,
explaining what are tables of values, graphs, or
equations, and the relationship between the different
forms of representations. After the instruction, the
computer tutor then provided examples illustrating how
to construct each of the different forms of algebraic
representations and how to convert these representations
from one form to another.
Two forms of “embedded teaching” were examined: a
program-control instruction (Condition 2), and learnercontrol instruction (Condition 3). Both conditions
presented the instruction about the different forms of
algebraic representations (i.e., what are tables of values,
graphs, or equations) within the context of constructing
these representations. Because it was the instructional
designer of the computer tutor who decided the
occasions to introduce the relevant algebraic concepts
and principles, students had to follow a fixed sequence
imposed by the computer tutor in the programcontrolled instruction (Condition 2). The ways that the
computer tutor presented various types of algebraic
knowledge might not meet the needs of individual
students. Therefore, a learner-controlled hypermedia
environment (Condition 3) was developed to enable
students themselves to determine what, and when to
consult a particular type of knowledge. In the learnercontrolled hypermedia environment, students engaged
directly in problem-solving activities without receiving
any prior instruction or demonstration, but they could
receive relevant instructions and demonstrations using
hyperlinks. It is necessary to indicate that for both
Condition 2 and 3, the instruction on algebraic
representations was broken into small independent
chunks to enable the computer tutor or students to
access the relevant knowledge elements in the context
of solving specific problems. This might create stronger
links between particular knowledge chunks and their
applications, but weaker links between the different
forms of algebraic representations.
All three conditions included a practice session in
which two problems similar to the one used in the
demonstration were presented. Students could check
their answers, or get the correct answers if them failed
to provide the correct answers.

Participants
A public English school in suburban Montreal was

selected as the setting of the experiment. An effort was
made to recruit as many participants as possible. As a
result, two types of students constituted the sample
pool for the experiment: (a) ninth graders in a belowaverage class, who had just finished learning linear
functions one week prior to the pretest, but who had
difficulties in math classes; and (b) eighth-graders from
two regular math classes who had some knowledge of
algebra, but hadn’t explicitly learned about linear
functions. A pretest was administered to assess the
prior knowledge that students had on linear functions.
Twenty-seven students who scored under 60 on a scale
of 100 were selected to participate in the experiment.

Procedures
The twenty-seven students were divided into three
groups based upon their pre-test scores, the grades and
gender were balanced in each group. Each group was
then randomly assigned to one of the three experimental
conditions. Some adjustments were made to
accommodate the schedules of the participants. The
experiment consisted of two 45-minute learning
sessions over a two-week period in the school computer
lab. The algebra tutoring program was used as the sole
source of instruction and each student learned alone
with one version of the computer program. Instruction
on the use of a particular version of computer program
was presented by the computer at the beginning of the
learning sessions. In order to understand types of
learning activities in which students engaged, studentcomputer interaction was recorded during the
experiment. To conclude the experiment, a posttest was
administered one week after the last learning session.
The posttest consisted of (a) two word problems to
assess students’ algebraic skills and the transfer of such
skills, and (b) questions designed to assess students’
understanding of algebraic concepts and rules. After
students had completed the posttest, they were asked to
complete an attitude questionnaire concerning their
learning experience with the computer tutor. In
addition, three students who received the best posttest
scores were interviewed one week after the posttest.
They were asked first to orally answer some structured
questions in attempt to understand their conceptual
knowledge, problem-solving and reasoning strategies,
then to translate the algebraic representations from one
form to the other in “backward” fashion in order to
determine whether student performance was based on
the execution of a set of “rote” procedures or on the
understanding of the algebraic relations.

Results
The independent variable of this study is the
presentation modes: two forms of "embedded teaching"
were compared to a conventional teaching mode. The
dependent variables include the pretest and posttest
measures that reflect the development of students’

algebraic knowledge and skills: (a) the measure on the
ability to construct different forms of algebraic
representations; and (b) the measure on the ability to
make estimates using the relationships expressed by
such representations. In addition, several other
dependent variables were measured in the posttest but
not in the pretest: (c) the measure of the transfer of
algebraic knowledge and skills to the solution of a
problem in an unfamiliar situation, (d) the measure of
understanding of the relationships between different
forms of algebraic representations by asking students to
construct the various forms of algebraic representations
that they had learned in “backward” fashion, and (e) the
assessment of students’ conceptual understanding of the
key algebra concepts and principles by asking them to
fill in the answers to some conceptual questions. In
addition, students offered their opinions about their
learning experience by answering an attitude
questionnaire.
Two types of “process” data were also collected to
determine how the three different teaching modes
affected students’ learning of well-structured algebraic
tasks: (a) the “dribble” file recordings of the history of
student-computer interaction; and (b) the explanations
that the selected students provided in response to
structured interview questions.
The data-analysis strategy consists of two steps: The
first step is comparing the learning outcome measures
to determine whether the three different presentation
modes have different effects on students’ learning
outcomes. A multivariate analysis (MANOVA) is
employed to analyze the pre- and posttest scores on
students’ ability to construct different forms of
algebraic representations and their ability to make
estimates using these representations. This is followed
by a qualitative analysis of the learning process
measures to understand what may have contributed to
the effects observed. The results of this study were
reported in details elsewhere (Chen, 2000). This paper
only highlights the findings concerning the following
questions:
(1) did the three versions of computer tutor improve
student performance on well-structured algebraic
tasks?
The population mean scores on the measure of students’
ability to construct algebraic representations was raised
from 22.5 to 72 on a scale of 100. Similarly, the
population mean score on the measure of students
ability to make estimates using these representations
was raised from 27.1 to 70. Table 1 presents the preand post-test scores of these two variables for all three
conditions. A multivariate analysis (MANOVA) of the
pre- and posttest scores indicates a significant overall
effect on the two measures used (F (2, 23) = 46.6, p <
0.01). Therefore, it seems that students improved not
only their ability to construct algebraic representations,
but also their ability to make estimates using the
different forms of algebraic representations. However, it

Table 1: The pre- and post-test scores of two measures
of students' algebraic abilities (N=27).
Constructing
Representa
Presentation Modes
-tions
Pre- Posttest
test

Making
Estimates
Pretest

Posttest

C1: Conventional

17.9

86.4

25.9

92.6

C2: Program-control

29.8

64.8

33.3

57.4

C3: Learner-control

19.9

67.3

22.2

59.3

M

22.5

72.8

27.1

70

SD

21.4

31.6

33.4

37.2

should be noticed that the standard deviations are
considerably large in both the pre- and post-test scores
(SDs range from 21 to 37), reflecting big individual
differences in the participants’ initial algebraic abilities,
as well as the improvement of such abilities.
(2) Did “embedded teaching” modes promote better
learning outcomes than conventional teaching?
The MANOVA rejects the hypothesis of no difference
between the conventional teaching mode and the
program-controlled embedded-teaching mode on
students ability to construct algebraic representations
and their ability to make estimates using these
representations (F (2, 23) = 3.7, p < 0.05). Similarly,
the hypothesis of no difference between the
conventional teaching and the learner-controlled
embedded-teaching on the same two dependent
variables is rejected (F (2, 23) = 4.1, p < 0.05).
Therefore, students’ learning outcomes in the embedded
teaching modes differ significantly from that in the
conventional teaching mode. However, contradicting
the hypothesis that the embedded teaching is more
effective than conventional teaching, this study reveals
that students produced better learning outcomes in the
conventional teaching mode. Students in conventional
teaching mode also showed superiority in terms of their
performance on transfer task, and measure on conceptual
understanding. It is important to indicate that all
students in the conventional teaching condition
(including those who had difficulty in the regular math
classroom) successfully passed the posttest, whereas
only 56% of students passed the post-test in the other
two conditions. However, three out of nine students in
each of the embedded teaching modes received the
perfect scores whereas only one out of nine students in
the conventional teaching mode was able to do so. It
seems that the conventional teaching provides an
instructional context that enables the majority of
students to succeed whereas the embedded-teaching
conditions offer the conditions for certain students to
reach their greatest potential.

(3) Did “learner-controlled” instruction enhance
student learning in a “embedded-teaching” mode?
No difference is found between the learner-controlled
and the program-controlled embedded-teaching modes
on the measures of students’ ability to construct
algebraic representations and their ability to make
accurate estimates (F (2, 23) = 0.46, p > 0.05). Thus,
the level of student control (i.e., being able to
determine whether or when to consult the different
types of knowledge available) did not influence
students’ learning outcomes. However, the examination
of student-computer interaction reveals what
differentiates the high achievers from the low achievers
is the navigation strategies that they employed when
they were given control over the navigation paths. The
high achievers tended to complete each topic that they
reviewed whereas the low achievers tended to switch
from topic to topic, indicating a lack of mindful
engagement.
(4) What factors may have contributed to different
learning outcomes observed?
The analysis of the interview protocol reveals that the
strategies that students employed to solve problems are
linked to the types of conceptual understanding that
they developed. The interview also indicates that
successful task performance is associated with
conceptual knowledge that is retrievable and, more
importantly, that is coupled with appropriate reasoning
strategies.
The examination of student-computer interaction and
students’ self-reports indicates that students’ posttest
performance relates to neither the amount of time that
students spent on tasks, nor to the amount of
instructional materials that they reviewed. However, the
navigation strategies that students used in the learnercontrolled condition seem to relate to the outcomes of
learning. The surfer’s strategy (i.e., switching from
topic to topic without completion) is directly linked to
poor posttest performance. The “learning curve” derived
from the dribble file recordings further indicates that (a)
significant learning had took place through instruction
and demonstration and, (b) a certain amount of learning
took place through practice, however, the role of
practice was not as predominant as what is usually
believed. The questionnaire and interview data indicate
that student attitudes toward their learning with the
computer tutor program are very positive, irrespective
of the teaching conditions. Therefore, the superior
posttest performance of the students who learned under
the conventional teaching condition seem primarily due
to the characteristics of this presentation mode rather
than any other factor.

Discussion
This section will discuss briefly two important findings
of this study. First, this study shows that students’
algebraic knowledge and skills have improved
significantly over time. Such a finding suggests that

computer-based learning environments that employ an
adequate instructional model, incorporate authentic
problem scenarios, provide rich learning activities, and
use multimedia to illustrate abstract concepts and
procedures, can effectively enhance student learning of
algebra. Second, this study indicates that students in
the conventional teaching condition generally learned
better than students in both program-controlled and
learner-controlled embedded teaching conditions did. It
is speculated that the conventional teaching condition
may enable the majority of students to develop a
coherent mental model of the algebraic representations.
The coherent knowledge representations that students
developed, in turn, may help them better interpret the
goals and functions of the subsequent procedures and
effectively direct their attention to the key task elements
in the step-by-step demonstration performed by the
tutor, as well as in their own problem-solving
exercises. Furthermore, this study shows that
significant learning had taken place through instruction
and demonstration prior to the practice of the exercises.
The findings of this study seem to support the notion
that learning is a sense making process that involves
construction and integration of mental representation of
the materials being studied, as explained by Kintsch’s
CI model (Kintsch, 1989, 1998). The findings of this
study suggest that instructional designers need to
consider the coherence of the symbolic representations
when applying “embedded teaching” and “learning by
doing” principles to design instruction applications for
formal learning. This study also showed that the
percentage of students who received perfect posttest
scores is higher in the embedded teaching conditions
than that in the conventional teaching condition. It
seems that the problem-solving context and the higher
level of learner control enables some students to reach
their greatest potential. Therefore, problem-solving
context may indeed more effectively facilitate the
development of conceptual understanding, problemsolving skills, and reasoning strategies for some
students. In addition, some students are able to focus
on their own weaknesses when they have control over
what to learn.
Some limitations of this study include the use of a
small sample of the participants and a lack of aptitude
and learning strategy measures prior to the experiment.
A further direction of this research is to incorporate
other features of successful “embedded teaching”
approaches (e.g., using diversified and contrasting cases
to enable students to generate the “rules of thumb”) into
the computer algebra tutors described here to investigate
how these features can support both collaborative
inquires and individual learning. The goal is to
understand the pedagogical requirements for
implementing particular instructional approaches and to
explore their limitations and strengths for teaching in a
given domain. The findings of such studies will
certainly have important implications for the

development of instructional theories and applications.
However, precautions are in order when discussing the
pedagogical approaches taken by teachers in classroom
situations. This is because good teachers adjust their
teaching techniques according to their assessment of
students and their monitoring of the on-going
instructional processes—they rarely use an instructional
technique exclusively even though they may firmly
believe in a particular pedagogical approach .

Acknowledgements
The research was supported in part by Fonds FCAR.
Special thanks to my husband Michel Décary for his
contributions and support. The author would also like
to thank Dr. Frederiksen, Dr. Breuleux and Dr. Lajoie
for their thoughtful comments and suggestions.

References
Chen, M. (2000). The impact of three instructional
modes of computer tutoring on student learning in
algebra. Unpublished doctoral Dissertation, McGill
University, Montreal.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics
problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science,
5, 121-152.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S. and Newman, S. E. (1989).
Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of
reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick
(Ed.) Knowing, learning and instructions: Essays in
honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greeno, J. G., Collins, A. M., & Resnick, L. B.
(1996). Cognition and learning. In D. C. Berliner &
R. C. Calfee (Eds.) Handbook of educational
psychology (pp. 15-46). London, UK: Prentice Hall.
Hmelo, C. E., & Narayanan, N. H. (1995). Anchors,
cases, problems, and scenarios as contexts for
learning. Proceedings of the 17th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 5-8).
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kolodner, J. L. (1994). Case-based reasoning. San
Mateo, CA: Morgan-Kaufmann.
Mayer, R. (1989). Models for understanding. Review of
Educational Research, 59(1), 43-64.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Cognition in the head and in
the world: An introduction to the special issue on
situated action. Cognitive Science, 17(1), 1-6.
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D.
(1991). Perspectives on socially shared cognition.
Washington, DC: American Psychology
Association.
Schank, R. C. (1995). Engines for Education.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

