UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Base-Rate Neglect in Pigeons: Implications for Memory Mechanisms
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98d9n6v3
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)
Authors
Zentall, Thomas R.
Clement, Tricia S.
Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

            Base-R ate N eglectin Pigeons:Im plications for M em ory M echanism s
                                          Thom as R.Zentall(zentall@ pop.uky.edu)
                                         Tricia S.Clem ent(tcharb1@ pop.uky.edu)
                                      D epartm entof Psychology,U niversity of K entucky
                                                   Lexington,K Y 40506 U SA
                            A bstract                            x p(correct) = .15 x .80 = .12, w hereas the probability of
                                                                 saying it w as blue w hen it actually w as green is
   In delayed m atching-to-sam ple, there is an initial (or      p(green|judgem entincorrect)= p(green)x p(incorrect)= .85
   sam ple) stim ulus and tw o test(orcom parison)stim uli.      x .20 = .17.This m eans thatthe probability ofbeing correct
   W hen pigeons are trained to m atch,they presum ably          underthese conditions is only .12/(.12 + .17)= .41,orless
   choose betw een the tw o com parison stim uliaccording        than 50% .Thus,hum ans often failto considersufficiently
   to their ability to rem em ber the sam ple. W hen the         the probability ofbeing correctin the absence ofthe eye-
   sam ple cannot be rem em bered, com parison choice            w itness inform ation.A lthough there are certain conditions
   should depend on the history of reinforcem ent                under w hich hum ans can be induced to perform m ore
   associated w ith each ofthecom parison stim uli(i.e.,the      accurately (e.g., G igerenzer & H offrage, 1995), base-rate
   com parison base rates). In the present research,             neglectislikely responsible form anyexaggeratedfearssuch
   pigeons acquired tw o m atching tasksin w hich sam ples       as air travel, w alking the streets of N ew Y ork C ity, and
   S1 and S2 w ere each associated w ith one of tw o             having one’s children killed atschoolby a fellow student.
   com parisonsC1and C2(equalexperiencew ith both trial             A n analogous situation can be designed for an anim al
   types),and sam ples S1 and S3 w ere each associated           using a m atching-to-sam ple task.M atching-to-sam ple is a
   w ith one oftw o othercom parisons C3 and C 4 (equal          conditionaldiscrim ination in w hich the identity oftheinitial
   experience w ith both trial types). A s the retention         or sam ple stim ulus indicates w hich oftw o (orm ore)testor
   interval increased, the pigeons show ed a bias to             com parison stim uliis correct(Skinner,1950).A ccording to
   choose the com parison (C 1 orC 3)associated w ith the        H artland Fantino (1996),com parison choice for pigeons
   m ore frequently occurring sam ple (S1).Thus,pigeons          should depend on tw o factors,the relative probabilities of
   are sensitive, not just to the probability of                 reinforcem ent associated w ith the com parisons (i.e., the
   reinforcem ent associated w ith the each of the               baserates)in theabsence ofthesam ple,and theconditional
   com parison stim uli (i.e., the base rates) w hich w ere      probability of each com parison being correct given
   equal,butalso to the(irrelevant)likelihoodthateach of         presentation ofone ofthe sam ples (i.e.,the actualsam ple
   the sam ples w as presented (i.e.,base-rate neglect).         eventor the evidence,given the base rates).In the case of
                                                                 m atching-to-sam ple,the probability ofreinforcem entgiven
                        Introduction                             the sam ple is typically 1.0.This ensures thatthe task has
                                                                 been adequately acquired and thatthe contingencies have
H um ansare know n to underestim atetheeffectof base rates
                                                                 been adequately experienced.B iases can be introduced by
associated w ith probability of being correct(K ahnem an &
                                                                 m anipulating the ratio of sam ples and the probability of
Tversky 1972).In a classic problem proposed by Tversky
                                                                 reinforcem entforchoices of the m atching com parison (see
and K anem an (1980,p.62),participants are told that85% of
                                                                 G oodie & Fantino,1995,forsim ilarfindings w ith hum ans,
thetaxis in a city are green w hileonly 15% are blue(thebase
                                                                 butsee also G oodie & Fantino,1996,forexceptions).
rates).They are also told thata w itness to a hit-and-run
                                                                    C ontrol by the com parisons alone can be increased by
accident involving a taxi identified the taxi as blue.
                                                                 degrading thesam plesatthetim eofcom parison choice (i.e.,
Furtherm ore,they are told that under sim ilar conditions
                                                                 by increasing the probability ofpoorm em ory,or in thetaxi
w itnesses correctly identify the colorofa taxi80% ofthe
                                                                 exam ple,ofan identification error).O new ay to degrade the
tim e.W hen participants are then asked, “W hat is the
                                                                 sam ples is by introducing adelay betw een the offsetof the
probability that the taxi involved in the accident w as
                                                                 sam ple and the onsetofthe com parisons.A ssum ing that
actually blue?” m ostofthem say thatitisvery likely thatthe
                                                                 the com parison stim uliare correctequally often overtrials,
taxiis blue.In m aking this judgem enttheparticipantsfailto
                                                                 and thatthe probability ofreinforcem entis the sam e fora
considersufficiently thebase-rateprobabilities.W hen base
                                                                 correctresponseto each com parison,onew ould expectthat
rate is considered,the conditionalprobability ofcorrectly
                                                                 w ith increasing delay,the slopes of the pigeons’retention
identifying abluetaxiis p(blue|judgem entcorrect)= p(blue)
                                                                 functions w ould be quite sim ilar(see G rant,1991;W hite &

W ixted,1999).                                               pigeons w ere m aintained on a 12:12-h,light:dark cycle. A ll
    The analog to base rate in a m atching task is the       pigeons had previously served in an unrelated study
probability ofbeing correctin the absence ofinform ation     involving sim ple sim ultaneous discrim inations.
about the sam ple (i.e., the relative probability of
reinforcem ent associated w ith each of the com parison      A pparatus
stim uli).A ccording to W hite and W ixted (1999), pigeons
                                                             The experim ent w as conducted in a standard B R S/LV E
should be sensitive to base-rateprobabilities,butgenerally
                                                             (Laurel,M D ) sound attenuating pigeon testcham ber.Three
thebaseratesand theprobability ofsam ple presentation are
                                                             rectangularresponsekeys(2.5cm high x3 cm w ide and 1 cm
thesam e (both generally 0.5).In the presentexperim entw e
                                                             apart) w ere aligned horizontally and centered on the
asked ifpigeons are able to estim ate the probability of a
                                                             response panel.M ounted behind each response key w as a
correctcom parison response w hen the sam ple probabilities
                                                             12-stim ulus inline projector (Industrial Electronics
are different from the base rates. There are a num ber
                                                             Engineering,Series 10,V an N uys,C A ,)thatcould projecta
procedures thatm ightbe used to m anipulate the relative
                                                             red hue or a green hue onto the any ofthe three response
frequency of sam ple (S) presentation w hile m aintaining
                                                             keys ora plain w hite field onto the center response key.In
equalprobability ofreinforcem entforcom parison (C)choice
                                                             addition,the leftand rightprojectors could projecta w hite
(i.e.,equalbase rates).In the presentexperim ent,w e chose
                                                             circle and a w hite dot.A houselightlocated atthe center of
tointroduceasecond2-sam ple-2-com parison m atching task.
                                                             the cham berceiling provided generalillum ination.A rear-
Each of the tw o m atching tasks involved a differentpairof
                                                             m ounted grain feeder w as centered horizontally on the
com parison stim uli but the tw o tasks shared a com m on
                                                             response panelm idw ay betw een the pecking keys and the
sam ple.Thus,thetw o taskscan berepresented S1-C1,S2-C2
                                                             floor of the cham ber. W hen operated, the feeder w as
and S1-C3,S3-C4(w ithC1and C2alw aysappearing together
                                                             accessible through a 5.0 x 5.5 cm litaperture in theresponse
and C3 and C4 alw ays appearing together). If each of the
                                                             panel. R einforcem ent consisted of 2.0-s access to Purina
four trial types appears equally often, each of the
                                                             Pro G rains.W hite noise and an exhaustfan m ounted on the
com parisons w ould be associated w ith reinforcem ent on
                                                             outside of the cham ber m asked extraneous noise. The
25% ofthe reinforced trials.H ow ever,the sam e w ould not
                                                             experim entw as controlled by a m icrocom puterlocated in an
be true of the sam ples.S2 and S3 w ould each be presented
                                                             adjacentroom .
on 25% ofthe trials,w hereasS1w ould bepresented on 50%
of the trials. U nder conditions w ith no delay, one w ould
                                                             Procedure
expecta high levelofm atching accuracy and no bias.B utif
adelay is inserted betw een the offsetof the sam ple and the Training A ll pigeons w ere placed directly on 0-s-delay
onset of the com parisons, errors should increase. If        m atching-to-sam ple training.A tthe beginning ofeach trial,
com parison choice depends on the reinforcem ent             the center key (sam ple) w as illum inated. Follow ing 10
contingencies associated w ith com parison choice,errors     responses to the sam ple,the sam ple w as turned offand the
should notresult in a com parison bias.In the absence of     side (com parison) keys w ere illum inated. C om parison
m em ory forthe sam ple,the probability ofreinforcem entof   stim uliw ere presented random ly w ith respect to location,
com parison choice should be 50% for either com parison in   w ith the restriction thata particularhue could notoccur on
eithertask.Furtherm ore,ifthere is m em ory forthe sam ple,  the sam e side key for m ore than three consecutive trials.
theconditionalprobability ofreinforcem entassociated w ith   O neresponseto eithercom parison constituted achoiceand
com parisonchoiceshould bethesam e foreithercom parison      term inated the trial. Correctcom parison responses resulted
in eitherm atching task.H ow ever,ifpigeons show a biasby    in a 2-sec presentation of food and a 10-sec intertrial
using theirreference m em ory ofsam ple presentations,they   interval. Incorrect choices resulted in the 10-sec intertrial
should access m ore instances ofS1 than ofeitherS2 orS3      intervalalone.
and a bias to choose C 1 and C 3 m ay result.                  For each pigeon,training consisted of a hybrid m atching
                                                             task involving three sam ple stim uli(one pertrial)and tw o
                                                             pairs ofcom parison stim uli(one pairon each trial). O n one
                         M ethod
                                                             fourth ofthe trials, one of the hues served as the sam ple
Subjects                                                     (S1)w ith red and green com parison stim uli(C1 and C2)on
The subjects w ere eight W hite C arneaux pigeons,           the side keys and,forexam ple,red w as correct. O n another
purchased as retired breeders (5-8 years old) from the       fourth of the trials, a different hue sam ple (S2) w as
Palm etto Pigeon Plant (Sum ter, SC ). The pigeons w ere     presented w ith thered andgreen com parison stim uliand,for
m aintained at 80% of their free-feeding body w eights       exam ple,green w as correct.
throughouttheexperim entand w ere caged individually w ith     O n halfofthe rem aining trials,S1 w as again presented as
gritand w atercontinually available in the hom e cage. The   the sam ple and circle and dot w ere presented as the

com parisons (w ith, for exam ple, dot correct). O n the
rem aining fourth ofthe trials a third hue w as presented as
the sam ple (S3)and circle and dot w ere presented as the
com parisons (w ith circle correct).
   The three sam ple hues w ere counterbalanced such that
each hueserved asthe one-to-m any sam ple for 2-3 pigeons
and each of the rem aining sam ples w as associated w ith the
huecom parisonsforatleastonepigeon.Sessionsconsisted
of96 trials and w ere conducted 6 days a w eek. For each
pigeon,criterion w as m etw hen the correctcom parison for
each trialtype w as chosen on atleast90% ofthosetrials for
tw o consecutivesessions.Follow ing criterion perform ance,
each pigeon received five sessions of overtraining.
R etention testO n the follow ing session,each pigeon w as
transferred to a m ixed-delay m atching procedure in w hich
theoffsetofthesam ple w as separated from the onsetofthe
side keys by a dark retention intervalof0,2,4,or8 s.For
each ofthe trialtypes,there w as an equalnum beroftrials                                D iscussion
involving each retention interval. The retention test
                                                               A ccording to traditionalinstrum entalview s ofconditional
consistedof2sessionsand thereinforcem entcontingencies
                                                               discrim ination learning (i.e., H artl & Fantino, 1996), the
w ere the sam e as they w ere during training.In allanalyses
                                                               probability ofacom parison choiceshould bedeterm ined by
of results, the .05 level of statistical significance w as
                                                               theconditionalprobabilityassociatedw ith each com parison
adopted.
                                                               stim ulus,given the sam ple,and,ifthesam ple is unavailable
                                                               or forgotten, w ith the probability of reinforcem ent
                           R esults                            associated w ith each com parison (independently of the
Training                                                       sam ple).Thus,the choice a particularcom parison (e.g.,C1)
Sessions to criterion (tw o successive sessions at 90%         should depend on both the num berofsam ple-com parison
correct)fortheone-to-oneportion ofthetaskw as10.2w hen         pairings (e.g.,S1-C 1)thatare follow ed by reinforcem ent,as
the com parisonsw ere hues and 11.1 w hen the com parisons     w ellas the num berofreinforcem ents associated w ith that
w ere shapes. Sessions to criterion for the one-to-m any       com parison,independentofthe sam ple (W ixted,1993).In
portion ofthe task w as 13.6 w hen the com parisons w ere      the present experim ent, the conditional probability of
hues and 13.8 w hen thecom parisonsw ere shapes.A m ixed-      reinforcem entassociated w ith each of the com parisons,
effect analysis of variance perform ed on the acquisition       Figure 1.R etention functions follow ing training in w hich
scores, w ith task (one-to-one vs. one-to-m any) and           tw o and sam ples, S1 and S2, w ere associated w ith
com parison dim ension (hues vs. shapes) as factors,           com parison stim uli,C 1 C 2,respectively and S1 and S3w ere
indicated that neither effect nor the interaction w as         associated w ith com parisonsC3and C4,respectively.Thus,
statistically reliable,F(1,7)= 2.08,>1,and >1,respectively.    S2and S3 w ere involved in one-to-onem atching (O TO )w ith
                                                               C 2 and C 4,w hile the third sam ple,S1,w as associated w ith
R etention T est                                               tw o com parison stim uli,C 1 and C 3 (one-to-m any m atching,
                                                               O TM ).In training and test,each com parison w asassociated
D ata from the retention test w ere pooled over the 2 test
                                                               w ith reinforcem ent on 50% of the trials and C 1 and C 2
sessions and w ere subjected to a repeated-m easures
                                                               alw ays appeared together as did C 3 and C 4.
A N O V A , w ith task com ponent (one-to-one vs. one-to-
m any) and D elay (0, 2, 4, and 8 sec) as factors. M ost
                                                               given one of the sam ples, w as equal. Furtherm ore, the
critically,the A N O V A indicted thatthere w as a significant
                                                               probability ofreinforcem entassociated w ith choiceofeither
Task C om ponentx D elay interaction,F(3,21)= 4.37.There
                                                               com parison w asalso equal.Thus,in thepresentexperim ent,
w as also a significant effect of D elay,F(3,21) 44.01.The
                                                               given presentation ofC 1 and C 2,the only relevantsam ple-
effectofTask C om ponentw as notquite significant,F(1,7)
                                                               com parison associations determ ining com parison choice
= 4.79.The retention data are presented in Figure 1.
                                                               should be S1-C1 and S2-C2.If so,delay-induced sam ple
                                                               degradation should have had a sym m etrical effect on
                                                               com parison choiceand theretention functionsshould have
                                                               been paralleland overlapping.

   In the present experim ent, clearly divergent retention     rate neglectshow n by hum ans w hen they failto consider
functionsw erefound.T heseresultsrequire them odification      sufficiently the base-rate probability of occurrence of an
of current theories of delayed conditional discrim ination     event.
perform ance (e.g.,W hite & W ixted,1999)because pigeons
choice behavioris influenced notonly by the probability of                            R eferences
reinforcem entassociated w ith responding to each of the
                                                               G igerenzer, G. & H offrage, U . (1995). H ow to im prove
com parison stim uli and to the conditional probabilities
                                                                  B ayesian reasoning w ithout instruction: Frequency
associated w ith choice of the com parison stim uli as a
                                                                  form ats.PsychologicalReview,102,684-704.
function ofm em ory forthe sam ple butalso by the relative
frequenciesofthe sam ples.W hen delaysare introduced,as
                                                               G oodie, A . S., & Fantino, E. (1995). A n experim entally
thedelay increases,pigeonshaveanincreasing tendency to
                                                                  derived base-rate error in hum ans.PsychologicalScience,6,
selectthe com parison associated w ith the m ore frequently
                                                                  101-106.
presented sam ple, even though that sam ple w as not
                                                               G oodie,A .S.,& Fantino,E.(1996). Learning to com it or
presented m ore often than the alternative sam ple in the
                                                                  avoid the base-rate error.Nature,380,247-249.
context ofeithercom parison pair.Itis as if,on trials w hen
                                                               G rant,D .S.(1991).Sym m etricaland asym m etricalcoding of
m em ory for the sam ple is poor, presentation of the
                                                                  food and no-food sam ples in delayed m atching in
com parisons causes the pigeons to consult theirreference
                                                                  pigeons.JournalofExperim entalPsychology:Anim alBehavior
m em ory forthe overallprobability ofsam ple presentation
                                                                  Processes,17,186-193.
(independentof the com parison pair).
                                                               H artl,J.A .,& Fantino,E.(1996).C hoice as a function of
   O f broader interest, such use of reference m em ory in
                                                                  reinforcem ent ratios in delayed m atching to sam ple.
delayed m atching m ay be a generalphenom enon.H ow ever,
                                                                  Journalofthe Experim entalAnalysis ofBehavior,66,11-27.
the use ofsam ple frequency independently ofotherm ore
                                                               K ahnem an,D .,& Tversky,A .(1972).Subjectiveprobability:
relevantm easures m ay beapparentonly w ith adesign such
                                                                  A judgem entof representativeness.Cognitive Psychology,
as thatused in the presentresearch because in the m ore
                                                                  3,430-453.
typicaldesign,eitherhypothesis m akesthesam eprediction.
                                                               Skinner B . F. (1950). A re theories of learning necessary?
   A lternatively, in the present experim ent, although the
                                                                  PsychologicalReview,57,193-216.
pigeons had equalopportunity to acquire each ofthe four
                                                               Tversky, A , & K ahnem an, D . (1980). C ausal schem as in
sam ple-com parison associations, the m ore frequent
                                                                  judgem ents under uncertainty. In M . Fishbein (Ed.),
presentations ofthe S1 sam ple could have allow ed itto be
                                                                  Progress in social psychology (pp. 49-72). H illsdale,N J:
m ore efficiently coded,betterm aintained in m em ory,orm ore
                                                                  Erlbaum .
easily retrieved from m em ory. That is, at the tim e of
                                                               W hite,K .G .,& W ixted,J.T.(1999). Psychophysics of
com parison choice, w hen the S1 stim ulus had been the
                                                                  rem em bering. Journal of the Experim ental Analysis of
sam ple,itm ayhave been m ore accessible than the S2 or S3
                                                                  Behavior,71,91-113.
stim uli w ere w hen they had been the sam ple. B ut if the
                                                               W ixted,J.T.(1993).A signaldetection analysis ofm em ory
difference in slope of the retention functions w as
                                                                  for nonoccurrence in pigeons. Journal of Experim ental
attributable to differencesin sam ple accessibility atthetim e
                                                                  Psychology:Anim alBehavior Processes,19,400-411.
the com parisons w ere presented,both theS1 and the S2/S3
functions should have approached 50% correct w ith
increasing retention interval. Instead, the S1 retention                             A uthor N otes
function appears to have leveled off, w hile the S2/S3         Thisresearchw assupported by N ationalInstituteofM ental
retention function declines below chance atdelaysof4and        H ealth G rants 55118 and 59194.C orrespondence should be
8 sec.Such retention functions suggest that rather than        addressed toThom asR.Zentall,D epartm entofPsychology,
betterretrievalofthe S1 sam ple,the pigeons developed a        U niversity ofK entucky,Lexington,K Y 40506-0044.Em ail,
com parison bias to choose thecom parison associated w ith     zentall@ pop.uky.edu
the m ore frequently presented sam ple.
  This com parison biasin pigeonsisanalogousto the base-

