UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beliefs Versus Knowledge: A Necessary Distinction for Explaining, Predicting, and Assessing
Conceptual Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/65q2p667

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Griffin, Thomas D.
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beliefs Versus Knowledge: A Necessary Distinction for Explaining, Predicting,
and Assessing Conceptual Change
Thomas D. Griffin (tgriffin@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 West Harrison Street (M/C 285)
Chicago, IL 60607, U.S.A.

Abstract
Empirical research and theoretical treatments of
conceptual change have paid little attention to the
distinction between knowledge and belief. The
distinction implies that conceptual change involves both
knowledge acquisition and belief revision, and highlights
the need to consider the reasons that beliefs are held. We
argue that the effects of prior beliefs on conceptual
learning depends upon whether a given belief is held for
its coherence with a network of supporting knowledge,
or held for the affective goals that it serves. We also
contend that the nature of prior beliefs will determine the
relationship between the knowledge acquisition and the
belief revision stages of the conceptual change process.
Preliminary data suggests that prior beliefs vary in
whether they are held for knowledge or affect-based
reasons, and that this variability may predict whether a
change in knowledge will result in belief revision.

Introduction
Theorists and researchers tend to agree that prior
concepts often impede people's ability to learn
conflicting information (e.g., Chi, 1992; Dole &
Sinatra, 1998; Thagard, 1992). The paradox of
knowledge acquisition is that new information can only
be understood in terms of existing ideas, yet existing
ideas act as a filter, often distorting new information to
make it more consistent with prior concepts. This raises
the question of how we ever learn anything
fundamentally new.
At least two widely cited models agree about crucial
steps in the conceptual change process (Chi, 1992;
Thagard, 1992): (1) recognizing that the new
information conflicts with (or is fundamentally different
from) existing concepts; (2) constructing a new
knowledge structure to support the new information; (3)
replacing the old concepts with the new, more coherent
concepts. In short, conceptual change involves learning
new concepts and then substituting them for the old.
Though these models (i.e., Chi, 1992; Thagard, 1992)
diverge in some of the details about the process, they
seem to agree that conceptual coherence largely
determines conceptual replacement.
In addition, Ohlsson and Lehtinen (1997) have
suggested that the use of abstract schemas may be

needed to explain how new knowledge representations
can be created that will not be distorted by the
conflicting prior concepts. They suggest that activation
of conflicting prior concepts activates related abstract
concepts that are not in direct conflict with the new
information, and that can be utilized in constructing an
accurate representation of the new information. These
aspects of the conceptual change process become more
important when we consider how beliefs differ from
knowledge.

Belief Versus Knowledge
The present paper defines knowledge as the
comprehension or awareness of an idea or proposition
("I understand the claim that humans evolved from
early primates"). After a proposition is known, one can
accept it as true ("I believe the claim that..."), reject it as
false ("I disbelieve the claim that..."), or withhold
judgment about its truth-value ("I have no opinion
about the claim that...").
The present knowledge/belief distinction is intended
to be psychological. Thus, knowledge and belief refer
to qualitatively different aspects of the mental
representation: knowledge refers to the representation
of a proposition, and belief refers to the representation
of a truth-value associated with a proposition. These
definitions are consistent with Quine, and Ullian's
(1970) argument that people can have knowledge of an
idea or proposition, but either not believe it to be true,
or hold a belief that the concept is false.
A proper distinction between comprehension versus
acceptance or rejection of an idea allows us to consider
the multiple influences on belief formation, and to
speak more clearly (and realistically) about the
relationship between knowledge and belief change.

A Change in Knowledge, Beliefs, or Both?
It is striking that discussions of conceptual change
use the terms 'knowledge', 'beliefs', and 'prior
conceptions' interchangeably. Recently, diSessa (2000)
highlighted the unexamined lack of agreement among
conceptual change researchers regarding basic issues
such as whether the conceptual change refers to a
change in concepts, beliefs, nodes, or links.

In the models previously mentioned (Chi, 1992;
Thagard, 1992) conceptual change involves both the
creation of new knowledge (step 2), and a process of
abandoning the old ideas in favor of the new ones (step
3). Step 2 amounts to acquiring new knowledge or
conceptual understanding, while step 3 amounts to
belief revision. Thus, belief revision is characterized as
rationally disavowing a prior belief whenever the
computed conceptual coherence of a new knowledge
structure is higher. This account presupposes that
knowledge is the only foundation for belief.
The present argument favors a distinction between
knowledge and belief, but acknowledges that
knowledge of a concept must precede any judgment of
its truth or falsehood. The issue being raised here is
that acceptance or rejection of a concept may not be
solely contingent upon the coherence of its relations to
supporting knowledge in the form of evidence,
argument, and logical implications. Belief in a concept
may serve affective and social functions. Thus, people
might accept a certain idea independent of its coherence
with relevant knowledge, and perhaps change a belief
even though it will reduce conceptual coherence.
Beliefs may vary qualitatively in the degree to which
they are part of a specified and coherent network of
relevant knowledge.
This claim about the varying bases of belief is similar
to one made regarding the affective versus cognitive
bases of attitudes (e.g., Eagly & Chaiken, 1993).
However, while attitudes refer to subjective evaluations
of objects as 'positive' or 'negative', beliefs refer to the
acceptance or rejection of propositions. Knowing that a
person believes in a proposition, such as "humans
evolved form primates", tells us nothing about whether
that person feels positively or negatively about this state
of affairs. Furthermore, attitude-change theories predict
greater change in attitudes that are grounded more in
affect than cognitions: precisely the opposite prediction
being made here for affect-based beliefs.
A number of implications arise when considering the
variability in the bases of beliefs. This variability could
influence how belief-conflicting information is
processed and understood. Even if a new conceptual
scheme is understood, the role of affective motivations
in belief acceptance calls into question the notion that
belief revision results every time a new conceptual
scheme increases coherence.

Belief Bases and Conceptual Learning
Part of the importance in making a knowledge/belief
distinction lies in the potential influence that a belief's
underlying knowledge structure (or lack thereof) might
have on the comprehension of belief-conflicting
information. The greater conceptual coherence of
knowledge-based beliefs should aid in conceptual
learning by making conflict recognition more likely and

providing a context that facilitates the construction of a
new conceptual representation.
Knowledge-based beliefs are defined by greater
coherence with related conceptual networks than beliefs
held for affective goals. Therefore, a person should
more easily recognize when the evidence, argument, or
logical implications of a new conceptual scheme are in
conflict with a knowledge-based belief than with an
affect-based belief. As already stated, conflict
recognition is the first step in the conceptual change
process and a necessary step in avoiding distortion via
assimilation (Chi, 1992; Thagard, 1992). Thus, when
people encounter information that conflicts with
knowledge-based versus affect-based beliefs, they
should be less likely to assimilate and distort and more
likely to begin the process of constructing an accurate
representation of the information.
Following conflict recognition, the richer and more
detailed conceptual context of knowledge-based beliefs
should help compare and contrast the belief with the
new information, thus facilitating the process of
constructing a representation of the new information.
By definition, a prior belief that conflicts with new
information is relevant to that new information. The
concepts of ‘black’ and ‘white’ contain components
that oppose one another, yet our understanding of
‘black’ seems to rely heavily on its contrast with the
concept of ‘white’. Conceptual contrast could help
highlight the boundaries that separate and therefore
define the concepts.
In addition, contrasting old and new concepts might
lead to the generation of useful abstractions that capture
the principles underlying the contrast. In fact, the
conceptual network underlying knowledge-based
beliefs may provide direct links to abstract concepts
that already exist. Given the theorized role of abstract
concepts in constructing new representations (i.e.,
Ohlsson & Lehtinen, 1997), the conceptual framework
provided by knowledge-based beliefs could prove quite
beneficial in the comprehension of conflicting concepts.
The hypothesis that conflicting beliefs can assist
learning via conceptual contrast has received indirect
support from classroom studies of pedagogical
techniques (for a review, see Guzzetti, Snyder, Glass,
Gamas, 1993). A meta-analysis of 70 reading and
science education studies revealed that techniques that
contrasted new concepts with common misconceptions
resulted in better comprehension of the new concepts
compared to a number of alternative techniques. The
problematic conclusion drawn from was that prior
concepts impede learning, so they must be refuted.
However, refutational techniques did not directly refute
the students' own prior concepts, but rather informed
students of common misconceptions, then presented
new concepts as a contrast to these misconceptions.

It is possible that merely highlighting contrasting
concepts facilitated comprehension. This interpretation
is consistent with the fact that students who did not
already possess the prior concepts appeared to benefited
equally from refutation compared to students who did
have the misconceptions. Contrary to a common
assumption, these results could be evidence that
conflicting prior beliefs can aid in conceptual learning,
so long as the prior concepts are made salient and
explicitly contrasted with the new information.
In sum, there are sound theoretical reasons to expect
that knowledge-based beliefs should lead to greater
conceptual understanding of conflicting information
than affect-based beliefs. In fact, if the initial problem
of recognizing conceptual conflict is overcome, then the
conceptual framework of knowledge-based beliefs may
result in greater comprehension than when there are no
prior beliefs at all. However, the final stage of
conceptual change (i.e., belief revision) remains.

Belief Bases and Belief Revision
There are some obvious reasons to expect that the third
and final stage of conceptual change will also be
influenced by the underlying source of prior beliefs.
Updating beliefs with new knowledge should be
heavily influenced by motivation and epistemological
values. Those who are affectively motivated to form
beliefs independent of conceptual coherence will have
little motivation to revise those beliefs in light of new
ideas that could increase coherence. These people may
be specifically motivated to 'isolate' new information
and actively avoid evaluative comparisons of
conceptual coherence. Recent work has shown that
different kinds of beliefs are associated with different
epistemological values, and these values predict how
different beliefs are affected by anomalous information
(Chinn & Brewer, 2000). Conceptual replacement or
belief revision may follow the competitive rules of
conceptual coherence, but only when the initial belief is
based upon its coherence with other knowledge.
Beyond motivational influences on belief revision,
the conceptual structure of prior beliefs is likely to have
direct cognitive effects on coherence comparisons.
Making meaningful comparisons between affect-based
beliefs and new conceptual knowledge will prove
difficult given the different levels of conceptual
specification. Also, if coherence comparisons are made,
the lack of conceptual specificity inherent in affectbased beliefs will make any revision short of complete
abandonment cognitively difficult. Thus, affective
beliefs seem to face an 'all or nothing' dilemma, where
the most probable outcome is a lack of belief revision.
Issues of motivation and conceptual structure make it
unlikely that affect-based beliefs will be revised
following the comprehension of a coherent conceptual
framework.

In short, the present paper advances the following
arguments: (1) beliefs differ from knowledge; (2)
beliefs vary in whether they are held for coherence with
supporting knowledge versus affective motives; (3)
conceptual change involves both knowledge acquisition
and belief revision; (4) the variability in prior belief
bases may influence both of these components of the
conceptual change process. The first step in the
empirical validation of these claims is to demonstrate
that people believe in different concepts for affective as
well as knowledge-based reasons and that this
difference is related to their willingness to change those
beliefs.

Method
The following study was a preliminary investigation of
the variability in the underlying bases for beliefs. Any
attempt to assess whether beliefs are the result of
knowledge coherence or affective goals will have
weaknesses that can only be overcome with the use of
multiple converging methodologies. Our modest goal in
this study was to examine whether people would selfreport that their beliefs were held for largely affective
reasons and not due to support from relevant
knowledge. We hoped to demonstrate variability across
beliefs regarding their bases in knowledge versus affect.
We also expected that people's underlying reasons for
holding their beliefs would be related to their selfreported willingness to revise those beliefs in the face
of strong conflicting evidence.

Participants
Participants were 120 undergraduates at the University
of Illinois at Chicago.

Belief Assessment Materials and Procedures
Participants reported their prior beliefs on five different
topics: creationism, evolution, extra sensory perception,
the 'opposites attract' theory of romantic attraction, and
the existence of an afterlife. The topics were chosen for
their potential relationships to relevant knowledge and
affect. For each topic participants were told "for the
purpose of this study [topic] is defined as...", followed
by a one sentence description of the topic. The
descriptions were worded as simply as possible and
participants were told to ask for clarification if needed.1
Following each description was the question "To
what extent do you believe in [topic]?" Participants
indicated their level of belief on a scale ranging from 1
(completely disbelieve) to 9 (completely believe).
1

No participants asked for clarification. Also, failures in
definition comprehension would be consistent with the
present theory, and would not alter the interpretation of the
present results.

Participants were then asked to list their top 3 reasons
for their belief on the topic. This self-generation task
was designed to examine participants' most accessible
reasons that they had previously associated with their
belief on the topic.
After participants reported their degree of belief and
listed their reasons for all five topics, they were
presented with a list of potential reasons why a person
might hold any given belief. They were told "for each
potential reason below indicate whether that reason is
why you personally, hold your belief about the idea."
Participants responded on a likert-scale ranging from
1(not at all my reason) to 9(completely my reason).
Five reasons were presented, two knowledge based
reasons and three affective reasons (see Table 1).

affective and knowledge-based reasons for their beliefs.
The types of reasons varied systematically across topics
and between believers and non-believers (see Table 2,
for prototypical reasons given by 'believers'). The
reasons given for belief in creationism, an afterlife, and
disbelief in evolution were rarely knowledge-based and
often referred to affect. Some participants simply
mentioned that the belief was part of their religion or
just how they were brought up. In contrast, belief in
evolution, and disbelief in creationism and an afterlife
were never supported with affective reasons and
participants often referred to evidence. Belief and
disbelief in ESP and opposites attract was most often
supported by personal experience or reference to media
portrayals, but affective reasons were also provided.

Table 1. Knowledge and Affective Reasons for Belief.
_____________________________________________
Affective Reasons*:
My belief about [topic] makes me feel good or is
comforting.
When it comes to issues like [topic], I trust my 'heart',
not my 'head' to tell me the truth.
I don't need proof, I have faith that my belief about
[topic] is correct.

Table 2. Prototypical reasons for belief*.
_____________________________________________
Creationism
"I rely on faith"; "the bible says so"; "I couldn't live if I
didn't think there was a God"
Afterlife
"I hope there is one"; "It relieves my fear"; "life would
be meaningless otherwise"
Evolution
"biological evidence"; "You can observe similarities
between species"
ESP
"I have this ability"; "t.v. documentaries"; "It sounds
cool"
Opposites attract
"personal experience"; "media"; "I have seen it"
_____________________________________________
*Reasons for disbelief are not included in this table

Knowledge Reasons*:
My belief about [topic] is a result of examining all of
the evidence I'm aware of and choosing the most
convincing explanation.
My belief about [topic] is supported by current
scientific knowledge.
_____________________________________________
*Reasons were not labeled 'affective' or 'knowledge'.
After rating their reasons for each belief, participants
were asked: "Imagine that you were presented with
strong evidence that contradicted your belief. How
likely would you be to change your belief?"
Participants indicated their willingness to change each
belief on a scale from 1(not at all) to 9(completely).

Results
For each of the five topics, participants were classified
into one of three groups: 1 to 3 rating = 'disbeliever'; 4
to 6 rating = 'no opinion'; 7 to 9 rating = 'believer'.
Believers on one topic could be believers, disbelievers,
or have no opinion on the other topics. The results that
follow compare the knowledge versus affective reasons
given by believers and disbelievers across the five
topics. Those with no opinion are not included here.

Self-Generated Reasons
A qualitative examination of participants' self-generated
reasons for belief revealed that participants gave both

Ratings of Knowledge Versus Affective Reasons
The mean scores were calculated for the three affect
reasons and the two knowledge reasons. Figures 1 and 2
report the mean levels of knowledge and affect scores,
and self-reported willingness to change a belief or
disbelief in the face of conflicting evidence. As
mentioned previously, each participants belief or
disbelief varied as a function of topic. This presents a
problem for any straightforward statistical test of the
Belief X Topic interaction. Thus, a qualitative
comparison of the means was followed-up by a formal
test using correlational methods.
As expected, both the mean levels of affect and
knowledge associated with a belief varied across the
different topics (see Figure 1). Belief in evolution was
associated with higher knowledge than affect scores,
and with lower affect scores than belief in the other four
topics. In contrast, belief in creationism and an afterlife
were associated with higher affect than knowledge
scores, and with higher affect than belief in the other
three topics.

Knowledge

Af fect

Change

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

n = 59

n = 60

n = 41

n = 39

n = 52

Creation

Af ter

Opposite

ESP

Evolution

Figure 1: Reasons and Will to Change for Believers.

Knowledge

Affect

Change

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

n = 30

n = 18

n = 18

n = 40

n = 29

Creation

A fter

Opposite

ESP

Evolution

Figure 2: Reasons and Will to Change for Disbelievers.
The opposite pattern of results was found for
disbelief across topics (see Figure 2). Specifically,
disbelief in creationism was associated with higher
knowledge than affect scores, and higher knowledge
scores than disbelief in the other four topics. In
contrast, disbelief in evolution was associated with
higher affect than knowledge scores, and higher affect
than the other topics. Overall, the differences in
knowledge and affective scores for belief and disbelief
across the five topics were consistent with the kinds of
reasons participants provided in the self-generation
task.
To get around the problem of the membership
overlap between believers and disbelievers across
topics, belief was treated as a continuous variable. Also,
a single score of endorsed reasons was calculated for
participants on each topic, by subtracting their affect
score from their knowledge score on each topic. Each
of the five difference scores was correlated with the
continuous measure of belief for the corresponding
topic. The results are the five coefficients in Table 3.
For all topics, the knowledge-affect difference score
was significantly correlated with the tendency to
believe or disbelieve. Negative correlations suggest that

as belief in the issue was greater, knowledge reasons
decreased compared to affect reasons. This was the case
for belief on all issues except for evolution. As belief in
evolution increased the endorsement of knowledge
reasons increased greatly compared to affect reasons.
These findings are consistent with the descriptive
examination of the mean scores for believers and
disbelievers.
Reasons for belief were also related to self-reported
willingness to change. As seen in Figures 1 and 2, mean
change scores were lowest when beliefs were
associated with higher affect than knowledge scores, as
was the case for belief in creationism, an afterlife, and a
disbelief in evolution. This relationship was tested by
correlating participants' knowledge-affect difference
scores with their willingness to change their beliefs on
the five topics. All five bi-variate correlations were
significant at p < .05, and the coefficients ranged
between .30 and .40. Thus, the more a participant's
belief was based in knowledge relative to affect, the
more willing they were to change that belief in the face
of conflicting evidence.
In sum, many participants reported that their beliefs
were based more on affect than on any relation to
existing knowledge. Also, there was significant
variation among beliefs in terms of their knowledge
versus affective bases. Lastly, participants claimed they
would be less willing to change affect-based beliefs
than knowledge-based beliefs if presented with sound
belief conflicting evidence.
Table 3. Correlations between knowledge-affect
difference scores and belief, on all five topics.
_____________________________________________
Creationism Afterlife

ESP

Opposites

Evolution

-.68*
*p < .05.

-.42*

-.35*

.73*

-.38*

Discussion
These preliminary results support our hypothesis that
beliefs and knowledge are related but distinct
constructs. People will not only report that some of
their beliefs are held on affective grounds, they will
even specifically reject knowledge based reasons as the
bases for some of their beliefs. In addition, these selfreported reasons for belief predicted participants
willingness to change those beliefs.
These data are only a first attempt to examine this
issue. It is a difficult task to assess the true bases for
individual beliefs. If belief formation and maintenance
are relatively deliberate mental enterprises then it is
reasonable to assume that people would be able to
accurately report the relationships between their beliefs
and relevant knowledge and affective goals. The
validity of these self-reports is aided by the fact that

participants' self-generated reasons matched their
endorsement of the knowledge and affective reasons
that we provided.
It should be noted that self-reported willingness to
change a belief was not intended to be an actual
measure of belief revision. This point is made obvious
by the fact that no belief conflicting information was
ever provided to participants. However, we argue that
belief revision is highly subject to motivational
influence and that epistemological values are integral to
people's motivation to update beliefs with any newly
acquired knowledge. Self-reported willingness to
change a belief reflects belief-specific epistemological
values that should affect the motivations relevant to
belief revision. Thus, it is noteworthy that participants
reported being rather unwilling to change their affectbased beliefs, even if presented with sound conflicting
evidence, but relatively willing to change knowledgebased beliefs.

Implications and Future Research
The obvious next step is to see whether these reported
differences in belief bases predict how well people
comprehend new information in conflict with their
beliefs. The distinction between knowledge and beliefs
requires that outcome measures be tailored to assess
change in one or the other. If conceptual understanding
(knowledge change) is being assessed, then participants
must be clear that their task is to demonstrate their
understanding of the new concepts, and not to report
their current point of view.
A similar concern arises when the outcome of interest
is belief revision or conceptual replacement. Dependent
measures must show that people are spontaneously
employing new concepts in their thinking, not merely
adapting their thinking to the expectations of
experimental or educational settings. Being explicit in
our discussions and methodologies about beliefs versus
knowledge may reveal where the real disagreements are
in the area of conceptual change and perhaps reveal that
there is less disagreement than it seems.
Previous accounts of conceptual change have
assumed a uniformly negative influence of prior beliefs
on conceptual change. We argue that the knowledge
versus affective basis of prior beliefs may be an
important determinant of whether conflicting concepts
are accurately understood. We also contend that the
coherence competition accounts of belief revision are
too simplistic, given the existence of affect-based
beliefs. A conceptual-coherence theory of belief
revision only makes sense for the sub-set of beliefs that
are initially based on their coherence with current
knowledge.
Previous theories claim that conceptual change is in
the direction of greater coherence. Thus, incoherent
prior beliefs should be more likely to change than

coherent beliefs. The present theory suggests several
reasons to expect just the opposite in some
circumstances. Affect-based beliefs by virtue of their
lack of coherence with the conceptual framework might
be immune to threats posed by conflicting information.
Any new information is likely to be distorted, and if it
is accurately comprehended, it will have little influence
on an affect-based belief.
The present theory predicts that emotional beliefs not
derived from relevant knowledge are the least likely to
change in the face of conflicting information. This
prediction should make intuitive sense to anyone who
has ever had a dinner-time discussion about politics or
religion. Scientific ideas may change slowly, but the
informal observation that they seem to change quicker
than non-scientific ideas may be an indication that the
scientific enterprise generally does adhere to the
principles of forming ideas based on knowledge and
coherent argument.

References
Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Conceptual change within and
across ontological categories: Examples from
learning and discovery in science. In R. N. Giere
(Ed.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science:
Vol. XV, Cognitive models of science (pp. 129-186).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (2000). Knowledge
change in response to data in science, religion, and
magic. In K. S. Rosengren, C, N. Johnson, and P. L.
Harris (Eds.), Imagining the impossible: Magical,
scientific, and religious thinking in children (pp. 334371). Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge University Press.
diSessa, A. A. (2000). A complex adaptive systems
view of conceptual change. In L. R. Gleitman and A.
K. Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 8-9). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers.
Dole, J. A., & Sinatra, G. M. (1998). Reconceptualizing
change in the cognitive construction of knowledge.
Educational Psychologist, 33, 109-128.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The psychology of
attitudes. London: Harcourt Brace Publishers.
Guzzetti, B. J., Snyder, T. E., Glass, G. V., & Gamas,
W. S. (1993). Promoting conceptual change in
science: A comparative meta-analysis of instructional
interventions from reading education and science
education. Reading Research Quarterly, 28, 117-159.
Ohlsson, S., & Lehtinen, E. (1997). Abstraction and the
acquisition of complex ideas. International Journal of
Educational Research, 27, 37-48.
Quine, W. V., & Ullian, J. S. (1970). The web of belief.
New York: Random House.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

