UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Information as a Constraint on Similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4444m73n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Choplin, Jessica M.
Cheng, Patricia W.
Holyoak, Keith J.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal Information as a Constraint on Similarity
Jessica M. Choplin (choplin@psych.ucla.edu)
Patricia W. Cheng (cheng@psych.ucla.edu)
Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles
405 Hilgard Ave.
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563

Abstract
Considerable evidence indicates that causal
information provides a vital constraint on conceptual
representation and coherence. We investigated the
role of causal information as a constraint on
similarity, exploiting an asymmetry between
predictive causal reasoning (given the cause, predict
the effect) and diagnostic causal reasoning (given the
effect, diagnose the cause). This asymmetry allowed
us to isolate the effects of causal understanding from
the effects of sharing non-causal features. We found
that judged similarity between two objects that are
identical except for one feature was affected by
whether that feature was a competing potential cause
of an effect or an effect of a common cause.

Causation Constrains Similarity

Any two objects have indefinitely many features in
common. For example, Murphy and Medin (1985)
pointed out that the number of features that plums and
lawn mowers have in common is, in principle, infinite.
Both weigh less than 1000 kg, and both are found on
earth, in the solar system. Both cannot hear well, have
an odor, are used by people, not by elephants, and so
on. But despite these shared features people do not
generally consider plums and lawnmowers to be
similar.
Intuitively, the features plums and
lawnmowers have in common are not considered
important. But what features are important? Why are
some features important and not others? There must be
criteria for constraining the sheer number of these
features (Goodman, 1972; Medin, Goldstone, &
Gentner, 1993). Previous researchers (e.g., Murphy &
Medin, 1985) have suggested that features will be
considered more important when they are diagnostic of
causal function and part of a larger explanatory
framework. Whether or not a feature is causal serves as
a criterion by which people select important features
and separate them from unimportant ones (Sloman,
Love, & Ahn, 1998).
We propose a new paradigm to investigate the
influence of causal knowledge on similarity and
categorization. This paradigm provides an optimal way
of equating the number of common and distinctive
features between two objects across conditions:

Equality is ensured because the stimuli were in fact
identical across conditions. We use this paradigm to
investigate the influence of causal knowledge as a
constraint on similarity.

Experiment
To avoid confounding the effects of causal
understanding with the effects of shared non-causal
features, we utilized an asymmetry tested by Waldmann
and Holyoak (1992). When a feature is identified as a
cause, other potential causes are discounted (Morris &
Larrick, 1995). Other potential causes (presented at the
same time) are redundant to explain the effect and are
assumed not to be causes after all. For example, if one
notices a bowling ball moving, knowing that it was
kicked is enough to explain the motion. There is no
need to postulate another cause. By contrast, when a
feature is identified as an effect, other potential effects
are not discounted. For example, if one were to kick a
bowling ball, the person might move the bowling ball
and hurt his or her foot at the same time. The cause
(the kick) would have two effects (the moving of the
bowling ball and the pain in the foot). One would not
assume the ball did not move simply because of the
pain in the foot. The significance of this asymmetry
for our current project is that it can be used to
distinguish the influence of causal understanding from
that of mere associations.
Two tasks were used in this experiment: first a
training task and subsequently a similarity rating task.
The purpose of the training task was to allow
participants to learn a competing cause of an effect or an
effect of a common cause. It used a two-phase blocking
paradigm similar to that employed by Waldmann and
Holyoak (1992). We trained participants by showing
them the keys presented in Table 1. Half of the
participants (predictive condition: identify features that
predict an effect) were told that some of the keys could
open any safe (target event in predictive condition), and
they were asked to identify which features were
responsible for this special ability. The other half of
the participants (diagnostic condition: diagnose whether
features were caused by the carving process) were told
that some of the keys were carved by a special carving
process (target event in diagnostic condition), and they

were asked to identify whether each feature was caused
by the special carving process.
Participants saw two series of keys. In the first
series, the keys were all missing a section. In the
second series, this section was restored. The restoration
provided an enabling condition (provided a location on
which a feature could be located) for the existence of a
redundant new feature that could be causally related to
the target event. In the predictive condition, because
old features were sufficient to explain the opening of
safes, we predicted that this new, redundant feature
would not be thought responsible for opening safes.
By contrast, in the diagnostic condition, because a
cause can have multiple effects, the new feature could
very well be the result of the special carving process.
We predicted that the carving process would be
assumed to produce the redundant feature. Non-causal
features would not produce this asymmetry.
We predicted that this causal knowledge would affect
whether features are considered important in a similarity
judgment. Consider a similarity judgment between a
key that had the restored new feature and one that did
not. If the old feature was sufficient to open safes, the
key without the restored feature could open safes just as
well as the key with this feature, the causal relations
would not be altered, and the restored feature would not
be important. By contrast, when the restored feature is
the result of the carving process, the key with the
restored feature received different treatment from the key
without it, the causal relations would be altered, and
the feature would be important.

Method
Participants

The participants were 298 students enrolled in an
introductory psychology class at the University of
California, Los Angeles, and 106 travelers waiting to
board airplanes at Los Angeles International Airport
(LAX). The students participated as part of a class
exercise. The travelers participated voluntarily. Of
these 404 participants, 5 failed to answer critical
questions, leaving 399 responses for analysis.

Materials

As shown in Table 1, we created pictures of keys with
features attached. To parallel Waldmann and Holyoak’s
(1992) disease symptoms, these keys had four features
that we manipulated during the training phase as
follows. One feature was constantly present (the tshape on the left, called Cue C for Constant) and was
not correlated with the target event. Another feature
was present half of the time (the b-shape on the middle
left, called Cue U for Uncorrelated) and also was not
correlated with the target event. The L-shape on the
middle right (called Cue P for Predictor) was a perfect
deterministic predictor of the target event. The k-shape
on the right (called Cue R for Redundant) was not
presented at all during the first series and was only

presented in the presence of Cue P during the second
series. Within the second series, Cue R was a perfect
predictor of the target event but only provided
redundant information after Cue P.
1st Series
(missing section)

2nd Series
(restored section)

Target Event
Occurs?

No

Yes

No

Yes

Table 1: Key stimuli. The top key is a blank used
as an initial illustration for participants. Cues C (tshape on the left) and U (b-shape on the middle
left) were not correlated with the target event.
Cues P (L-shape on the middle right) and R (kshape on the right) were correlated with the target
event, but Cue R only provided redundant
information.
We prepared two three-page booklets, one booklet for
the predictive condition and another for the diagnostic
condition. The first page was used to present the first
series of keys and to elicit the causal inferences that
participants first made. The second page was used to
present the restored feature in the second series of keys
and to elicit the causal inferences participants made after
this item was restored. The third page was used to
collect similarity judgments.
At the top of the first page, participants were told
that some of the keys they would see either could open
any safe (predictive condition) or were caused by a
special carving process (diagnostic condition). It was
necessary to explain why Cue R was missing from this
first page. To do so, participants in both conditions
were told that the keys for the first page were carved
from blanks with a missing notch that looked like the
first key in the left column of Table 1. In the middle
of the booklets' first page a two-column table was used
to present the keys. The left-hand column was labeled
"Keys" and presented the four keys in the bottom four
rows of the left column in Table 1. The right-hand
column was used to indicate whether the target event
occurred for each key.
In the predictive condition, the right-hand column
asked, "Will this key open any safe?" In the diagnostic
condition, it asked, "Is this key carved by the special
process?" The word "Yes" was used to indicate that the
target event occurred and the word "No" was used to

indicate that the target event did not occur. At the
bottom of the first page, participants were asked
questions on their understanding of the causal relations.
In the predictive condition, participants indicated
whether they thought each of the three features, Cues C,
U, and P respectively, caused safes to open by circling
the word “yes” or the word “no.” In the diagnostic
condition, they likewise indicated whether they thought
the carving process caused each of the three features.
The second page resembled the first, except that the
keys on the middle column of Table 1 replaced those
on the left. The first key in the middle column of
Table 1 replaced the first key in the left-hand column as
the blank. The keys in the bottom four rows on the
right replaced the keys in the bottom four rows on the
left as the keys causally related to the target event.
Participants were asked to indicate whether they
thought each of the four features, Cues C, U, P, and R,
respectively, was causally related to the target event.
The final page was used to collect similarity
judgments. Seven-point scales were provided, with
“1” labeled “not at all similar;” and “7” labeled “very
similar.” Participants compared a key containing all
four features to a key that lacked Cue R. In the
predictive condition, since Cue P would be sufficient to
open safes, judged similarity between the two keys
would be high— both keys could open safes. By
contrast, in the diagnostic condition, since Cue R was
caused by the carving process, judged similarity
between the two keys would be low—the keys received
different treatments. Participants likewise judged the
similarity between a key containing all four features to
one that lacked Cue P. This similarity serves as a
baseline for evaluating the importance of Cue R, to
reduce noise in the analyses.

Procedure

The introductory psychology students received our
materials within a larger packet of materials. The
packets were randomly assigned and completed within
the classroom. The travelers were approached by the
experimenter and asked to participate. After agreeing to
participate, participants were randomly given a booklet.
Participants were given pencils and instructed to follow
the instructions inside the booklet. After participants
had finished, the experimenter returned to collect the
booklets.

Results and Discussion
The results of the training task mirrored the basic
findings of Waldmann and Holyoak (1992). We divided
participants into those who showed a coherent pattern
of responses that indicates blocking (judged Cues C, U
and R non-causal and Cue P causal) and those who
showed other patterns. A blocking pattern of responses
was observed for 12.5% of the participants in the
predictive condition and only 4.7% of the participants
in the diagnostic condition.
This difference was

2

significant, Χ (1, n=399) = 6.13, p < .025. Only a
minority of the participants in both conditions,
however, showed this pattern. Questioning participants
afterwards revealed that many based their judgments
solely on the information provided on the second page,
the page on which P and R both predicted the target
event Many thought the second page represented a
separate updated scenario. This misunderstanding likely
explains why the majority of participants in both
conditions judged Cue R to be causal.
To measure the importance of Cue R (relative to Cue
P) in similarity judgments, we subtracted judged
similarity between a key containing all four features and
one that lacked Cue R from judged similarity between a
key containing all four features and one that lacked Cue
P. Positive scores indicated that Cue P was more
important than Cue R and vice versa. As predicted,
participants (n = 198) in the predictive condition
judged the relative importance of Cue P to Cue R (M =
1.45) higher than participants (n = 201) in the
diagnostic condition (M = 0.99), t(397) = 2.27, p <
.025.
Because the size of this effect was relatively small
and large numbers of participants misunderstood the
task, we analyzed the relative importance of Cue P and
Cue R conditionalized on causal response patterns. We
divided participants into 3 groups: those who showed a
coherent pattern of responses that indicates blocking
(judged Cues C, U, and R non-causal and Cue P
causal), those who showed a coherent pattern of
responses that indicates “no blocking” (judged Cues C
and U non-causal and Cues P and R causal), and those
who showed other patterns. Of the participants in the
predictive condition, those who showed blocking (n =
22) judged the relative importance of Cue P to Cue R
(M = 2.64) greater than those who showed “no
blocking” (n = 118, M = 1.28), t(138) = 2.71, p < .01.
[Note: Of the participants in the diagnostic condition,
the very few (n = 9) who showed blocking also judged
the relative importance of Cue P to Cue R (M = 2.33)
greater than those who showed “no blocking” (n = 134,
M = 0.80), t(141) = 2.81, p < .01.] Most important for
our hypothesis, those participants in the predictive
condition who showed the blocking pattern judged the
relative importance of Cue P to Cue R (M = 2.64)
much higher than participants in the diagnostic
condition (M = 0.99), t(221) = 3.89, p < .001, and
even higher yet than participants in the diagnostic
condition who did not show blocking (M = 0.8), t(154)
= 4.83, p < .0001. We also replicated these results in
another experiment (not reported here). It is notable
that we obtained these results from a simple paperpencil task with participants who were probably
unmotivated or unable to pay close attention to the
instructions or answer the questions carefully. It is
likely that the differences will be enhanced under more
controlled conditions, providing a means for future

studies to isolate the effects of causal understanding
from the effects of mere associations.

Conclusions
The importance of causal information in category
formation and conceptual coherence has been
emphasized by a number of researchers (e.g., Lien &
Cheng, 2000; Murphy & Medin, 1985). The results
reported here extend this research to similarity
judgments among novel stimuli and provide a
paradigm to study this effect. A two-phase blocking
paradigm such as the one used by Waldmann and
Holyoak (1992) can be used to isolate the effects of
causal understanding from the effects of mere
association. We found that different causal schemas
applied to the same correlational data affected rated
similarity of novel stimuli. Of course, causality is not
the only mechanism that constrains similarity.
Analogical processes and higher-order relations are also
responsible for providing constraints (Medin,
Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993).
Why should causal information be so important?
People need to discover causal relations because only
such relations allow the prediction of the consequences
of interventions. This constraint makes discovery of
causal features vital for understanding the world and for
predicting future events. Having a notion of similarity
that reflects the causal relations in the world is critical
for inductive inference.

Acknowledgments

We thank John Hummel, Michael Waldmann and
Douglas Medin for helpful conversations and Askim
Okten for running participants. This research was
supported by NSF grants SBR-9729726 and SBR9729023.

References
Goodman, N. (1972). Seven strictures on similarity.
In N. Goodman (Ed.), Problems and projects. New
York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Lien, Y., & Cheng, P. W. (2000). Distinguishing
genuine from spurious causes: A coherence
hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 87-137.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D.
(1993). Respects for similarity.
Psychological
Review, 100, 254-278.
Morris, W. M. & Larrick, R. (1995). When one cause
casts doubts on another: A normative analysis of
discounting in causal attribution.
Psychological
Review, 102, 331-355.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of
theories in conceptual coherence.
Psychological
Review, 92, 289-316.

Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998).
Feature centrality and conceptual coherence.
Cognitive Science, 22, 189-228.
Waldmann, M. R., & Holyoak, K. J.
(1992).
Predictive and diagnostic learning within causal
models: asymmetries in cue competition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General. 121, 222-236.

