UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comprehension of Action Sequences: The Case of Paper, Scissors, and Rock

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39n0599q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Bach, Patric
Knoblich, Gunther
Friederici, Angela D.
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comprehension of Action Sequences: The Case of Paper, Scissors, Rock
Patric Bach* (bach@mpipf-muenchen.mpg.de)
Günther Knoblich* (knoblich@mpipf-muenchen.mpg.de)
Angela D. Friederici° (orendi@cns.mpg.de)
Wolfgang Prinz* (prinz@mpipf-muenchen.mpg.de)
*Max Planck Insitute for Psychological Research; Amalienstr. 33, 80799 Munich, Germany
° Max Planck Institute for Cognitive Neuroscience, Stephanstr. 1a, 04303 Leipzig, Germany

Abstract
The basic idea of the present study is that it is useful to
conceptualize the processes involved in action
comprehension in a similar manner as the processes
involved in sentence comprehension. One important
question then is whether order and meaning of action
sequences are processed sequentially or in parallel
(analogous to syntactic and semantic processing in
sentence comprehension). We conducted three
experiments to address this issue. Participants were
asked to detect violations of order, meaning, or both, in
action sequences of the game Paper, Scissors, and Rock.
The main results were that it took longer to detect single
violations than double violations and that it was
impossible to ignore any of the violations. This pattern of
results suggests that the processes involved are highly
automatic and that they are running in parallel.

Have you ever wondered why people in sports bars
stare at the numerous TV-screens that are silently
picturing sequences of actions like people in fancy
dresses bumping forcefully into one another, or two
people hitting a ball with their rackets? Obviously, in
some situations observing other people's actions is more
interesting than chatting. This is not only true for sports
bars but also for French street cafés and many other
places. But how do we understand what happens while
we watch other people acting?
Whereas cognitive science has been making much
progress regarding the processes involved in language
comprehension (Friederici, Steinhauer, & Frisch, 1999;
Garrod & Pickering, 1999; MacDonald et al., 1994;
Rayner & Pollatsek, 1989), action comprehension has
been hardly addressed. Although Schank and Abelson’s
(1977) script theory seems relevant, it mainly deals with
the comprehension of extended texts and not action
comprehension as in the examples above. Another wellknown approach, the grammar of action (Goodnow &
Levine, 1973), addresses only the construction of
complex movements from simpler units in writing. Our
research is guided by the idea that it might be useful to
conceptualize the processes involved in action
comprehension in a similar fashion as the processes
involved in sentence comprehension.

Sentence and Action Comprehension
In order to understand a sentence it is necessary to parse
it according to the grammatical rules that governed its
formation and to understand the meaning of the words
given the context of the sentence. Likewise, to
understand an action sequence it is often necessary to
parse the sequence according to rules that constrain the
order in which one action follows another and to
understand the meaning of single actions given the
context of the sequence. Although there might be action
sequences the order of which is hardly constrained,
most of them follow rules that can be spelled out
clearly.
The main question for action comprehension (as for
sentence comprehension) then becomes how processing
of the order of action sequences (in analogy to syntactic
processing) and the processing of its meaning are
related. There are essentially four possibilities: (1) The
analysis of order generally precedes and influences the
analysis of meaning. (2) The analysis of meaning
generally precedes and influences the analysis of order.
(3) The two processes run in parallel and do not affect
each other. (4) They run in parallel and they do affect
each other. Controversies in sentence comprehension
have mainly focused on the possibilities that are
analogous to 1 and 4. The garden path model (Frazier &
Rainer, 1982) suggests that meaning does not influence
the selection of the initial syntactic structure (syntax
first). The connectionist theory of MacDonald et al.
(1994) states that syntactical and semantic constraints
are narrowing the possible interpretations of a sentence
in parallel and interactively. However, (2) and (3) are
also viable possibilities for action comprehension. For
instance, in favor of (2) one could say that the meaning
of a single action of a peer might be most relevant for
organisms (for instance because they can be dangerous
or not) and that therefore the action comprehension
system analyses meaning before order. The experiments
that follow focused mainly on the question of whether
the order and meaning of an action sequence are
analyzed in parallel or whether there is any sequential
order of the two processes.

Experimental Paradigm
In our experiments, we used a simple action domain,
the game Paper, Scissors, and Rock. In this game, the
order of consecutive actions is well defined and only a
small set of gestures is meaningful in its context.
Moreover, the game is well known (at least in
Germany), so that people are quite familiar with the
rules. The game has a fixed sequence (see Figure 1): In
the beginning, the two players hold their hands close to
the chest (upper position) and form a fist. In the next
step, they drop their fists to a position near their waists
(lower position) synchronously, and lift them again.
This pattern is repeated once. During the third
downward movement both players form one of three
gestures: paper, scissors, or rock. The winner is
determined by the following rules: Rock dulls scissors
(rock wins), scissors cut paper (scissors win), paper
wraps rock (paper wins). There are three meaningful
gestures, that is, paper, scissors, and rock. Other
gestures produce violations of context, as for instance
the thumbs up gesture. It is also easy to see what a
violation of order might look like. There is only one
valid structure that is defined by alternating hand
positions:
Upper, lower, upper, lower, upper, lower.
Therefore violations of order can be introduced by
changing the sequence in the following way:
Upper, lower, upper, lower, upper, upper.
Obviously, violations of context and order are
independent of one another. A violation of order might
occur, although a meaningful gesture is formed (e.g.
paper in the upper position, see leftmost picture in
Figure 2). Alternatively, a meaningless gesture can be
formed without violating order (e.g. thumbs up at the
lower position (see picture in the middle of Figure 2). In
addition, both violations can occur at the same time as
when displaying a meaningless gesture at the wrong
position (e.g. thumps up at the upper position, see
rightmost picture in Figure 2). By comparing reaction
times for different types of violations one can determine
how order and meaning are analyzed in this type of
action sequence.

people might be faster in detecting violations of order
than violations of context. If, on the other hand, the
processing of meaning is prevalent in action
comprehension, violations of context should be faster
detected.
The second aim was to determine whether order and
meaning are processed in parallel. Faster detection of
either violation does not necessarily imply that
sequence and meaning are analyzed in a serial fashion.
Rather, the differences could be due to different
processing times taken by two parallel processes. If
order and meaning are processed in parallel it should
take less time to detect double violations than either
single violation. The rationale behind this assumption is
that the process that is completed first will trigger the
reaction indicating that the violation was detected.
Alternatively, evidence accumulated by each process
might converge to trigger the wrong reaction. If order
and meaning of action sequences are processed
sequentially, detecting a double violation should take
the same time as detecting the single violation (of either
order or context) that is detected fastest.
One problem with measuring RTs for the detection of
order and context violations in action sequences is that
the onset of the violation is not well defined. When
watching a video film displaying a person playing
paper, scissors, and stone, the syntactic violation may
be detected as soon as the expected downward
movement does not occur. The semantic error can only
be detected as soon as a gesture is formed. To avoid
these problems, we used still frames that displayed the
upper and lower position of the hand three times,
respectively. The changing frames create the impression
of a movement and they are readily interpreted as action
sequences (Stürmer, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2000).
With still frames, syntactic, semantic, and double
violations have the same onset, that is, the onset of the
frame that completes the sequence at the lower position.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(5)

(6)

Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was twofold. The first aim
was to determine whether it is easier to detect violations
of order than violations of context. If processing the
order of an action sequence is similar to syntactic
processing, it might be completed before the meaning
of an action is fully retrieved or it might even be a
necessary condition for the analysis of meaning. Hence

(4)

Figure 1: Sample sequence of pictures (correct).

Method
Participants. Sixteen participants, all students at the
University of Munich, took part in the experiment, 9 of
them male. They ranged in age from 24 to 35 years. The
key assignment was counterbalanced across
participants.

(a) v. of order (b) v. of context (c) double violation

detected than either violations of order (M = 569, S =
71) or violations of context (M = 602, S = 57).
Moreover, violations of order were faster detected than
violation of context. These differences were present in
both blocks, although RTs were generally faster in
Block 2 (M = 559 ms, S = 66) than in Block 1 (M = 580
ms, S = 55). The mean RTs for responses to correct
action sequences were 566 ms (S = 58). They were not
included in the statistical analysis because they are hard
to compare to RTs for violations because of the
different base rate and the different type of response.

660

Figure 2: Sample for last frame in action sequences
with violation of order, meaning, or both.
Material. The material consisted of action sequences
showing still frames of a person playing paper, scissors,
and rock. There were six pictures displaying the actor
forming legal gestures (Rock, Scissors, Paper), and six
displaying him forming illegal gestures. The first five
pictures of a sequence always showed a closed fist
alternating between the upper and lower position. The
sixth picture displayed one of the six possible gestures
in the upper or lower position (see Figure 1 for a
complete legal sequence). Hence, there were sequences
ending with (1) a legal gesture at the lower position
(correct), (2) an illegal gesture at the lower position
(violation of context), (3) a legal gesture at the upper
position (violation of order), and (4) an illegal gesture
at the upper position. Figure 2 shows examples for the
last frame in the violation conditions.
Procedure and Design. The experiment consisted of
two blocks of 144 trials each. The order of action
sequences was randomized in each block. To avoid
response bias, correct action sequences were displayed
as often as incorrect sequences. Hence there were 72
correct action sequences in each block, and 24
containing a violation of order, context, or both,
respectively. The course of each trial was as follows:
The first five frames were displayed for 500 ms,
respectively. The sixth, critical frame was displayed for
1000 ms. The reaction time interval started with the
onset of the last frame and lasted as long as the gesture
was displayed (1000 ms). The participants judged
whether there was a violation or not and pressed a left
or a right key, accordingly. If they committed an error
or did not react within the given time interval of 1000
ms, they were given error feedback.

Results and Discussion
Figure 3 displays the RTs for the detection of different
types of violations during the first and second block of
trials. Double violations (M = 540, S = 56) were faster

620

580

540

Violation of Context
Violation of Order
Double Violation

500

460
1

2
Block

Figure 3: RTs for detecting different types of
violations.
The RTs for the three error conditions were entered into
a 3 x 2 repeated measurement ANOVA with the factors
Type of Violation (Order, Context, vs. Double) and
Block (1st vs 2nd). The analysis revealed significant
main effects for Block, F (1, 15) = 9.9, p < .01, and
Type of Violation, F(2, 30) = 28.4, p < .001, but no
significant interaction. The RTs differed significantly
for different types of violations. Duncan tests showed
that double violations were detected significantly faster
than either violations of order or context (both p <
.001). In addition, there was also a significant
difference between the two types of single violations (p
< .001).
The pattern of RTs is in favor of a parallel processing
explanation. Double violations were detected faster and
more reliably than either violations of sequence or
context. This is in favor of the claim that either of two

parallel processes being completed first can trigger the
reaction indicating that a violation was detected. Order
violations were faster detected than context violations
right from start. Hence, it seems that analyzing the
order of a sequence is completed before the meaning of
an action is fully processed. An alternative explanation
for the different speed with which violations of order
and context can be detected is perceptual saliency.
Violations of order might have been easier to detect
because a wrong hand position is perceptually more
salient than a hand forming a different gesture.

gesture, one displaying the face of the hand (correct)
and one displaying the backside (violation of order).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Experiment 2
The second experiment was conducted to rule out the
perceptual saliency explanation. To do so, we replicated
Experiment 1 using a set of stimuli in which the
perceptual saliency of order and context violations was
more comparable. The deep structure of the action
sequence, five alternations of the same gesture and
formation of the target gesture with the last alternation,
did not change. However, the alternations were now
expressed as hand turnings instead of arm movements
(see Figure 4). Hence both, violations of order and
context now depended on the configuration of hand and
fingers. Violation of order consisted in a missing turn of
the hand, violations of context consisted in invalid
gestures, as in Experiment 1 (see Figure 5).
If higher perceptual saliency caused the faster detection
times for violations of order in Experiment 1 the
detection times should be slower or equally fast as for
violations of context under the new conditions. If faster
processing of sequence information caused the
difference the results should be the same as in
Experiment 1. It is quite likely that such a difference
would not occur right from start because people have to
link the new type of alternation (hand turning) to the
familiar deep structure of the sequence before optimal
detection of order violations becomes possible. Hence,
in order to allow this link to be established we added a
further block of trials. For double violations we
expected the same pattern as in Experiment 1, that is,
faster detection than for either single violation.

Method
Participants. Fifteen participants, all students at the
University of Munich, took part in the experiment, five
of them male. They ranged in age from 24 to 35 years.
Material. A different set of stimuli was used. The fixed
pattern of alternations consisted of hand turnings while
the hand position remained fixed. The critical
manipulation occurred with the last frame. The gesture
displayed could either be correct, a violation of order,
context, or both (see Figure 5 for examples). There
were three different valid gestures and three that
violated the context. There were two versions of each

Figure 4: Sample sequence of pictures (correct).

Figure 5: Examples for violation of order (left: wrong
orientation), context (middle), and double violation
(right) in Experiment 2.
Procedure and Design. The procedure was the same
as in Experiment 1 with one exception. A third block of
144 trials was added.

Results and Discussion
Participants pressed the wrong button in about 3% of
the cases and reacted too late in about 2% of the cases.
Figure 3 displays the RTs for the detection of different
types of violations during the first, second, and third
block of trials. Overall, it took participants longer to
detect violations of context (M = 615, S = 64) than
violations of order (M = 596, S = 76). However, this
difference occurred only after the first block. As
expected, double violations were faster detected than
either single violation right from start (M = 561, S =
70). Participants became faster during later blocks.
Mean RTs were 617 (S = 56), 584 (S = 63), and 572 (S
= 70) during Block 1, 2, and 3.
The RTs of the three error conditions were entered into
a 3 x 3 repeated measurement ANOVA with the factors
Type of Violation (Order, Context, vs. Double) and
Block (1, 2, vs. 3). There were significant main effects
for Type of Violation, F(2, 28) = 14.7, p < .001, and
Block, F (2, 28) = 20.9, p < .001, the interaction
between both factors was only marginally significant, F
(4, 56) = 2.0, p = 0.1. Duncan-tests showed that the RTs
for violation of order were significantly faster than for

violations of context in Block 2 and 3, but not in Block
1. The difference between double violations and either
single violation was significant in each Block.

660

620

580

540
Violation of Context
Violation of Order

500

Method

Double Violation
460
1

2

block of Experiment 3 was identical to that of
Experiment 2. In the following blocks we asked
participants to ignore violations of order or context
while detecting the other type of violation, respectively.
In a first block, they were asked to detect violations of
order and to ignore violations of context, that is,
sequences containing the latter violation should be
judged as correct. In the other block they were asked to
detect violations of context and to ignore violations of
order, that is, sequences containing a violation of order
should be judged as correct.
If order and meaning of action sequences are
analyzed automatically the violations to be ignored
should interfere with judging a sequence as correct. If
the processes are not automatic there should be no
differences in RTs between action sequences containing
an interfering violation and truly correct action
sequences. Moreover, if sequence processing is faster
than the processing of meaning a violation of order
should interfere more strongly with the correct response
than a violation of context.

3

Block

Figure 6: RTs for detecting different types of
violations.
The results basically replicate Experiment 1. After
Block 1, the RTs were almost numerically identical to
those observed in the first experiment. This suggests
that it was not perceptual saliency that created the RT
differences between violations of order and context.
Rather it seems that sequence information is faster
processed, at least for simple sequences as in paper,
scissors, and rock. The lack of difference during the
first block is probably due to the necessity of
establishing a link between the new perceptual cues and
the familiar deep structure. The finding that double
violations were faster detected right from start further
supports the claim that order and meaning of action
sequences are processed in parallel.

Experiment 3
It has often been claimed that parallel processes do not
require attention and that they are highly automatic.
Experiment 3 was conducted to determine whether this
is also true for the processes involved in analyzing the
order and meaning of action sequences. We used an
interference paradigm to provide evidence for the
automatic nature of the processes involved. The first

Participants. 20 participants, all students at the
University of Munich, took part in the experiment, 8 of
them male. They ranged in age from 24 to 35 years. The
order of blocks was counterbalanced.
Material. The material used was identical to that of the
second experiment.
Procedure and Design. The experiment consisted of
three blocks of 144 trials each. The first block was the
same as in Experiment 2. At the beginning of the
second and third block participants received an
instruction to attend to one of the single violations only
and to ignore the other (e.g. detect violation of
context/ignore violation of order). During the third
block participants attended to the other type of violation
and ignored the other (e.g. detect violation of
order/ignore violation of context). The order of blocks 2
and 3 was counterbalanced across participants.

Results and Discussion
Participants pressed the wrong button in about 1% of
the cases and reacted too late in about 3% of the cases.
The RTs for different types of violations during the first
block were indistinguishable from Experiment 2.
Because of the space constraints, we will report only
RTs for trials in which action sequences should be
judged as correct. Figure 7 shows the results.
RTs were generally faster for correct sequences (M =
522, S = 59) than for sequences that contained an
interfering violation (M = 580, S = 82). The difference
was larger when a violation of order interfered (82 ms)
than when a violation of context interfered (24 ms).

660

Ignore Context
Ignore Order

620

580

540

500

whether the faster processing of order is a general
phenomenon or whether it depends on the complexity
of the task at hand.
The possibility to conceptualize action comprehension
in an analogous manner to language comprehension
does not necessarily imply that the cognitive processes
involved in both domains are the same or that they are
governed by the same principles. However, this strategy
provides an opportunity to relate findings from both
domains and to detect interesting parallels or
differences. Currently, we are conducting ERP studies
to determine whether violations of order and context in
action sequences evoke the same ERP components as
syntactic and semantic violations in spoken sentences
(Friederici et al., 1999). The results of such studies
might provide more conclusive answers to the question
of whether there are cognitive processes which are
actually contributing to both, action and language
comprehension (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998).

References
460
Correct

Interference

Figure 7: RTs with and without interfering violation.
The RTs were entered into a 2 x 2 repeated
measurement ANOVA with the factors Type of
Sequence (Correct vs. Interfering Violation) and Type
of Interference (Order vs. Context). There were
significant main effects for the factors Type of
Sequence F(1, 19) = 27.5, p < .001 and Type of
Interference F(1, 19) = 86.6, p < .001, as well as an
interaction between the two factors F(1, 19) = 23.1, p <
.001.
The pattern of results is consistent with the claim that
the processes involved in analyzing order and meaning
of action sequences are highly automatic. Otherwise
one would not expect the huge interference effects that
were observed in Experiment 3. It seems impossible to
focus on one or the other aspect of an action sequence
and to ignore the other. The stronger effect in the
condition with interfering violations of order further
supports the claim that analyzing the order of an action
sequence takes less time than analyzing it's meaning.

General Discussion
The general pattern of results suggests that in action
comprehension the analysis of order and meaning
proceeds in parallel. Moreover, both processes seem to
be highly automatic, that is, none of the two aspects of
action sequences can be easily ignored. A further result
is that analyzing the order of a sequence might be
completed before its meaning is fully analyzed.
However, further experiments are needed to determine

Frazier, L., & Rayner, K. (1982). Making and
correcting errors during sentence comprehension: Eye
movements in the analysis of structurally ambiguous
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 14, 178-210.
Friederici, A. D., Steinhauer, K., & Frisch, S. (1999).
Lexical integration: Sequential effects of syntactic
and semantic information. Memory & Cognition, 27,
438-453.
Garrod, S., & Pickering M. J. (1999). Language
Processing. Hove: Psychology Press.
Goodnow, J. J., Levine, R. A. (1973) “The grammar of
action”: Sequence and syntax in children's copying.
Cognitive Psychology. 4, 83-98.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., Seidenberg, M.
S. (1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Psychological Review. 101, 676-703
Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A. (1989). The psychology of
reading. Englewood Cliffs,: Prentice-Hall.
Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. (1998). Language within
our grasp. Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 188-194.
Schank, R. C., Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stürmer, B., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W. (2000).
Correspondence effects with manual gestures and
postures: a study on imitation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 26, 1746-1759.

