UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coordinating Representations in Computer-Mediated Joint Activities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01h6b34p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Alterman, Richard
Feinman, Alex
Introne, Josh
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Coordinating Representations in Computer-Mediated Joint Activities
Richard Alterman, Alex Feinman, Josh Introne, Seth Landsman
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02454 USA
Abstract
This paper develops, in the context of the
interdisciplinary literature on coordination, the concept
of a coordinating representation as an everyday method
for structuring the coordination of actors engaged in a
non face-to-face joint activity. Evidence is provided by
applying the idea of coordinating representation to the
development of a computer-mediated cooperative
activity.

Introduction
A critical reasoning problem confronted by actors as
they engage in their everyday activities is the
maintenance of coordination (Clark, 1996). Within a
community of actors, designs that organize (structure)
behavior in recurrent situations of cooperation develop
over time. Once developed, the expectation that a
given sort of structure might be in place for a given
kind of situation simplifies the interaction among the
participants while reducing mental effort, physical
work, and errors (Alterman & Garland, 1998). In non
face-to-face interactions, structures that simplify the
coordination of a conventional behavior are coded into
a coordinating representation. The coordinating
representation helps the participants to jointly make
sense of the situation in the absence of a face-to-face
interaction.
An everyday example of a coordinating representation
is the "stop sign". The stop sign is a representation
shared among the participants at a traffic setting. The
stop sign presents a structure for organizing the
collective behavior of drivers, pedestrians, and cyclists
at a busy intersection. The interpretation of the structure
imposed by the stop sign is negotiated during the
activity. Things may run smoothly at the intersection but there will also be interruptions. An impatient driver
piggybacks on the driver in front of him. A pedestrian
decides to ignore the stop sign altogether.
The first part of this paper will develop the notion of a
coordinating representation in the context of the
interdisciplinary literature on coordination. The second
part focuses on the cognitive engineering task of
building coordinating representations for computermediated joint activities. The last part of the paper
presents an experimental evaluation of the utility and
function of the coordinating representation.

The Problem of Coordination
Whether it is greeting someone, or planning a potluck
dinner party, or moving through a doorway, or forming
a queue at the coffee shop - there are always problems
of coordination. When you greet someone, depending
on the circumstance, you may say “hi", shake hands,
slap hands, hug, kiss, or ignore. Each form of greeting
(except the last) requires coordination (and cooperation)
among the participants. For a potluck dinner party, the
meal must be coordinated for taste, balance, and
variety. The meal can include appetizers, main courses,
desserts, and beverages; a preponderance of one or the
other detracts from the meal. For many doorways,
there is not enough room for two people (say, in
conversation) to pass through the doorway shoulder-toshoulder. To effectively move through the doorway the
participants must coordinate on an order as to which
one passes through the doorway first, second, ... and
who is to hold the doorway open. The queue at the
coffee shop begins and ends at a certain place; people
line up in the order they arrive.
Some examples of coordination problems are the
assignment of roles, the establishment of location,
manner, and structure, and issues of sequencing; timing
and co-reference.
Suppose Tipper and Al are re-arranging furniture in the
house. Each of the above kinds of coordination problem
may come into play as they move the old couch from
the living room, down the stairs, around the corner,
through a doorway into the basement. Al's role may be
to back down the stairs holding the front of the couch;
Tipper walks forward holding the backend of the couch.
Initially they meet in the living room. Their path as
they carry the couch begins in the living room and ends
at the basement.
Their manner may be slow and
cautious, so as to avoid bumping into walls and
doorways. At certain points they are tilting the couch at
an angle so they can move down the stairwell without
bumping the couch into the ceiling. Coordination at the
boundaries between phases of the activity (Clark,
1996), must be jointly engineered by Tipper and Al as
they shift from moving down the stairs to moving
through the doorway. In order to move the couch down
the stairs, Tipper and Al need to establish co-references
for features of the stairwell (e.g., the low ceiling) or the
situation (e.g., an unexpected problems they encounter).
Some of the coordination problems are 'solved' before

action begins (e.g., Al walks backwards and Tipper
walks forwards); others are resolved as the action
proceeds (e.g., the coordination problems entailed by
the low ceiling in the stairwell).
The term structure for behavior is used here to refer to
the kinds of information exchanged between Tipper and
Al in order to achieve their joint task and maintain
coordination - examples of which are the assignment of
roles, the path, the manner… Not all the information
exchanged is a structure for the current behavior. For
example, Tipper and Al are also socializing as they
proceed with their activity. Nor are all structures for
joint behavior exchanged at runtime: both Tipper and
Al are likely to have prior experience at moving a
couch through a doorway. Using both the social
exchanges of information about structure and the
recollection of prior related experiences, the
participants must jointly reason out and construct a
behavior which achieves their shared goal of moving
the old couch from the living room to the basement.
The structures relevant to a given act in the current
activity that are available before the act may be either
recalled, planned, the result of an explanation, or
designed. Both Tipper and Al may remember previous
occasions when they moved furniture. For the difficult
portions of their task, they may explicitly create a
shared plan (Grosz & Sidner, 1990), an agreed to
structure - you do this and I'll do that - for the
behavior. If the structure for behavior is produced after
a given behavior is completed, it is called an
explanation (Mitchell, et. al., 1986), which can become
realized in future related episodes of joint activity. Over
time, for joint activities that Tipper and Al regularly do,
behaviors become conventionalized and designs for the
structure of those behaviors will begin to emerge
(Alterman & Garland, 1998).
As Tipper and Al perform their activity, the fact that
they are co-present allows them to monitor the progress
of their joint activity. Because they can see one
another, they can use body position to communicate
information. Throughout their activity they can speak
to one another in order to co-develop, for example, a
procedure for moving the couch down the stairway.
Their comments to one another are exchanged without
delay, in the course of their joint behavior. The actions
that form their conversation and activity occur
sequentially.1
Other kinds of joint activity do not allow for a face-toface interaction, so other methods or mediums must be
introduced to support the exchange of structural
information. Performance depends on the participants
communicating - by these altered means - information
1

This list is adapted from an analysis developed by Clark &
Brennan (1991) to explicate differences among various kinds
of mediated communication.

relevant to design, plan, and commitment.
For
computer-mediated tasks, the trick will be to convert
structures (designs) that are naturally produced in
conversation by the users into external representations
that can mediate similar sorts of cooperative activities
in the future. The design of the external representations
that are developed will focus on simplifying the most
difficult coordination problems that typically confront
users.

The Coordinating Representation
A coordinating representation is an external
representation shared among participants in a joint
activity. It is designed for the activity-at-hand and
reduces the complexity of the coordination task. It
mediates and structures the activity.
It has the
designated purpose of helping participants to achieve
coordination in non face-to-face cooperative activities.
Its meaning is based on conventional interpretation. It
signals to the participants - without dictating action that a convention of behavior is in place.
Consider the scene at the airport. For the passenger, the
printed itinerary that her travel agent sent her helps her
to stay coordinated. The itinerary identifies her flight
destination and number. When she arrives at the
airport, she uses the listed flight number to select
among the flights and gates listed on the departure
monitor for American Airlines.
The design of the
destination monitor (first listed in alphabetical order of
destinations and then by time of departure) reduces her
cognitive load in finding the departure gate for her
flight. When it comes to finding her departure gate, the
itinerary and the departure monitor are two
coordinating representations that help to replace a faceto-face interaction with a mediated one.
Alternately, suppose the passenger needs to "check in"
some luggage before proceeding to her gate. What
coordinating representations are used to insure her bag
makes the trip? Now, upon arrival at the airport, the
passenger looks for the check-in counter for the airline
from which she purchased her ticket. Large signs
displaying airline logos indicate where each airline is
located. Smaller signs divide the queue into first class
and regular passengers. As the passenger puts her bag
on the scale, the clerk attaches a tag indicating airline,
flight destination, and flight number. Later, a bagger
must transport in a truck the bags to the cargo space of
the plane. A complex sheet that links flights to
destinations and unique aircraft identification numbers
is used by the bagger to achieve his goal (Goodwin &
Goodwin, 1996). The organization of the complex sheet
makes the access of information more efficient.
Each of the coordinating representations used to get
both the passenger and her luggage on the correct plane
has both a social and an individual function. From the
perspective of the social, the coordinating

representation preserves a set of references for objects
shared among the participants. From the perspective of
the individual, the coordinating representations simplify
access to the information that is being exchanged.
There are many other examples of coordinating
representations in everyday life. An appointment slip
helps a patient to return to the dentist's office on the
right day at the right time. A mail order catalogue helps
the customer and the sales office reach agreement on
purchase items, sizes, and prices. Tax forms help to
coordinate citizens and IRS personnel in their efforts to
exchange information....

Experimental Platform: VesselWorld
For the last several years we have been building a same
time/different place groupware system (VesselWorld)
as an experimental platform for analyzing real time
computer-mediated collaborations. A demo of the
system was run at CSCW 2000 (Landsman et. al.,
2000).
There are several important characteristics of the joint
activity of participants in a VesselWorld problemsolving session. Participants have different roles (both
predefined
and
emergent).
Cooperation
and
collaboration are needed to succeed. Participants must
develop a shared understanding of an unfolding
situation to improve their performance. Uncertainty at
the outset makes pre-planning inefficient in many
circumstances. There are numerous problems of
coordination.
In VesselWorld, there are three users engaged in a set
of cooperative tasks that require the coordination of
behavior in a simulated environment. In the simulated
world, each participant is a captain of a ship, and their
joint task is to find and remove barrels of toxic waste
from a harbor. Two of the users operate cranes that can
be used to lift toxic waste from the floor of the harbor.
The third user is captain of a tugboat. The cranes are
able to individually lift and carry small or medium toxic
waste barrels, jointly lift large barrels, and jointly lift
(but not carry) extra large barrels. The tugboat cannot
lift barrels, but can attach to, and move, small barges.
Small barges may hold multiple barrels. Each captain
has a small radius of perception. Many barrels require
the use of other equipment in addition to the cranes.
The tugboat captain is the only one who can examine
barrels to determine equipment needs. Barrels can be
leaking - or will begin to leak if they are dropped - in
which case the leak must be contained by the tug.
The VesselWorld interface provides to each user
several different windows of information. The World
View (not shown) depicts the harbor from the point of
view of a participant, who can only see a limited region
at one time. The World View graphically represents
several kinds of information about the location and
status of objects from the perspective of an individual

participant. A second window of information is used for
planning. A third window allows a user to access more
detailed information about visible objects. A chat
window allows participants to communicate with one
another using an electronic chat.
In a base version of the VesselWorld system,
participants can only coordinate by electronic chatting.
Most of the participant dialogue is centered on the
barrels, and how effort can be coordinated in removing
the barrels from the harbor and transporting them to a
large barge. During a problem solving session, the flow
of information between participants using the base
system is continuous. It is the responsibility of each
actor to add information conveyed to him by another
actor to his or her private representation (either by
taking notes, marking the map, or remembering), or be
prepared to examine the history of chatting at some
appropriate future time. Any information that is lost,
misunderstood, never recorded, or never transmitted in
the first place, can lead to discrepancies between the
participants’ individual assessments of the situation.
An analysis of participant dialogue determines a set of
problem areas in organizing behavior in relation to a
shared domain object. So, for example, a large volume
of information must be exchanged over the naming,
status, location, and properties of the toxic wastes. In a
second version of the system, coordinating
representations are introduced that basically structure
and simplify the exchange of information in the
problem areas of coordination.

Analysis of Electronic Chatting
The electronic chatting amongst participants is used as
a basis for developing some coordinating
representations. As the analyst reviews the discourse,
she needs to look closely at using coordinating
representations to simplify the most common
interactions, fix repeated errors in coordination, and
replace conventions developed by users during the
course of a problem-solving session. The goal is not to
entirely replace other forms of communication with
coordinating representations. Rather the analyst wants
to use coordinating representations to improve
performance - thereby simplifying the interaction - at
critical points in the ongoing cooperation among
participants.
The analysis was framed by cognitive work on the
problem of coordination that was presented at the
beginning of the paper. Figure 1 shows a list of the
kinds of methods that were used by participants to
coordinate their joint activities. The participants did
some planning by assigning roles or agreeing to sets of
actions. During the activity, a fair amount of chatting
was used to initiate joint actions that were tightly
coupled; for example, to lift an extra large waste, the
cranes have to begin lifting during the same time

segment. Also found in the discourse were examples of
the participants creating conventions to simply the
exchange of information for recurrent problems of
coordination.
Chatting was continuously used
throughout each session to establish references and
exchange information about shared domain objects.
•

Plan (provide orientation: delimit tasks)
•
Plan to do; Role assignments
•
During Activity (Entry & Exit into Phases)
•
Synchronization; sequencing; step; turn-taking;
Action taken; See; Initiating Statement
•
Develop conventions
Co-Referencing and the exchange of information
•
•
Refer to status, location, feature, identity of object

Figure 1: Taxonomy of coordination methods.
Figure 2 shows a sample dialogue of the kind of close
coordination users needed to do in order to time closely
coupled activities. At 1 and 2, after jointly lifting a
large barrel, Crane1 and Crane2 agree to do a joint
carry followed by a joint load onto a barge. It will take
three moves to reach their destination. In lines 3, 4, and
5, they tell each other they submitted their first move.
At 8 the tug suggests a convention to simplify
coordination. At 9 and 10, Crane1 and Crane2 tell each
other they are ready to do the second part of the move.
At 14, Crane1 states she is doing the third move. At 1518 they plan, and then they submit actions, to do the
joint load. At 21 and 22, they celebrate.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Crane1: now a joint carry, clicked at 375,140 got 3
carrys
Crane2: i will do same
Crane2: move to first location
Crane1: submitted first
Crane2: ditto
Crane1: again?
Crane2: yes
Tug1: do you want to just type something in after
submitting each turn
Crane1: submitted second
Crane2: ditto
Tug1: just some shorthand or something, for everyone so
we know whats going on
Crane1: submitted third
Tug1: submitted
Crane2: submitted third
Crane2: Crane1: load, and then i'll to the same
Crane1: submitted load
Crane2: ditto
Tug1: submitted move
Crane2: hey, i think that worked!
Crane1: looks like it’s Miller time. I think we did it.

Figure 2: A sample dialogue

Three Coordinating Representations
The analysis of the pilot study discourse identified three
recurrent areas of coordination activity:
1. Timing of closely coupled activities
2. Establish references for, and exchange information
about, shared domain objects and their status.
3. Higher-level planning to manage multiple
cooperative activities
None of these should be surprising as possible areas of
difficulty: each of these has been suggested by prior
theoretical analysis. But there are also other potential
problem areas. So the problem for the cognitive
engineer is to determine which things are problematic
for the task-at-hand.
Some sketches of three coordinating representations
were developed and later refined through an interview
with one of the test groups in the pilot study.2 After
the interview, the iterative design process continued by
a cycle of (re)design, implementation, and evaluation.
The periodic evaluation came in several forms,
including expert reviews, in-group experimentation,
and study groups paid for at Brandeis University. What
resulted from this process were three coordinating
representations that were designed both to simplify the
interaction among participants (the social part) and
structure it so as to reduce the cognitive load of each
user (the individual part) in her use of the mediating
representation.
The coordinating representation showed in Figure 3
allows a user to compare his projected actions to those
of the other participants. The next few projected steps
of each actor is displayed in a labeled column for each
participants. The actions are listed in order from top to
bottom. (So, the next projected step of Crane1 is to do
deploy equipment and then he will lift some waste.)
Each user has control of only one column, his/her own.
This representation improves timing on exit and entry
of phases for tightly coordinated phases of activity by
allowing participants to compare each other’s next few
projected actions.

Figure 3: Timing of joint actions.
The second coordination representation is the object
list, which contains a list of objects with relevant
2

S. Kirschenbaum at NUWC collected the data for this pilot
study.

properties in a table format.
Columns provided
information about the name, object type, location, and
equipment needed for a given object. The organization
of this information reduces the cognitive load for the
individual, by organizing information relevant for
decision making into predetermined representational
structure.
A third coordinating representation was designed to
allow the users to do high-level planning. The idea was
to create a space where the participants could rapidly
sketch a high-level plan that would help them to
manage multiple open tasks. There are three columns
in this window: one for each actor. Each column could
be used, for example, to abstractly represent that each
actor is currently searching a different part of the
harbor. Further down each column, the participants
could indicate that they are committed to a plan to
move, in order, wastes 1, 2, and 3 onto a small barge. A
palette at the top the window allows users to rapidly
build a description of a joint action sequence. Actions
are one of a small set of action primitives, i.e., MOVE,
SEARCH, and CONTAIN. Color-coding of entries in
the high-level plans allows participants to indicate both
accomplished tasks and future commitments.

Experimental Evaluation
An experimental evaluation conducted at Brandeis
compared the performance of teams of participants with
(and without) the coordinating representation. Three
groups could only electronically chat during problemsolving sessions, and three groups could chat but also
had access to coordinating representations. Each team
was trained and then played for about 10 hours over
several sessions of problem solving. All events that
occur during a problem-solving session are recorded in
a log file by the system. A VCR-like device was used
to review and analyze the decision making of each
group. A more complete discussion and detailed
analysis of the experimental data, with numerous
examples, can be found in Alterman et al (2001).

Quantitative Analysis
One measure of general performance is the amount of
clock time it took the participants to solve a problems:3
there was a 49% improvement in clock time to
complete task for those groups using coordinating
representations.
Another measure of user work
indicates that there was a 38% reduction in the number
of events generated while completing tasks of
comparable difficulty.
Because the coordinating
3

These results have 95% confidence intervals and are
normalized for the complexity of the problem. Problem
complexity is a weighted sum over all wastes taking into
account size, equipment needed, and distance from large
barge for each waste.

representations pre-structure certain exchanges of
information we expected to see a reduction in the
quantity of electronic chats: there was a 57% reduction
in the amount of electronic chatting. Because one of
the coordinating representations dealt with commitment
(high-level planning), another with timing, and a third
with the exchange of information about equipment
requirements for lifting barrels, we expected to see a
reduction in domain errors: total errors were down
61%. However, a closer analysis of the data reveals
that the high-level planning coordinating representation
was used hardly at all. Further discussion of this last
point is below.

Qualitative Analysis
For the groups that did not have access to coordinating
representations, the predominant method for
maintaining a common view of the world was for the
participants to continuously report on their current
activity via electronic chatting. One strategy for
avoiding differences in assessment was to engage in a
conversation to review the status of one or another of
the shared domain objects. Whenever discrepancies in
the assessment of a situation unexpectedly developed
the participants engaged in repair work to re-mediated
between alternate representations of
“reality”.
Participants also regularly confirmed that somebody
else’s report or repair was received. Each of these
techniques was important to the functioning of the
groups using the basic system in maintaining a joint
sense of their common enterprise. These groups also
developed additional structures to simplify the
exchange of information using the electronic chat
window.
The simplest of these were naming
conventions.
A second example was a set of
conversational structures that were developed by each
group to support coordination of closely coupled
actions.
The general advantage of the coordinating
representation was that it simplified the problem of
establishing a consistent representation of the situation
among the participants.
One advantage that accrued to the users who had access
to the coordinating representation that supports the
timing of joint actions is that it required no extra work
on the part of the participants to build. In order to
submit an action to the system the users needed to add
it to their “plan” anyway. So, from the point of the
view of the users who have access to the shared
planning window, having to talk about their cooperative
activity is just extra work. Another advantage was that
one actor now has the opportunity to spot potential
problems in another actor’s plan.
Much of the dialogue that accompanied the discovery
of a new waste in the groups using the basic system was
mediated by the object list for the groups that had

access to coordinating representations. Identifiers were
attached to each of the “objects” that were found.
Pointing and clicking was used to add entries to the
object list, thus precise locations for each of wastes that
were found could be stored. These aspects of the object
list simplified the process by which the actors
established references and referents. Because the object
list was a shared representation, much of the
consistency checking that the users of the base system
had to engage in was no longer necessary. Rather than
having two private representations that must
periodically be reconciled by electronic chatting, the
users could share a single representation. This scheme
reduced the number of conflicts between different
conceptions of the shared workspace, but it also
eliminated the work involved in re-mediating
discrepancies between alternate views of the shared
domain objects.
The high-level planning window was not used by any
of the groups. The surveys we collected from the
subjects show that the chief problem with the high-level
planning windows was that, given the rewards it
provided, it required too much work to complete.
Further analysis shows that the problems that the highlevel planning window was designed to fix continued to
occur.
We are developing two solution paths to fixing this
problem. The first is to do a better job of modeling the
work of the individual user in cooperation with the
other users (Feinman & Alterman, 2001). The second
approach is develop some AI techniques that would
allow the system to fill out portions of the high-level
planning window semi-automatically (Introne &
Alterman, 2000).

Concluding Remarks
The overarching interest of this research is to continue
to develop a framework for Cognitive Science that
depends not only on the mental operations of the
individual but also on the social interaction within
which it is embedded. (An underlying thesis is the
cognition is irreducibly social.) Application domains
involving the computer-mediation of joint activity are
significant areas of research because they allow one to
investigate both the social and individual aspects of
cognition.
The methodology that was used for
developing
coordinating
representations
for
VesselWorld reflects these commitments and attitudes.
There are two parts to the methodology: a social and an
individual one. During the social part, the developer
can collect data on the usage of the base system and do
an analysis of the information exchanged among
participants (a discourse analysis) that helps them to
stay coordinated.
A key is to identify recurrent
problems of coordination that showed up in the pilot
version of the system. During the individual part, the

designer tunes the initial approximations for
coordinating representations to the cognitive operations
of the individual user.
During this phase,
representations are iteratively designed to simplify the
work of the individual user in creating and accessing
the coordination information that is shared among the
participants.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by ONR Contracts
N00014-96-1-0440 and N66001-00-1-8965.

References
Alterman, R. and Garland, A. (1998). Convention in
Joint Activity. TR# CS-98-199, CS Department,
Brandeis University (1998). To appear in Cognitive
Science 25(4), 2001.
Alterman, R., Feinman, A., Landsman, S. and Introne,
J. Coordination of Talk: Coordination of Action. TR#
CS-01-217.
Clark, H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge
University Press.
Clark. H. and Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in
Communication. In Resnick, Levine, and Teasly
editors, Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition
(pp. 127-0149)
Feinman, A., and Alterman, R. (2001) Modeling
Communicative Behavior in a Groupware System.
TR CS-00-211 Computer Science Department,
Brandeis University. To appear in HCI 2001.
Goodwin and Goodwin (1996). Seeing as situated
activity: Formulating planes. In Engeström and
Middleton editors, Cognition an communication in
work. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Grosz, B. and Kraus, S. (1996). Collaborative plans for
complex group action.
Artificial Intelligence,
86:269-357.
Grosz, B. and Sidner, C. (1990). Plans for discourse.
In Cohen, P. R., Morgan, J., and Pollack, M. E.,
editors, Intentions in Communication, pages 417-444.
Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA.
Introne, J. and Alterman, R. (2001) Segmenting Usage
Data in Collaborative Systems. TR CS-01-215.
Appeared in workshop on “Dealing with Community
Data” at CSCW 2000.
Landsman, S., Alterman, R., Feinman, A, Introne, J.,
VesselWorld and ADAPTIVE, TR CS-01-213,
Brandeis University. Demo given at CSCW 2000.
Lewis, D. (1984) Convention: A philosophical study.
Harvard University Press.
Mitchell, T. Keller, R. and Kedar-Cabelli, S. (1986)
Explanation-based generalization: A unifying view.
Machine Learning, 1:47-80.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., and Jefferson, G. (1974). A
simplest systematics for the organization of turntaking in conversation. Language, 50:696-735.

