UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Costs of Switching Perspectives in Route and Survey Descriptions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4cz5n7j3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Lee, Paul U.
Tversky, Barbara

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Costs of Switching Perspectives in Route and Survey Descriptions
Paul U. Lee (pauly@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Bldg. 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Barbara Tversky (bt@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Bldg. 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract
Two experiments examined perspective switching in
comprehension and retrieval of spatial information.
Participants read route or survey descriptions of
environments line by line. Reading times were recorded.
For half of the descriptions, the perspective of the last
sentence was switched.
True/false verification of
sentences from both perspectives followed the
descriptions. Switching perspective increased reading
times but increased verification times only for survey
sentences. This suggests that perspective switching
exacts a cost in comprehension, but that the cost
dissipates after information retrieval, especially for route
descriptions. The second study examined which aspects
of perspective, viewpoint or terms of reference,
accounted for switching costs by using hybrid
descriptions. Switching terms of reference slowed
reading times more than switching viewpoint. Together,
the experiments suggest that switching perspective plays
a role in comprehension that diminishes with repeated
retrieval. They also point to a fundamental asymmetry
between route and survey perspectives, one that depends
on orientation.

Introduction
All animals, human or otherwise, must be able to gain
knowledge about their surroundings in order to survive.
Like other animals, humans often gain this knowledge
first-hand by navigating through their immediate
surroundings. However, unlike other animals, humans
also have the ability to transmit this knowledge to
others by language.
Whether the world is experienced first-hand or
through descriptions, the world is viewed from a
particular perspective.
In text comprehension,
maintaining a consistent perspective makes the text
more coherent and comprehensible to the readers
(Black, Turner, & Bower, 1979).
Although there is a general agreement that we
perceive the world from specific viewpoints, the role of
perspectives on spatial memory is less certain. In
particular, there is a considerable debate about whether
or when spatial relations are encoded independently of
perspective.

If spatial memory is formed in a perspectivedependent manner, it should be more accessible from
one perspective over the others. Therefore, when people
describe spatial layouts from memory, they should
prefer to maintain a consistent perspective in their
descriptions since memory associated with a specific
perspective is more accessible than others (Levelt,
1982). There is some evidence that supports this view.
When readers take a particular viewpoint during text
comprehension, they later remember the information
better from that viewpoint (Black, Turner, and Bower,
1979; Abelson, 1975).
Other evidence suggests that for constrained welllearned environments, spatial memory can equally be
accessible from multiple perspectives. Taylor and
Tversky (1992) demonstrated that when people learned
route or survey descriptions of spatial layouts and later
were asked inference questions about them, they were
as fast and accurate to questions from the read
perspective as from the new perspective.
In
spontaneous descriptions of naturalistic environments,
people mixed route and survey perspectives about half
the time (Taylor & Tversky, 1996). The choice of a
perspective also seems to depend on the pragmatics of
the situation much more than an inherent bias toward
any particular perspective. During a conversation,
speakers often use not only their own perspective, but
also the perspective of their addressee’s or some
perspective independent of both (Schober 1993;
Tversky, Lee, & Mainwaring, 1999).
In visual cognition, there is a similar inquiry about
the nature of spatial memory derived from perception
and navigation. There is some evidence that spatial
relations are encoded in a viewpoint-dependent manner
(Diwadkar & McNamara, 1997; Shelton & McNamara;
Rieser, 1989). For example, Diwadkar and McNamara
(1997) had participants study the locations of objects in
a room from a single perspective and then learn to
recognize the layout from three other views. A
recognition test of the layout from different viewpoints
showed faster response times for the learned viewpoints
than the novel viewpoints. However, memories of
large-scale spaces seem to encode spatial relations in a
viewpoint-independent manner, in which familiar and

novel views of spatial layouts are equally accessible
(Evans & Pezdek, 1980; Presson, DeLange, &
Hazelrigg, 1989).
So far, the evidence seems to suggest that
maintaining a consistent perspective is important when
learning a new environment, but the effect of
perspective is less clear for retrieving well-learned
environments. The present study is an attempt to
understand the role of perspectives in spatial
descriptions during both on-line comprehension and
subsequent retrieval of the layouts from memory.
As an extension to Taylor and Tversky study (1992),
we studied acquisition of environments by text that
maintained a consistent perspective or switched
perspectives. Testing was from same or switched
perspective. We expected that the cost of switching
perspective be large when under construction of spatial
mental models but diminished after repeated retrieval.

Experiment 1
Method
Subjects. Thirty-nine undergraduates, 18 male and 21 female,
from Stanford University participated individually in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. The criterion of 67%
correct response eliminated the data of three men and four
women.
Materials. Descriptive texts were prepared for sixteen
fictitious environments. Each environment consisted of two
intersecting roads and three adjacent landmarks.
The
descriptions were given either in a route or a survey
perspective.
Route Description
Go east on High St and you will intersect with a
much narrower Green Ave.
Turn right on Green Ave and on your right, you will
see the stock market.
Past the stock market, on your right on Green Ave,
you will see the mortgage bank.
On your right on Green Ave, past the mortgage
bank is the legal firm.
Survey Description
High St runs east-west, intersecting a much
narrower Green Ave, which runs north-south.
South of High St on the west side of Green Ave is
the stock market.
South of the stock market on the west side of Green
Ave is the mortgage bank.
On the west side of Green Ave, south of the
mortgage bank is the legal firm.
Figure 1: Route and Survey Descriptions
A route perspective takes an imagined navigator through an
environment describing landmarks relative to the navigator in

terms of left and right. A survey perspective takes bird’s eye
view of the environment describing landmarks relative to each
other in terms of cardinal directions.
Each description consisted of two introduction sentences,
followed by four sentences that described the spatial layout of
the environment. Figure 1 shows examples of the spatial
descriptions.
In order to examine the perspective switching cost during
on-line comprehension, the last sentence of the study phase
was presented either in the same perspective as the preceding
descriptions or in a new perspective. Figure 2 shows the
perspective switch in both directions for the target sentence.
Perspective Switch: Route to Survey
Past the stock market, on your right on Green Ave,
you will see the mortgage bank.
On the west side of Green Ave, south of the
mortgage bank is the legal firm.
Perspective Switch: Survey to Route
South of the stock market on the west side of Green
Ave is the mortgage bank.
On your right on Green Ave, past the mortgage
bank is the legal firm.
Figure 2: Perspective Switch during
On-line Comprehension
Four statements (i.e. two statements each for route and survey
perspective) followed the target sentences for true/false
verification.
These questions provided assurance that
participants formed accurate mental models of the spatial
layouts. Since the questions used in both perspectives, half
required perspective switching with respect to the study
perspective. All of the questions were inference questions,
querying the spatial relations that could be inferred but were
not directly specified in the descriptions. An example of
route inference statement is "The stock market is on your
right when you face the mortgage bank from Green Ave.",
and an example of a urvey statement is "The mortgage bank is
north of the legal firm and west of Green Ave.".
Design and Procedure. Subjects were told that they would
read descriptions of various environments. They were asked
to study and remember them because after each scene, they
will be given true/false questions to test their memory of the
scene. They were then given a practice trial, so that they
would be familiar with the overall nature of the experiment.
The trial consisted of a route and a survey environment
followed by four test questions.
For the actual trial, subjects read sixteen texts, i.e. eight
route and eight survey descriptions, and then answered four
true/false questions for each description. The order of
presentation and the assignment of experimental condition to
environments were randomized across subjects. The texts
appeared on the screen one sentence at a time. Each sentence
remained on the screen until participants pressed a key to
indicate that they were ready to move on to the next sentence.
The reading time for each sentence was recorded. After
reading a description, participants answered four test
questions by pressing assigned keys for true and false. Both

response time and accuracy were recorded for each question.
The question order was randomized across subjects. The
experiment was conducted on a Apple PowerMac computer
controlled by PsyScope software package (J.D. Cohen,
MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993).

Results
The reading time during the study phase indicates the
amount of time that subjects needed to comprehend the
descriptions. Using repeated measures design, reading
times (RT) per syllable were compared between route
and survey perspective for all study sentences except
for target sentences. Subjects studied survey texts
longer (351 msec/syllable) than route texts (311
msec/syllable). F(1, 31) = 12.39, p < 0.001.
The target sentence was the last sentence in the study
phase.
Half of the target sentences switched
perspective from preceding study descriptions and the
other half kept the same perspective. Target sentences
were analyzed for two factors: perspective of the target
sentence and perspective consistency.
On the average, subjects read route targets marginally
faster (456 msec/syllable) than survey targets (513
msec/syllable; F(1,31) = 3.02, p < 0.10). They read
targets that kept the same perspective much faster (397
msec/syllable) than the targets with a new perspective
(572 msec/syllable; F(1,31) = 30.89, p < 0.00001.

We analyzed response times for question perspective
and study perspective. We also checked for effects of
target perspective since it differed from study
perspective half the trials. These analyses are reported
for correct RTs to true questions, since RT analyses for
incorrect answers or false questions yielded no
significant results. It seems that subjects needed to
correctly verify an accurate mental model to produce a
consistent perspective effect.
Route questions were verified faster and more
accurately than the survey questions (423 ms/syl for
route, 476 ms/syl for survey; F(1,31) = 9.02, p < 0.005;
83% for route, 75% for survey, F(1,31) = 7.90, p <
0.008). There was no effect of target perspective on the
response time (F(1,31) = 0.0005; p > 0.98).
The effect of perspective consistency was also
significant but this was due only to survey questions, as
there was a significant interaction between the question
perspective and its consistency with the study
perspective. F(1,31) = 9.71, p < 0.004. Subjects
responded equally fast to route statements, regardless of
perspective (426 ms/syl for route vs. 419 ms/syl for
survey) but were faster to survey questions when they
had studied from survey perspective (429 ms/syl; 523
ms/syl for route) (see Figure 6). Accuracy data for this
interaction was not significant but was consistent with
the RT results, assuring us that there is no speedaccuracy tradeoff.

700

600
700

500
600

400

Study Perspective

Consistent

300

Inconsistent

200

Route Target

500

400

Study Perspective

Survey Target
Consistent

300

Target Statem ent Type

Inconsistent

200

Figure 3: RT/syllable for Target Sentences: Effects of
Perspective Switch during On-line Comprehension
Furthermore, there was an interaction between target
perspective and perspective consistency (F(1,31) =
10.43, p < 0.003). Figure 3 illustrates that on the
average, reading a route target sentence that was
preceded by a description with a consistent route
perspective was much faster (0.33 s/syl) than reading a
route target sentence preceded by a survey description
(0.59 s/syl). Although a same general pattern holds for
survey target sentences, the difference in RTs is smaller
(0.47 s/syl and 0.56 s/syl for consistent and inconsistent
perspectives respectively).
For the true/false verification statements, we
collected both response time (RT) and accuracy data.

Route Q uestion

Survey Q uestion

True/False Q uestions

Figure 4: RT/syllable for T/F Questions: Effects of
Perspective Switch during Memory Retrieval

Discussion
As predicted, switching perspective during on-line text
comprehension resulted in a longer reading time,
supporting cognitive costs for perspective switching
during acquisition.
The interaction between target type and perspective
consistency suggests that perspective consistency is
more important for route descriptions. Since a route
perspective is relative to a moving referent, the
knowledge of current location and orientation of the

referent is crucial to processing the incoming route
information.
Switching from survey to route
descriptions forces the reader to establish the current
orientation of the referent without the benefit of
inferring this knowledge from the previous text. Since
survey descriptions are based on a fixed orientation
perspective, consistency has no advantage over
switched perspective in establishing the orientation
information.
For the true/false verification statements, there was
an effect of perspective switch, but the effect size was
diminished from that of on-line comprehension.
Furthermore, the effect completely disappeared for the
route statements. The results indicate that retrieval
from spatial memory is less perspective-dependent than
on-line comprehension. The diminished effects of
perspective for memory together with previous findings
of perspective-independent memory (Taylor & Tversky,
1992) suggest that conversion from perspectivedependent to perspective-independent spatial memory
may be a gradual process. If so, the present results
indicate that route and survey perspective have different
timetable for this conversion.
Finally, subjects took longer to study survey
descriptions than route descriptions. This result is
opposite that of Taylor and Tversky (1992). Although
readers of route perspectives may have had greater
cognitive loads due to continual updates and integration
of changing location and orientation of the referent,
they still read the description faster. It may be that any
such difficulty is compensated by other factors, such as
greater familiarity with intrinsic spatial terms (e.g.
left/right) than extrinsic terms (e.g. north/south) in
everyday route descriptions.

Experiment 2
We have established that switching between route and
survey perspectives during study has cognitive costs.
The nature of these costs seems different for route and
survey perspectives. What are some of the factors that
might account for these differences?
Route and survey descriptions differ in at least two
ways. One is the way orientation is described. Route
descriptions use intrinsic spatial terms, such as left and
right, which change with the changing orientation of
the navigator. Thus, they adopt a person-centered
reference frame. Survey descriptions use extrinsic
spatial terms, such as north and south, which fix the
orientation in space, adopting an environment-centered
reference frame.
Another difference is the viewpoint of the observer.
Route perspectives are embedded within the
environment, whereas survey perspective are external
and above the environment.
In this experiment, we created hybrid descriptions
that take route-like viewpoints but update its orientation

using extrinsic terms. For example, a route description
such as "Go down the street, turn right, and the building
will be on your right" can be converted to a hybrid
description like "Go north on the street, turn east, and
the building will be south of you."
Using hybrid descriptions, we can examine if the
perspective switching costs are due to changes in
orientation terms or changes in viewpoint.
If
orientation terms are crucial, we expect hybrid results
to mirror the survey results. If viewpoint is important,
we expect hybrid results to mirror the route results.

Method
Subjects. Sixty-four undergraduates, 30 male and 34 female,
from Stanford University participated individually in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. 67% accuracy criterion
eliminated two men and eight women.
Materials. The stimuli were similar to those used in
Experiment 1 with few changes. In addition to route and
survey descriptions, hybrid descriptions were added for the
study and the test phase. Figure 5 shows an example of a
hybrid description.
Hybrid Description
Go east on High St and you will intersect with a
much narrower Green Ave.
Turn south on Green Ave and west of you, you will
see the stock market.
Past the stock market, on the west side of Green
Ave, you will see the mortgage bank.
West of you on Green Ave, south of you past the
mortgage bank is the legal firm.
Figure 5: Description in Hybrid Perspective
Both descriptions and targets were given in each of three
perspectives. Two fictitious environments were added to the
sixteen environments in Experiment 1 to match the number of
environments with the experimental conditions. In addition,
four true/false questions per environment were reduced to
three, one each from route, survey, and hybrid perspective.
Finally, the number of practice trials was increased to three,
one for each description type.
Design and Procedure. Except for the changes in the
materials described in the previous section, the procedure is
identical to Experiment 1.

Results
The reading time results replicated those of Experiment
1. The new results for this experiment show how
switching perspectives with hybrid descriptions affect
on-line comprehension and memory.
We analyzed reading times for the target sentences
for two factors: perspective of the target sentence and
perspective consistency with study. Each factor has
three perspectives: route, hybrid, and survey.

700

600

500

Study Perspective
400

Route
300

Hybrid
Survey

200

Route

Hybrid

Survey

Discussion

Target Statem ent Type

Figure 6: RT/syllable for Target Sentences: Effects of
Perspective Switch during On-line Comprehension
There was an interaction between target perspective and
study perspective (see Figure 6). F(4,212) = 20.55, p <
2e-11). Planned contrasts on hybrid target sentences
showed faster reading times for hybrid (468 msec/syl)
than route descriptions (661 msec/syl; t(212) = 4.89, p
< 1e-6), and reading times for hybrid was marginally
faster than survey descriptions (556 msec/syl; t(212) =
2.16, p < 0.02; Bonferroni group pcrit = 0.0025). Direct
comparison between route and survey descriptions
showed that a perspective switch from route to hybrid
took marginally longer than a switch from survey to
hybrid (t(212) = 2.73, p < 0.004; pcrit = 0.0025).
Similarly, route target sentences were read faster
after route (357 msec/syl) than either hybrid (474
msec/syl; t(212) = 3.04, p < 0.0015) or survey
descriptions (649 msec/syl; t(212) = 4.55, p < 5e-6). In
addition, a perspective switch from survey to route took
significantly longer to understand than a switch from
hybrid to route (t(212) = 7.60, p < 1e-11).

700

600

500
Survey Perspective
400

Route

300

Hybrid
Survey

200
Route

Hybrid

0.0004), but not by hybrid descriptions (448 msec/syl;
t(212) = 0.34, p > 0.35). A direct comparison between
route and hybrid descriptions showed a perspective
switch from route to survey to take longer than a switch
from hybrid to survey (t(212) = 3.07, p < 0.0015).
Overall, hybrid statements behaved more like survey
statements than like route statements.
True/false verification statements failed to replicate
the results from Experiment 1, as there was no
significant main or interaction effects (see Figure 7).

Survey

True/False Q uestions

Figure 7: RT/syllable for T/F Questions: Effects of
Perspective Switch during Memory Retrieval
Finally, survey target sentences were read faster when
preceded by survey descriptions (435 msec/syl) than by
route descriptions (566 msec/syl; t(212) = 3.41, p <

The hybrid perspective provided an "intermediate"
perspective between route and survey perspective. Its
viewpoint was embedded like a route perspective but its
reference terms were like survey perspective (i.e. north,
south, east, and west). Which of these two factors
would play a role in exacting cognitive costs during
comprehension? The answer turned out to be both.
Reading times for target sentences were longer when
the perspective was switched from route to hybrid than
when consistent. Since the route and the hybrid
descriptions were identical except for orientation terms,
orientation terms contributed to the perspective
switching costs. Similarly, when perspective was
switched from survey to hybrid, longer reading times
resulted. Since a survey description differs from a
hybrid in the viewpoint of the observer, viewpoint also
contributed to the perspective switching costs, although
the effect size was much smaller than that of the
orientation terms.
Target reading times for the route statements
confirmed this hypothesis. Switching from the hybrid
to route perspective increased the reading times,
implicating orientation terms or reference frames.
Since a switch from survey to route required a change
in both orientation terms and the viewpoint, reading
times were even longer than for a switch from hybrid to
route. The advantage of hybrid over survey study
perspectives for reading route targets further supported
the significance of the viewpoint in the perspective
switching costs.
For the survey targets, the overall results
corroborated the other findings, except that there was
no perspective cost when readers switched from hybrid
to survey perspective. This suggests that orientation
terms exact a greater cost than viewpoint.
Overall, there were strong and consistent effects of
perspective switching costs due to changes in
orientation terms. The effects due to viewpoint changes
were weaker, since there was a significant effect for the
route targets, a marginal effect for the hybrid targets,
and no effects for the survey targets.
During the sentence verification, all effects between
conditions disappeared. These results were consistent
with Taylor and Tversky (1992) but differed slightly

from the results of Experiment 1. Both experiments are
consistent with the claim that perspective effects
diminish during the retrieval phase compared to the
study phase, especially when the retrieval is done
repeatedly from multiple perspectives. Answering
true/false questions from three different perspectives
might have accelerated the process.

Conclusion
When people describe a large-scale environment, they
typically adopt route or survey perspectives, or a
combination of both (Taylor & Tversky, 1996). These
two perspectives are also readily understood,
suggesting that they capture a natural way of
understanding the world.
Previous work suggested that mental representations
of constrained, well-learned environment acquired from
descriptions are perspective-free, that is, statements
about the environments from either perspective are
verified equally quickly and accurately, irrespective of
study perspective (Taylor & Tversky, 1992). However,
other studies have suggested perspective-dependent
representations (Diwadkar & McNamara, 1997).
The present experiment provided evidence that
maintaining a consistent perspective during learning
facilitates acquisition of new environments, that is,
switching perspective exacts a cost in reading times.
However, after acquisition and during testing for
memory of the environment, costs of switching
perspectives diminish considerably (Exp 1) or disappear
(Exp 2). Perspective-independent responding could
indicate that the mental representations are more
abstract than any particular perspective, allowing
equally efficient retrieval from either perspective.
Alternatively, it could indicate multiple representations
or increased efficiency of comprehending various
perspectives.
Spatial perspectives include both viewpoints and
terms of reference, as well as other factors, such as
referent object. In particular, survey descriptions take
an overhead viewpoint and use the cardinal direction
terms of reference. Route descriptions take viewpoints
within environments and use intrinsic direction terms,
left, right, front, and back. In the second experiment, a
hybrid description was constructed using a route
viewpoint and survey reference terms. Switching
reference terms exacted a greater cognitive cost than
switching viewpoint, suggesting that overall reference
frame is more critical in spatial descriptions than
viewpoint.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Stanford Graduate
Fellowship to the first author and by Office of Naval
Research, Grant Number NOOO14-PP-1-O649, to the

second author. We are grateful to Herb Clark and
Gordon Bower for helpful discussion.

References
Abelson, R. (1975). Does a story understander need a
point of view? In R. Schank & B. L. Nash-Webber
(Eds.), Theoretical issues in natural language
processing. Washington, DC: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Black, J. B., Turner, T. J., & Bower, G. H. (1979).
Point of view in narrative comprehension, memory
and production. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 18, 187-198.
Cohen, D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive
environment for designing psychology experiments.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers. 25, 257-271.
Diwadkar, V. A., & McNamara, T. P. (1997).
Viewpoint dependence in scene recognition.
Psychological Science, 8(4), 302-307.
Evans, G. W., & Pezdek, K. (1980). Cognitive
mapping: Knowledge of real-world distance and
location information.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning & Memory, 6, 13-24.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1982). Linearization in describing
spatial networks. In S. Peters & E. Saarinen (Eds.),
Processes, beliefs, and questions. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Presson, C. C., DeLange, N., & Hazelrigg, M. D.
(1989). Orientation specificity in spatial memory:
What makes a path different from a map of the path?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 15, 225-229.
Rieser, J. J. (1989). Access to knowledge of spatial
structure at novel points of observation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15, 887-897.
Schober, M. F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47(1), 1-24.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (1997). Multiple
views of spatial memory. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 4(1), 102-106.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1992). Spatial mental
models derived from survey and route descriptions.
Journal of Memory & Language, 31(2), 261-292.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1996). Perspective in
spatial descriptions. Journal of Memory & Language,
35(3), 371-391.
Tversky, B., Lee, P., & Mainwaring, S. (1999). Why do
speakers mix perspectives?.Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 1, 399-412.

