UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cue-Readiness in Insight Problem-Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5r14p01r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Suzuki, Hiroaki
Abe, Keiga
Hiraki, Kazuo
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cue–Readiness in Insight Problem–Solving
Hiroaki Suzuki (susan@ri.aoyama.ac.jp)
Keiga Abe (a1297007@cc.aoyama.ac.jp)
Department of Education, Aoyama Gakuin University
Tokyo 150-8366 JAPAN
Kazuo Hiraki (hiraki@idea.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Department of Systems Science, The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, 153-8902
Michiko Miyazaki (miyazaki@psyche.tp.titech.ac.jp)
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo, 152-8552 JAPAN
Abstract
This paper explores a mechanism underlying cuereadiness in insight problem-solving. Cue-readiness is
concerned with situations where previously neglected information suddenly and unexpectedly becomes illuminative. From the view point of dynamic constraint relaxation theory (Suzuki & Hiraki, 1997), this can be explained by constraint relaxation caused by noticing failures. The theory predicts that constraint violations increase during the problem-solving process, and that a
specific combination of constraint violations takes place
which leads people to an insight. In this paper, we examined the time-course differences of frequencies of constraint violations, and of sensitivity to the crucial information using a rating task. Although Experiment 1 did
not provide supporting evidence, in Experiment 2 we
found increased frequency of constraint violations during
problem-solving, and that subjects who experienced more
failure were more sensitive to crucial information. These
results are discussed in terms of other theories of insight.

Insight, one of the most outstanding cognitive activities, is more and more a topic within the scope of rigorous scientific investigation. For the past decade, various approaches have been taken to explore the nature
and processes of insight (see, for example, Sternberg &
Davidson, 1995).
However, there still remains a mystery. People sometimes find a crucial cue in a relative early stage of
problem-solving, but they cannot make use of it. This
cue, however, suddenly and unexpectedly becomes illuminative at a certain point, leading problem-solvers to an
insight. To put it another way, the same cue has different meanings during the problem-solving process. This
can be called “cue-readiness” because it appears analogous to developmental readiness in that the effectiveness
of instructional intervention depends on the child’s developmental stage.
A good example of the cue-readiness is found in
Kaplan and Simon (1990). They used the mutilated
checkerboard (MC) puzzle as a material. To solve this
puzzle, it is crucial to realize the parity of differently colored squares. In order to control the ease of noticing parity, some subjects in their experiment were given a special board where a word, Bread or Butter, was printed on
each square (bread and butter connote parity), instead of
colors black or pink. As they predicted, subjects noticed
parity more easily and solved the puzzle more quickly.

However, they reported one puzzling result. The times
from their first mention of parity to the final solution
were longer for these subjects than those who were given
a standard checkerboard or blank one. While subjects
with a Bread–Butter board took 653 s on average to solve
the puzzle from their first mention of parity, those with a
standard checkerboard took only 110 s.
The problem immediately poses the questions of why
people can make use of the crucial cue that they could not
do so initially, and what distinguishes the internal states
in these two situations.
This problem cannot easily be explained by current
theories. Theories based on spread of activation presuppose that the inappropriate problem representations prevent problem-solvers from retrieving an important cue.
If this explanation is correct, people could solve the puzzle immediately after noticing the important cue, because
the representation of the cue should be activated and the
activation spreads over to related information. In the MC
puzzle case, subjects could obtain an insight immediately
after they mentioned parity.
The idea of the prepared-mind proposed by Seifert et
al. (1995) appears to be relevant to the cue-readiness
problem. According to them, when people find a standard approach inappropriate, they generate failure indices that mark initial problem solving attempts as unsuccessful. These failure indices are presumed to have
the special status in long-term memory, in the sense that
they are activated for a longer period than other types
of memory traces. In the incubation phase where people stop their initial attempts and are engaged in other
activities, a relevant cue is sometimes provided externally, which reminds them of their initial failure and
leads them to an AHA experience. We agree that failure and externally provided information play important
roles. However, this idea cannot be applied directly to
the cue-readiness problem, because their idea deals with
a situation where people do not encounter or find crucial information in the initial phase but are given that information externally in the incubation phase. The cuereadiness problem is, however, concerned with a situation where people find crucial information in the initial
stage.
In order to deal with the cue-readiness problem, we
have developed a dynamic constraint relaxation theory of
insight (Suzuki & Hiraki, 1997; Hiraki & Suzuki, 1998).

In the next section, we briefly illustrate the theory.

Dynamic Constraint Relaxation
The dynamic constraint relaxation theory consists of
three kinds of constraints (object-level, relational, and
goal), and a relaxation mechanism. The main idea is that
impasses are formed by these constraints and that qualitative changes are caused probabilistically by the failuredriven incremental relaxation of these constraints.

Constraints
Since it is unlikely that we are equipped with a special
cognitive engine for insight problem-solving, it would be
desirable that theories of insight do not involve insightspecific mechanisms. One of the most important findings in problem-solving research is that people construct
a problem representation consisting of objects, relations,
and a goal of the given problem. Reflecting on these findings, we postulate three constraints with objects, relations, and goal. Although the notion of constraints in insight literatures is not new (Isaak & Just, 1995; Knoblich
et al., 1999; ; Ohlsson, 1992), our treatment is different
from theirs and very similar to analogy (Holyoak & Thagard, 1995).
Object-level constraint There are numerous ways of
encoding objects. However, we have a natural tendency
to encode them at a basic level (Rosch, 1978). This tendency sometimes becomes an obstacle for insight. For
example, in the “Candle” problem, it is well known that
people do not notice a pasteboard box of tacks as a holder
of the candle. This is because the basic level of a box is
“box,” not a “solid body” (more abstract) or a “pasteboard box” (more concrete).
We call this tendency the object-level constraint, because it constrains, among possible alternatives, the selection of a specific encoding of a single object. Note
here that the constraint is a soft one. It is not that this
constraint precludes any other encodings.
Relational constraint Relations define the ways in
which objects relate to one another, and each object is
assigned a specific role within the relation. Usually, one
can relate something to others in various ways. The box
in the candle problem, for example, can interact with others in ways of containing, standing on, being thrown to,
other objects. However, people usually select the “contain” relation as its default relation.
We call this tendency the relational constraint, because
it leads people to select specific relations among numerous alternatives. This constraint is, like object-level constraint, a soft one.
Goal constraint The representation of a goal involves
the desired state and evaluation function. This constraint
evaluates a match between present and desired states, and
gives feedback to the other constraints. Thus, the goal

greatly constrains how objects and relations are represented. Although a relation of a candle to other objects
is, by default, to light something, a relation such as to
glue something by its wax is likely to be selected by the
goal constraint.
It is important to note that these constraints interact
each other. For example, one reason why the “tacking”
relation is selected for the tack is that the basic level encoding of the tack enhances this selection. Another reason is that the goal constraint prevents them from being
thrown.
In ordinary problem-solving, these constraints play
important roles by eliminating an infinite number of useless representations. However, as noted above, they operate in a harmonious way to form an impasse in insight
problem-solving.

Relaxation mechanism
It is important to note that each constraint is not constant
during problem-solving, but that its strength changes dynamically. In the course of problem–solving, the mismatch computed by the goal constraint decreases the
strengths of initially dominant constraints, which leads
to an increase in the probability of constraint-violations.
When specific constraint violations occur simultaneously
at object-level and relational level, people reach an insight.
In this constraint relaxation process, failure or mismatch detected by the goal constraint plays a key role.
A current computational model uses a sort of Q learning algorithm to relax the constraints (Hiraki & Suzuki,
1998). The basic idea is that the strength of the constraint
responsible for the failure is reduced to some degree and
that the amount of the reduction is distributed to other
less dominant constraints by the softmax algorithm (Bridle, 1989).
The dynamic constraint relaxation theory owes much
to the multiconstraint theory of analogy (Holyoak & Thagard, 1995). Types of constraints are similar between the
two. This is partly because both theories are based on the
general characteristics of human problem-solving. However, a crucial difference is that multiconstraint satisfaction often leads to a fruitful analogy, whereas constraint
violation leads to an insight in insight problem-solving.
Another important difference is that whereas constraint
relaxation is purely internal in ARCS and ACME, our
theory presumes dynamic interaction with the external
environment via feedback.

Previous Studies
We used the T puzzle, similar to the tangram, as material.
The goal of this puzzle is to construct the shape of a “T”
using four pieces depicted in the left side of Figure 1.
At first glance, it appears quite easy to solve, since there
are only four pieces and one can easily identify possible
positions that some of them should be placed. However,
a pilot study, in addition to our own experiences, showed
that it is awfully difficult. It usually takes more than half

to crucial information in the rating stimuli than the 2min subjects. Hence, we expect a statistical interaction
between the types of stimuli and before-rating times (2and 7-min).

Method

Figure 1: The T puzzle: Construct a shape of “T,” using
four pieces on the left side.

an hour to solve it spontaneously. Furthermore, more
than a few give up trying to solve it.
The difficulties can be explained by the constraints described in the previous section. The object-level constraint in this puzzle is concerned with the preference
for how a single piece should be placed, because pieces
are objects in the problem representation. People have a
strong tendency to place the pentagon piece either horizontally or vertically (Suzuki & Hiraki, 1997). A previous study revealed that subjects placed this piece horizontally or vertically in about 70% of their trials.
The relational constraint in this puzzle is concerned
with how one piece is physically connected to one another. The puzzle of this type has an infinite number of
relations, because one can produce different patterns by
sliding a side of a piece touching another. But, again,
people have a strong tendency to connect pieces so as to
form a “good” shape with fewer angles. If this constraint
actually operates with the goal constraint that evaluates
the difference between the current shape and the image
of T, it is predicted that people spend most of their time
filling the notch of the pentagon. The prediction was confirmed by a previous study which showed more than 70%
of the subjects’ trials involved notch filling.

Experiment 1
Since our theory predicts that the frequency of constraint
violation increases during problem-solving by noticing
failure, we analyzed the time-course of constraint violation in Experiment 1. Another dependent variable was
subjects’ rating score. We used a rating task where subjects evaluated the closeness of various types of combinations of two pieces to the goal. The rating materials
were a set of combinations of the pentagon and one of
the other pieces, produced by systematically violating
the constraints. To control the degrees of relaxation, we
divided subjects into two groups, 2-min and 7-min conditions. Subjects were required to solve the puzzle for
two or seven minutes, then proceeded to the rating task.
Since subjects in the 7-min condition have failed more
often than those in 2-min condition, the theory predicts
that the degree of relaxation is higher in the former than
in the latter (this is an empirical issue to be examined
later). If so, their ratings should be different. According to the theory, the 7-min subjects are more sensitive

Subjects Participants were 33 undergraduate students
without any prior experience to solve the T puzzle. They
were randomly assigned to 2-min or 7-min condition. We
omitted subjects who solved the puzzle before the rating
task. Resulting 26 subjects (12 in the 2-min and 14 in the
7-min conditions) were analyzed.
Rating Materials The rating materials consisted of 12
combinations of the pentagon and one of the other pieces
(big, small trapezoids, or triangle). These combinations formed four types: O–R– where neither constraints
were violated, O–R+ where not object-level, but relational constraint was violated, O+R– where the violating
pattern was reversed, and O+R+ where both constraints
were relaxed. Since each type had three members depending on which piece was used (big, small trapezoids,
or triangle), the total number of rating stimuli was 12.
Procedure The subjects were given the four pieces of
the T puzzle and a sheet of paper printed with a 25%
reduced-size image of a constructed T. Subjects were
asked to construct the shape of “T” using the pieces, with
the information about the time allowed to spend before
the rating task (2 or 7 minutes).
In the rating task, they were told to rate how close a
presented stimulus was to the shape of T with respect
to the goal of constructing T, and to click “10” if the
stimulus was very close, “0” if it was far from the goal,
and other numbers for the intermediary degrees of closeness. Stimulus was presented in a semi-random order
that stimuli belonging to the same type were not presented successively. Stimulus presentation time was two
seconds, and time for the rating was five seconds.
After completing the rating task, the subjects were
asked to resume solving the puzzle. If subjects could
not solve the puzzle within 10 minutes from the beginning, the experimenter gave subjects the first hint not to
fill the notch of the pentagon (the hint for the violation
of the relational constraint). When subjects could not
solve the puzzle within five minutes after the first hint,
the experimenter gave the second hint not to place the
pentagon horizontally or vertically. The entire problemsolving processes were video–taped for the later analysis.

Results and Discussion
To analyze the problem-solving performance, we used a
segment as a unit of analysis, in addition to the solution
time. A segment is operationally defined as a series of actions that was initiated by physically joining two pieces
and terminated by their separation. A segment roughly
corresponds to a trial that begins with trying an approach
and ends up with noticing failure. It is worth noting that

the notion of segment is not a subjective one, because
the definition is based only on physical connections and
separations of pieces.
Constraint violation To analyze the time-course of
constraint violation, we divided problem-solving processes into four phases, based on the segments (segments
after the hints were not included). We counted a segment
as a violation of object-level constraint, if the segment
did not include the horizontal or vertical placement of
the pentagon. We counted a segment as a violation of the
relational constraint, if the segment did not have actions
to fill the notch of the pentagon by other pieces. Since
we found no difference between the two conditions, we
merged data obtained from 2- and 7-min conditions. Table 1 shows the proportions of constraint violations in
each phase. We conducted one-way ANOVAs for the violation of each constraint separately. We could not find
significant time-course difference in the number of segments where the constraints were violated.

Table 1: The percentages of constraint violation in each
phase.
1/4 2/4 3/4 4/4
object-level constraint (%) 24 21 25 25
relational constraint (%)
36 38 38 46

Presenting various types of stimulus did not have a
strong effect on the problem-solving performance. The
proportions of subjects who solved the puzzle within
three minutes after the rating task were 25% in the 2min condition, and 28.6% in the 7-min condition. These
results suggest that majority of the subjects were unable
to utilize the useful information presented in the rating
task. Additionally, the solution times were not different
between the two conditions (U2−min (12, 14) = 66, ns.).
Rating Before analyzing the rating task data, it is
necessary to examine the assumption about constraintrelaxation. Our theory predicts that the more often subjects fail, the more relaxed their constraints are. Hence,
we must first examine whether the subjects in the 7-min
condition actually failed more often before the rating task
than those in the 2-min condition. As we expected, the
average number of the segments before the rating task
in the 7-min condition was 45.6, while that in the 2-min
condition was 17.4 (t(24) = 7.79, p <. 001).
Table 2 shows the rating score for each type of stimulus. Although the ratings for R–O–, R–O+, R+O– were
not different between the two groups, it appears that the
7-min subjects rated the R+O+ type stimuli closer to
the goal than the 2-min subjects did. Thus, we conducted a three-way ANOVA to examine the interaction
between the types of the stimulus and the conditions.
However, the interaction did not reach the significant
level (F(3, 72) < 1, ns.), although there was a main effect of the stimulus types (F(3, 72) = 10.93, p <. 005).

Pair-wise comparisons revealed that for both conditions,
the R+O+ type was rated closer to the goal than the other
types.

Table 2: Mean rating score.
R–O– R–O+ R+O– R+O+
2-min
2.73
2.96
3.90
4.29
7-min
2.83
3.04
3.94
5.35

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 did not support the hypotheses. We found no time-course difference in the frequencies of constraint violations. Furthermore, there was no
statistical interaction between the rating scores and the
problem-solving time before the rating task. Do these
results dismiss the dynamic constraint relaxation theory?
There is, however, the possibility that even for the 7min subjects, the constraints were less relaxed than expected. According to our theory, one reason is concerned
with the goal constraint. As described earlier, the goal
constraint plays crucial roles by evaluating the match between the goal and the present state and by giving feedback to the constraints for their relaxation. Actually, previous research revealed that the goal constraint greatly
facilitated problem-solving performance (Suzuki et al.,
1999). In that experiment, some subjects were given a
template sheet printed with an image of a constructed
“T,” and asked to cover the image by placing the four
pieces. Providing the template sheet is expected to facilitate the evaluation of the (mis)match between a current
state and the goal. As expected, these subjects solved
the puzzle significantly faster than those without the template sheet.
In Experiment 1, subjects were given a sheet of paper
printed with an image of “T,” but the size was reduced to
25%. In addition, the subjects were not allowed to put
the pieces on the sheet. This procedure may cause the
goal constraint to operate less effectively. Experiment 2
explores this possibility, by providing the template sheet
and instructing subjects to cover the sheet by the pieces.

Method
Subjects Subjects were 20 undergraduate students
who had no experience with the “T” puzzle. None of
them participated in the previous experiment. These subjects were randomly assigned to either the 1-min or 5min condition. We omitted three subjects in the 1-min
condition and one subject in the 5-min condition who
solved the puzzle before the rating task.
Materials The rating materials were 12 combinations
of the pentagon and one of the other pieces used in Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was basically the same as
that of Experiment 1, but there were two modifications.

The first one was to provide subjects with a template
sheet printed with an image of “T” and to ask them to
cover the image by placing the four pieces. The second
one was that the time to solve the puzzle before rating
was changed from two and seven to one and five minutes. This was because in a previous study, half of the
subjects with the template sheet solved the puzzle within
seven minutes.

Results and Discussion
Constraint violation To examine the time course of
constraint-violation, we divided the entire problemsolving processes into four phases and counted the number of violations in each quarter, as for Experiment 1.
We omitted segments after the hints and merged data obtained from 1- and 5-min conditions. Although the increase of the violation of the relational constraint was not
statistically significant (F(3, 48) = 1.07, ns.), the number
of violations of object-level constraints increased dramatically (F(3, 48) = 7.89, p <. 001). Pair-wise comparisons revealed that the violations of object-level constraints in the final quarter was higher than the others.
The lack of an increase in the number of the relational
constraint violations might be due to the fact that the
template sheet relaxed the relational constraint from earlier stages. It should be noted that, although the number
of constraint violation increased during problem-solving,
the constraint violations were observed even in the first
quarter. It means that the cue-readiness problem is involved, even when the template sheet was available.

Table 3: The percentages of segments violating the
object-level and relational constraints.
1/4 2/4 3/4 4/4
Object-level constraint (%)
6 19 13 46
Relational constraint (%)
40 41 47 47

Rating As in the previous experiment, we first examined the assumption that 5-min subjects failed more often
than 1-min subjects. The average numbers of segments
was 50.7 in the 5-min condition and 7.6 in the 1-min condition (t(11) = 10.15, p <. 001).
The ratings of each condition were summarized in
Table 4. Unlike Experiment 1, we obtained different
patterns of ratings. A three-way ANOVA (object-level
× relational constraint × before-rating time (1- or 5min)) revealed a significant main effect of the relational
constraint(F(1, 14) = 41.12, p <. 001) and interaction
between the relational constraint and the time before the
rating (F(1, 14) = 10.06, p <. 01). Although subjects in
both conditions gave high rating scores for stimuli that
violated the relational constraint, the 5-min subjects gave
the highest score for stimuli violating both constraints,
whereas the 1-min subjects did so for the stimuli violating only the relational constraint.

Table 4: Mean rating score.
R–O– R–O+ R+O– R+O+
1-min
2.54
2.42
4.38
2.88
5-min
2.58
3
4.04
5.46

General Discussion
In this paper, We propose the dynamic constraint relaxation theory to investigate mechanisms underlying the
cue-readiness in insight problem-solving. Our theory assumes that initial impasses are caused by the object-level
and relational constraints and that these constraints are
gradually relaxed by failures detected by the goal constraint. If our theory is correct, two predictions can
be made. First, constraint violations increase during
problem-solving processes, because constraints are more
relaxed by facing more failures. Second, for the same
reason, sudden noticing of crucial information is more
likely observed in problem-solvers with more failures
than those with fewer. If so, the ratings for constraintviolating stimuli should be different between them.
In order to examine these predictions, we conducted
two experiments, using the T puzzle. Subjects’ tasks
were to solve the puzzle and to rate the closeness of various types of stimulus to the shape of “T.” However, we
could not obtain any supporting results in Experiment 1.
The frequencies of constraint violations did not increase
during problem-solving, and the ratings were not statistically different between the 2- and 7-min conditions.
However, we found confirming evidence in Experiment
2 where the goal constraint operated more effectively by
the template sheet. Violation of the object-level constraint increased when problem-solving proceeded. Furthermore, the ratings of subjects with more failures were
different from those with fewer failures in a predicted
way.
These results suggest that cue-readiness is caused
by constraint relaxation. Due to noticing failure, the
probabilities of constraint violations increases during
the problem-solving processes, which makes problemsolvers ready to utilize crucial information. Another implication for the problem is that constraint violation at a
single level may not be sufficient for insight and it should
be coupled with violation at another level.
It is interesting to contrast our theory with a similar
view proposed by Knoblich et al. (1999). They have
proposed that constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition play key roles in insight problem-solving. Using
matchstick arithmetic problems, they found empirical evidence supporting their theory.
Although both theories admit the key roles of constraint relaxation, there are a number of differences between the two. First, constraints used by Knoblich and
their colleagues are task-specific. For example, they
listed constraints concerning values, operators, and tautology. These constraints are specific to matchstick arithmetic problems, which makes it difficult for their theory

to apply to a large number of insight problems that have
no numerical values, mathematical operators, or equal
sign.
Second, their theory is not dynamic in the sense that
they do not assume any interactions with external environment. In their experiment, subjects were required to
mentally transform various equations to desired states,
which prohibits feedback from the external environment.
As Seifert et al. (1995) properly claimed, we obtain
information important for modifying our internal states
as well as achieving the goal. Therefore, their theory
of insight cannot explain findings in the present study,
such as the time-course differences of the frequencies of
constraint-violation and in the rating patterns observed in
Experiment 2.
Third, related to the second, their theory cannot deal
with the issue of what relaxes the constraints. They predicted the ease of relaxation based on the notion of the
scope of constraints. However, what triggers constraint
relaxation remains unanswered. In addition, the scope of
the constraint cannot give a principled explanation for the
relaxation patterns of the constraints. According to their
theory, the relational constraint in our study has wider
scope than the object-level one, because the former binds
more than one element whereas the latter binds a single
element. Thus, their theory predicts that the object-level
constraint is more easily relaxed than the relational one.
However, we obtained the opposite patterns of relaxation
in Experiment 2.
To summarize, we agree that constraints forms an impasse and that insight is achieved by constraint relaxation, but oppose their notion of purely “cognitive” insight as well as task-specificity of constraints.

Acknowledgment
This research was supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (C)(No. 10610082 and 12680390).
We thank Steven Phillips for his helpful proofreading and
comments, and Yasuhiro Hiraoka for his help in conducting the experiments.

References
Bridle, J. (1989) Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classification network outputs with relationships
to statistical pattern recognition. In F. FogelmanSoulie & J. Herault (Eds.) Neuro-computing: Algorithms, Architectures. Springer-Verlag.
Hiraki, K. & Suzuki, H. (1998) Dynamic constraint relaxation as a theory of insight. Bulletin of Cognitive
Science, 5, 69 – 79. (In Japanese with an English abstract)
Holyoak, K. J. & Thagard, P. (1995) Mental Leaps:
Analogy in Creative Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Isaak, M. I. and Just, M. A. (1995) Constraints on thinking in insight and invention. In R. J. Sternberg and J.
E. Davidson (Eds.) The Nature of Insight. Cambridge,
MA: MIT.

Kaplan, C. A. and Simon, H. A. (1990) In search of insight. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374 – 419.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999) Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition
in insight problem-solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25,
1534 – 1555.
Ohlsson, S. (1992) Information processing explanations
of insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane and
K. J. Gilhooly (Eds.) Advances in the Psychology of
Thinking, vol. 1, Hertfordshire, UK: Harvester.
Rosch, E. (1978) Principles of categorization. In E.
Rosch & B. Lloyd (Eds.) Cognition and Categorization. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Seifert, C. M., Meyer, D. E., Davidson, N., Patalano,
A. L. & Yaniv, I. (1995) Demystification of cognitive
insight: Opportunistic assimilation and the preparedmind perspective. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson
(Eds.) The Nature of Insight. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Suzuki, H. & Hiraki, K. (1997) Constraints and their relaxation in the processes of insight. ETL Technical
Report, TR–97–13.
Suzuki, H., Miyazaki, M. & Hiraki, K. (1999) Goal constraints in insight problem-solving. Proceedings of
the Second International Conference on Cognitive Science, 159 – 164.
Sternberg, R. J. and Davidson, J. E. (1995) The Nature of
Insight. Cambridge, MA: MIT.

