UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deference in Categorisation: Evidence for Essentialism?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4hx0h6m3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Braisby, Nick

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deference in Categorisation: Evidence for Essentialism?
Nick Braisby (N.R.Braisby@open.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, The Open University, Walton Hall,
Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK

Abstract
Many studies appear to show that categorization
conforms to psychological essentialism (e.g., Gelman &
Wellman, 1991).
However, key implications of
essentialism have not been scrutinized. These are that
people’s categorizations should shift as their knowledge
of micro-structural properties shift, and that people
should defer in their categorizations to appropriate
experts. Three studies are reported. The first shows that
even gross changes in genetic structure do not radically
shift categorizations of living kinds. The second and
third reveal a pattern of conditional deference to experts,
coupled with systematic deference to non-experts. It is
argued that these results point towards only a partial role
for essentialism in explaining categorization, and a
continuing role for theories that emphasize the
importance of appearance and/or functional properties.

Introduction
Theories of concepts have shifted markedly over the
past twenty years (Medin, 1989). Early theories were
characterised by the view that similarity determines
category membership, and that similarity-based models
can account for a range of empirical evidence
concerning human categorisation (e.g., Rosch, 1975;
Rosch & Mervis, 1975). However, Murphy & Medin
(1985), building on the earlier critiques of philosophers
such as Goodman (1972), argued that similarity was a
notion of weak explanatory value. Instead, they
proposed that lay or common-sense theories were
responsible for determining category membership.
There have since been many demonstrations of the
influence of common-sense theories on category
learning (e.g., Murphy, 1993; Kaplan & Murphy, 2000;
Spalding & Murphy, 1996) and on categorisation itself
(e.g., Keil, 1986, 1989; Rips, 1989). Nonetheless
difficulties with theory-based accounts of categorisation
remain. Margolis & Laurence (1999) and Fodor (1998)
both point to the difficulties for theory-based views in
accounting for error and ignorance.
A variant of the theory-based approach has also been
proposed – psychological essentialism (Medin, 1989;
Medin & Ortony, 1989). According to this, people tend
to believe that objects have essences that are grounded
in micro-structural properties (e.g., genetic properties
for categorising organisms), and it is this belief that
guides their categorisation, even though the belief may
turn out to be false. This psychological essentialism

differs from metaphysical essentialism (cf. Kripke,
1980; Putnam, 1975), which is the stronger doctrine
that members of natural categories do in fact possess
essences that determine their category membership.
Much evidence has been cited in support of
psychological essentialism.
Aside from earlier
demonstrations from Carey (1985), Keil (1986, 1989)
and Rips (1989) that similarity does not always
determine categorisation, other studies have suggested
that even young children are disposed to categorise
objects according to presumed essences (Gelman &
Medin, 1993; Gelman, 2000). Gelman & Wellman
(1991) showed that 4 and 5 year old children appear to
believe that an apple seed will grow into an apple tree,
regardless of the environment in which this happens.
Apparently children believe something inside the seed,
and not contingent features of the environment, is
causally responsible for the properties it later acquires.
In spite of the support essentialism has received, there
have been counter claims. Malt (1994) showed that
categorisation of instances of water is not fully
explained by the proportion of H2O people believe the
instances contain. She argued for the importance of
function instead. Braisby, Franks & Hampton (1996)
showed that categorisation is at odds with predictions
suggested by Putnam and Kripke’s articulation of
essentialism. Instead they argued categorisation was
perspectival or context-sensitive. Kalish (1995) showed
fuzziness in category boundaries that he argued was
incompatible with essentialism. Yet, in a rejoinder,
Diesendruck & Gelman (1999) have argued that
findings such as these are compatible with essentialism.
This paper aims to add empirical evidence concerning
psychological essentialism by examining an important
implication of the essentialist view that has remained
largely unexplored.
Putnam (1975) developed a
corollary of his essentialist view that he labelled the
Division of Linguistic Labour. While being developed
around word meaning, these arguments have
nonetheless been taken to apply to concepts (e.g.,
Fodor, 1998). So interpreted they have the following
implications. If categorisation is determined by microstructural properties such as genetic, chemical or
biological properties, then scientists who are expert in
the appropriate domain are likely to have more
information than lay-people on which to base their
categorisations. If lay people are essentialist, they

should rationally defer to people with more knowledge
of the relevant properties. For instance, if a metallurgist
pronounces a gold watch to be “not gold,” other things
being equal, essentialism requires our categorizations to
change accordingly.
Deference arises from this
division of linguistic labour – scientists are deemed to
labour to uncover essential properties, while lay-people
‘piggy-back’ on their expertise. Putnam suggests there
is a social dimension to concepts and categorization,
one in which categorization by non-experts is intimately
tied to, and parasitic on, categorization by experts.
There have been a number of recent theoretical
examinations of deference (e.g., Fodor, 1998; though
see Segal, 2000, for a different position), and different
accounts proposed. Yet there has been no empirical
evidence cited in support of these accounts. Similarly,
studies have examined expertise in relation to
categorization (e.g., Medin, Lynch, Coley & Atran,
1997), but have not been designed to tap the claims of
essentialism. This paper seeks to establish, first,
whether deference occurs and, second, parameters
which govern that deference and, in so doing, offer a
further evaluation of psychological essentialism.
The studies all examine the way in which genetically
modified organisms are categorised. This is for two
reasons. First, many prior examinations of essentialism
have employed counterfactual scenarios involving
fantastical transformations and/or discoveries of an
object’s properties. These scenarios may be hard to
understand and use unfamiliar transformations.
Second, few studies have examined how categorization
changes as a function of changes in the information
people possess about properties thought to be essential,
such as genetic properties. Focusing on genetic
modification allows the use of transformations of which
people are likely to be aware, and allows a careful
examination of the dependence of categorisation on
genetic properties. It also allows the identification of
groups thought to be expert and inexpert.
The first study examines the extent to which putative
modifications in the genetic structure of organisms lead
to changes in the way those organisms are categorized.
Studies 2 and 3 examine the extent to which lay-people
defer in categorisation. Study 2 examines deference to
expert groups, predicted by essentialism, and study 3
functions as a control, examining deference to nonexpert groups that is not predicted by essentialism.

Study 1
This study considers the way in which the
categorisation of natural (living) kinds depends upon
knowledge of the kind’s genetic properties.

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three

conditions that varied according to the extent and nature
of the modification – a Purification/Genetic
Modification condition; a Same Super-ordinate
category genetic modification condition; and an Other
Super-ordinate category genetic modification condition.

Method
Participants 68 undergraduate psychology students
attending an Open University residential school
volunteered to participate.
Materials Four natural (living) kinds were chosen:
apple, potato, salmon, chicken. These were chosen also
to be food-stuffs so that they, and the prospect of their
genetic modification, would be relatively familiar to the
participants. Within these constraints, the kinds were
also chosen to be as typical as possible of their
immediate super-ordinate categories (i.e., fruit,
vegetable, fish, bird).
Procedure Participants were presented with 8
scenarios, involving 2 different kinds of transformation
for each natural kind category.
In the
Purification/Genetic Modification condition, half the
scenarios referred to purification, half to genetic
modification. In the Same Super-ordinate condition,
transformations involved either 50% or approx. 100%
of genetic material being taken from a member of the
same super-ordinate category (e.g., for salmon, genetic
material would come from other fish). In the Other
Super-ordinate condition, transformations involved
either 50% or approx. 100% of genetic material being
taken from a category outside the super-ordinate (e.g.,
for salmon, from animals that are not fish).
The scenarios adopted the following form where X
refers to one of the four kinds and Y refers to the
relevant super-ordinate: “You have just bought an X
from a reputable retailer. However, on examining its
packaging closely, you discover that the X has been
(genetically modified/purified, so as to remove many of
the impurities often found in X/genetically modified,
with around half of its genetic material coming from
other Y/genetically modified, with nearly all of its
genetic material coming from other Y/ genetically
modified, with around half of its genetic material
coming from [animals/plants] that are not Y/genetically
modified, with nearly all of its genetic material coming
from [animals/plants] that are not Y). In all other
respects though the object looks, feels, smells and tastes
just like an X.” On reading each scenario, participants
were asked to answer six questions, including a
categorization question (Is the object that you have
bought an X?).
Since the opening sentence of the scenarios refers to
the object as a member of the category in question, this

procedure may lead to an underestimate of the impact
of the transformations. However, this potential bias is
difficult to avoid since failing to refer to the object as a
member of a category would pragmatically imply that
the object was thought not to be a member of the
category, thus generating a potential opposing bias.

Results
Responses to the categorization question were analysed
by a series of log-linear analyses (analysis of the other
questions will not be reported). Different analyses were
conducted for the three main conditions. The over-all
results are shown in table 1.
Table 1. Percentage of Yes responses by condition
Transformation
Purification
Modification
50% same super-ordinate
100% same super-ordinate
50% other super-ordinate
100% other super-ordinate

% Yes responses
98.0
96.0
57.0
44.0
52.5
47.5

Purification/Genetic Modification Surprisingly, there
was no effect of type of modification (i.e., purification
vs. genetic modification), with 96.7% of all responses
being Yes (i.e., responses that the purified or
genetically modified object is a member of the kind).
Same Super-ordinate and Other Super-ordinate
These conditions were combined for analysis.
Categorisation depended upon the extent of the
modification (i.e., 50% vs. approx. 100% genetic
material being modified): when 50% of genetic material
was modified, 55.0% of responses were Yes, which fell
to 41.7% when approx. 100% of the material was
modified (partial chi-square(1) = 12.45, p < 0.001).
There was a marginal effect of the type of genetic
material introduced: when material came from the same
super-ordinate, 50.5% of responses were Yes, which
fell to 45.6% when material came from another superordinate (partial chi-square(1) = 3.50, p = 0.06).

Discussion of Study 1
These results support the view that changes in genetic
structure introduce changes in the way people
categorize living kinds. While this is consistent with
essentialism, what is striking about these results is how
little categorization changes in the face of gross
changes in genetic structure. Living kinds that have
simply been ‘genetically modified’ are regarded almost
universally as remaining members of the kind. Even
when nearly all of a salmon’s genetic material is said to
come from animals that are not fish, approximately half
of all responses still treat the object as a salmon. Given

that humans and chimpanzees share approximately 98%
of their DNA, the resistance of categorization to the
influence of genetic modification is remarkable.
One explanation that is compatible with essentialism
is that people’s knowledge of genetic properties is so
poor that the scenarios used here merely render them
uncertain in their categorization. They may be unsure,
for instance, whether genetic properties are likely to be
essential or not. Indeed, a pattern of around 50% Yes
and 50% no responses is suggestive of uncertainty.
Another explanation, however, is that people are not
only weighing the genetic properties of the objects, but
also their appearance and functional properties and that,
in these scenarios, they outweigh the genetic influence.
Contra essentialism, this suggests that categorization is
determined in part by non-micro-structural properties.
The patterns of approx. 50% Yes responses also
imply that these scenarios are ideal for investigating
Putnam’s division of linguistic labour, since uncertainty
is likely to increase the influence of expert opinion.
This is the focus for studies 2 and 3.

Study 2
This study considers the way in which people’s
categorizations depend on those of expert scientists.

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions, selected from Study 1: a Genetic
Modification condition; a 50% Same Super-ordinate
condition; and a 50% Other Super-ordinate condition.

Method
Participants 90 undergraduate psychology students
attending an Open University residential school
volunteered to participate.
Materials The same materials as in Study 1 were used.
Procedure A similar procedure to Study 1 was used.
However, information concerning how an expert group
categorized each object was incorporated immediately
after the description of the modification. In the genetic
modification condition, the scenario read as follows:
“You have just bought an X from a reputable retailer.
However, on examining its packaging closely, you
discover that the X has been genetically modified.
According to most biologists the object (is/is not) an X.
In all other respects though the object looks, feels,
smells and tastes just like an X.” Each of the 4 natural
kinds was presented twice, once with an affirmative and
once with a negative expert categorization judgement,
yielding 8 scenarios. Participants were asked the same
questions as in Study 1.

Results
Log-linear analyses were conducted for the three main
conditions. Over-all results are shown in figure 1.
Genetic Modification Categorization varied according
to how the biologists had judged the same
categorizations: 87.5% of responses were Yes when the
biologists had said Yes; 75.6% of responses were No
when the biologists said No (partial chi-square(1) =
131.66, p < 0.001). Participants deferred more when
the biologists said Yes than when the biologists said No
(partial chi-square(1) = 6.57, p <0.05).
50% Same Super-ordinate This condition yielded
similar findings: 85.8% of categorization responses
were Yes when the biologists had said Yes and 76.7%
of responses were No when the biologists said No
(partial chi-square(1) = 125.93, p < 0.001). Participants
again deferred more when the biologists said Yes
(partial chi-square(1) = 3.86, p <0.05).
50% Other Super-ordinate Similar findings emerged:
62.9% of responses were Yes when the biologists had
said Yes and 72.7% of responses were No when the
biologists said No (partial chi-square(1) = 32.94, p <
0.001). This time, however, participants deferred more
when the biologists said No than when the biologists
said Yes (partial chi-square(1) = 3.32, p <0.05).
Further analysis showed the number of Yes responses
differed across these two latter conditions (partial chisquare(1) = 6.85, p <0.01). Also, the dependence of
categorization on the Biologists’ prior categorization
differed across these two conditions (partial chisquare(1) = 7.58, p < 0.01). These results are discussed
in conjunction with those of Study 3.

Study 3
This study considers the way in which people’s
categorizations depend on those of non-experts.

Design
Participants were assigned to conditions as in Study 2.

Method
Participants 62 psychology students attending an Open
University residential school volunteered to participate.
Materials The same materials as in Study 1 were used.
Procedure A similar procedure to Study 2 except that
information
concerning
an
expert
group’s
categorization was replaced by information about a
non-expert group’s categorization.
The word
“biologists” was replaced with the word “shoppers” to

produce the scenarios. Again, each natural kind was
presented twice, once with an affirmative and once with
a negative non-expert judgement. Participants were
asked the same questions as in Studies 1 and 2.
100
80

Modification
50% same super-ordinate
50% other super-ordinate

60
40
20
0
Yes
No
Biologists' Judgement
Figure 1. Percentage Yes responses by transformation
type and the biologists' judgements

Results
Similar analyses to study 2 were conducted. Over-all
results are shown in figure 2.
Genetic Modification Categorization varied according
to how the shoppers had judged the same
categorizations: 86.4.% of responses were Yes when the
shoppers had said Yes; 36.4% of responses were No
when the shoppers said No (partial chi-square(1) =
18.92, p < 0.001). Participants deferred more when the
shoppers said Yes than when the shoppers said No
(partial chi-square(1) = 53.24, p <0.001).
50% Same Super-ordinate This condition yielded
similar results: 71.3% of responses were Yes when the
shoppers said Yes; 55.0% of responses were No when
the shoppers said No (partial chi-square(1) = 19.02, p <
0.001). Deference was greater when the shoppers said
Yes (partial chi-square(1) = 4.81, p <0.05).
50% Other Super-ordinate Rather different results
emerged: 44.3% of responses were Yes when the
shoppers said Yes; 68.8% of responses were No when
the shoppers said No (partial chi-square(1) = 4.16, p <
0.05). This deference was greater when the shoppers
said No (partial chi-square(1) = 10.30, p <0.01).
Further analysis showed that the number of Yes
responses varied across these two latter conditions
(partial chi-square(1) = 15.81, p <0.001). Also, the
dependence of categorization on the Shoppers’
categorization varied marginally by these two
conditions (partial chi-square(1) = 3.66, p = 0.06).

100
80

Modification
50% same super-ordinate
50% other super-ordinate

60
40
20
0
Yes
No
Biologists' Judgements
Figure 2. Percentage Yes responses by transformation
type and by the shoppers' judgements

Discussion of Studies 2 and 3
Studies 2 and 3 show a complex pattern of responding.
In study 2, most responses made by participants
conform to those of the expert group (biologists).
Superficially at least, this appears to show support for
essentialism, and Putnam’s division of linguistic labour.
Nonetheless, study 2 also shows other influences on
categorization, ones that are not so easily explained by
an essentialist account. Firstly, there is a substantial
minority of responses that are in opposition to those of
the biologists. For the 50% Other Super-ordinate
condition, there is greater opposition when the
biologists’ judge the organism to be a member of the
kind. For the 50% Same Super-ordinate condition,
there is greater opposition when the biologists’ judge
the organism not to be a member of the kind. While it
would be difficult to argue these completely undermine
the apparent support for essentialism that the majority
of responses show, they do raise the question as to why
participants are choosing to categorise in opposition to
the experts, and so presumably in opposition to the
micro-structural properties.
They also raise the
question as to how much deference essentialism
predicts.
The findings of study 2 suggest that while people do
defer to experts, they do so less when the experts’
judgements are contrary to their own – the deference is
conditional. The question then arises as to what is
influencing people’s categorization so strongly that they
will disregard the opinions of experts to whom they will
defer in other circumstances. One possibility is that
these findings point towards a continuing role for
appearance and functional properties in categorizing
natural kinds.
Participants in all of the studies were given the
opportunity to offer written comments, and some of
these support the importance of appearance and
functional properties. One participant wrote: “If

biologists said it was a fruit, that’s OK. If biologists
said it was not a fruit, that’s not OK.” This comment
bolsters the view that the pattern of deference that is
revealed is conditional. Another participant wrote “The
apple we eat is not defined by biologists but by how it
looks and tastes to non-experts” thus revealing a
strongly non-deferential position.
These suggestions from study 2 are supported by
study 3. Since shoppers generally are not expert with
regard to the genetic properties of organisms, there is
no essentialist basis for people to defer to this group.
Nonetheless, this study revealed deference, albeit to a
much smaller degree than in study 2. It also revealed
similar systematic variation in deference. For the 50%
Same Super-ordinate condition, people showed greater
conformity when the shoppers judged the organism to
be a member of the kind. For the 50% Other Superordinate condition, there was greater conformity with
the shoppers’ judgement when the shoppers judged the
organism not to be a member of the kind. Again, it may
be that people are more willing to ‘defer’ when the
shoppers’ judgement conforms to their own.

General Discussion
Overall, it seems as if deference to expert groups
occurs, and more so than to non-expert groups.
However, the extent of the deference depends upon how
the organism has been transformed, and on what
categorization judgement the expert group gives. This
then is a pattern of partial or conditional deference.
Deference to non-expert groups also occurs and this
raises questions concerning the basis on which people
may defer in categorization. If people defer to others,
such as shoppers, who do not possess expertise with
regard to the relevant micro-structural properties, then
we may also question why people defer to experts.
Could it be that people defer to experts not because of
their presumed greater knowledge of micro-structural
properties?
The systematic influences on deference, coupled with
the striking resistance of categorization to gross
changes in genetic properties, suggest that
categorization is influenced both by micro-structural
properties and by appearance and functional properties.
This may be explicable on a perspectival view of
concepts, according to which concepts have multiple
contents that shift systematically according to
perspective and context (Braisby, 1998). On such a
view, concepts might reflect essential, micro-structural
properties from some perspectives, but appearance
and/or functional properties from others.
These
findings would then reveal a conflict for people seeking
to categorize natural kinds: between deferring to experts
on the micro-structural properties on the one hand,
while being influenced by appearance and functional
properties on the other. If this is right, then the findings

reported here suggest that essentialism can provide only
a partial explanation of concepts and categorization.
Nonetheless, these studies represent just the first step
in a wider programme of much needed research, one
that raises many difficult questions. These studies have
used objects whose appearance and functional
properties are stipulated to be fixed, and whose microstructural properties are manipulated. What would
happen under the reverse conditions? Essentialism
would predict little impact of changes in appearance
and function relative to micro-structural properties.
How should deference be operationalised? It has been
operationalised in these studies as a switch in
categorization due to the categorizations of others. But
are there other, better ways of operationalising it?
Finally, how are we to make sense of the interplay
between categorization and social influences? Finally,
what is the relation between deference and conformity
or compliance? These studies suggest a fruitful
interaction between social psychological work on these
issues and the cognitive psychology of categorization.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Bradley Franks for discussions of
the ideas contained herein; any errors remain my own.

References
Braisby, N. (1998). Compositionality and the modelling
of complex concepts. Minds and Machines, 8(4),
479-508.
Braisby, N., Franks, B., & Hampton, J. (1996).
Essentialism, word use, and concepts. Cognition, 59,
247-274.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Diesendruck G. & Gelman S. A.(1999). Domain
differences in absolute judgments of category
membership: Evidence for an essentialist account of
categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
6(2), 338-346.
Fodor, J. (1998). Concepts: Where cognitive science
went wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. A. (2000). The role of essentialism in
children's concepts. Advances in Child Development
and Behavior, 27, 55-98.
Gelman, S. A. & Medin, D. L. (1993). What’s so
essential about essentialism? A different perspective
on the interaction of perception, language, and
conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Development, 8,
157-167.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essences: Early understandings of the nonobvious.
Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Goodman, N. (1972). Seven strictures on similarity. In
N. Goodman, Problems and projects. Indianapolis,
IN.: Bobbs-Merrill.

Kalish C. W. (1995). Essentialism and graded
membership in animal and artifact categories.
Memory & Cognition, 23(3), 335-353.
Kaplan, A. S. & Murphy, G. L. (2000) Category
learning with minimal prior knowledge. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory And
Cognition, 26(4), 829-846.
Keil, F. (1986). Conceptual development and category
structure. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Concepts and
conceptual development. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds and cognitive
development. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and necessity. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Malt, B. C. (1994). Water is not H2O. Cognitive
Psychology, 27, 41-70.
Margolis, E. & Laurence, S. (1999). Introduction. In
E. Margolis & S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts: Core
readings. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Medin, D. L. (1989). Concepts and conceptual
structure. American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1481.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S.
(1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree
experts: Do all roads lead to Rome? Cognitive
Psychology, 32, 49-96.
Medin, D. L. & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Murphy, G. L. (1993). Theories and concept formation.
In I. Van Mechelen, J. Hampton, R. Michalski & P.
Theuns (Eds.), Categories and concepts: Theoretical
views and inductive data analysis. London: Academic
Press.
Murphy, G. L. & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of
theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological
Review, 92, 289-316.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of 'meaning.' In H.
Putnam, Mind, language, and reality: Philosophical
papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and
categorization. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Rosch, E. H. (1975).Cognitive representations of
semantic categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 104, 192-233.
Rosch, E. H. & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Segal, G. (2000). A slim book about narrow content.
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Spalding, T. L. & Murphy G. L. (1996). Effects of
background knowledge on category construction.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
Memory and Cognition, 22(2), 525-538.

