UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Perceptual Complexity and Object Familiarity Matter for Novel Word Extension?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8s0739hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Sandhofer, Catherine M.
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Perceptual Complexity and Object Familiarity Matter for
Novel Word Extension?
Catherine M. Sandhofer (csandhof@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47404 USA

Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47404 USA

Abstract
This paper examines the relationship between shape
complexity and familiarity in extending novel adjectives.
Previous research has suggested that familiarity with an
object's basic level label determines the likelihood that a
novel adjective will be extended to new instances. The
present results do not support that conclusion. Instead the
results suggest that given an adjectival syntactic frame
children are likely to extend novel words to other objects
of the same material when the objects are simple in
shape. This result suggests that the perceptual properties
of objects and the lexical form class cues are integral to
understanding how children come to learn new words.

Introduction
How do children come to extend words to new
instances? This question is at the heart of research
understanding language development partially because
much of language learning presumably takes place
using ostensive definition: children learn a label for one
object, event, or property and are able to extend that
label to new instances. The task used to study this is the
novel word extension task. In this task a child is shown
an exemplar and the exemplar is labeled. The child is
then given other objects that match the exemplar on
different dimensions and the child is asked to select the
one that also has the same label. Although much of the
research in this area tends to focus on how children
extend novel count nouns, other grammatical classes
have been studied as well.
For example, previous work has suggested that when
encountering novel adjectives, children are likely to
extend the novel adjective to other objects of the same
material only if the objects are familiar to them. (Hall,
Waxman, & Hurwitz, 1993). Thus, young children can
extend the novel adjective “plush” to other objects of
the same material if the plush objects are familiar to the
child e.g. a shoe, but not if the objects are unfamiliar to
the child, e.g. a widget, even when the children are
provided with an adjectival syntactic frame. This
finding has been interpreted as evidence that children
are biased to expect a novel word to refer to a kind of

object. By this account children should extend novel
words to other objects of the same shape if the object is
unfamiliar to them and children should extend novel
words to objects sharing some other property when the
object is familiar to them.
However, Landau, Smith, and Jones (1992) and
Smith, Jones, and Landau (1992) have shown that
young children can generalize novel adjectives to other
objects that match in material. These results are
seemingly at odds with Hall, Waxman, & Hurwitz
(1993) because the objects presented to children in
these studies were unfamiliar objects and thus by Hall
et al’s proposal children should initially interpret the
novel words as referring to objects of the same shape or
object kind.
In addition, other research has shown that children
take the specific perceptual properties of objects into
account when extending novel words. For example,
several researchers (Soja, 1992; Dickinson, 1988; but
see Markman & Wachel, 1988 for contradictory
findings) have demonstrated that children extend novel
nouns to solid objects with the same shape, but children
extend novel nouns to non-solid substances with the
same material as an exemplar. Further, Imai and
Gentner (1997) have shown that children as young as
two years of age generalize simple objects, complex
objects, and substances differently.
Based on these previous results, we propose an
additional constraint that may guide whether children
are likely to extend a novel word to objects that match
an exemplar in shape vs. objects that match in other
properties. We call this the perceptual complexity
hypothesis. By this hypothesis, complex objects,
objects like tractors with multiple parts may be labeled
by more possible words than simple objects, like ball.
This may foster attention to shape if these other labels
point to properties (wheels, smokestack, engine) are
themselves correlated with shape. Thus, we predict that
attention to shape should be a stronger pull when the
objects are complex than when they are simple. This
idea is supported by previous findings by Imai and
Gentner (1997) that show when Japanese 2 year olds

are presented with simple objects or materials they are
likely to extend by material. However, when Japanese 2
year olds are presented with complex objects they are
likely to extend by shape.
We test this idea by presenting children with objects
that are either perceptually simple or complex and
objects that are either familiar or unfamiliar. If
perceptual complexity matters for word extension we
would expect children to more readily select objects
that match in material when the objects are simple.
However, if the perceptual complexity of the objects is
unimportant for word learning we would expect to see
no differences between the complex and simple objects.
In Experiment 1 we present the novel words in an
adjectival frame. In Experiment 2 we present the novel
words in a count noun frame.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we ask whether children are more
likely to extend novel adjectives to objects of the same
material or shape when the objects are simple or
complex and familiar or unfamiliar. We do so by
providing children with a novel word in an adjectival
syntactic frame. Previous work has shown that when
novel words are presented in a adjectival frame children
may match by material kind (Hall, Waxman, &
Hurwitz, 1993; Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1992; Smith,
Jones, & Landau, 1992).

Method
Participants Fifty-six 4-year-olds participated. Half
were male and half were female. The four year olds
ranged in age from 48 to 59 months. Fourteen children
(7 boys and 7 girls) were randomly assigned to each of
four conditions. Children were tested individually in
their preschools during normal school hours or in the
laboratory.
Design Subjects were assigned to one of four
conditions. In each condition the stimuli presented
varied in the level of shape complexity (simple vs.
complex) and familiarity (familiar or unfamiliar).
Simple shapes were defined as objects that were
composed of one or two parts whereas complex shapes
were defined as objects that were composed of many
parts. We assessed the shape complexity of the objects
by asking 10 undergraduates to rate each of the 48
objects used in the experiment on shape complexity
using a 5-point scale. Objects that were judged as not
very complex were given a score of 1 and objects that
were judged as very complex were given a score of 5.
Table 1 shows the mean complexity ratings for each of
the four conditions. As can be seen objects in the
simple conditions were judged as less complex than
objects in the complex conditions.

Table 1: Shape Complexity Ratings for the Four
Conditions
Condition
Simple familiar
Simple unfamiliar
Complex familiar
Complex unfamiliar

Rating
1.41 (.59)
1.53 (.61)
3.72 (.97)
3.94 (.91)

We defined objects as familiar if they were listed
on the MacArthur Communicative Development
Inventory: Words and Sentences, (Fenson et al, 1994) a
checklist of words known to 50% of all children by 30
months of age. However, two objects, heart and
bucket/pail, were not included on the MacArthur, but
pre-testing indicated these objects were known by many
four-year-old children. To ensure that unfamiliar
objects were truly unfamiliar to children, the unfamiliar
objects were made in the laboratory and did not
resemble any nameable objects.
Four triads of objects were used in each condition. In
each triad there was a target object, a shape matching
object and a material matching object. The shape
matching object matched the target in shape and object
kind but differed in material kind and related properties
such as color and texture. The material matching object
matched the target in material kind and related
properties but differed in shape and object kind. Figure
1 shows an example of a triad from each of the four
conditions. In each condition the exemplar object
matched one object by material and one by shape. The
four material matches were blue plush, natural wood,
silver metal, and paper.
Exemplar
(blue plush)

Material match
(blue plush)

Shape match
(yellow plastic)

simple
familiar
ball

heart

ball

complex
familiar
tractor

bug

tractor

simple
unfamiliar

complex
unfamiliar

Figure 1 Examples of stimuli for the four conditions of
Experiments 1 and 2.

We next examined children’s performance in the
adjective extension trials. Figure 2 shows the mean
number of material matching selections children made
in each of the four conditions. As can be seen, the
number of material choices was higher in the two
simple conditions than in the two complex conditions.
An ANOVA conducted on the number of material
choices confirmed this and revealed a main effect of
complexity F(1,52) = 25.19, p < .01, but no effects of
familiarity (power = .36) and no interaction (power =
.21). Thus the results suggest that the shape complexity
of the object, and not children’s familiarity with the
object, affects whether children generalize a novel
adjective to a material match or to a shape match.
4

familiar
unfamiliar
Mean number of material-matching selections

Procedure In each condition of the adjective extension
trials children were presented with an exemplar object
while the experimenter labeled it with a novel adjective.
For example, “See this? This is very wuggish. Can you
say wuggish?” A shape match and a material match
were then placed in front of the child, and the child was
asked, “Can you find another one that is very
wuggish?” This process was repeated for all four sets
in the condition. The words blickish, fepish, wuggish,
and zavish were used as the novel adjectives. The novel
adjectives and the adjective syntax were taken from
Hall, Waxman, and Hurwitz (1993).
Children were next presented with familiarity trials to
ensure that the familiar objects were indeed familiar
and the unfamiliar objects were unfamiliar to the
children. Children were first “trained” to answer the
familiarity trials by first presenting them with one
familiar object (a shoe). Children were asked “What is
this? What’s this called?” Children were liberally
praised for correctly labeling the shoe. Children were
next presented with two unfamiliar objects and again
asked “What is this? What’s this called?” Children were
liberally praised if they responded “I don’t know.” If
children labeled the unfamiliar object the experimenter
responded by telling the child that it was appropriate to
say “I don’t know” if they did not know the name of the
object and children were encouraged to reply “I don’t
know” and were again liberally praised. Children were
then randomly presented with the 12 stimulus objects
from the adjective extension trials and asked of each
“What is this? What’s this called?” During these 12
trials children were not provided with feedback.

3

2

1

0
simple

Results and Discussion
We first asked whether the objects we deemed as
familiar were indeed familiar to children and the objects
we deemed unfamiliar were indeed unfamiliar. Children
responded with an appropriate label for the objects in
the simple familiar condition 97% of the time on
average and for objects in the complex familiar
condition 91% on average. In contrast children
responded that they did not know the name of the
objects in the simple unfamiliar condition 89% of the
time on average and for the objects in the complex
unfamiliar condition 71% of the time on average. The
remainder of responses in the two unfamiliar conditions
involved children providing a description of the object,
e.g. a green thing, an inappropriate object name, e.g.
that looks like a tooth, correctly naming a piece of the
object, e.g. it has a ribbon on it, or providing the novel
adjective, e.g. wuggish. Thus, the results of the
familiarity trials confirm that the objects in the two
familiar conditions were largely familiar to children and
the objects in the two unfamiliar conditions were
largely unfamiliar to children.

complex

Figure 2. The number of material matching selections
for the four conditions of Experiment 1.
We next compared children’s selections to chance.
If children responded randomly they would be expected
to make material match selections in 2 of the 4 trials.
The results showed that children made more material
match selections than expected by chance in the simple
familiar condition, t(13) = 2.38, p < .05, and in the
simple unfamiliar condition , t(13) = 2.22, p < .05.
Children also made less material matches than expected
by chance in the complex unfamiliar condition, t(13) =
-5.26, p < .01. Thus children exceed the number of
material matches predicted by chance performance in
the two simple conditions, but selected equal to or less
material matches than predicted by chance in the two
complex conditions.
Finally we asked whether knowing the object name
made individual children more or less likely to match
that object by material. One object included in the study
made a nice test case for this question. We selected
“sprinkler” as a complex familiar object in part because
it was listed on the MacArthur Communicative

Developmental Inventory indicating that over 50% of
all 30 month olds had produced the term. Thus we
expected that 4-year-old children should be able to
readily identify the object. However, only seven of the
fourteen 48-60 month olds were able to appropriately
identify the object as a “sprinkler” or a “sprayer”. We
thus asked whether correctly labeling the object
coincided with more or less material choice matches.
Table 2 presents the distribution of material and object
matches for the 7 children who produced “sprinkler”
and the 7 children who responded “I don’t know” when
asked what the sprinkler was. As can be seen the
distributions are exactly equal suggesting that the
ability to produce the basic level object name does not
affect whether children are more or less likely to make
a material kind selection.
Table 2: Number of material and object selections for
children who did and did not produce the label
“sprinkler”

Object match
Material match

produced
“sprinkler”
4
3

did not produce
“sprinkler”
4
3

However, one possible explanation for our results
could be that children are selecting material matches in
the two simple conditions, not because they are
correctly identifying the novel word as an adjective and
correctly extending the word to objects that match in
material in the simple object conditions, but instead that
children are selecting material matches for other
reasons. To test this possibility, in Experiment 2 we
present children with the same sets of objects but use a
count noun syntactic frame. Because count noun syntax
has been shown to encourage extension to objects that
match in shape, if the results of Experiment 1 are not
due to idiosyncratic properties of our stimuli we would
expect children in Experiment 2, who are presented
with the same stimuli to make many more shape
selections than material selections, regardless of the
complexity of the stimuli.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we again ask whether children are
more likely to extend novel words to objects of the
same material or shape when the objects are simple or
complex and familiar or unfamiliar. We do so by
providing children with a novel word in a count noun
syntactic frame.

Method
Participants Fifty-six 4-year-olds participated. Half
were male and half were female. The four year olds

ranged in age from 4-0 to 4-11. Fourteen children (7
boys and 7 girls) were randomly assigned to each of
four conditions. Children were tested individually in
their preschools during normal school hours.
Stimuli and Design The stimuli and design were
identical to Experiment 1
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment
1 with one exception. The novel word was provided to
children in a count noun syntax (instead of adjective
syntax). For example, “See this? This is a wug. Can you
say wug?”

Results
To confirm the findings of the first experiment, we
again asked whether the objects we deemed as familiar
were indeed familiar to children and the objects we
deemed unfamiliar were indeed unfamiliar. Children
responded with an appropriate label for the objects in
the simple familiar condition 97% of the time on
average and for objects in the complex familiar
condition 91% on average. In contrast children
responded that they did not know the name of the
objects in the simple unfamiliar condition 97% of the
time on average and for the objects in the complex
unfamiliar condition 91% of the time on average. The
remainder of responses in the two unfamiliar conditions
involved children providing a description of the object,
e.g. a green thing, an inappropriate object name, e.g.
that looks like a tooth, correctly naming a piece of the
object, e.g. it has a ribbon on it, or providing the novel
noun, e.g. a wug. Thus, the results of the familiarity
trials confirm that the objects in the two familiar
conditions were largely familiar to children and the
objects in the two unfamiliar conditions were largely
unfamiliar to children.
We next examined children’s performance in the
extension trials. Figure 3 shows the mean number of
material matching selections children made in each of
the four conditions. As can be seen, children
generalized the novel name to the material matching
object infrequently in all four conditions. An ANOVA
conducted on the number of material choices revealed
no main effects and no interactions. Thus, when
children are provided with count noun form class cues,
neither the shape complexity of the objects or children’s
familiarity with the basic level label of the objects
affect whether children generalize a novel count noun
to a material match or to a shape match. That is,
children generalize by shape regardless of the particular
object and its perceptual properties.
We next compared children’s selections to chance. If
children responded randomly they would be expected to
make material match selections in 2 of the 4 trials. The
results showed that children made less material match

selections than expected by chance in all conditions: the
simple familiar condition, t(13) = -6.27, p < .01, the
simple unfamiliar condition , t(13) = -7.87, p < .01, the
complex familiar condition, t(13) = -15.69, p < .01, and
the complex unfamiliar condition, t(13) = -8.63, p <
.01. Thus these results confirm that children made less
material matches, that is more shape matches, than
expected by chance regardless of the particular object
condition.
4

familiar

an apple corer. Thus the stimuli used in Hall Waxman,
and Hurwitz may have inadvertently confounded
familiarity with complexity.
These findings may help by providing a unifying
explanation for discrepant results in the literature. One
reason why some research (Hall, Waxman, & Hurwitz,
1993; Markman & Wachel, 1988) may have found that
familiarity is necessary for enabling children to extend
novel words by properties other than shape may have
much to do with the perceptual properties of the stimuli
presented to children.

Mean number of material-matching selections

unfamiliar

Acknowledgements
3

This study was supported in part by a National Institute
of Mental Health grant F31MH12614 to the first author

References
2

1

0
simple

complex

Figure 3. The number of material matching selections
for the four conditions of Experiment 2.

General Discussion
Thus, the results suggest that given a count noun
syntactical frame children selected objects that matched
the exemplar by shape. However, given a adjectival
syntactical frame children more often selected objects
that matched the exemplar by material in the two
simple-object conditions and shape in the two complex
object conditions.
These results conflict with previous findings that
children extend novel adjectives to objects of the same
material only when the object kinds are familiar to the
child. One possibility for this discrepancy is that the
unfamiliar stimuli selected by Hall Waxman, and
Hurwitz (1993) may have been inadvertently more
complex than the familiar stimuli. Because Hall
Waxman, and Hurwitz sought to control for taxonomic
kind between the two conditions, the types of items that
were unfamiliar to children may have also been slightly
more complex than items that were familiar to children.
For example, in the familiar condition one set of stimuli
contained a cup and a spoon. In the unfamiliar
condition the analogous set contained a garlic press and

Dickinson, D. (1988). Learning names for materials:
Factors limiting and constraining hypotheses about
word meaning. Cognitive Development, 3, 15-35.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal,
D., & Pethick, S. (1994). Varibility in early
communictive development. Monographs of the
Society for Reserch in Child Development, 5, whole
serial number 242.
Hall, D. G., Waxman, S. R., & Hurwitz (1993). How
two- and four-year-old children interpret adjectives
and count nouns. Child Development, 64, 1651-1664.
Imai, M. & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study
of early word meaning: Universal ontology and
linguistic influence Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Markman, E. & Wachel, G. (1988). Children’s use of
mututal exclusivity to constrain the meanings of
words. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121-157.
Soja, N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of
nouns: The relationship between perception and
syntax. Cognitive Development, 7, 29-45.

