UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emotional Impact on Logic Deficits May Underlie Psychotic Delusions in Schizophrenia

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vt523jj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Mujica-Parodi, Lilianne Ricka
Greenberg, Tsafrir
Bilder, Robert M.
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emotional Impact on Logic Deficits May Underlie Psychotic Delusions in
Schizophrenia
Lilianne Rivka Mujica-Parodi (lrk9@columbia.edu)
Division of Medical Genetics, Laboratory of Clinical Neurobiology
New York State Psychiatric Institute—1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 6; New York, NY 10032 USA

Tsafrir Greenberg (tsafrirg@aol.com)
Division of Medical Genetics, Laboratory of Clinical Neurobiology
New York State Psychiatric Institute —1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 6; New York, NY 10032 USA

Robert M. Bilder (bilder@nki.rfmh.org)
Department of Medical Physics, Center for Advanced Brain Imaging—Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research
140 Old Orangeburg Road; Orangeburg, NY 10962 USA

Dolores Malaspina (dm9@columbia.edu)
Division of Medical Genetics, Laboratory of Clinical Neurobiology
New York State Psychiatric Institute —1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 6; New York, NY 10032 USA

Abstract
Psychotic delusions, defined as false immutable culturally
discordant beliefs, constitute an endemic symptom among
patients with schizophrenia. We examined whether the
deficits in reasoning responsible for the formation and
maintenance of delusions are a product of inappropriate
discrimination between relevant and irrelevant data or
rather the product of inappropriate processing from data
that is appropriately relevant. We used a Logical Reasoning
Task that presents items that test inferences and the choice
of relevant information within two separate sections, one of
which uses language designed to be affect-neutral, the
other of which uses language with violent imagery that is
designed to be affect-laden. Our preliminary results
indicate that all patient groups show significant deficits on
the types of reasoning that we measured, relative to healthy
controls. While non-delusional patients also showed
deficits in reasoning, delusional patients were unique in
that their performance on reasoning tasks was most similar
to that of healthy individuals as long as the context was
affect-neutral. In the affect-laden contexts, however,
delusional patients’ reasoning significantly declined, while
healthy individuals’ performance was only mildly affected.
We suggest that delusional patients may suffer from a
vulnerability to arousal which causes them to commit types
of reasoning errors similar in kind to those made by healthy
controls under much more severe forms of stress.

Logic Deficits and Psychotic Delusions
A 36-yr-old man is arrested upon trying to enter the
United Nations, arguing that he is Ambassador to Alpha
Centauri; a 48-yr-old homeless woman believes that she
is the wife of Thomas Aquinas; a 22-yr-old college student
gradually becomes convinced that the CIA, FBI, and New

York City Police Department have been following him
since birth. All three of these individuals suffer from
“psychotic delusions,” the adoption of false, often bizarre,
beliefs that are held in spite of ample evidence that
contradicts the belief or greatly diminishes its likelihood.
Psychotic delusions are characteristic of a number of
mental and neurological illnesses, but are most common
in schizophrenia and the manic phase of bipolar disorder.
Delusional ideation produces much of the social
alienation, lack of treatment compliance, and poor
functioning associated with these diseases. Even so, the
neurobiological and cognitive mechanisms responsible for
the formation and maintenance of psychotic delusions are
one of the least understood aspects of these illnesses.
In the absence of sensory distortion, it seems reasonable
to assume that delusional patients have access to the same
information about the world as everyone else. Yet if this
is the case, we are left with two large puzzles. The first is
why patients, who presumably start from the same
premises as healthy individuals, manage to reach such
radically different conclusions. The second is why
patients’ false conclusions revolve so consistently around
certain themes, such as paranoia and grandiosity. Our
study was designed to begin to address both questions.
Since logic was first developed to formalize rationality,
it makes sense that it would serve as a useful tool in
modeling aberrations of reason. If individuals infer
conclusions from a set of premises by applying a preestablished category of rules of reasoning, then false
conclusions may be arrived at by either starting from false
premises or by invalid inferences. The vast majority of
literature on schizophrenia and logic address the second
of these possibilities, beginning with von Domarus’ idea

that patients with schizophrenia consistently use a specific
fallacious inference (Von Domarus, 1944). More modern
studies have tested patients’ abilities to use standard
logical inferences (Ho, 1974; Kemp et al, 1997; Watson
and Wold, 1981). Related to these are studies linking
poor performance on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (a
rule-generating task) with schizophrenia (Pantelis et al,
1999), and the correlation between delusion thought and a
peculiar style of reasoning in which patients “jump to
conclusions” (Huq, Garety, Hemsley, 1988). Results
from these studies have been inconclusive. Though
valuable as preliminary data, Mujica-Parodi, Malaspina,
and Sackeim (2000) have argued that these studies are
flawed because of the heterogeneity of patient samples,
floor effects, and the conflating of different types of logic
as if they reflected the same type of reasoning.
Surprisingly, little attention has been paid to the other
possibility by which false conclusions may be reached:
inappropriate choice of premises. This absence is all the
more striking because modern empirical studies of normal
cognition suggest a paradigm of reasoning, mental
models, that is radically at odds with that presupposed by
standard tests of logic (Johnson-Laird, 1995). The most
obvious difference lies at the level of premises. Tests of
deductive logic provide pieces of information that are
explicitly described as the material from which
conclusions ought to be derived. In the real world,
however, our premises are seldom laid out so neatly
before us. Instead, a large portion of our mental work
must go towards discriminating between relevant and
irrelevant information, choosing that from which we will
later derive conclusions. Since available premise-groups
are usually incomplete, most “conclusions” are actually
closer to be being hypotheses, over-inclusive sets that are
then restricted by confrontation with new evidence.
Johnson-Laird’s experiments suggest that the capacity for
recognizing counter-examples to our provisionary models,
and these models’ subsequent revision, are just as critical
in the formation of belief systems as the inferences that
initially give rise to the models (Oakhill and JohnsonLaird, 1985). Since perhaps the most characteristic
feature of delusions is not the strangeness of the
conclusions reached, but of their perseverance in the face
of systemic evidence to the contrary (Jones and Watson,
1997) one would expect the recognition and application of
counter-examples to be a cognitive ability that is seriously
impaired in patients with delusions.
Yet it is a
phenomenon that has hardly been studied in this
population.
Our central hypothesis is that it is the failure to sort
premises: distinguishing relevant from irrelevant
information and, in particular, the recognition and
application of counter-examples, that is responsible for
delusions. We suggest that such a failure may be the
result of a normal prioritization of neural resources during
periods of emotional stress, inappropriately activated in

patients. While it may be natural for healthy individuals
to initially form false or partially false models, these
models are normally revised in the face of contradictory
evidence. In the presence of anxiety or fear, this selfcorrecting mechanism may be temporarily disabled in
order to devote full mental resources to avoiding the cause
of threat. Once the threat has passed, the mechanism
would become functional once more and false beliefs
would be revised. If, in the case of patients, the amygdala
(and/or other medial temporal lobe structures responsible
for perceiving threat) is hyperactive, then the same
process may occur with far less provocation. Under the
strain of a more or less continual state of emotional stress,
the recognition of counter-examples may become disabled
long enough to allow false beliefs to become entrenched.
The advantage of grounding the creation of delusions in
emotion, rather than the reverse, is that it provides an
explanation for the relative thematic uniformity found
between different patients’ beliefs. The patient who
experiences a state of fear or anxiety without a clear
referent for it will presumably feel the need to explain that
feeling; the explanatory structure that the patient creates,
however, will very likely be flawed because of the
mechanism hypothesized above.
The view of paranoid delusions as quasi-rational stories
that are created to explain pre-existing emotional states is
consistent with a wide variety of preliminary clinical
evidence connecting psychosis and affect, including
vague feelings of fear and anxiety reported during the
prodromal (pre-symptomatic) period in schizophrenia
(Henmi, 1993; Wiedemann et al, 1994) and correlations
between levels of perceived stress and preoccupation with
delusions (Myin-Germeys, 1999). It has long been known
that there is a strong correlation between relapse in
schizophrenia and even minor increases in stress (Doering
et al, 1998). At a physiological level, schizophrenic
patients’ MRI’s are characterized by lower hippocampal
volumes than that of controls (Kegeles et al, 2000), these
patients appear to have increased cortisol levels (a “stress
hormone”) (Goldman et al, 1993), and increased cortisol
levels over sustained periods of time are known to be
toxic to the hippocampus (Sapolsky et al, 1990). Other
studies have linked prenatal damage to the limbic system
with later development of schizophrenia (Lipska et al,
1993; Hanlon, Astur, and Sutherland, 1999). It may be
that a vulnerable amygdala and/or medial temporal lobe
abnormalities could be both responsible for the increased
cortisol levels as well as for the common generalized
feelings of anxiety and fear associated with the emergence
of psychosis. It may also be the case that insult to the
hippocampus and structures also involved with the circuit
associated with arousal, such as cortical regions and the
thalamus/hypothalamus, could be at least partly
responsible for whatever defect in reasoning is
responsible for the development of delusional beliefs.
Most provocatively, this line of thought, if valid, could

shed light on the relationship between delusional ideation,
clinically defined, and the anecdotal truism that even
normally rational individuals become irrational when they
are upset (or angry, or fearful, or euphoric, for that
matter). It might also eventually provide a link between
a particular symptom—delusions—and its neural
mechanism among disorders, such as mania, psychotic
depression, and schizophrenia, that are currently
considered to be unrelated.
For our study, we tested the following hypotheses:
I. Patients with delusions are impaired in their ability to
distinguish relevant from irrelevant premises in the
formation and restriction of mental models.
II. Patients with delusions use logical inferences
equivalently to healthy and patient controls.
III. All individuals (patients and controls) are impaired in
their ability to distinguish relevant from irrelevant
information when they are subject to emotional
stress. We hypothesize that this task of sorting is
more vulnerable to the effects of emotional stress
than the task of logical inference-making.
IV. Patients are more vulnerable to stress, and therefore
require less emotional provocation than do controls in
order to reach the level at which this cognitive
mechanism is impaired.

The Logical Reasoning Task
Dr. LR Mujica-Parodi and Dr. Harold Sackeim developed
a Logical Reasoning Task (LRT) that avoids many of the
problems present in previous attempts to test logic deficits
in patients. Unlike previous tests, this task tests both
logical inferences and the choice and evaluation of
premises. The evaluation of premises sections are
essentially an inverse of the inferences sections, in which
the conclusion is given, and the subject is instructed either
to identify information that would support the conclusion
or to identify information that would contradict it. Items
that are identical in form are presented within both affectneutral and affect-laden contexts, counter-balanced for
order. The affect-laden sections use threatening language
in order to provoke a state of mild arousal, measured by
visual analog scale and skin galvanic response.
Responses are circled from a list of possible answers that
are randomly spaced along the page. Extensive pilot
testing ensured that LRT avoids floor effects by testing
only inferences that most (60%-70%) healthy adults
without any formal education in logic found to be
intuitive and representative of “everyday reasoning.”
Most importantly, we established that both controls and
patients are able to well-tolerate the task. The LRT is
comprised of 60 items, 30 for the neutral section and 30
for the affect-laden section. For each section, 10 items
test inferences, propositional premise choice, and class
(quantifier) premise choice, respectively. The entire LRT
takes approximately one hour to complete. Items on the

LRT are scored in a manner that permits one to
discriminate between errors of premise over-inclusion,
errors of premise exclusion, and errors of contradiction.
Subjects are able to choose more than one response. A
score of 1 point is given for every item that includes the
correct answer as long as there is no contradiction entailed
by the subjects’ responses. In Example 1 shown below
(Table 1), the subject’s choice of the second and third
responses or the third and fourth responses would entail a
contradiction. If the subject chooses more responses than
are necessary, this is indicated by separate scoring for
over-inclusion (with 1 additional point for each additional
response). Similar scoring is done for under-inclusion.
Separate scoring also records number of contradictions
and choice of “not-enough-information” responses (which
also indicate, with under-inclusion, degree of premise
exclusion). Subjects are given five practice items before
beginning the test, three of which have the correct
answers marked, and two of which the subject completes.
Table 1: Examples from the Logical Reasoning Task
Example 1: Inferences, Affect-Neutral Condition
If John has missed the bus, then he will be late.
John has missed the bus.
contradiction
What follows from this?
Nothing follows.
John will not be late
John will be late.
contradiction
John has not missed the bus.

Í

Example 2: Inferences, Affect-Laden Condition
If they are stabbing me, then they will kill me.
They are stabbing me.
What follows from this?
Nothing follows.
They will not kill me.
They will kill me.
They are not stabbing me.

Í

Example 3: Premise Choice, Affect-Neutral
Condition (Propositional logic, Counter-example)
John says that he will be late.
What information, together, makes you think that he
is wrong?
John is late.
John has missed the bus.
Nothing makes me think that he is wrong.
John has not missed the bus.
Only if John is late, will he then miss the bus.
Only if John misses the bus, will he then be late.

Í

Í

Study Design
Subjects:
For these preliminary data we looked at responses from
28 patients, divided by cognitive symptom profiles, and
16 healthy controls. Of the patients, 10 had welldeveloped delusional systems, 5 were thought-disordered,

and 13 were neither delusional nor thought-disordered
(with hallucinations as the primary symptom). Our
completed data will contain 50 subjects in each of the 3
groups, as well as a group of healthy controls with high
degrees of magical ideation. Diagnosis and symptom
severity were determined using the Diagnostic Interview
for Genetic Studies (DIGS). Patients were matched for
symptom severity and medication status. For our final
analysis, all three groups will be matched for Verbal IQ
(using the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scales), age, and
education. For our preliminary analysis, patients and
controls were not matched due to the relatively small N,
although ANCOVA’s determined that covariates of
education, gender, age, and education were not significant
confounds. Both patient groups and controls were
relatively well-educated, averaging two years of college,
with no formal training in logic.
In our sample there were more male patients (21)
than female patients (7), reflecting the general distribution
in schizophrenia, and more female control subjects (10)
than male control subjects (6). All subjects signed
informed consent for this Institutional Review Boardapproved study. Patients were recruited from the New
York State Psychiatric Institute’s Schizophrenia Research
Unit, the Washington Heights Community Unit, and
affiliated out-patient clinics. Controls were recruited
from the local community, and were screened using the
Psychosis Proneness Scales developed by Chapman and
Chapman (Chapman et al, 1994).

when assessing relevance under mild arousal
(premises(class): p=.083/df=15). Delusional patients
displayed the same pattern, but in a significantly
exaggerated form (inferences: p=.004/df=9;
premises(class): p=.033/df=9) This suggests that
delusional patients have a relatively intact ability to
reason under neutral conditions, with a particular
vulnerability toward emotional arousal. Thoughtdisordered patients displayed an inverse pattern,
improving under emotional arousal (premises(class):
p=.035/df=4), which perhaps reflects an inability to
maintain adequate arousal under normal conditions.
Healthy controls, delusional patients, and thoughtdisordered patients may be viewed as occupying different
initial locations on an inverted “U,” where—following the
Yerkes-Dodson Law— performance initially improves
with small degrees of arousal but suffers with increasing
amounts of stress. In this case, stress-level is held
constant, with different vulnerabilities to arousal
accounting for the different locations on the curve. The
types of errors made were also different for different
groups. Delusional patients generally, and particularly
under arousal, showed a tendency to shut out relevant
information (p=.067/df=9), again an exaggeration of the
healthy controls’ response to stress (interestingly, patients
who only hallucinated showed even more of an
exaggeration in this regard). Thought-disordered patients,
on the other hand, were more likely than other groups to
assign inappropriate weight to irrelevant information
(p=.05/f=2.3).

Procedures:
Control subjects were screened using the Psychosis
Proneness Scales. All subjects were administered the
LRT and several sections of the WAIS (testing spatial
inferences, abstraction without use of counter-examples,
vocabulary, and working memory). Blind symptomprofiling for patients was performed post-hoc to avoid
bias.

Table 2: 3 Types of Reasoning x 4 Subject Groups

Results:
We performed ANOVA to determine differences between
subject groups and test types (with post hoc t-tests),
ANCOVA to screen confounds of age, sex, and education,
and paired t-tests for individual subjects on affect
neutral/laden condition to test the effects of arousal on
performance. The results are summarized below in Table
2.
Differences between patient and control groups
reached statistical significance for all types of reasoning
(inferences: p=.005; premises(prop): p=.024;
premises(class): .012). Performance was highest for
healthy controls, followed by—in descending order—
delusional patients, patients hallucinating only, and
thought-disordered patients. This same pattern was
present for all three types of reasoning. Healthy controls
displayed a slight (non-significant) drop in performance

Inference
0.54±22
0.24±.18
0.48±.20
0.65±.19

Prop
0.31±28
0.11±.09
0.29±.15
0.45±.23

Class
0.46±.28
0.12±.08 NEUTRAL
0.40±.27 CONDITION
0.62±.28

Inference
Del
0.35±.24
Th Dis. 0.26±.19
Halluc 0.41±.25
HC
0.67±.23

Prop
0.24±.19
0.15±.10
0.21±.13
0.41±.24

Class
0.33±.25
0.20±.13 AROUSED
0.28±.20 CONDITION
0.52±.29

Del
Th Dis.
Halluc
HC

Three important preliminary conclusions to be drawn
from this data are that: a) all patients groups show
significant deficits in both inferences and cognitive gating
relative to controls; b) of all patients, delusional patients
infer most similarly to healthy individuals, except in the
presence of emotional material, which also seems to affect
their reasoning most dramatically; and that c) the
“irrationality” of delusional patients (which is affectdriven and shuts out relevant information) appears to be
quite different from that of thought-disordered patients
(which is affect-independent and reflects and inability to
“screen-out” irrelevant information). This last point is of
particular relevance because it suggests differences

between symptoms-types that may be relevant not only
from the point of view of etiology, but of treatment
(delusional patients may benefit from adjunctive
benzodiazepines and/or cognitive-behavioral-therapy in a
manner that thought-disordered patients may not, for
instance). Interestingly, delusional patients’ abnormal
vulnerability to arousal, combined with healthy controls’
less dramatic decline in cognitive gating under arousal,
raise provocative questions regarding the degree to which
delusional patients’ reasoning may resemble normal
controls’ reasoning when normal controls are under more
pronounced levels of stress.

Implications and Future Work
“Cognitive” versus “Sensory” Neural Gating
As shown above, our data suggests that all three patient
groups had significant deficits in cognitive gating. In
investigating the neurobiological roots to such a deficit,
we have considered the possibility that deficits in
cognitive gating may be rooted in a more fundamental
“lower-level” deficit in “sensory-gating,” whose deficits
have been shown to be ubiquitous to schizophrenia.
While “cognitive gating” is defined as the discrimination
between relevant and irrelevant conceptual information,
“sensory gating” can be similarly understood as the
discrimination between relevant and irrelevant sensory
data.
One explanation that could link cognitive and sensory
gating is a “hierarchical” hypothesis for information
processing, in which sensory data is sorted through a
series of neural “filters,” traveling first through a “coarsegrained” filter, then through filters that are progressively
more “fine-grained” as attentional levels (and presumably
levels of abstraction) are increased. This hypothesis is
testable, for it predicts that poor performance on tests of
higher-order filtering will also entail poor performance on
tests of lower-order filtering. However, the converse is
not true; performance on tests of lower-order filtering will
not entail equivalent performance on tests of higher-order
filtering (since information may be adequately filtered at a
lower level before stumbling at a faulty higher-level
filter). We would expect the brain activation associated
with performance to behave equivalently. Thus we would
predict that areas of the brain activated during higherorder filtering will entail (i.e., will correlate positively
with) activation of areas of the brain associated with
lower-order filtering (since all information that that
passed through higher-order filters had to be processed
through lower-order filters first). However, the converse
will not be true; areas of the brain activated during lowerorder filtering will not entail areas of the brain activated
during higher-order filtering. M.-Marsel Mesulam [1998]
proposes a similar hierarchical “critical gateway” model
in which “lower” processing of sensory information
contributes to “higher” processing of cognitive material

along certain pre-established pathways. In Dr. Mesulam’s
model, the level of neurological impairment (i.e., whether
related to “lower-order” global deficits like multimodal
anomia or “higher-order” deficits like category-specific
anomias) also results from the point in the hierarchy at
which processing is disrupted.
We are currently
conducting a neuroimaging (fMRI) study looking at
different information-gating processes (including the
Logical Reasoning Task) operating at different “levels” to
test this hypothesis.
While prominent, delusions are only one of many
cognitive and perceptual symptoms of schizophrenia,
which include thought-disorder and hallucinations. The
elucidation of filter-level deficits, and their relationship to
specific signs and symptoms of schizophrenia, is
important in responding to a cogent criticism placed by
Frith (1979), that the disabling of a sensory filtering
mechanism in schizophrenia, if it exists, cannot be at a
general level. This is because a generalized gating deficit
would result in far more neurological disability than is
actually clinically observed. However, the degree to
which patients are disabled varies quite a bit, varying
between extreme disorganization and intricatelyconstructed delusional belief systems. As Frith (1979)
earlier has suggested, the precise symptomatology of the
illness may be based on the degree to which gating is
impaired. It may be that paranoid patients have relatively
well-preserved lower-level filtering, while only higherorder filtering is impaired. Thought-disordered patients,
on the other hand, may represent a more severe form of
the illness in which lower as well as higher level gating is
affected. Drawing these connections will be important
not only theoretically, in establishing a unitary model of
schizophrenia which accounts for varied symptoms, but
also potentially in developing medications that are
tailored to treating specific symptoms. If the mechanism
associated with neural filtering does exist upon a
continuum, ranging from the basic sensory gating
involved in attention (at the lowest end), to the cognitive
gating required to separate relevant from irrelevant
information (at the highest end)—with each level
dependent upon the one “beneath” it—then it may be the
case that the stage at which filtering is impaired is
responsible for the cognitive symptom picture (thoughtdisordered vs delusional, for instance) with which a
schizophrenic patient presents.
Higher-order filter
deficits, with lower-order sensory gating that is still intact,
may produce symptoms that look like belief systems that
are flawed because they are constructed based on
inappropriate choice of information (including inattention
to counter-examples), but which remain fundamentally
self-consistent. Patients whose filtering deficits have
progressed to include both higher and lower-order gating,
may produce a more general disorganization in which
inferences, and therefore self-consistency, may no longer
be possible. This picture is akin to Frith’s model (Frith,

1979); he suggests that delusional ideation may exist as a
less severe form of the disease, in which some aspects of
cognition are still well-preserved. Based on the literature
on sensory/sensorimotor gating and selective attention, we
will be primarily looking at activation in the dorsolateral
prefrontal
cortex,
hippocampus,
striatum,
and
thalamus/hypothalamus.

Aknowledgments
Support for this research was provided by the National
Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression,
the Essel Foundation, the Frontier Fund for Scientific
Research, and the National Institute for Mental Health.

References
Chapman L.J., Chapman J.P., Kwapil T.R., Eckblad M.,
& Zinser M.C. (1994). Putatively psychosis-prone
subjects 10 years later. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103(2), 171-183.
Dawson M.E., Hazlett E.A., Filion D.L., Nuechterlein
K.H., & Schell A.M. (1993). Attention and
schizophrenia: impaired modulation of the startle reflex.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102(4), 633-641.
Doering S., Muller E., Kopcke W., Pietzcker A., Gaebel
W., Linden M., Muller P., Muller-Spahn F., Tegeler J.,
& Schussler G. (1998). Predictors of relapse and
rehospitalization in schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24(1), 87-98.
Frith C.D. (1979). Consciousness, Information Processing
and Schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 134,
225-235.
Goldman M.B., Blake L., Marks R.C., Hedeker D., &
Luchins D.J. (1993). Association of nonsuppression of
cortisol on the DST with primary polydipsia in chronic
schizophrenia, American Journal of Psychiatry,150(4),
653-655.
Hanlon F.M., Astur R.S., & Sutherland R.J.(1999).
Changes in adult brain and behavior caused by neonatal
limbic damage: a rat model with implications for
understanding cognitive symptoms in schizophrenia
(presented, International Congress on Schizophrenia
Research 1999).
Henmi Y. (1993). Prodromal symptoms of relapse in
schizophenic outpatients: retrospective and prospective
study. Japanese Journal of Pyschiatry and
Neurology, 47(4), 453-475.
Ho D.Y.F. (1974). Modern logic and schizophrenic
thinking. Genetic Psychology Monographs, 89, 145165.
Huq S.F., Garety P.A., & Hemsley D.R.(1988).
Probabilistic judgements in deluded and non-deluded
subjects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 40A, 801-812.
Johnson-Laird P.N. (1995). Mental models, deductive
reasoning, and the brain. In Gazzaniga M.S. (Ed.),The
Cognitive Neurosciences. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Jones E., & Watson J.P. (1997). Delusion, the overvalued
idea and religious beliefs: a comparative analysis of
their characteristics. British Journal of Psychiatry, 170,
381-386.
Kegeles L.S., Shungu D.C., Anjilvel S., Chan S., Ellis
S.P., Xanthopoulos E., Malaspina D., Gorman J.M.,
Mann J.J., Laruelle M., & Kaufmann C.A.
(2000).Hippocampal pathology in schizophrenia:
magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy studies.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 98,163-175.
Kemp R., Chua S., McKenna P., & David A. (1997).
Reasoning and delusions. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 170, 398-405.
Lipska B.K., Jaskiw G.E., & Weinberger D.R. (1993).
Postpubertal emergence of hyperresponsiveness to
stress and to amphetamine after neonatal excitotoxic
hippocampal damage: a potential animal model of
schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology, 9 (1), 6775.
Mesulam M.M. (1998) From sensation to cognition. Brain
121, 1013-1052.
Mujica-Parodi L.R., Malaspina D., & Sackeim H.A.
(2000). Logical processing, affect, and delusions in
Schizophrenia: A New Cognitive Model, Harvard
Review of Psychiatry, 8(2),73-83.
Myin-Germeys I. (1999). The contextual background of
delusional experiences (presented International
Congress on Schizophrenia Research)
Oakhill J.V., Johnson-Laird P.N.(1985). Rationality,
memory and the search for counter-examples,
Cognition, 20, 79-94.
Pantelis C., Barber F.Z., Barnes T.R., Nelson H.E., Owen
A.M., & Robbins T.W. (1999). Comparison of setshifting ability in patients with chronic schizophrenia
and frontal lobe damage, Schizophrenia Research,
37(3), 251-270.
Sapolsky R.M., Uno H., Rebert C.S., & Finch C.E.
(1990). Hippocampal damage associated with
prolonged glucocorticoid exposure in primates. Journal
of Neuroscience, 10(9), 2897-2902.
Von Domarus E. (1944). The specific laws of logic in
schizophrenia. In J. Kasanin (Ed.), Language and
Thought in Schizophrenia. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Watson C.G., & Wold J. (1981). Logical reasoning
deficits in schizophrenia and brain damage. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 3(3), 466-471.
Wiedemann G.,Hahlweg K., Hank G. Feinstein E., Muller
U., & Dose M. (1994). Detection of early warning signs
in schizophrenic patients. Nervenartzt , 65(7), 438-43.

