UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Episode Blending as Result of Analogical Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/817828p4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Zareva-Toncheva, Neda

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Episode Blending as Result of Analogical Problem Solving
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)12
Neda Zareva-Toncheva (nzareva@cogs.nbu.bg)2
1

2

Institute of Mathematics and Informatics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad. G. Bonchev Street, bl.8
Sofia 1113, Bulgaria

Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1635, Bulgaria

Abstract
We know that misinformation presented in interrogating
questions or in advertising produces blendings, that even
imagining a possible episode might produce blending as well,
however, we do not know whether reasoning and problem
solving can produce the same effect. On the other hand,
models of analogy-making assume “perfect memory” for old
episodes. The AMBR model of analogical problem solving
has mechanisms for interaction between memory and
reasoning which explain partial memory and memory
distortions and has predicted blending effects which are due
to the reasoning process. Such predictions have no parallel in
any other model we know of. There has been no experimental
support for these predictions so far. The current paper
describes an experiment explicitly designed to test these
predictions. It consists of three sessions: 1) solving three
problems, 2) solving two more target problems by analogy
with some of the problems in the first session, and 3)
reproduction of the three problems in the first session. The
results demonstrate that the degree of blending in the recalled
stories depends on the target problem solved in the second
session.

Motivation
There is a considerable amount of research demonstrating
various types of memory distortions, such as
schematisation, blending, and false memory illusions
(Bartlett, 1932; Loftus, 1977; Loftus, 1979; Loftus,
Feldman, & Dashiell, 1995; Loftus, Miller, & Burns, 1978;
Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Moscovitch, 1995; Neisser, 1998;
Nystrom & McClelland, 1992; Reinitz, Lammers, &
Cochran, 1992; Schacter, 1995). These findings, however,
have been established in “pure memory tasks” conditions.
Very rarely researchers have tried to integrate memory tasks
with other kinds of cognitive tasks in order to explore
whether there will be interactions between them. Thus for
example, we know that misinformation presented in
interrogating questions or in advertising produces
blendings, that even imagining a possible episode might
produce blending as well, however, we do not know
whether reasoning and problem solving can produce the
same effect.

At the theoretical end these findings are typically
explained by the constructive nature of human memory,
however, very few models exist that lay out the specific
memory mechanisms that could explain the memory
distortion effects. The key concept has always been the
postulation of distributed representations of some type in
human memory. These include Hintzman’s (1988) multitrace model, Metcalfe’s (1990) CHARM model, and
McClelland’s (1995) PDP-type of model. The last two
models explicitly deal with memory blending effects.
On the other hand, models of human analogical reasoning
which necessarily include a memory component (since they
have to explain how analogous episodes are retrieved)
simply ignore both the experimental findings about memory
distortions and the theoretical ideas about the constructive
nature of human memory. They typically assume “perfect”
memory for past episodes and even some kind of nice
organization of memory that would allow the retrieval of
the relevant episode (Forbus, Gentner, & Law, 1995;
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997; Kolodner, 1984; Thagard,
Holyoak, Nelson, & Gochfeld, 1990; Warton, Holyoak, &
Lange, 1996). All these models assume centralized
representation of episodes which means that episodes are
either retrieved as a whole (and than mapped onto the target
problem description) or they fail to be retrieved. No
blending of episodes may occur, no false memories can
arise, no partial retrieval can happen. Surprisingly, this is
true even for the LISA model (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997)
which is based on distributed representations, since the
representations are truly distributed only in working
memory, but the episode representation in LTM is highly
centralized, although distributed in some sense (in the same
sense in which the representation is distributed in the model
described in the current paper). A list of all units
representing a single episode is assumed and if the episode
wins the competition between episodes then all it
corresponding units are switched from dormant to active
state.
The main motivation for recent developments in the
AMBR model of analogical problem solving (Kokinov,
1998; Kokinov & Petrov, 2000, 2001; Petrov & Kokinov,

1998, 1999) was to propose mechanisms for interaction
between memory and reasoning which will allow for
explaining memory distortions and blendings among other
things. AMBR has predicted blending effects which are due
to the reasoning process. Such predictions have no parallel
in any other model we know of. However, we do not know
of any experimental support for them either. That is why an
experiment was designed to test these predictions. The
current paper describes this experiment and its outcomes.

AMBR Model and its Predictions
The AMBR model of analogical problem solving was
introduced in (Kokinov, 1988) and then further developed
over the years (Kokinov, 1994a, Kokinov, 1998, Kokinov
& Petrov, 2001). It is based on a general cognitive
architecture called DUAL (Kokinov, 1994b,c) which relies
on emergent computations produced by a society of microagents (Minsky, 1986; Hofstadter, 1995). The latest
developments (Kokinov, 1998, Kokinov & Petrov, 2000,
2001; Petrov & Kokinov, 1998, 1999) are directed towards
building a more psychologically plausible memory for
episodes and thus allowing for memory distortions to take
place. Moreover, a prediction is made that the reasoning
process during the analogical problem solving may itself
produce memory distortions.

Episode Representation
Episode representation in AMBR is highly decentralized,
which means that each episode is represented by a large
coalition of micro-agents each of them representing some
aspect of the situation. We may call this representation
“distributed at a higher level” by analogy to the
connectionist representations which are distributed over a
set of simple features. In reasoning, and in analogy-making
in particular, the relations are even more important than
single features and therefore they have to be explicitly
represented. The agents here are more complex than the
connectionist units (Kokinov, 1994a, b, c) and roughly
speaking they represent a whole proposition (such as “there
is a coffee pot”, “the coffee-pot is made of metal”, “the
coffee-pot is on the plate”, “the plate is hot”, “the water is
in the coffee-pot”, “proposition 1 causes proposition 2”,
etc.). Thus the episode is represented by a set of such
propositions (by a coalition of the corresponding microagents), but there is nowhere in memory a list of all
propositions (all micro-agents) involved in a given episode.
That is why we call this representation decentralized. There
is one agent which refers to the unique point in time and
space – when and where the event has happened, and all
agents from a given coalition have links directed to it. In
this way the system can differentiate among propositions
belonging to different episodes, however, there are no links
from this agent to the agents in the coalition, i.e. it does not
know any of the members of the coalition. Therefore this
agent cannot contribute to the retrieval or construction
process.
Each agent has a level of activation that changes
dynamically. The activation level determines the degree to

which the information contained in that agent is available
and the degree to which this agent participates in the
computational process (Kokinov, 1994b,c, Petrov &
Kokinov, 1999). Working memory is considered to be the
active part of long term memory, i.e. the set of all active
agents at a given moment. There is a process of spreading
activation as well as a process of decay which guarantees
that an agent that do not receive activation will soon quit
WM.

Episode “Retrieval” or “Construction”
Episode “retrieval” corresponds to the process of activation
of the agents representing various aspects of the event and
bringing them into WM. This means that typically the recall
is only partial since there is no way to guarantee the
activation of all members of a coalition. Some coalitions
will be stronger (having stronger links between the agents)
and therefore the corresponding episode will tend to be
reproduced more fully, other coalitions are weaker and only
few aspects of the episode are reproduced.
However, many agents belonging to other coalitions will
also turn out to be activated – agents representing some
general knowledge (concepts, facts, rules, etc.), agents
representing aspects of other episodes. Thus the set of
agents happened to be in WM will produce a description of
the episode which is partial, but also containing intrusions
from general knowledge and other episodes. Intrusions from
other episodes are in fact blendings between two or more
episodes. In fact, the representation of an old episode is not
just retrieved from LTM, but is actively constructed in WM.
The process of spreading activation is an automatic one but
it depends on the current state of WM, the goals of the
system and its input from perception. Thus the reasoning
process, which runs in parallel to the memory process,
interferes with this process of episode construction and in
fact even guides it to a certain extend.

Mapping Guidance in Episode Construction
In the context of analogical problem solving the
construction of the old “retrieved” episode is guided by the
mapping process between this episode and the current target
problem. The mapping process in AMBR does not start
after the old episode is retrieved as in all other models of
analogy-making, but runs in parallel to it. This makes it
possible the already established partial mapping to guide the
episode construction in such a way that the old episode is
reconstructed in directions which allow better alignment
between base and target. For example, the intrusions from
general knowledge and from other episodes will be not
arbitrary, but will correspond to elements of the target
description which do not have corresponding elements in
the base description (they are either missing in the encoding
of the episode or are simply not activated at the moment).
The precise mechanisms for this episode extension are
described elsewhere (Kokinov & Petrov, 2000). A
simulation experiment with AMBR has demonstrated that

the parallel run of reasoning and “retrieval” in this model
yields the retrieval of structurally similar episodes that
would otherwise be not retrieved (Petrov & Kokinov,
1998).

AMBR’s Prediction
AMBR’s prediction relevant to the current paper is that
intrusions from other episodes will happen more often if the
currently constructed representation of the most active
episode is missing elements which are important for the
mapping process with the target problem. This emphasizes
not any missing element, but elements which are crucial for
the mapping. This is in contrast to a model that is very
similar in flavor (Nystrom & McClelland, 1992;
McClelland, 1995) which, however, is not sensitive to the
structure but fills in any missing information. The latter
model explains data from a memory experiment on sentence
recall and is not intended to explore the relation between
memory and reasoning. Structure might be unimportant in
this case. In contrast, AMBR makes stronger predictions
about the relevance and structural consistency of the
intruded elements.
In this case the analogy-making process itself produces
blending under certain conditions. Therefore the more
partial the mapping between the target and the base problem
is the more intrusions will occur and thus higher degree of
blending between episodes will be observed. This is the
prediction tested in the following experiment.

Experiment
The main idea of the experiment is the following one. Ask
the participants to solve several base problems and as a side
effect to hold them in their long-term memory. Half of the
participants will then solve one target problem and the other
half another target problem. After that we will ask the
participants to retell us the base problems as accurate and
complete as possible. We will measure the degree of
blending between the problems and expect that it will
depend on which target problem has been solved.

Method
Design
The experiment consists of three sessions:
• Session 1: solving three base problems (A, B, C);
• Session 2: solving one of two target problems (T1 –
partially analogous to A and partially analogous to B,
or T2 – partially analogous to B and partially analogous
to C);
• Session 3: recalling the problems from session 1.
The whole trick is that target problem T1 partially maps
to both A and B, while target problem T2 partially maps to
both B and C. That is, in order to solve problem T1 one
needs to make a double analogy (with A and B) and use two
different principles which are provided in A and B
respectively. This requires that A and B are both partially
“retrieved” in WM and partially mapped to T1. We may
describe this situation as blending the two episodes A and B

and constructing a new “old” episode AB that is then
remembered. Thus later on in session 3 we would expect
that participants who solved problem T1 will tend to blend
episodes A and B. Reversibly, participants who solved
target problem T2 in the second session will tend to produce
more blends of B and C in session 3.
Thus we use a between group design. The independent
variable is the type of target problem solved in session 2
and its relation to the base problems. The dependent
variables have to measure the blending occurring in the
retold stories in session 3. We use two types of measures:
• a binary variable – “yes/no” expert judgments of
blended memories;
• degree of blending (a value between 0 and 1) –
measured as the degree of mixture between statements
related to each of the base problems A, B, and C.
Material
The problems used in the experiment both in session 1 and
in session 2 have been designed to fulfill several criteria:
• they should be solved by some general principles that
can then be applied to another problem;
• if the principles used for solving the base problems A,
B, and C in session 1 are called PA, PB, and PC
respectively, then the target problems in session 2
should be solved by a combination of two principles
(T1 by PA and PB, and T2 by PB and PC).
In problem A we used a criminal story about an attempt to
come in for money of a wrong person who actually killed
the legatee and dressed and acted like her. She imitated
successfully even the gestures of the dead relative,
including her habit to arch her right eyebrow when asking
questions. She practiced these gestures for a long period of
time in front of a mirror. Finally, however, she was
recognized as a fake legatee. The question is how she was
recognized. And the correct solution relies on principle PA:
“Left and right are reversed in an mirror image”. Thus, the
lady arched her wrong eyebrow.
Problem B was an expanded version of the radiation
problem. The principle underlying the correct solution was
PB: the convergence of several weaker X-rays in one point
form a stronger X-ray.
Problem C involved baking 3 flat loafs in a small baking tin
which can hold only 2 loafs. The question was what is the
minimal time period required to bake the 3 loafs turning
each of them on both sides. And the principle underlying
the correct solution was PC which outlines a turning
schema: you first bake one side of two loafs, then you turn
one of them and replace the second loaf with the third one,
and finally you bake the remaining sides of the second and
the third loafs.
All three problems were told as folk tales with some
superficial similarities in the plot (having kings, princesses,
wise man, etc.), still they were quite different.
Target problem T1 was about a five-headed dragon that
has to be killed, but he can be killed only if at the very same
moment his 2nd head from the left to right is cut off and his
heart is destroyed by a strong laser beam. However, there
were several obstacles: you cannot look at the eyes of the

dragon directly because you will become blind, and also
there were only 3 weak laser beams available. Thus the
participants had to apply principle PA and to cut off the 2nd
right head (instead of the 2nd left one) staying backwards
and looking at the dragon into a mirror and principle PB to
use a converging configuration of three weak laser beams.
Target problem T2 involved killing another dragon where
again his heart should be destroyed by a strong laser beam
and you have only three small ones, however, here the
dragon was behind a moat full of lava which could be
passed only by using three magic stones. The obstacle is
that you can use each stone only once to step on each of its
two sides. The solution involved principle PB from above,
and principle PC used in problem C – the particular scheme
of turning the stones and loafs respectively.
Procedure
During the first session the participants were told that they
will undergo a series of experiments on human thinking and
they will have to solve various problems. The problems
were given one by one without an explicit time restriction.
After the participants produced a written solution the
experimenter read it aloud and if this was not the targeted
solution she encouraged them to find an alternative
solution, if this did not help a hint was given, and finally if
the target solution was not found it was provided by the
experimenter. The aim was all participants in session 1 to
solve the base problems correctly and to acquire the basic
principles PA, PB, and PC.
The second session followed after a period of 3 to 7 days.
During this second session the group was split and half of
the subjects solved problem T1, and the other half – T2.
The second session was run again individually and the
thinking aloud method was used, the speech of the
participants was recorded. No hints were provided here.
The third session followed immediately after the second
session. During this session the participants were asked to
retell as accurate and complete as possible the problems
from the first session. The stories were reproduced orally
and tape-recorded.
Participants
48 undergraduate students participated in the experiment,
but only 33 went through all sessions. 16 were female and
17 – male.

Results and Discussion
The records were transcribed and the protocols of the third
session were used as the main data set. Each story was
segmented into short phrases which express independent
and understandable statements. The texts of the problems A,
B, and C were also segmented into separate statements and
their appearance in the body of the protocol was encoded.
For example, we separated the text of problem C into 22
statements – C1-C22 and whenever a phrase (or its semantic
equivalent) occurred in the narration of the subject the
corresponding Ck was inserted in the protocol encoding.
Quite often when reproducing one of the problems

participants inserted statements from one of the other two
problems. This was exactly what we were counting. Thus
for measuring the AB blending (blending between problem
A and B) we counted how many As and how many Bs we
have in the reproduction. The degree of blending was
calculated as the ratio: number of As over number of Bs
(when the As are less than the Bs), or reverse – number of
Bs over number of As (when the As are more than the Bs).
To put it differently we measured the percentage of
intrusions in the text arising from another problem. Thus if
the number of As or Bs are zero than no blending has
occurred (degree of blending is 0), and when the number of
As and Bs are equal then an absolute blend has been
produced (with degree of blending equal to 1). The results
are shown in Table 1 and Figure 1. As we can see the
results are coherent with our hypothesis: we have higher
degree of blending of type AB in group 1 (solving T1 in the
second session) and higher degree of blending of type BC
in group 2 (solving T2 in the second session). Just to
remind that T1 required double analogy with A and B, and
T2 required a double analogy with B and C. At the same
time there is no difference whatsoever in the degree of
blending of type AC which should be expected since none
of the target problems required combining base A and base
C. The performed analysis of variance showed a significant
2-way interaction between the groups (target problems
solved) and the type of blending occurred (F(2,62)=4.41,
p<0.016). The difference in the degree of AB blending is
significant, but the difference in the degree of BC blending
is not significant. Analyzing our data we found out that very
few of the participants in group 2 were able to solve target
problem T2 (in fact only 4 out of 16) and therefore they
have not done the double analogical mapping with B and C.
Thus we cannot expect the blending effect in this case. In
contrast, problem T1 was solved by 11 out of the 17
participants. Evidently the second target problem was too
difficult. We looked into the solved/unsolved difference and
found support for this interpretation. The mean degree of
BC blending in group 2 is: 0.148 for the subjects who
solved T2 and 0.025 for the subjects who did not solved it,
i.e. it is 6 times higher for the subjects who solved the target
problem T2. The difference is significant at p-level 0.028
(measured by one-tailed t test, t=2.45)
Table 1: Mean degrees of blending in each group.
#
of
subjects
group 1
(solving
T1~AB)
group 2
(solving
T2~BC)

AB
blending

BC
blending

AC
blending

17

0.102

0.043

0.036

16

0.022

0.056

0.035

0 .1 2
0 .1
0 .0 8
0 .0 6
0 .0 4
0 .0 2
0

gr oup 1
gr oup 2
AB
BC
AC
bl endi ng bl endi ng bl endi ng

Figure 1: Degree of blending between the base problems
reproduction depending on experimental group. There is a
significant 2-way interaction between groups and type of
blending.
Since we used a very formal method of measuring blending
– the number of intrusions as registered in the protocols –
we were curious to compare this to a more qualitative
judgment done by human experts who may recognize
whether there is a real blending or just some general
knowledge intrusions or superficial mixture. Two
independent judges had to read each protocol (without
knowing neither about our hypothesis nor which group this
protocol comes from). The experts had to judge whether
there was a blending between some old problems. There
was a high degree of agreement between the experts (about
10% disagreement where a third expert was called for
judgment). The frequencies of blending of type AB, BC,
and AC are presented in Table 2 and their percentage in
Figure 2.
Table 2: Number of blendings as judged by experts.
#
of
subjects
group 1
(solving
T1~AB)
group 2
(solving
T2~BC)

17

16

AB
blending

BC
blending

11

5

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

6

8

AC
blending
5

5

gr oup 1
gr oup 2

AB
BC
AC
bl endi ng bl endi ng bl endi ng

Figure 2: Percentage of blendings as judged by experts.

The results from expert judgments are generally coherent
with the measurements of the degree of blending and again
we have more AB blends in group 1, and more BC blends
in group 2. The number of AC blends is almost equal in
both groups. The log-linear analysis declared all the
differences insignificant, however.

Conclusions
AMBR mechanisms of memory access and mapping work
in parallel and interact with each other and thus predict
mutual influence between these processes. One specific
prediction is that when the target problem maps only
partially with two different bases and a double analogy is
required to solve it, then both bases are partially activated
and elements from both episodes are brought into WM. In
that way a blend between the two old episodes is produced
and remembered. That is why a higher degree of blending is
expected after subjects having solved such targets requiring
double analogies.
This prediction has been experimentally tested in a series
of three sessions in which the participants had first to learn
the bases (by solving the problems in session 1), then to
solve one additional target problem (session 2), and finally
to retell the base stories (session 3). It turns out that higher
degree of blending between two episodes is observed in the
group where the target problem in session 2 required usage
of a double analogy with these two episodes.
We consider these results as a first step in a series of
experiments which have to test this hypothesis. We are
currently running several more experiments varying the
material, the design of the experiment and the timing of the
sessions.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the AMBR research team for their
continuous support and stimulating environment.

References
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Forbus K., Gentner D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC: A
model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science, 19,
141-205.
Hintzman, D. (1988). Judgements of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple-trace model.
Psychological Review, 95, 528-551.
Hofstadter, D. and the Fluid Analogies Research Group
(1995). Fluid concepts and creative analogies: Computer
models of the fundamental mechanisms of thoughts. New
York: Basic Books.
Hummel, J. & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed representation of structure: A theory of analogical access and
mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Kokinov, B. (1988). Associative memory-based reasoning:
How to represent and retrieve cases. In T. O'Shea and V.
Sgurev (Eds.), Artificial intelligence III: Methodology,
systems, applications. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Kokinov, B. (1994a). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in
connectionist and neural computation theory: Vol. 2.
Analogical connections (pp. 247-318). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex
Kokinov, B. (1994b). The DUAL cognitive architecture: A
hybrid multi-agent approach. Proceedings of
the
Eleventh European Conference of Artificial Intelligence.
London: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Kokinov, B. (1994c). The context-sensitive cognitive architecture DUAL. Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kokinov, B. (1998). Analogy is like cognition: Dynamic,
emergent, and context-sensitive. In K. Holyoak, D.
Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in analogy
research: Integration of theory and data from the
cognitive, computational, and neural sciences. Sofia,
Bulgaria: NBU Press.
Kokinov, B. & Petrov, A. (2000). Dynamic Extension of
Episode Representation in Analogy-Making in AMBR.
In: Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kokinov, B. & Petrov, A. (2001). Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In: Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B. (eds.) The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kolodner, J. (1984). Retrieval and organizational strategies
in conceptual memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Loftus, E. (1977). Shifting human color memory. Memory
and Cognition, 5, 696-699.
Loftus, E. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press
Loftus, E., Feldman, J., & Dashiell, R. (1995). The reality
of illusory memories. In D. Schacter (ed.), Memory
distortions: How minds, brains, and societies reconstruct
the past. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Loftus, E., Miller, D., Burns, H. (1978). Semantic
integration of verbal information into a visual memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 4, 19-31.
Loftus, E. & Palmer, J. (1974). Reconstruction of
automibile destruction: An example of interaction
between language and memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585-589
McClelland, J. (1995). Constructive memory and memory
distortions: A parallel distributed processing approach. In
D. Schacter (Ed.), Memory distortions: How minds,
brains, and societies reconstruct the past. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Metcalfe, J. (1990). Composite holographic associative
recall model (CHARM) and blended memories in
eyewitness testimony. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 119, 145-160.
Minsky, M. (1986). The society of mind. New York: Simon
and Schuster.
Moscovitch, M. (1995). Confabulation. In D. Schacter

(Ed.), Memory distortions: How minds, brains, and
societies reconstruct the past. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Neisser, U. (1998). Stories, selves, and schemata: A review
of ecological findings. In M. Conway, S. Gathercole, &
C. Cornoldi (Eds.), Theories of memory (Vol. 2). Hove,
UK: Psychology Press.
Nystrom, L. & McClelland, J. (1992). Trace synthesis in
cued recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 591614
Petrov, A. & Kokinov, B. (1998). Mapping and access in
analogy-making: Independent or interactive? A
simulation experiment with AMBR. In K. Holyoak, D.
Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in analogy
research: Integration of theory and data from the
cognitive, computational, and neural sciences. (pp. 124134) Sofia, Bulgaria: NBU Press.
Petrov, A., & Kokinov, B. (1999). Processing Symbols at
Variable Speed in DUAL: Connectionist Activation as
Power Supply. In: Dean, T. (ed.) Proceedings of the 16th
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
(pp. 846-851) San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufman.
Reinitz, M., Lammers, W., & Cochran, B. (1992). Memoryconjunction errors: miscombination of stored stimulus
features can produce illusions of memory. Memory &
Cognition, 20, 1-11.
Schacter, D. (1995b). Memory distortion: History and
current state. In D. Schacter (Ed.), Memory distortions:
How minds, brains, and societies reconstruct the past.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thagard, P., Holyoak, K., Nelson, G., & Gochfeld, D.
(1990). Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction.
Artificial Intelligence, 46, 259-310.
Wharton, C., Holyoak, K., & Lange, T. (1996). Remote
analogical reminding. Memory and Cognition, 24 (5),
629-643.

