UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Primitive is Self-Consciousness?: Autonomous Nonconceptual content and Immunity to
Error Through Misidentification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0b93d2s8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Meeks, Roblin R.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

H O W PR IM ITIV E IS SELF-C O N SC IO U SN ESS?:A U TO N O M O U S
N O N C O N C EPTU A L C O N TEN T A N D IM M U N ITY TO ER R O R
TH R O U G H M ISID EN TIFIC A TIO N
R oblin R .M eeks(rm eeks@ gc.cuny.edu)
D epartm entofPhilosophy,The G raduate Schooland U niversity Center,
The City U niversity ofN ew Y ork,365 Fifth A venue
N ew Y ork,N Y 10016-4309 U SA

A bstract
Traditionally, investigations into the nature of selfconsciousness have focused on the peculiarities of the
first-person pronoun. But can w e extend the notion to
non-language-using creatures as w ell, including prelinguistic infants? José Luis Berm údez has recently
argued that creatures possessing no conceptual abilities
w hatsoever nevertheless possess states that can be
considered prim itive form s of self-consciousness. I
discuss one such form Berm údez gives— thatofsom atic
proprioception— and show that it fails to satisfy the
conditions he adopts for states funded by that type of
perception to be representationalasw ellasto be im m une
to errorthrough m isidentification.Thisconclusion forces
a choice betw een abandoning either im m unity to error
through m isidentification or a sharp conceptual/
nonconceptualdistinction w ith regard to representational
states.

Introduction
M ost traditional accounts of self-consciousness have
focused exclusively on the peculiarities of the firstperson pronoun. To be self-conscious from this
perspective is to possess the ability to m ake judgm ents
em ploying a first-person concept, judgm ents
canonically expressed w ith ‘I’.Butdo creatures lacking
linguistic abilities thereby lack self-consciousness?
A fter all,w hen hungry,even lobsters are self-possessed
enough to avoid eating them selves. A nd w hat of prelinguistic infants? If they are eventually to com e to
entertain thoughts involving a first-person concept,how
does self-consciousness for them arise out of their
w ordless beginnings?
V enturing aw ay from such traditional accounts
requires that w e should be clear concerning w hat w e
m ean w hen w e speak of a creature as self-conscious.In
general, to be self-conscious, a creature m ust possess
states w ith first-person content.W e need to restrictour
search further,how ever,for first-person contentcom es
in (at least) tw o flavors. Consider the follow ing
exam ples:
(1) Iam the w innerofthe N ew Y ork Lottery.
(2) RM is the w innerofthe N ew Y ork Lottery.

Intuitively itseem s that(2) does notentail(1),for I can
rationally believe that(2)is true w hile denying the truth
of (1)— I could lack a further belief thatI am identical
w ith RM . In (1), I am thinking of m yself
nonaccidentally, perfectly aw are to w hom I am
ascribing the property of lottery-w inner,even if I have
m isread the num bers on m y ticket and am actually no
w ealthier than before. In contrast, (2) leaves open the
possibility that I am thinking of m yself only
accidentally, ascribing a property to som eone
unbeknow nstto m e w ho in factturns outto be m yself.
N aturally, for m e the above cases w ill further differ
radically in the am ount of joy expressed at their
tokening. But the crucial distinction betw een the tw o
illustrates the cardinal feature of self-consciousness:
Fora creature to be self-conscious itm ustbe capable of
possessing states that,like (1),have nonaccidentalfirstperson content.
Can creatures lacking any conceptual resources
w hatsoever possess states that capture the distinction
betw een (1) and (2), or at least approxim ate the
nonaccidental nature of (1)? José Luis Berm údez has
offered an affirm ative answ er to this question,arguing
at length in The Paradox of Self-Consciousness that
certain form s of autonom ous nonconceptual content—
states w ith w hich a creature represents the w orld as
being such-and-such a w ay despite possessing no
conceptual resources w hatsoever— can be considered
form s of genuine self-consciousness.1 W e have good
initial reason to agree w ith Berm údez: Extending the
range of types or form s of contentthatcan correctly be
characterized as genuinely first-personal gives us a
hope of dispelling the m ystery of how the richer,
1

Berm údez is m otivated to look for nonconceptual content
that is genuinely first-personal to escape what he calls the
paradox of self-consciousness.This paradox is roughly that
analyzing self-consciousthoughtsolely in term sofa subject's
m astering the first-person pronoun w ill rely upon the notion
of him thinking of he him self as the author of the thought.
Spelling outthe “he him self” condition requires reference to
the first-person pronoun,and w e thus fallprey to circularity.
W hether one finds Berm údez's paradox com pelling,it is an
interesting question in its ow n right as to w hether creatures
lacking conceptual resources should be thought of as selfconsciousand ifso on w hatgrounds.

conceptualform s of self-consciousness actually arise in
the norm al course of hum an psychological
developm ent.
In w hat follow s w e w ill consider one source of
perceptual contents— nam ely som atic proprioception—
that Berm údez believes gives rise to genuine, albeit
prim itive, form s of self-consciousness. W e w ill find,
how ever,thata w idely accepted condition thatm ustbe
m et for a state to be considered nonaccidentally firstpersonal stands at odds w ith certain nonconceptual
states’ being representational. In light of the
incongruity, w e face a choice betw een rejecting that
condition, that nonaccidental first-person states be
im m une to error through m isidentification,or accepting
that a clear distinction betw een conceptual and
nonconceptualstates cannotbe m aintained.

A utonom ous N onconceptualC ontent
Elucidating exactly w hat nonconceptual content in
generalam ounts to is a difficulttask.Berm údez him self
is interested in establishing the existence of states w ith
autonom ous nonconceptual content to fend off
circularity in a certain explanation of nonaccidental
first-person thought.Though one can dispute his charge
of circularity, his overall approach to prim itive selfconsciousness is instructive. H e m otivates the
theoretical necessity of nonconceptual representational
states via inference to the bestexplanation.A rguing on
a broadly functionalistline,Berm údez contends thatno
accountofthe behaviorofan intentionalsystem can be
given w ithout reference to representational states.
H ow ever, certain intentional system s— including nonlinguistic anim als and pre-linguistic infants— lack
concepts, yet still succeed, for exam ple, in navigating
their environm ent. W e know that such creatures are
representing their surroundings (and the states of their
bodies) because no law-like relation holds betw een
sensory input and behavioral output. D ifferences in
behavior w hen faced w ith the sam e sensory input
indicate that a creature is possibly m isrepresenting a
currentstate of the w orld or perhaps thatits behavior is
a function of a com plex group of states,som e of w hich
differ from a previous occasion (a past predator can
becom e prey,e.g.).O nce general room has been m ade
for states w ith autonom ous nonconceptual content,
Berm údez goes to great lengths to provide specific
exam ples of nonconceptual contents that qualify as
prim itive form s ofself-consciousness.
O ne such exam ple Berm údez gives is thatof som atic
proprioception.2 O ne’s proprioceptive system provides
a stream of inform ation regarding the state of one’s
body, the position of lim bs, skin and joint tension,
2
Fora fairly extensive sum m ary ofthe inform ationalsystem s
that constitute som atic proprioception, see the general
introduction to Berm údez,M arcel,& Eilan (1995).

bodily feedback during motion, etc. These states are
representational states because they, like any other
representationalstate,“serve as interm ediaries betw een
sensory input and behavioral output” (Berm údez,
1998). G ranting for the m om ent that such states are
both representationaland autonom ously nonconceptual,
how are w e to determ ine if they qualify as form s of
prim itive self-consciousness? Berm údez offers that
such states m ustm eetthe tw o core requirem ents forany
self-conscious thought: They m ust have im m ediate
im plications for action,3 and they m ust be
nonaccidentally about oneself. Skipping the form er for
the m om ent, thoughts are nonaccidentally about
oneself,Berm údez and m any others argue,because they
are im m une to error through m isidentification relative
to the first-person pronoun. To assess the claim such
states have to self-consciousness w ith any accuracy,w e
m ust briefly review w hat this condition am ounts to
m ore generally.

Im m unity to Error Through
M isidentification
In The Blue Book W ittgenstein (1958) distinguishes
betw een w hathe calls ‘I’used as subjectand ‘I’used as
object.The latter,he claim s,perm its the possibility of
m isidentifying the referent of the first-person pronoun,
w hereas the form er does not.4 W hen uttering ‘I am in
pain’— the canonical instance of ‘I’ used as subject—
W ittgenstein offers thatthe identification ofthe speaker
is not in question: I cannot ascribe a felt pain to
som eone w ho, unbeknow nst to m e, is actually m yself.
In a genuinely self-conscious ascription ofa property,it
is no accident that I recognize that I am the subject of
the ascription, for it could not be otherw ise. In
W ittgenstein’s m em orable phrase:“The m an w ho cries
out w ith pain,or says that he has pain, doesn’tchoose
the m outh which says it” (W ittgenstein,1958,em phasis
his).
Sydney Shoem aker has done m uch w ork to elucidate
and to extend this condition, labeling it w ith the now
standard term inology “im m unity to error through
m isidentification relative to the first-person pronoun”
(Shoem aker, 1968).5 For Shoem aker, roughly as for
3

Fora characterization ofthisrequirem entsee Perry (1979).
Indeed,W ittgenstein claim s that ‘I’ in cases of its use as
subject is not a referring expression at all. This position is
endorsed and quite forcefully defended by A nscom be (1975).
5
Shoem aker (1968) basically accepts W ittgenstein's
distinctiontoutcourt,though he doeshold thatinstancesof‘I’
in judgm ents im m une to error through m isidentification do
genuinely refer. In recent w ork, Shoem aker (1994) has
adopted G areth Evans's (1982) coinage for this im m unity,
calling such judgm ents “identification free”. The argum ent
that follow s does not depend on favoring a particular
term inology,and therefore I w ill use the original phrase to
avoid possible confusion.Fora recentexploration ofthe kinds
4

W ittgenstein,a certain class of judgm ents perm it error
in the predicate position butdo notleave the identity of
the subject of the predication in question,for know ing
in a particular w ay thata property is instantiated sim ply
obviates the need for identifying its source.Berm údez
rightly points out,as G areth Evans did before him ,that
these contents are im m une to error through
m isidentification in virtue of the “evidence base from
w hich they are derived, or the inform ation on w hich
they are based” (Berm údez,1998),notin virtue of any
particularpredicate orpredicates.A scriptions ofpain to
m yself as w ellas to others em ploy the sam e predicate;
the claim is thatim m unity issues from the w ay in w hich
I know a pain to be present.6 Fundam entally,
Berm údez— like nearly all other participants in this
dialectic— accepts that contents cannot be considered
genuinely self-conscious unless they possess this type
ofim m unity.7
Som atic proprioception provides just such an
evidence base, argues Berm údez, for “som atic
proprioception cannot give rise to thoughts that are
accidentally about oneself” (Berm údez, 1998). H e
w rites:
O ne ofthe distinctive featuresofsom atic proprioception
isthatitissubserved by inform ation channelsthatdo not
yield inform ation about anybody’s bodily properties
except m y ow n (just as introspection does not yield
inform ation about anybody’s psychological properties
except m y ow n). It follow s from the sim ple fact that I
som atically proprioceive particularbodily propertiesand
introspectparticular psychologicalproperties thatthose
bodily and psychological properties are m y ow n.
(Berm údez,1998)

Focusing just on the particular bodily properties
reported on by proprioception,how are w e to assess the
claim that I cannot be m istaken about w ithin w hose
body those properties are instantiated w hen perceived
in thatw ay? For som atic proprioception to be a source
of genuine self-consciousness, it m ust serve as an
evidence base for contents w here the subjectcannotbe
in doubt, even for creatures lacking any conceptual
resources w hatsoever. Y et to
qualify
as

ofim m unity,including fundam entalw ays in w hich Evans and
Shoem akerdisagree,see Pryor(1999).
6
Cf. Evans (1982). Berm údez also argues, persuasively I
think, that Shoem aker's elucidation of im m unity to error
through m isidentification should be stated in term s of
justification as opposed to know ledge.For if one can stillbe
m istaken about the instantiation of a predicate— even if one
cannotbe m istaken aboutthe first-person identification in that
case— thatbeliefcannotbe considered know ledge. Itrem ains
a question w hetherforShoem akerthisispossible.
7
John Cam pbell(1999),for exam ple,has recently rem arked
that“im m unity to errorthrough m isidentification is a datum ”
that can be used to test the viability of various theoretical
approachesto the firstperson.

representational— thatis,to be considered contentfulat
all— thoughts funded by proprioception m ust allow for
the possibility of m isrepresentation.M isidentification is
but a special case of m isrepresentation, and hence
endorsing im m unity to error through m isidentification
at this prim itive level precludes m isrepresentation,
w hich apparently serves to disqualify proprioceptive
states from being representational.
To putthe pointanother w ay,how can states funded
by proprioception m isrepresent? States in general can
only “w ho” or “w hat” m isrepresent— viz., they can
m isrepresent the subject of the state (“w ho”) or the
presence of a property (“w hat”), or presum ably both.
M isrepresentation of the “w ho” variety am ounts to
m isidentification. To have “w hat” w ithout “w ho”
m isrepresentation requires som e representation of the
subjectw ith w hich a m istaken ascription can be m ade.
Since nonconceptual states lack subject-predicate
structure, no such representation of the subject is
available in thatcase.H ence,to “w hat” m isrepresentis
to m isidentify.
U nlike those w ho discuss im m unity to
m isidentification as it relates to judgm ents,it is not at
all clear that proponents of nonaccidental
nonconceptual content have the philosophical
m achinery to relieve this tension. Evans, for exam ple,
does not fall into a sim ilar predicam ent, for his ‘I’thoughts possess a conceptualstructure thatlocalizes—
as Shoem aker’s condition in its long form indicates—
the im m unity to error through m isidentification relative
to the first person pronoun.M isrepresentation can still
occur w ith regard to the predicate position and the
ascription of bodily properties,and hence im m unity to
m isidentification and m isrepresentation can co-existin
the sam e thought or judgm ent. N on-language-using
creatures, of course, do not have the first-person
pronoun at their disposal. W ithout conceptually
structured thoughts,itseem s thatthese types ofsubjects
cannot possess contents that are both representational
and im m une to error through m isidentification,for they
have nothing thatthatim m unity could be relative to.
O r do they? Berm údez argues that inference to the
best explanation w arrants ascribing “protobeliefs”, or
nonconceptual belief analogs, to non-language-using
creatures requiring intentional explanations to account
for their behavior. A s he presents them , perceptual
protobeliefs8 are nearly as rich as their conceptual
correlates: they can em body “nonextensional m odes of
presentation” in term s of G ibsonian affordances, and
they are som ew hat com positional, though they do not
allow for “global recom binability”, failing to m eet
8

Berm údez (1998) also briefly discusses instrum ental
protobeliefs, but our discussion can safely ignore them .
Berm údez draw s this bit of his theoretical apparatus from
Peacocke (1992).

Evans’s G enerality Constraint(Berm údez,1998;Evans,
1982). So structured, perceptual protobeliefs support
prim itive inference and the lim ited generation offurther
new nonconceptual contents from a set of others.
A ccordingly, perceptual protobeliefs so construed—
including contents based on som atic proprioception—
seem capable of supporting som ething like a discrete
subjectcom ponent,analogous to an ‘I’-idea,thatcould
serve as the locus of im m unity to error through
m isidentification, as w ell as a predicative com ponent
thatcould m isrepresenta property ofthe w orld orbody.
O ne certainly becom es puzzled at this point,
how ever.Ifnonconceptualcontents based upon som atic
proprioception can support both a com ponent im m une
to m isidentification and a com ponent preserving the
possibility of m isrepresentation, then w hat are w e to
m ake of the originalm otivation for m aintaining a clear
conceptual/nonconceptual distinction w ith regard to
contents? Indeed, it seem s that inference to the best
explanation w arrants thinking of the constituents of
protobeliefs as “protoconcepts”. M uch like concepts,
protoconcepts could be defined in term s of their
inferential role, w here a protoconcept’s inferential role
can be cashed out in term s of the protopropositions or
protobeliefs in w hich it features. A s the analogy
deepens betw een concepts and protoconcepts,w e seem
to have less reason to conclude that creatures lacking
language likew ise lack conceptual abilities of any sort,
how ever lim ited or nascent. A fter all, the set of
protopropositions m ay be quite lim ited for nonlanguage using creatures,butthey nevertheless succeed
in satisfying tw o subtle and sophisticated philosophical
criteria.Perhaps thatsuccess itself provides com pelling
evidence ofsom e degree ofconceptpossession.
Berm údez him self w ould no doubt resist this
approach since itseem s to run afoulofw hathe calls the
Priority Principle:
The Priority Principle: Conceptual abilities are
constitutively linked w ith linguistic abilities in such a
w ay that conceptual abilities cannot be possessed by
nonlinguistic creatures.(Berm údez,1998)

Priority w as initially im portantbecause it“allow s us to
m ake a very clear distinction betw een conceptual and
nonconceptual
m odes
of
content-bearing
representation” (Berm údez, 1998), and hence provides
us w ith a m eans of explaining, for exam ple, how
conceptual form s of self-consciousness can arise over
the course of norm al hum an psychological
developm ent. Y et, given that protobeliefs are in som e
m easure com positional and fund lim ited inference—
indeed are constituted by protoconcepts— itis no longer
clear how w e can m aintain a very clear distinction
betw een conceptualand nonconceptualcontents.
Still,perhaps the protoconcept/concept analogy runs
fairly shallow ,for even if non-language-using creatures

possessed a range of protoconcepts defined in term s of
protoconceptual roles, they do not have an explicit
grasp of these roles.Such creatures are m erely sensitive
to the truth of inferential transitions. Berm údez (1998)
w rites:
Certainly,itis possible to be justified (or w arranted) in
m aking a certain inferentialtransition w ithoutbeing able
to provide a justification (orw arrant)forthatinferential
transition.Itis a fam iliarepistem ologicalpoint,afterall,
that there is a difference betw een being justified in
holding a beliefand justifying thatbelief.W hatdoesnot
seem to be true is thatone can be justified in m aking an
inferential transition even if one is not capable of
providing any justifications at all for any inferential
transitions. But providing justifications is a
paradigm atically
linguistic
activity. Providing
justifications is a m atter of identifying and articulating
the reasons for a given classification, inference, or
judgm ent. It is because prelinguistic creatures are in
principle incapable of providing such justifications that
the priority thesis is true.M ere sensitivity to the truth of
inferential transitions involving a given concept is not
enough for possession of that concept. Rational
sensitivity is required, and rational sensitivity com es
only w ith language m astery.

ForBerm údez,then,possessing and deploying concepts
dem ands a fairly advanced capacity to identify and to
provide reasons for beliefs, and lim ited inferential
ability— even an ability to m ake inferences that one is
justified in m aking— does not indicate concept
possession.
This seem s a bittoo stringent,how ever.Being able to
give reasons as reasons is a function of possessing the
concepts of justification, belief, and reason, am ong
others. Im posing the further requirem ent on inferential
ability that one recognize that one is in fact giving
reasons m ay disqualify attributing conceptual abilities
w here w e norm ally w ould be com fortable doing so.To
take an exam ple Berm údez him self gives, the children
in Susan Carey’s experim ents w ho concluded that a
w orm w as m ore likely to have a spleen than a toy
m echanical m onkey are probably not in position to
identify their reasons for this conclusion as reasons and
to answ er a call to justify their inferences. Still, he
w ants to creditthese four-yearolds w ith possessing the
concepts H U M A N BEIN G, LIV IN G A N IM A L , INTERNAL
O RG A N S,and the inferentialrelations betw een them .

C onclusion
It seem s that m aintaining that nonconceptual contents
be im m une to error through m isidentification entails
that a sharp distinction betw een conceptual and
nonconceptualcontents m ustbe abandoned.Perhaps w e
can spare a fairly strong distinction by instead
abandoning the requirem ent that these contents be
im m une to error through m isidentification.That is,w e
accept that protobeliefs are only m inim ally structured,

ultim ately lacking the propositional precision required
to support the w eight of an im m unity claim . It’s not
clearto m e thatw e sacrifice m uch explanatory pow erin
m aking this m ove,since w e can stillhold firm ly to the
second core condition for genuine self-conscious
thought— nam ely, that nonconceptual proprioceptive
contents m ust have im m ediate im plications for action,
w hich in fact they do (Berm údez, 1998). M oreover, in
preserving this second condition w e still have a m eans
of determ ining the class of nonconceptualcontents that
qualify as a form of genuine prim itive selfconsciousness.A lternatively,w e can retain im m unity to
error as a necessary condition of self-consciousness,
relinquishing instead the Priority Principle and the
sharp conceptual/nonconceptual division that it w as
intended to capture.Choosing this route has interesting
im plications, for in doing so w e greatly expand the
range ofcreatures thatcan be said to possess conceptual
capacities of one sortor another— including,evidently,
those possessing som e form ofselfconcept.
W hatever route w e choose,som ething,itseem s,m ust
be surrendered. For despite w hat doubts w e m ight
harbor concerning the low ly lobster,higher anim als and
our ow n infants should give us pause. Selfconsciousness is certainly not ours alone;w e justhave
yetto understand itin its m ore prim itive form s.

A cknow ledgem ents
I w ould like to thank Y en Chu, Bernard K obes,
D ouglas M eehan, Erik M yin, A ndrés Páez, D avid
Rosenthal,Elizabeth V lahos,and Joshua W eisberg for
useful discussions and com m ents on an earlier version
ofthis paper.

R eferences
A nscom be, G . E. M . (1975). The first person. In S.
G uttenplan (Ed.), M ind and language. O xford:
Clarendon Press.
Berm údez, J. L. (1998). The paradox of selfconsciousness.Cam bridge,M A :M IT Press.
Berm údez, J. L., M arcel A ., & Eilan N . (Eds.) (1995).
The body and the self.Cam bridge,M A :M IT Press.
Cam pbell, J. (1999). Im m unity to error through
m isidentification and the m eaning of a referring term .
PhilosophicalTopics,26,1999.
Cassam ,Q .(1997). Selfand world.O xford:Clarendon
Press.
Castañeda, H .-N .(1966).‘H e’: A study in the logic of
self-consciousness.Ratio,8,130-157.
Evans, G . (1982). The varieties of reference. O xford:
Clarendon Press.
Peacocke, C. (1992). A study of concepts. Cam bridge,
M A :M IT Press.
Perry,J.(1979).The problem of the essentialindexical.
N oûs,13,3-21.
Pryor, J. (1999). Im m unity to error through
m isidentification.PhilosophicalTopics,26,1999.
Shoem aker, S. (1968). Self-reference and selfaw areness.The JournalofPhilosophy,65,555-567.
Shoem aker, S. (1986). Introspection and the self.
Reprinted in Shoem aker,1996,3-24.
Shoem aker, S. (1994). Self-know ledge and ‘inner
sense’.Philosophy and Phenom enological Research,
54,249-314.
Shoem aker,S.(1996). The first-person perspective and
other essays. Cam bridge: Cam bridge U niversity
Press.
W ittgenstein, L. (1958). The blue and brown books.
O xford:BasilBlackw ell.

