UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Difference in Reasoning about Broken Devices: An Eye Tracking Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98d9638g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Lu, Shulan
Olde, Brent
Cooper, Elisa
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences in Reasoning about Broken Devices: An Eye Tracking
Study
Shulan Lu (shulanlu@hotmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, 3693 Norriswood
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Brent Olde (baolde@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, 3693 Norriswood
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Elisa Cooper (culdihavben@hotmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, 3693 Norriswood
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Arthur C. Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, 3693 Norriswood
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
We examined the questions college students ask when
everyday devices malfunction. Our investigation of the
explanatory reasoning processes is organized around the
central theme of question asking. PREG, a model of
human question asking, predicts when and what types of
questions are asked by humans while comprehending
expository texts. PREG has two salient predictions. First,
deep comprehenders should ask questions that converge
on plausible faults. Second, eye movements should
converge on those likely faults. An eye tracking study
supported these predictions. The present research
supports the claim that question asking and eye tracking
are two excellent indicators of device comprehension in
the context of breakdown scenarios.

Introduction
Deep comprehension of everyday devices can be
manifested in a number of tasks and measures. For
example, most colleagues would agree that the deep
comprehenders construct coherent representations of
functioning devices, draw appropriate inferences,
answers explanation-based questions correctly (e.g.,
why, how, what-if, what-if-not), and solve transfer
problems that apply their understanding (Gentner &
Stevens, 1983; Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994).
This study investigates the manifestations of deep
comprehension of devices that are not as widely
recognized. We believe that deep comprehension is
required when devices breakdown, when eyes fixate on
likely faults, and when questions are asked about likely
faults. (Graesser, Olde, & Lu, in press; Graesser, Olde,
Pomeroy, Whitten, Lu, & Craig, in press).
Question asking and its role in understanding texts
and stories is well-documented (Graesser & McMahen,

1993; Kass, 1992; Schank, 1986, 1999; Ram, 1994).
The literature has consistently suggested that the
understanding of a story is achieved by identifying the
questions raised by the story and then searching for the
answers in the story. Question asking has many
potential functions in reasoning and problem solving.
For instance, question asking is often affiliated with
searches, comparisons, explanations, predictions and
several other cognitive processes. It is reasonable to say
that comprehenders would have more questions as they
reason through an expository text and that their
questions would manifest comprehension depth. For
example, it is very hard to imagine that a shallow
comprehender could ask questions addressing the
critical causal components of an event. In this article,
we examine a model of question asking in the context
of understanding technical texts. More specifically, we
are interested in the model’s predictions about deep
versus shallow comprehension of everyday devices as
revealed by question asking. It is suggested that
question asking opens a window for viewing the subprocesses involved in understanding (Ram, 1994), such
as the retrieval of explanations in long term memory
and the search of information from a display. However,
there has been very little empirical research that
documents the relationships among comprehension,
question asking, and information search (as reflected in
eye tracking). Therefore, we conducted a study in
which eye tracking was measured while college
students generated questions when confronted with a
breakdown scenario.

PREG: A Model of Question Asking
Several computational models of question asking
have been constructed in the context of story
understanding. These models were capable of
generating questions with respect to the goals and subgoals of a story. However, an adequate model of
question asking should be capable of predicting when
and what types of questions humans ask as they
comprehend expository texts as well as other types of
learning material. Otero and Graesser (in press)
developed a PREG model of question asking that
attempts to capture these question asking mechanisms
in detail. The general assumption of the model is that
clashes between text input and a reader’s existing world
knowledge trigger question generation (Graesser, Olde,
Pomeroy, et al., in press; Otero et al., in press).
Questions are constructed when readers come across
information in a text that presents contradictions,
anomalies, obstacles to goals, discrepancies, constrasts
and other triggers of potential cognitive disequilibrium
(Graesser et al., 1993; Graesser & Person, 1994).
The discrepancies between input and world
knowledge can be associated with the different levels of
representations, ranging from shallow to deep (Britton
& Graesser, 1996; Gentner et al., 1983; Graesser,
Millis, & Zwaan, 1997; Kieras & Bovair, 1984;
Kintsch, 1998). The surface code, which is at the
shallowest level, keeps the wording and syntax of a text
in a verbatim form. As for the visual modality, it
preserves the low-level lines, angles, sizes, shapes, and
textures of the picture. The textbase, which is at the
intermediate level, in essence is a propositional
representation that maintains the meaning of the
explicit text and the pictures. The mental model, which
is at the deepest level, captures the referential content of
the text. When applied to everyday devices, this would
include:
1. the components of the electronic or mechanical
system;
2. the spatial arrangement of components;
3. the causal chain of events when the system
successfully unfolds;
4. the mechanisms that explain each causal step;
5. the functions of the device and device
components;
6. the plans of agents who manipulate the system
for various purposes.
Quite clearly, a rich set of knowledge structures needs
to be constructed when an adult comprehends a device
at a deep level.
According to the PREG model, conceptual graph
structures are adopted to encode a chronology of events
and states that happen during the course of device
motion. The conceptual graph structure is not built
arbitrarily, but is comprised of a set of categorized

nodes which denote concepts and proposition-like
descriptions in the text and corresponding visual-spatial
information. These nodes are connected by arc
categories such as ENABLE, CAUSE, PROPERTY,
REASON and OUTCOME. In addition, most arcs are
directed with a source node and an end node.
It is assumed that pictorial and textual information is
incorporated in a single underlying representation.
Empirical studies show that most readers are capable of
alternating between picture and text and that the text
dominates the reading process when illustrated texts are
comprehended (Bagget & Graesser, 1995; Hegarty &
Just 1993).

Individual Differences in Question Asking
The current study examines the questions that college
students ask when an everyday device malfunctions.
For example, consider a cylinder lock and the following
breakdown scenario: the key turns, but the bolt does not
move. According to PREG, understanding is manifested
when a device breaks, not when it is running smoothly.
Thus PREG predicts that deep comprehenders should
ask good questions that converge on likely faults. More
specifically, these questions should tap the nodes in the
conceptual graph structure that are the plausible causes
of the malfunction. To test this hypothesis, Graesser,
Olde, Pomeroy et al. (in press) conducted a study in
which 108 participants first read an illustrated text, then
were provided a breakdown scenario, and then
generated questions. After completing the question
asking task, an objective comprehension test on the
devices were administered. A battery of tests that
measure cognitive abilities and personality were
administered in the end.
The results confirmed the hypothesis: Good
comprehenders generate high quality questions that
focus on plausible faults of the breakdown. Follow-up
multiple regression analysis further suggested that
ASVAB (the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude
Battery, Department of Defense, 1983) technical score
was the primary predictor of both deep comprehension
and question quality.
Given that technical scientific knowledge turned out
to be a robust predictor of device comprehension, we
conducted a qualitative analysis of the questions asked
by participants with high (upper 33% of distribution)
versus low technical knowledge (lower 33% of the
distribution). The questions generated by participants
with high technical scores tend to converge on the fault
components and address the causal connections
between parts, processes, and relations that are in the
chain of breakdown. The questions asked by low
technical participants tend to be diffuse. That is, most
of the components in a system were addressed in the
hope that it might turn out to be pertinent instead of
converging on 1 or 2 parts. Their questions rarely were

elaborations on the causal links addressing the
malfunction.
Since the above patterns emerged, we were curious
to know whether there were systematic differences in
the eye movement patterns between individuals with
different levels of cognitive abilities. That is the focus
of the present study.

Question Asking and Control of the Eye
Eye movements provide an important window for
understanding
the
cognitive
processes
and
representations that play a role in a particular cognitive
task. However, no one has investigated the relationship
between eye movements and the cognitive components
in question asking. PREG predicts that eye movements
should converge on the likely faults. As far as
individual differences in the eye movement are
concerned, the following hypotheses could be directly
generated from the PREG model. First, deep
comprehenders are expected to have a high density of
eye fixations occur at words, objects, parts, and
processes that are at the source of cognitive
disequilibrium (e.g., anomalies, contradictions, broken
parts, contrasts, missing components, and so on), while
shallow comprehenders should indiscriminately scan
the regions of the illustrated text. A sufficient amount
of technical knowledge is necessary for identifying
anomalies in a system. Thus, technical knowledge and
other indices of deep comprehension should be
positively correlated with measures of the fixations that
assess the extent to which a comprehender focuses on
fault areas.

Method
Participants
The participants were forty college students at the
University of Memphis. The students participated for
course credit in an introductory psychology class.
Illustrated Texts and Question Asking Tasks
The participants read 5 illustrated texts on everyday
devices: a cylinder lock, an electronic bell, a car
temperature gauge, a toaster, and a dishwasher. The
illustrated texts were extracted from Macaulay’s (1988)
book, The Way Things Work. These were the same
devices that were used in the Graesser, Olde, Pomeroy
et al., (in press) study, except that the clutch was
dropped from the current study; it was extremely
difficult for participants to differentiate and label the
individual teeth in the wheels of the clutch mechanism.
As in the Graesser, Olde, Pomeroy et al., (in press)
study, there were five trials, each of which consisted of
two phases. The participant first read an illustrated text
for 3 minutes, which was displayed on a computer
monitor. After the reading phase, the breakdown

description was presented either above or to the left of
the illustrated text and the participants began the
question asking phase (while the illustrated text
remained on the screen). The participants asked
questions aloud for 90 seconds during this phase and
the protocol was recorded. The previous study had
participants generate questions in writing whereas the
present study collected spoken questions. Each
participant furnished question asking protocols for all 5
devices. The assignment of devices to test order was
counterbalanced across the 40 participants with a Latin
square.
Device Comprehension Test
The participants subsequently completed a 30-question
test of device comprehension (5 devices x 6 threealternative, forced-choice question per device). All 30
questions were generated from a theoretical framework
in qualitative physics (Forbus, 1984). Suppose there are
N components in a system and their states are
delineated as either inhibitory, excitatory, or neutral as
affected by other components in the causal network.
The test questions are concerned with how tweaking
one component A has an impact on another component
B. An example question constructed according to the
three possible states is as follows:
What happens to the pins when the key is turned to
unlock the door?
(a) they rise
(b) they drop
(c) they remain stationary (correct answer)
It is not likely that participants will be able to answer
such questions correctly without deep comprehension
of the devices. It is reasonable to predict that deep
comprehenders will be able to trace the causal
antecedents and causal consequences of the events
(Graesser & Bertus, 1998) and shallow comprehenders
will lose track of causal connections. The device
comprehension test was thus designated as the gold
standard for deep comprehension. It is predicted that
performance on the device comprehension test should
positively correlate with the quality of the questions
that get asked and also with fixations on the faults of a
breakdown scenario. The device comprehension score
could vary from 0 to 30. A score of 10 would be chance
performance if there were no sophisticated guessing or
background knowledge.
Battery of tests of individual differences
The participants completed assessments of the
following measures of individual differences: four
scales
of
technical
knowledge
(mechanical
comprehension, electronics, general science, auto &
shop) extracted from ASVAB (Department of Defense,
1983), and additional tests of spatial reasoning (Bennet,

Seashore, & Wesman, 1972) and openness (Costa &
McCrae, 1991). These were included, as they were the
statistically
significant
predictors
of
deep
comprehension and question asking in the Graesser,
Olde, and Pomeroy et al. (in press) study.
Recording of eye tracking and question asking
Eye movements were recorded by a Model 501 Applied
Science Laboratory eye tracker. There was a magnetic
head tracker so the participants could move the head
during data collection. The participants were calibrated
before they started the experimental session of reading
the illustrated texts and asking questions. During
calibration, the participants viewed 9 points on the
computer display and a computer recorded the x-y
coordinates.
The calibration process took 10-15
minutes. Participants were dismissed if they wore
glasses, but the equipment could accommodate contact
lenses.
The experimental session was videotaped and audio
recorded. The VCR camera focused on a scene monitor
screen, on which the illustrated text being viewed by
the participant and the trace of the participant’s eye
movements were mirrored. The VCR recorded both the
illustrated text and a superimposed image of what the
left eye was focusing on. The superimposed image
showed the locus of (a) the focus of the eye and (b) an
X-Y axis with the 0-0 point at the center of the focus.
The voice of the participant was recorded on the VCR
so that the spoken questions could be transcribed. This
set-up allowed us to record and review (a) the contents
of the computer display, (b) the focus of the left eye,
and (c) the voice of the student asking questions.
Computer software was available to record eye
movements at a fine-grained level. The software
produces area plots for specific areas of interest. In
particular, we were interested in the portions of eye
fixations focusing on the areas of interest associated
with faults. These faults were sometimes in the text
and sometimes in the picture.
The following measures were scored on the think
aloud protocols collected in the question asking task.
Volume of questions: The number of questions that
were asked in the question asking task.
Question Quality: The number or proportion of
questions that referred to a plausible explanation of the
breakdown.
Trained judges coded the verbal protocols with an
acceptable level of reliability.

Results and Discussion
Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents means and standard deviations for the
measures collected in this study. The ASVAB measures

were comparable to normal college student populations.
Scores of spatial reasoning were not significantly
different from the scores for college students reported
in Bennet et al. study (1972).
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics on Measures of
Individual Differences
Measures
Mechanical
Electronics
Auto & Shop
General Science
Spatial
Openness
Gender

Mean
13.9
9.3
10.0
16.9
23.8
52.1
1.25

SD
6.0
4.3
5.3
4.7
15.2
9.2
.44

The Coordination between Question Asking and Eye
Movements
It is important to examine the device comprehension
scores first. The mean device comprehension score was
18.6 (SD = 4.6), which is 62% of the questions being
answered correctly. As would be expected, device
comprehension was significantly correlated with the
number of fault questions asked (r = .45, p < .01). In
addition, device comprehension showed a high positive
correlation with all the ASVAB measures, in particular,
ASVAB technical knowledge (r = .54) and general
science (r = .60).
The data supported PREG’s predictions. There were
29.5 fixations (SD = 11.1) on plausible faults per
device, or 9.3 seconds (SD = 3.9) out of 90 seconds.
11.5% of the eye fixations and 10.4% of the time
focused on the fault areas. The index of deep
comprehension, i.e., device comprehension score, was
significantly correlated with the eye tracking measure
of number of fixations on faults (r = .43).
We examined the role of question asking in eye
tracking at this point. The data showed strong evidence
that there was consistent coordination between question
asking and eye movements. Furthermore, there were
significant differences in the measures of eye tracking
between participants who had a relatively high number
of fault questions and those who had a low number of
questions, e.g., number of fixations on faults (167.6
with SD = 42.2 versus 127.5 with SD = 61.0, for high
versus low).
Given the importance of cognitive abilities during
device comprehension, we explored which measures of
cognitive ability are more capable of discriminating
deep comprehension versus shallow comprehension as
measured by question asking and eye movements.
General science turned out to be a significant predictor
of the eye tracking measure and the number of fault
questions asked. The participants who scored higher on
general science had more questions on faults (7.7 with

SD = 2.7 versus 6.0 with SD = 3.0, for high versus
low), and had bigger number of fault fixations (173.1
with SD = 48.7 versus 122.0 with SD = 50.9).
Openness is one of the “big five” personality factors:
neuroticism, extroversion, openness, agreeableness, and
conscientiousness (Costa et al., 1991). The subscale of
openness attempts to capture creativity. A t-test on the
eye tracking measure and question asking measure
showed that there were significant differences between
participants with high openness scores versus those
with low openness scores: number of fixations on faults
(167.8 with SD = 49.6 versus 127.3 with SD = 55.0, for
high versus low), and number of fault questions (8.2
with SD = 2.9 versus 5.5 with SD = 2.4). The data
suggested that openness was a robust predictor of
question asking and subsequently affected the patterns
of eye movements.
9
8
7
6
5

High

4

Low

3
2
1
0
General Science

Openness

Figure 1: The number of questions on faults by high
versus low on general science and openness scales.
200
180
160

extent question asking was in control of eye
movements. The ideal method of addressing this
question would be structural equation modeling.
However, given the number of participants in the
present study, we could only conduct a partial
correlation analysis.
If our PREG model is correct, there should not be a
significant correlation between the number of questions
addressing faults and readers’ technical knowledge after
partitioning out the variance of question asking.
Subsequent data analysis supported the hypothesis that
question asking is in control of eye movements rather
than eye tracking guiding question asking. When the
variable (number of fault questions) was controlled, the
correlation between technical knowledge and the
number of fixations on faults approached 0 (r = .14, p <
.05). However, controlling the variance of eye
movements did not affect the correlation between
technical knowledge and the number of fault questions.
They remained significantly correlated (r = .39, p <
.05). The results are consistent with some recent
findings which suggest that some cognitive processes
are fast enough to affect eye movements (Rayner et al.,
1998).
In short, it appears that individuals with high scores
on general science and openness are most capable of
asking questions about the anomalous information in a
system. Subsequently these individuals move their eyes
to the plausible fault areas and verify their reasoning
about the breakdown scenario. On the other hand,
individuals, who are low on the general science and
openness scales, tend to be less sensitive to the
contradictions when they arise. Thus they resort to the
strategy of scanning all the regions of a text in the hope
of hitting the target.

140
120

High

100

Low

80
60
40
20
0
General Science

Openness

Figure 2: The number of fixations addressing faults by
high versus low on general science and openness scales.
There have been two different views concerning the
relationships between eye movements and ongoing
cognitive processes (Rayner, Reichle, & Pollatsek,
1998). One is that eye movements are mainly driven by
oculomotor processes; the other is that there is a
correspondence between eye movements and cognitive
processes. The data quite clearly suggested the
coordination between question asking and eye
movements. The question at this point was to what

Conclusion
The current research has demonstrated the usefulness of
the eye tracking data for studying the cognitive
components in question asking. The analysis of eye
fixations provides an account of how people with
different levels of cognitive ability and different types
of personality reason through the device malfunction
and how their explanatory reasoning processes center
around anomaly detection and question asking.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Office of Naval
Research (N00014-98-1-0331). We thank Victoria
Pomeroy, and Shannon Whitten for collecting and
analyzing data on this project.

References
Baggett, W. B., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). Question
answering in the context of illustrated expository
text. Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 334-339).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bennet, G. K., Seashore, H. G., & Wesman, A. G.
(1972). Differential aptitude test: Spatial relations.,
Form T. New York: Psychological Corporation.
Britton, B., & Graesser, A. C. (1996) (Eds.). Models of
understanding text. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1991). NEO: Five
Factor Inventory.
Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources.
Department of Defense (1983). Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Battery, Form 12a. Washington,
D.C.: Department of Defense.
Forbus, K. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial
intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Gentner, D., & Stevens, A. L. (1983) (Eds.). Mental
models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., Bertus, E. L. (1998). The construction of
causal inferences while reading expository texts on
science and technology. Scientific Studies of Reading,
2, 247-269.
Graesser, A. C., & McMahen, C. L. (1993). Anomalous
information triggers questions when adults solve
quantitative problems and comprehend stories.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 136-151.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question
asking during tutoring.
American Educational
Research Journal, 31, 104-137.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing inferences during narrative text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Graesser, A. C., Millis, K. K., Zwaan, R. A. (1997).
Discourse comprehension. Annual Review of
Psychology, 48, 163-189.
Graesser, A. C., Olde, B., & Lu, S. (in press).
Question-driven explanatory reasoning about devices
that malfunction. In T. Filjak (Ed.), Proceedings of
the 36th International Applied Military Psychology
Symposium.
Graesser, A. C., Olde, B., Pomeroy, V., Whitten, S., Lu,
S., & Craig, S. (in press). Inferences and questions in
science text comprehension. In J. Otero and M.
Helena (Eds.), Science text comprehension.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing
mental models of machines from text and diagrams.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Kass, A. (1992) Question-asking, artificial intelligence,
and human creativity. In T. Lauer, E. Peacock, & A. C.
Graesser, (Eds.), Questions and information systems.
Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kieras, D. E., & Bovair, S. (1984). The role of a mental
model in learning to operate a device. Cognitive
Science, 8, 255-274.

Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.
Macaulay, D. (1988). The way things work. Boston,
MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Otero, J., & Graesser, A. C. (in press). PREG:
Elements of a model of question asking. Cognition
and Instruction.
Ram, A. (1994) AQUA: Questions that drive the
explanation process. In R.C. Shank, A. Kass, & C.K.
Riesbeck (Eds.), Inside Case-Based Explanation.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rayner, K, Reichle, E. D. & Pollatsek, A. (1998). Eye
movement control in reading: An overview and
model. In G. Underwood (Eds.), Eye guidance in
reading and scene perception. Oxford, England:
Elsevier.
Schank, R. C. (1986).
Explanation patterns:
Understanding
mechanically
and
creatively.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic memory revisited.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

