UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactions Between Frequenct Effects and Age of Acquisition Effects in a Connectionist
Network

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19s1m9qx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Munro, Paul W.
Cottrell, Garrison

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactions betw een Frequency Effects and A ge ofA cquisition Effects in a
C onnectionistN etw ork
PaulW .M unro (m unro@ sis.pitt.edu)
SchoolofInform ation Sciences
U niversity ofPittsburgh
Pittsburgh,PA 15260 U SA

G arrison C ottrell(gary@ cs.ucsd.edu)
D epartm entofCom puterScience and Engineering 0114
U niversity ofCalifornia,San D iego
La Jolla,CA 92093-0114 U SA

A bstract
The perform ance of a connectionist netw ork, in w hich
som e resources are absentor dam aged is exam ined as a
function of various learning param eters. A learning
environm ent is created by generating a set of random
“prototypes” and clusters of exem plar vectors
surrounding each prototype. A n autoencoder is trained
on the patterns. The robustness of each learned item is
m easured as a function of the tim e at w hich it w as
“acquired” by the netw ork and its overall frequency in
the environm ent. Both factors are show n to influence
robustness underseverallearning conditions.

A nderson (2001). H ere,w e look atpattern perform ance
in the face of dam age to the netw ork, sim ulating
neuronalfailure as could occurw ith aging ortraum a.
The robustness of netw ork perform ance to hidden unit
dam age has been show n to im prove for netw orks
trained w ith noise am ong the hidden units (Judd &
M unro, 1993). In som e cases, this kind of noise has
been show n to im prove the generalization properties of
a netw ork (Clay & Sequin, 1990). Functionally, the
hidden representations of the training item s settle to
states that are further apart in term s of a Euclidean
m easure.

Introduction
For all their shortcom ings, feed-forw ard netw ork
m odels oflearning and m em ory share certain im portant
features w ith their biological counterparts. A m ong
these are the ability to gradually abstract statistical
regularities from their environm ents by incorporating
them into their connectivity structures and the feature
generally know n as “gracefuldegradation”.
In this paper, the relationship betw een early learning
(acquisition) and degradation of perform ance through
loss of resources is exam ined in the context of sm allscale sim ulations,in term s of frequency effects,age of
acquisition (A oA ) effects, prototype effects, and the
insertion ofnoise into the neuralnetw ork.
The relative influence of A oA com pared to frequency
on w ord nam ing tasks has been argued am ong cognitive
psychologists and linguists for several years now
(Brow n & W atson, 1987; M orrison et al., 1992;
G erhard & Barry,1998). O f course,teasing apart the
influences of A oA and frequency is confounded by the
strong correlation betw een them . A oA effects have
also been reported in other dom ains, such as object
identification and face recognition (M oore & V alentine,
1999). The effects of A oA and frequency on pattern
error have been analyzed by Sm ith, Cottrell, and

In this paper, w e exam ine the follow ing three
hypotheses:
1. The robustness of an item under loss of netw ork
com putational resources (analogous to the loss of
neurons in hum ans) is related both to the tim e at
w hich thatitem w as “acquired”,and to the average
frequency ofthe item in the netw ork’s experience.
2. Prototypicalitem s are m ore robustthan exem plars,
even if they are never explicitly presented to the
netw ork,since they share features w ith populations
of exem plars, and thus have high “effective
frequencies” in the environm ent.
3. Early explicitlearning of prototypes can resultin a
m ore robust set of internal exem plar representations.

M ethodology
The training set
A tw o-step process is used to generate a structured set
of bit strings of length L. First, a set of N prototype
strings is produced by generating 0 and 1 values

independently w ith probability 0.5 foreach bithaving a
value 1. In the second step,a setofni exem plar strings
are generated from the ith prototype Pi by “flipping” bits
w ith a low probability. The resultis a setof N pattern
“clusters” (see Figure 1). W hile the netw ork is trained
on the exem plarpatterns only,the netw ork perform ance
is m easured for both the exem plars and the prototypes.
In this study,L=100,N=10,and ni=10,(i=1...10).

training atw hich a pattern is firstacquired is called its
age of acquisition (A oA ). Prelim inary studies have
show n that in som e cases a pattern m ay briefly be
“forgotten” soon after its initial acquisition. In such
instances,the forgotten pattern is prom ptly reacquired;
thus,the A oA is defined as the tim e the pattern is first
acquired.

Perform ance A nalysis

P2
P1
P5
P6
P3

A fter training,the netw ork’s response to each training
pattern w as tested under various dam age levels.
D am age w as im plem ented by only allow ing the output
ofk of the H hidden units to stim ulate the outputlayer,
w here k is varied from 1 to H . The m inim um num ber
ofhidden units required to reconstructthe inputpattern
(to w ithin a specified degree oftolerance)is recorded as
a m easure ofthe pattern’s robustness in the netw ork. In
som e cases, patterns w ere “forgotten” after initial
acquisition. In m ost such cases, the pattern w as
reacquired,butnotalw ays.

Experim entalC onditions

P4
Figure 1. Schem atic view of the training patterns.
Prototypes (open squares) are random ly generated
binary strings. A set of exem plars (filled circles) is
generated in the neighborhood ofprototype.
In order to analyze the role of frequency, item s w ere
selected from the training set according to a ram p
distribution; that is, the selection probabilities for the
100 exem plars ranged from approxim ately 0.0002 to
0.0200 linearly. The probabilities w ere assigned such
that the cluster probabilities also follow ed a ram p
distribution. In other w ords, the item s w ere ordered
according to the parent prototypes and the probability
of selecting the kth item w as proportional to k. This
w ay, the clusters w ere also ordered such that the
probability of selecting an item from the jth cluster w as
proportionalto j.

In all the experim ents, the acquisition criterion is that
95 outof 100 units should be w ithin 0.2 of their target
value (0 or1). The totaltraining tim e is either50000 or
100000 pattern presentations, depending on the
condition. Thus,w ith the ram p distribution,the num ber
of presentations of each individual pattern varies from
about10 to about2000.
C ontrol C ondition (C C ) In the control condition, the
netw ork is trained w ith just the 100 exem plars for a
period of100000 pattern presentations.
H ead Start C ondition (H C ) H ere, the training set
consists a subset of only 10 patterns (one from each
cluster) of the full set of 100 exem plars for the first
10000 tim e steps. This is done to guarantee very low
A oA s on som e patterns. The training setis expanded to
the fullset,including the initialsubset,for 90000 m ore
presentations. Ellis & Lam bon-Ralph (2000) found
strong A oA effects in a staged learning condition ofthis
kind.

N etw ork A rchitecture
N etw orks trained by backpropagation to reconstruct
their input pattern at the output layer (autoencoders)
w ith a single hidden layer of 40 units are trained using
backprop. In som e trials,the responses of the hidden
units are random ly perturbed to analyze the effect of
netw ork noise. A n output unit’s response is deem ed
“correct” if it differs from the target by less than a
predeterm ined tolerance level δ. Perform ance is
m easured in term s of the num ber of correct output
units. Ifthe netw ork responds w ith a sufficientnum ber
of correct output units to an input pattern,that pattern
has been acquired by the netw ork. The point in

N oisy C ondition (N C ) This condition is the sam e as
the previous condition (H C) w ith “Boolean” noise
injected into the hidden layer during the early phase.
H ere, the activity levels of a sm all num ber of hidden
units are m ultiplied by –1. This m anipulation is
predicted to increase the overall robustness of the full
training set.
Prototype C ondition (PC )In this variation of H C,the
netw ork is trained on only the protoypes during the
early phase w ith no injected noise. N ote thatprototypes

are never explicitly presented in the previous three
conditions.

45

A ll conditions show a strong dependence of A oA on
frequency. In general,prototype patterns are acquired
earlier than exem plar patterns, even if they are not
explicitly presented, w ith the A oA of the prototypes
dependent on average frequency of the corresponding
exem plars.

R equired H U

40

R esults

Exem plars
35

Prototypes

30

25
0

20000

40000

C ontrolC ondition (C C )

60000

80000

100000

A oA

O ver the course of 100000 exem plar pattern
presentations, 92 of the 100 exem plars w ere acquired
by the netw ork.The eightnonacquired exem plars w ere
allam ong the 11 leastfrequent. O f the 10 prototypes,
one w as not acquired, and eight w ere acquired in the
first 10000 iterations. A scatterplot of A oA vs
frequency follow s a hyperbolic trend (Fig 2,top). This
observation prom pted a second scatterplot (Fig 2,
bottom ), in w hich A oA is exam ined vs. freq-1.
Regression on these data indicates the productof A oA
and frequency is about190 (zero interceptassum ed).

Figure 3. The num ber of hidden units required to
reconstructthe inputas a function the A oA . A value of
41 indicates thatw hen the sim ulation halted,the pattern
could notbe reconstructed w ith all40 hidden units.
The fragility of each item ,as m easured by the num ber
ofhidden units required to reconstructthe pattern tends
to be higherforthe patterns w ith laterA oA (i.e.,earlier
patterns are m ore robust). This is true for both the
exem plars and the prototypes (Fig 3). Sim ilarly,item s
thatare m ore frequenttend to be m ore robust(Fig 4).
45

80000

40
R equired H U

100000

A oA

60000
40000

35

30

20000
25

0

0

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

Frequency

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

Frequency

Figure 4. The required num ber of hidden units vs.
frequency. The trendline show s that m ore frequent
item s tend to be m ore robust.

100000
80000

Regression against both variables indicates that the
influence of A oA (p = 0.01139) is stronger than
frequency (p = 0.03271)by a factorofalm ostthree.

A oA

60000
40000

H ead StartC ondition (H C )

20000
0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Inverse Freq

Figure 2: A oA vs Frequency (top) and A oA vs.Freq-1
(bottom ). The random selection of stim uli in the
sim ulation follow s a ram p distribution to give a w ide
range offrequencies.

H ere, the first 5000 iterations use only a subset of 10
item s (one exem plarfrom each prototype’s “cluster”)is
for training. The netw ork is then exposed to the entire
set of 100 exem plars for 45000 subsequent learning
trials. Selection of patterns during early exposure also
follow s a ram p distribution, giving a variety of
frequencies w ithin this set.

Early Item s. N ine of the 10 item s presented alone for
the first5000 tim e steps are learned before presentation
2000. Four of them are acquired before the earliest
prototype (1000 iterations). The leastfrequentitem in
this set w as never learned. A s in CC, A oA and
frequency are highly correlated.

The bar graphs in Figure 6 display the A oA and
robustness (H U required) for the prototype patterns,
such that they can be com pared w ith corresponding
values in the controlcondition (black bars=N C,striped
bars=CC).

45

40000

40

30000
A oA

H U R equired

Prototypes. The m ean A oA for prototypes under H C
(12907) is later than it is under CC (10568) and the
average prototype is slightly less robust under H C
(35.75 H U )than underCC (34.22 H U ).

the prototypes are acquired m uch faster. H ow ever,the
netw ork does not m aintain the ability to reconstruct
prototypes from the low frequency clusters. N evertheless,those prototypes thatare m aintained can w ithstand
m ore dam age to the netw ork.

35

20000
10000

30

0
25

1
0

500

1000

1500

2

3

4

2000

5

6

7

8

7

8

9

10

Prototypes

A oA

50
45

H U R equired

40

H U R equired

40

35

30
20
10

30

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

9

10

Prototypes

25
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

Frequency

Figure 5. The dependencies ofrobustness on A oA (top)
and frequency (bottom )underH C.

Prototype C ondition (PC )
This condition is like H C, except that the ten patterns
presented in the early phase are the prototypes of the
later patterns. N o significant differences in the effects
on robustness or A oA w ere observed in the PC relative
to H C.

Figure 6. D istributions of A oA (top) and the required
num ber of hidden units (bottom ) are displayed for the
controlcondition (striped bars)and N C (dark bars).The
10 item s are ranked from low est (approx. 0.018) to
highest frequency (approx. 0.18). The netw ork w as
never able to reconstruct the low est frequency
prototype (#1),hence there is no bar for this condition.
The m axim um value forthe low erbargraph is the total
num ber of hidden units,40. A value of 50 m eans that
the netw ork could not reconstruct those prototypes at
the end ofthe sim ulation.

C onclusions
N oisy C ondition (N C )
A s in the case of PC, this condition produced m ainly
negative results. N o significanteffectof the noise w as
noticed on the acquisition or robustness of the
exem plars. The m ain observed effect of noise is that

A s a pream ble to the data analysis, the relationship
betw een A oA and frequency w as exam ined. These
variables w ere found to be strongly related by a
function of the form a=k/f,w here a is the A oA ,fis the
frequency, and k is a constant (refer to Fig 2). Even

though this did not bear directly on the hypotheses, it
m ay be the strongestresultofthis paper!
O ur results supportthe firsttw o hypotheses. The first
hypothesis, that both frequency and A oA influence
robustness of a learned item is evident from the
sim ulations. Bivariate regression of the robustness
variable (H U required) against the tw o independent
variables gave fits that w ere not very tight (i.e., the p
values w ere too high for the results to be considered
significant). N evertheless, the value corresponding to
A oA w as consistently low er than that for frequency,
indicating a strongerdependence ofrobustness on A oA .
The second hypothesis,thatprototypes are m ore robust
than exem plars w as supported by the sim ulations.The
effect is as strong as expected by the m easure used
here: under CC,prototypes require an average of 34.3
H U ,w hile exem plars require 36.3 H U . N ote that this
m ay sim ply by a byproduct of the A oA effect, since
prototypes are acquired m uch earlier than exem plars.
Frequency also plays a role. Even w hen the prototypes
are notexplicitly presented,and thus have no frequency
per se, the exem plars m ay be considered distorted
versions of the prototypes. H ence,each prototype has
an “effective frequency” that depends on the total
frequency of its supporting exem plars w eighted by the
exem plar-prototype distances.
O ur sim ulations did not support the third hypothesis,
that early explicit prototype training w ould result in
representations that are m ore robust. W hile no such
effecthas yetbeen observed,itrem ains as a subjectfor
future investigation.

D iscussion
The issues investigated in this study are the first steps
into the exploration of a broader question: H ow does
the adult cognitive structure ultim ately depend on the
initialstages oflearning? This question is quite sim ilar
to the age-old debate of nature vs. nurture. H ere the
issue is w hether som e potential for later cognitive
capabilities is dependent,not on innate factors,but on
the content of early experience and the biological
m echanism s atw ork.
The process ofacquisition ofinform ation,the sequence
in w hich item s are presented to the learner,as w ell as
the internal param eters of the learner, m ay play a
determ ining role in the adultconceptualarchitecture. It
m ay be thatthe representations of concepts acquired in
childhood, and the associations form ed am ong them
constructa foundation on w hich laterconcepts are built.
H ence,the soundness ofthis foundation m ay determ ine
the ultim ate robustness ofthe adult.

Certainly,the im portance ofearly learning on cognitive
developm ent has been acknow ledged (for exam ple,
Catherw ood, 1999). In the present w ork, w e have
begun to exam ine this w ithin the connectionist
fram ew ork,w hereby adultcognitive perform ance m ight
be linked to the statistics ofthe learning environm entin
early childhood.
.

A cknow ledgm ents
W e w ould like to thank the m em bers of the G U RU
group at U CSD for valuable discussions. Paul M unro
gratefully acknow ledges the hospitality of the group
and its leader, coauthor G arrison Cottrell, during a
sabbatical leave spent at U CSD during the fall quarter
of2000.

R eferences
Brow n,G .& W atson,F.(1987)Firstin,firstout:W ord
learning age and spoken w ord frequency as predictors
of w ord fam iliarity and nam ing latency. M em ory &
Cognition,15:208-216
Catherw ood, D . (1999) N ew V iew s on the Y oung
Brain: offerings from developm ental psychology to
early childhood education. Contem porary Issues in
Early Childhood,1:23-35.
Clay, R. & Séquin, C. (1992) Fault tolerance training
im proves generalization and robustness.
In:
Proceedings ofthe InternationalJointConference on
NeuralNetworks. IEEE/IN N S:Baltim ore M D .
Ellis,A .W .,& Lam bon-Ralph, M . A . (2000). A ge of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect
loss of plasticity in m aturing system s: Insights from
connectionist netw orks. Journal of Experim ental
Psychology: Learning,M em ory,& Cognition,26(5),
1103-1123.
G hiselli-Crippa,T.& M unro,P.(1994) Em ergence of
global structure from local associations. In:
Advances in Neural Inform ation Processing System s
6,J.D .Cow an, G . Tesauro, J. A lspector, eds. San
M ateo,CA :M organ K aufm ann.
Judd, S. & M unro, P. (1993) N ets w ith unreliable
hidden nodes learn error-correcting codes.In: G iles,
C.L.,H anson,S.J.,Cow an,J.D .,(eds.)Advances in
Neural Inform ation Processing System s 5. San
M ateo,CA :M organ K aufm ann Publishers.

M oore,V .& V alentine,T.(1999) The effects of ageof-acquisition in processing fam ous faces and nam es:
Exploring the locus and proposing a m echanism .
Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual M eeting of
the Cognitive Science Society. M ahw ah N J:
Erlbaum .
Sm ith, M .,Cottrell, G ., and A nderson K . (2001) The
early w ord catches the w eights. To appear in:
Advances in Neural Inform ation Processing System s
12 M IT Press,Cam bridge,M A .

