UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Opportunistic Strategy for Information Navigation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mb0678j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Miller, Craig S.
Remington, Roger W.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

M odeling an O pportunistic Strategy for Inform ation N avigation
C raig S.M iller (cm iller@ cs.depaul.edu)
SchoolofCom puterScience,D ePaulU niversity,243 S.W abash A ve.
Chicago,IL 60604 U SA

R oger W .R em ington (rrem ington@ m ail.arc.nasa.gov)
N A SA A m es Research Center,M S 262-4
M offetField,CA 94036 U SA

A bstract
A com putational m odel of a user navigating W eb pages
w as used to identify factors thataffectW eb site usability.
The m odel approxim ates a typical user searching for
specified target inform ation in architectures of varying
m enu depth. Search strategies, link am biguity, and
m em ory capacity w ere varied and m odel predictions
com pared to hum an user data. A good fit to observed
data w as obtained fora m odelthatassum ed users 1)used
little m em ory capacity; 2) selected a link w henever its
perceived likelihood of success exceeded a threshold;
and,3) opportunistically searched below threshold links
on selected pages priorto returning to the parentpage.

Introduction
The W orld W ide W eb continues to revolutionize how
people obtain inform ation, buy products, and conduct
business transactions. Y et m any com panies and
organizations struggle to design W eb sites that
custom ers can easily navigate to find products or
inform ation.The identification of factors thataffectthe
usability of the W orld W ide W eb has becom e
increasingly im portant. W hile m any of these factors
concern the graphicallayoutofeach page in a W eb site,
the w ay in w hich the pages link to each other, often
called the site's inform ation architecture, plays a
decisive role in the site's usability, especially for sites
allow ing access to large databases (Rosenfeld &
M orville, 1998) O ur effort focuses on understanding
how a site's inform ation architecture im pacts a user's
ability to effectively find content in a linked
inform ation structure such as a W eb site.
W e develop our understanding through the
construction and testing of a w orking com putational
m odel.The m odelsim ulates a usernavigating through a
site m aking choices aboutw hether to selecta given link
or evaluate an alternate link on the sam e page.
Constructing and testing a w orking m odel not only
com plem ents em pirical studies, but also offers
advantages over em pirical usability testing. Em pirical
studies are generally too expensive and tim e consum ing
to address the w ide range of content, configurations,
and user strategies that characterize the W eb. In

contrast, an im plem ented m odel can run thousands of
sim ulated sessions in m inutes. A lso,em pirical studies
do not inherently provide explanations for their results
and thus m ake it m ore difficult to determ ine how a
given resultgeneralizes to othercircum stances,w hereas
a cognitive m odel can describe the underlying
processes that produce behavior. For exam ple,
com putational m odels have been used to highlight
patterns of interactions w ith a brow ser (Peck & John,
1992) and report on the accessibility of the site's
content(Lynch,Palm iter& Tilt,1999).
In this paper, w e build upon m ethods that w e
presented in an earlier paper (M iller & Rem ington,
2000a). For the sake of presentation, w e describe the
m ethods and our m odel in its entirety.W e introduce a
new navigation strategy and show how the m odel's
aggregate behavior tightly fits results from an em pirical
com parison of different site architectures (Larson &
Czerw inksi, 1998). Finally, w e experim ent w ith the
m odel's assum ptions by exploring alternate designs and
param eters in order to help identify critical elem ents in
the m odel's design.

M odeling Inform ation N avigation
W e sim ulate com m on patterns ofuserinteraction w ith a
W eb site w ith the goal of providing useful usability
com parisons betw een different site architectures. A
m odelthatprecisely replicates a user's navigation is not
possible,nor is itnecessary.U sefulinform ation can be
obtained from a sim ple m odelthatcaptures functionally
significant properties of the user and site architecture.
H ere w e show how a sim ple m odel can predict and
explain benefits of one design over another, such as
w hen itis advantageous to use a tw o-tiered site instead
ofa three-tiered site.
In constructing our m odel, w e use the follow ing
principles:
• The m odelshould only perform operations thatare
w ithin the physical and cognitive lim itations of a
hum an user.In W eb navigation,for exam ple,lim its
on visual attention dictate that a user can only
focus upon (and evaluate) one link at a tim e.
Likew ise, lim its on short-term m em ory dictate

•

•

navigation strategies that m inim ize m em ory
requirem ents, an assum ption consistent w ith
evidence that people often adopt m em ory
m inim ization strategies (Ballard, H eyhoe, Pook, &
Rao,1997).
The m odel should m ake sim plifying assum ptions
w henever they are not likely to have m uch im pact
on aggregate behavior. For exam ple the m odel
takes a fixed am ountoftim e to evaluate a link even
though hum an users’ tim es are certainly variable.
Since the m odel sim ulates the average user, this
sim plification w ill provide a good fit given a
reasonable estim ate of fixed tim e from hum an
perform ance data (Card,M oran & N ew ell,1983).
The m odel should em ploy the m ost effective
strategy fora given environm entunless com pelling
evidence from hum an usage suggests otherw ise.
G iven the large setofnavigation strategies thatcan
operate w ithin reasonable physical and cognitive
lim itations, w e exam ine a strategy that is m ost
effective w ithin know n cognitive constraints.This
design constraint is the rationality principle (see
Card,M oran & N ew ell,1983),w hich assum es that
hum an cognition isgenerally rational.

R epresenting a W eb Site
O ur m odel interacts w ith a sim plified, abstract
representation of a W eb brow ser and a W eb site. Each
site has one rootnode (i.e.the top page)consisting ofa
list of labeled links, each leading to a separate child
page. For a shallow , one-level site, child pages are
term inal pages, one of w hich contains the target
inform ation thatthe user is seeking. For deeper,m ultilevel sites, a child page consists of a listof links,each
leading to child pages at the next level. The bottom
level of all our sites consists exclusively of term inal
pages, one of w hich is the target page. O ur exam ples
are balanced trees (i.e.pages atthe sam e levelhave the
sam e num ber of links) since w e generally com pare our
results to studies thatuse balanced tree structures (e.g.
M iller, 1981 and Larson & Czerw inski, 1998).
H ow ever,our representation does notpreventus from
running sim ulations on unbalanced trees, or even on
structures involving m ultiple links to the sam e page and
links back to parentpages.
W hen navigating through a site,a userm ustperceive
link labels and gauge their relevance to the targeted
inform ation. Rather than m odel the com plex and
interesting process of link evaluation,w e fix a num ber
for each link, w hich represents the user's im m ediately
perceived likelihood that the target w ill be found by
pursuing this link. This sim plification allow s us to
easily investigate a range of num erical relationships
betw een the link labeland the targetinform ation.

In an idealsituation,after evaluating a link,the user
w ould know w ith certainty w hetherto selectand pursue
that link. Figure 1 represents a site w ith such links.
Each link (underlined num ber) on each W eb page is
understood w ithout am biguity. The user need only
follow the links labeled w ith a 1.0 to find the targeted
page w ith no backtracking.W e describe the architecture
ofthis site as having a tw o-tiered,4x2 structure.

Figure1 Site w ith sure path
M ore often, the user is less certain of w hich link to
select.The links in the site show n in Figure 2 are m ore
am biguous.For the top page,the m ostlikely link has a
perceived likelihood of only .7,thus indicating thatthe
useris less certain thatthis link w illlead to the targeted
item .In som e cases,a user strategy thatm erely follow s
the m ost likely links w ould directly lead to the target.
H ow ever,this figure show s a site w here the userw ould
find the targetunder w hathe or she perceives as a less
plausible sequence oflink selections (the targetis under
a likelihood value of 0.2 instead of the 0.5 value). In
this w ay it is possible to represent sites that differ
w idely in strength ofassociation betw een link labeland
targetinform ation.

Figure2 Site w ith am biguouslabels

M odeling the Brow ser and U ser A ctions
Byrne et al. (1999) found that selecting a link and
pressing the Back button accounted forover80% ofthe
actions used forgoing to a new page.Consequently,w e
focused our m odeling on the com ponent actions
underlying these behaviors.These include:
•
•

Selecting a link
Pressing the Back Button

•
•

A ttending to and identifying a new page
Checking a link and evaluating itslikelihood

To further sim plify our m odel, attending to and
identifying a new page can be folded into the actions of
Selecting a Link and Pressing the Back Button since
this action only occurs w hen either of these actions
occur. O urrevised m odelhas three prim itive actions:
•
•
•

Selecting a link (and attending to and identifying a
new page)
Pressing the Back Button (and attending to and
identifying a new page)
Checking a link and evaluating itslikelihood

Because of physical and cognitive lim itations,only
one of these actions can be perform ed atany one tim e.
Fixed tim es are assigned to each action to account for
its duration during a sim ulation. The m odel also
sim ulates changing the color of a link w hen it is
selected so that the m odeled user can “perceive”
w hetherthe page underthis link w as previously visited.

M odeling N avigation Strategies
The m odel navigates a W eb site by serially executing
these three prim itive actions, m eaning that links are
sequentially evaluated. Serial evaluation is m otivated
by evidence that the hum an user has a single unique
focus of attention that m ust be directed at the link for
this decision.
A user could em ploy any of a large set of possible
strategies for link selection thatvary in sophistication.
Tw o examples include:
• The threshold strategy: The user im m ediately
selects and pursues any link w hose probability of
success exceeds threshold.
•

The com parison strategy: The user first evaluates
a set of links and then selects the m ost likely of the
set.

The threshold strategy is m ost effective if the first
likely link actually leads to the targeted object. The
com parison strategy is m ore effective only if a likely
link is follow ed by an even m ore likely link that
actually leads to the targeted item . Both represent
sim ple yet effective strategies. W e chose to begin by
exam ining the threshold strategy on the principle thatit
requires the few estcom putational(cognitive)resources.
The m odel is neutral as to the actual order in w hich
the linksare evaluated. The design and layoutofa page
principally determ ine w hich links a user w ould evaluate
first. A ny understanding ofhow page layoutand design
affectthe user's focus could eventually be incorporated
into the m odel. For our purpose of investigating site
structure,the m odelsim ply establishes a fixed order in
w hich links are evaluated for each run. To avoid
system atic orderbiases,oursim ulations random ly place

the targeted item at a different term inal page for each
run.
W ith the appearance of a new page, the m odel's
threshold strategy firstattends to the page,w hich,ifitis
a term inal page, includes checking if it contains the
targetinform ation.Ifitdoes not,the m odelsequentially
scans the links on a page selecting any link w hose
likelihood is equal to or above a fixed threshold (0.5 in
the sim ulations reported below ). W hen a page appears
by selecting a link, the process of checking and
scanning the page is repeated.
O nce the m odeldetects no unselected links above the
threshold value,itreturns to the parentpage by pressing
the Back button and continues scanning links on the
parentpage starting atthe lastselected link.Itdoes not
scan links ithas already evaluated.D eterm ining the last
link selected places no dem ands on m em ory since the
last selected link is easily detected by its color, and
m any brow sers return the userto the location ofthe last
selected link.
Selecting the m ostprobable link w illoften lead to the
targeted item . H ow ever, som etim es the targeted item
lies behind ostensibly im probable links and,after som e
initial failures, hum an users m ust start selecting links
even if the link labels indicate that they w ill probably
notlead to the targeted item .A n earlier version of our
m odel (M iller & Rem ington, 2000a) started selecting
im probable links only after com pleting a full traversal
of the site.W e w illcallthis the traverse-firststrategy.
H ow ever, a m ore effective strategy
m ay
opportunistically selectim probable links ata low er tier
im m ediately after trying the m ore probable links and
before returning to a higher tier in the site.W e callthis
the opportunistic strategy.
Figure 2 illustrates how the opportunistic strategy
m ay be m ore effective. The m odelscans across the top
page and selects the second link (0.7). O n the second
level it selects the first link it encounters (0.5). A fter
discovering thatthis is notthe targeted item ,itreturns
to the page on the second level. H ow ever, before
returning to the top level, it tem porarily reduces its
threshold to 0.1,selects the second link (0.2) and finds
the targeton the new page. H ad the targeted item been
elsew here in the site, the strategy backs up tw ice,
returning to the top-leveland resetting the threshold to
the previous value (0.5).
The opportunistic strategy is m ore efficientthan the
traverse-first strategy. First, it explores less probable
links w hen the cost of doing so is m inim al, that is,
w hen the less probable links are im m ediately available.
Secondly, it im plicitly takes into account the positive
evaluation of the parent link, w hich had indicated a
high likelihood thatthe targeted item is under a link on
the currentpage.

The opportunistic strategy is notefficientifem ployed
in cases w here all the links on a page have very low
likelihood values (defined as less than 0.1). In such
cases our m odel assum es that the user has sufficient
m em ory to know that rescanning the page w ould be
futile,and returns to the parent page.This m em ory of
know ing that the page has nothing w orthw hile only
lasts as long as the m odelrem ains on the currentpage.
Thus,if the m odelleaves the page and then returns to
this sam e page, the m odel m ust assum e that the page
m ay be w orth rescanning and the opportunistic strategy
is em ployed. This qualification is also consistent w ith
our design principles in that it contributes to an
effective strategy w hile m inim izing m em ory resources.
W hile generally consistent w ith our design principle
of preferring strategies that place m inim al dem ands on
m em ory,the opportunistic strategy does require state
values to be held in m em ory. If opportunistic search
fails to find the targeted item ,the m odelm ustresetthe
link selection threshold to the previous value upon
returning to the upper level. Resetting a value requires
storing the old value before reducing it.Storing and
recalling one or tw o values reasonably fall w ithin the
lim its of hum an cognition,but storing and recalling an
arbitrary num ber of values does not. For this reason,
our m odel allow s us to fix a lim it on the num ber of
previous threshold values itcan recall. W e initially set
this num ber to one, but later in this paper w e w ill
explore the im pact of being able to store and recall
additionalvalues.
Part of our reason for adopting the opportunistic
strategy in place of the traverse-firststrategy w as our
exam ination of usage logs for a site search task. W e
conducted a pilot study using a W eb site w hose
structure m irrored a popular departm ent store’s
organization. Prelim inary results suggest that users
frequently select ostensibly less probable links before
backtracking to other possibilities (see M iller &
Rem ington, 2000b, for m ore details and an exam ple).
W e plan future studies thatcould furtheridentify usages
ofthis strategy.

Sim ulation Param eters
O ur previous w ork established plausible tim e constants
for link evaluation and link selection (M iller &
Rem ington, 2000a). W e com pared the m odel and
results from hierarchical m enu selection studies and
obtained good fits w ith link evaluation costs setto 250
m s and link selection costs set to 500 m s. The use of
tim e constants is w ellestablished (e.g.,Card,M oran,&
N ew ell, 1983) and these values are consistent those
previousestim ates.
To assign likelihood factors to the links,the ideallink
values (1,0) are perturbed w ith noise according to the
form ula below :

g*n+ v
w here g is a num ber chosen random ly from a standard
norm al gaussian distribution (m ean=0, stdev=1); n is
the noise factor m ultiplier (equivalentto increasing the
variance of the norm al distribution); and v is the
original likelihood value (0 or 1). Since this form ula
occasionally produces a num beroutside the range from
zero to one, our algorithm m ay repeatedly invoke the
form ula for a link until it generates a num ber in this
range.The noise factor n thus m odels the levelof label
am biguity in the site.H igher levels of am biguity lead to
m ore frequent backtracking, w hich m ay be m ore
prom inentin W eb search than m enu search.

Sim ulations
To further evaluate the m odel’s design decisions, w e
com pare its perform ance to the W eb navigation results
of Larson and Czerw inski (1998). They studied users
navigating tw o-tiered (16x32 and 32x16) and threetiered (8x8x8) site architectures that w ere otherw ise
com parable. Participants took significantly longer to
find item s in the three-tiered site (58 seconds on
average) than the tw o-tiered sites (36 seconds for the
16x32 site and 46 secondsforthe 32x16 site).

Sim ulations ofthe O pportunistic Strategy
For our sim ulations using the opportunistic strategy,
sites w ere constructed as described above,except that
the noise w as not applied to the bottom level, w hich
leads to the term inal pages. This reflects the fact the
participants in Larson & Czerw inski could clearly tell
w hether the link's labelm atched the textof the targeted
item .
For each site architecture (8x8x8, 16x32, and 32x16)
10,000 sim ulations w ere run using the follow ing tim e
costs: 250m s for evaluating a link, 500m s for selecting
a link, and 500m s for return to the previous page
(pressing the back button). Follow ing Larson and
Czerwinski (1998), any run lasting m ore than 300
seconds w as coded as lasting 300 seconds.
Figure 3 show s the calculated m ean tim es of the
sim ulation runs. N ot surprisingly, the tim e needed to
find a target increased w ith link am biguity. W hat is
more interesting is how link am biguity interacts w ith
site structure.The 8x8x8 architecture produced slightly
faster tim es at low levels of noise but substantially
slow er tim es atnoise levels above 0.2. A tthese higher
noise levels the results are consistent w ith the hum an
users. A t noise levels of 0.4 and higher, sim ulated
tim es w ere faster w ith the 16x32 architecture than the
32x16 architecture. This difference w as also noted in
the study w ith hum an users, albeit not reported as
statistically significant.
A t a noise levelof 0.4,the sim ulation results closely
m atch the hum an results in absolute term s: 62s

(com pare to 58s for hum ans) for 8x8x8, 43s (com pare
to 46s) for 32x16,and 35s (com pare to 36s). Itappears
thatthe 0.4 serves a good param eterestim ate describing
the am ount of label am biguity in the sites used by
Larson and Czerw inski.

Im pactofM em ory C apacity
Recallthatthe opportunistic strategy requires the m odel
to store and retrieve threshold values so that the
previous threshold can be reinstated upon returning to a
parentpage.So far,our sim ulations have assum ed that
only one threshold value can be restored.Thus,if the
m odel returned to the top level of a three-tier
architecture, it w ould no longer be able to recall the
previous threshold and w ould sim ply leave the
threshold atits currentstate.
Because this lim ited m em ory capacity only hinders
perform ance in a three-tiered site (e.g. 8x8x8), w e ran
sim ulations w here the m em ory capacity could hold the
additional threshold value so that the previous value
could be reinstated w hen navigating through a threetiered site. Figure 4 show s the results using the sam e
scale as Figure 3.W hile w e see that the extra m em ory
capacity im proves the perform ance of the 8x8x8
architecture,its navigation is still slow er than the tw otiered architectures.

Figure3 Sim ulating threshold and opportunistic
strategies

Im pactofTim e C osts
W hile changing the tim e costs (250m s for link
evaluations and 500m s for link selection and returning
to the previous page) w ill affect absolute sim ulation
tim es,it is less clear if different tim e costs w ill change
w hich architecture produces the fastest tim es. For
exam ple, one m ay w onder if the 8x8x8 architectures
w ould still produce the slow est tim es if the link
selection cost w ere double, w hich m ay occur for a
slow erinternetconnection.
To explore the im pact of tim e costs, w e look at the
num ber of link evaluations, link selections and page
returns. Ifindependentcounts ofthese actionscorrelate
w ith the aggregate sim ulation tim e, w e conclude that
varying the tim e costs have m inim al im pact on the
relative perform ance of the differentarchitectures. For
exam ple, if the 8x8x8 requires m ore evaluations, m ore
selections and m ore returns than the otherarchitectures,
w e know that 8x8x8 w ill produce slow er search tim es
regardless ofthe tim e costs.
Looking atthe num ber of evaluations,selections and
returns, w e see that the 8x8x8 architecture required
m ore of each action (173, 17, and 19 respectively) at
the 0.4 noise level than the 16x32 (125, 3, and 5) and
the 32x16 (134, 6, and 8). Further experim entation
reveals that this relationship holds across all but the
low est noise levels (0.2 and less). W e conclude that
changing the tim e costs have no effect on the relative
com parisons provided thatthe noise levelisatleast0.3.

Figure4 Resultsusing a largerm em ory capacity

D iscussion
W e have show n thata sim ple m odelofa W eb usercan
provide an excellent account of user behavior and
reveal im portant factors underlying W eb usage. The
m odel suggests that link am biguity interacts w ith the
depth of inform ation architecture to determ ine site
navigation tim e. A s link am biguity decreases, better
perform ance is found from architectures w ith deep
structures that m inim ize the num ber of links searched.
A s link am biguity increases, the m odel show s
perform ance degradations for architectures w ith deeper
structures. The sam e pattern is characteristic of hum an
users. H ow ever, the preference for shallow hierarchies
is observed only w ith sufficient am biguity in the link

labels and w ith no am biguity atthe bottom level.Thus,
the results of Larson and Czerw inski (1998) m ay not
generalize to large num bers of real W eb pages w ith
am biguity atalllevels.
A s for W eb search strategies, com bining thresholdbased selection w ith opportunistic search strategies
produced sim ulated tim es that are very close to
observed tim es for 0.4 noise level. This also
correspondsto the behaviorofseveraluserssearching a
departm ent store site in the pilot study m entioned
above.W e recognize the need for converging m ethods
to independently determ ine link am biguity and are
exploring theoretical and em pirical m ethods of
estim ating actualvalues.
To m ake tim e predictions, our m odel assum es
plausible tim e costs for link evaluation, link selection
and returning to the previous page.By noting the actual
counts for these operations, our sim ulations help us
understand w hat happens w hen the link selection tim e
is significantly longer,as w ould be the case for a slow
internet connection.W e found,how ever,that the tim e
costs have no effect on the relative com parisons
provided that the noise factor is at least 0.3. This
suggests that a slow er internet connection does not
im pact the relative advantage of shallow architectures
w hen significant link am biguity is present, at least for
the case w here no noise is presentatthe bottom level.
O ur sim ulations also aid ourunderstanding of how
hum an m em ory im pacts effective navigation.
Increasing the m odel’s m em ory capacity im proved
perform ance for the deep (8x8x8) structure but left the
other tw o architectures largely unaffected. This
suggests thatm em ory is m ore usefulin keeping track of
site architecture than in searching w ithin a page.Since
searching a page is facilitated by visual cues (e.g.,
changes in the color of previously selected links)users
can avoid reliance on m em ory.V isualcues are typically
notpresentto rem ind users of the nam es and locations
of previous links. The interaction of structure w ith
m em ory capacity indicates furtherthatsim ple heuristics
for representing capacity are insufficient to capture
m em ory phenom ena of im portance. Instead, it is
necessary to exam ine how the structure of inform ation
sites provides aids to m em ory. O ur analysis contrasts
w ith previous advice suggesting that the num ber of
links per page should be lim ited to 10 (Rosenfeld &
M orville, 1998) (see Larson & Czerw inski, 1998, for a
discussion based on experim entalresults).
W e have show n that a sim ple m odel of a user
interacting w ith a sim plified W eb site can reveal
im portant factors that affect usability and can support
the investigation of the interactions betw een those
factors across a w ide range of conditions. W hat w e
have presented is not a com prehensive m odelof W eb
navigation. N o attem pt is m ade to account for how
people scan a page,or evaluate link labels or im ages.

By abstracting these processes,and representing only
theirfunctionality,the m odel focuses on understanding
how inform ation architecture affects the navigation
process. A s an approxim ation of user navigation,the
m odel can account for a range of hum an behaviors by
varying likelihood factors in its site representations.W e
have show n that the m odel provides a good
approxim ation of the behavior of the com m on (m odal)
user. By varying param eters it should be possible to
extend the m odelto accountforalternate strategies.

R eferences
Ballard,D .H .,H eyhoe.M .M .,Pook,P.K .,& Rao,R.
P. N . (1997). D iectic codes for the em bodim ent of
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,20,723767.
Byrne, M . D ., John, B. E., W ehrle, N . S., & Crow , D .
C. (1999). The tangled w eb w e w ove: A taskonom y
of W W W use. Proceedings of CH I'99 H um an
Factors in Com puting System s (pp. 183-190).New
Y ork:A CM press.
Card, S. K ., M oran, T. P., & N ew ell, A . (1983).The
Psychology of H um an-Com puter Interaction.
H illsdale,N J:Law rence Erlbaum .
Larson,K .& Czerw inski,M .(1998).W eb page design:
Im plications of m em ory, structure, and scent for
inform ation retrieval. Proceedings of CH I'98 H um an
Factors in Com puting System s (pp. 25-32). New
Y ork:A CM press.
Lynch, G ., Palm iter, S., & Tilt, C. (1999) The m ax
m odel:A standard W eb site userm odel.Proceedings
of the 5th Annual H um an Factors and the W eb
Conference. Retrieved February 5, 2001 from the
W orld
W ide
W eb:
http://zing.ncsl.nist.gov/hfw eb/proceedings/lynch.
M iller, C. S. & Rem ington, R. W . (2000a). A
com putational m odel of W eb navigation: Exploring
interactions betw een hierarchical depth and link
am biguity. Proceedings of the 6th Conference on
H um an Factors and the W eb.Retrieved February 5,
2001
from
the
W orld
W ide
W eb:
http://w w w .tri.sbc.com /hfw eb/m iller/article.htm l.
M iller, C. S. & Rem ington, R. W . (2000b).Exploring
Inform ation Navigation Strategies with a
Com putational M odel (ReportN o.00-004).Chicago:
D ePaul U niversity, School of Com puter Science,
Telecom m unications,and Inform ation System s.
M iller, D .P. (1981). The depth/breadth tradeoff in
hierarchical com puter m enus. Proceedings of the
H um an Factors Society (pp.296-300).
Peck. V . A . & John, B. E. (1992). Brow ser Soar: A
com putational m odel of a highly interactive task.
Proceedings ofCH I'92 H um an Factors in Com puting
System s(pp.165-172).N ew Y ork:A CM press.
Rosenfeld, R. & M orville, P. (1998). Inform ation
Architecture f
or the W orld W ide W eb.Sebastopol,
CA :O ’Reilly & A ssociates.

