UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Interplay of Emotions and Plans in Multi-Agent Simulations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2j75f34w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Marsella, Stacy
Gratch, Jonathan

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

M odeling the Interplay ofEm otions and Plans in M ulti-A gentSim ulations
Stacy M arsella (m arsella@ isi.edu)
U SC Inform ation Sciences Institute,4676 A dm iralty W ay
M arina delRey,CA 90292 U SA

Jonathan G ratch (gratch@ ict.usc.edu)
U SC Institute forCreative Technologies,13274 FijiW ay
M arina delRey,CA 90292 U SA

A bstract
The goal of this research is to create general com putational m odels of the interplay betw een affect,cognition
and behavior. These m odels are being designed to supportcharacters thatactin virtualenvironm ents,m ake decisions,butw hose behavior also suggests an underlying
em otionalcurrent.W e attem ptto capture both the cognitive and behavioralaspects ofem otion,circum scribed to
the role em otions play in the perform ance of concrete
physical tasks.W e address how em otions arise from an
evaluation of the relationship betw een environm ental
events and an agent’s plans and goals,as w ellas the im pactofem otions on behavior,in particularthe im pacton
the physicalexpressions of em otionalstate through suitable choice ofgestures and body language.The approach
is illustrated w ithin a virtualreality training environm ent.

Introduction
Em otions play a central role in our lives. A w ealth of
em pirical research has revealed a com plex interplay
between em otions, cognition and behavior. Em otional
state m ay im pact decision-m aking, actions, m em ory,
attention, voluntary m uscles, etc., w hich, conversely,
m ay influence em otional state (e.g., see Berkow itz,
2000).Teasing apart and understanding these com plex
relationships is notan easy undertaking.
N otsurprisingly,given this com plexity,there are also
a wealth of em otional m odels, with starkly differing
view s concerning the relation betw een cognition and
em otion.W hile som e theories have argued that cognition has a central role in evoking em otions (Lazarus,
1991), others have argued for a m ore m inor role (Zajonc, 1984). W ith regards to the effects of em otions,
theories of em otion have historically posited them as a
problem for cognition,an im pedim entto effective cognitive function.O n the other hand,m ore m odern theories view em otions as m ore helpful than problem atic,
for exam ple,a m echanism thatfacilitates hum an adaptation (e.g.Lazarus 1991,Sim on,1967).
W e com e to this conundrum from a certain perspective. The focus of our work is on general softw are
agents thatm odelhum an perform ance in rich sim ulated
w orlds.In particular,w e focus on virtualtraining envi-

ronm ents w here intelligentagents interactw ith a hum an
participantto facilitate the training objectives.
Em otions play an im portant role in such environm ents by enhancing believability and realism ,increasing a sense of em pathy and attachm ent to synthetic
characters, and adding to the suspense of the sim ulation.For exam ple,one of our environm ents,Carm en's
BrightID EAS,is designed to teach m others ofpediatric
cancer patients better problem solving skills (M arsella
et al., 2000). The m other learns by interacting w ith
agents in a sim ulated world that m irrors her ow n. In
particular, em otional m odels are used to help the
m other identify w ith a hum an-like agent w ho faces
various social problem s due to her child’s cancer.A nother exam ple is the M ission Rehearsal Exercise, a
training environm ent designed to teach decisionm aking skills in highly evocative situations (Sw artout,
etal.,2001).The system provides an im m ersive learning environm ent w here participants can experience the
sights,sounds and circum stances they w illencounterin
real-w orld scenarios w hile perform ing m ission-oriented
training (Figure 1). Em otional m odels are used to enhance the intensity of the experience by creating
characters thatcan respond em otionally to the student’s
decisions.
These sim ulations are setapartby the com plexity of
the environm ents and, m ore im portantly, the detailed
cognitive,em otionaland behavioralm odeling required.
The agents face a variety of social and physical challenges,requiring the generation and execution of com plex m ulti-agentplans.O verall,this com plexity distinguishes this effort from m ore abstract sim ulation environm ents designed to study long term interactions of
sim pler agents (e.g.,N icholson et al.,1998) or believable,non-hum an agents in gam es (N ealReilly,1996).
A lthough com plex, these realistic sim ulation environm ents offer a unique opportunity to explore and
evaluate issues that arise by virtue of the com plexity
and fidelity of the m odeling. For exam ple, the agents
m ust be able to generate com plex plans w ith m ultiple
goals and sub-goals.These plans m ay need to evolve or
be replaced over tim e.Therefore,a key issue arises as
to how the dynam ics ofthis process and the structure of

deeply evocative/disturbing situations.These behaviors
m ustalso change in concertw ith the em otionalstate of
the agents;obviously people express them selves differently w hen sad,happy orangry.
O f course, one cannot realistically convey em otions
w ithoutrealistically m odeling the genesis ofthose em otions.Because planning is centralto our agent’s behavior,we firstneeded to address how agents’ plans/goals
lead to their em otions.Then,w e needed to address the
im pact of em otion on behavior. The driving force behind our m odeling efforts w as psychological research
on the relation of cognition, em otion and behavior.
H owever, the developm ent of the m odels also raised
significantresearch issues.

Plans and Em otionalA ppraisal

Figure 1:A scene from the M ission RehearsalExercise
the resulting plan relate to overall em otional state and
its dynam ics. A nother key issue concerns the agents'
behaviors.They m ust interact with hum an participants
across a range of m odalities in a w ay thatappropriately
conveys their underlying em otional state. The w ide
repertoire of hum an nonverbalbehaviors m ustbe m odeled,both subtle and extrem e behaviors,consistentw ith
em otionalstate.Fundam entalquestions arise as to what
behaviors are exhibited and how various cognitive and
em otional factors m ediate between alternative behaviors.Finally,the realism of these sim ulations affords a
unique, albeit w eak, form of evaluation. The realism
here supports m ore direct com parison w ith hum an behaviorunderm atching conditions.
In essence,w e are suggesting thatitcan be usefulto
attack the em otion conundrum head on via com prehensive,realistic sim ulations.Such sim ulations raise interesting research questions for cognitive science.Indeed
the relation is synergistic since research on hum an cognition and em otion drives the design ofourm odels.
In this paper,we dem onstrate how som e ofthe daunting subtlety in hum an behavior can be m odeled by intelligent agents, from the perception of events in the
w orld,to the appraisal of their em otional significance,
through to their outw ard im pacton agentbehavior.W e
putforth a dom ain-independentsolution thatfocuses on
the problem of m odeling “task-oriented” em otions –
em otions that arise from perform ance of a concrete
task. W e then go on to illustrate the application ofthis
m odelto virtualtraining environm ents.

Plans,Em otion & Behavior
The agents w e design m ustprovide convincing portrayals of hum ans facing difficult,dangerous problem s.In
particular, they m ust exhibit em otionally revealing
nonverbal behaviors and expressions consistent w ith

M any psychologicaltheories of em otion em phasize the
tight relationship between em otions and cognition.
Em otions clearly influence our decision-m aking (Clore
etal.,1994;Fiedler& Bless,2000).W hatis less recognized is the strong influence cognition has over em otion.Forexam ple,the sam e eventcould evoke a variety
of em otionalresponses depending on our m entalstate:
getting a flattire could evoke angerorjoy depending on
if w e want to reach or avoid our destination. Such
events derive their em otion charge, not from som e intrinsic em otion evoking properties,but from our interpretation oftheirsignificance. M uch ofthe recenttheorizing on em otion builds on this observation, arguing
that em otions arise from a cognitive appraisal of how
events im pactour plans and goals (O rtony etal,1988;
Lazarus,1991).
Such psychological findings are problem atic for
building realistic m odels of hum an em otion. Just as
fans of different team s w ill respond differently to the
score of a goal,intelligent agents m ust respond differently to events in the sim ulation,and in a w ay thatappears coherent to a hum an observer. For an agent developer, how ever, psychological findings and theories
are seldom castin a w ay thateasily translates to general
com putationalm odels.
Fortunately, there has been a nice convergence between cognitive appraisal m odels of em otion and the
technologies underlying intelligent agents.Thus,w hile
appraisal theories are vague on how events relate to
goals,artificialintelligence planning m ethods now provide elaborate “m ental” structures and inference techniques to assess this relationship (see W eld, 1999).
W hile cognition cannotbe reduced m erely to planning,
such algorithm s can provide a cornerstone for m aking
appraisal theories m ore concrete. By m aintaining an
explicit representation of an agent’s plans, they can
easily reason about future possible outcom es – a key
requirem ent for handling em otions like hope and fear
that involve future expectations. Planning techniques
also detect interactions betw een plans,for exam ple,as

w hen the plans of one agent are incom patible w ith
those ofanother– a key requirem entfor handling em otions like anger or reproach w hich typically involve
m ultiple actors.
M odern planning techniques also support a rich
m odel of how cognition influences one’s em otional
state.W e can m odelsom e ofthe dynam ic ebb and flow
of hum an em otion by relating em otional appraisals to
the current state of plans in an agent’s m em ory. A s
plans grow and change through the planning process,so
too the em otional state w ill change as a reflection of
this process – in a sense providing a w indow into an
agent’s m entalprocesses.
Finally, by providing an explicit and rich reasoning
infrastructure, plan-based approaches facilitate m odels
of how em otions im pact decision-m aking. Em otional
state can act as search control, focusing cognitive resources on specific goals orthreats. Itcan also alterthe
overall character of problem solving. For exam ple,
negative em otions seem to lead to narrow focused problem solving w hile positive em otions lead to broader
problem solving thatattem pts to achieve m ultiple goals
sim ultaneously (Slom an,1987).

Em otionalState and PhysicalBehavior
Psychologicalresearch on em otion reveals its pervasive
im pacton physicalbehavior such as facialexpressions,
gaze and gestures (A rgyle & Cook, 1976; Ekm an &
Friesen, 1969, 1971). These behaviors com m unicate
considerable inform ation about an individual’s em otional state. This m ay be intentional, as in shaking a
fist.O n the otherhand,behaviors such as rubbing one's
thigh,averting gaze and raised eyebrows m ay have no
explicitly intended role in com m unication, but they
suggest considerable inform ation about em otional
arousal, attitudes and attention. Indeed, observers can
reliably infer a person’s em otions and attitudes from
nonverbal behaviors (Ekm an & Friesen, 1969). For
exam ple, depressed individuals m ay avert gaze and
direct gestures inw ard tow ards their bodies. A n angry
person's nonverbal behavior tends, if unsuppressed, to
align itself w ith the object of the anger (e.g., by confrontationalstares orobvious avoidance ofeye contact).
Such m ovem ents also serve to m ediate the inform ation available to the individual. For exam ple, if a depressed individual’s head is low ered,this also regulates
the inform ation available to the individual.O rienting on
an objectoffear or anger brings the objectto the focus
of perceptual m echanism s, w hich m ay have indirect
influences on cognition and cognitive appraisal by influencing the content of w orking m em ory. Even a
soothing behavior like rubbing an arm m ay serve to
m anage w hata person attends to (Freedm an,1972).
These findings provide a w ealth of data to inform
agent design but such sources are descriptive,not proscriptive, often leaving open m any details as to how

alternative behaviors are m ediated.Contem porary agent
technology allow s one to create rich physicalbodies for
intelligent characters w ith m any degrees of physical
m ovem ent. This forces one to directly confront the
problem of em otional consistency. For exam ple, an
“em otionally depressed” agent m ight avert gaze, be
inattentive, perhaps hug them selves. H owever, if in
subsequentdialog the agentused strong com m unicative
gestures such as beats (M cN eill,1992),then the behavior m ight not “read” correctly. Sim ilarly, people don't
tend to nonchalantly use deictic gesture w hile sim ultaneously averting their gaze due to m ild feelings of anger or guilt.Such behavior m ay look un-natural,inconsistent, or m ay convey a different shade of m eaning
depending on context. W hich is not to say that the
overall m ix of behaviors should alw ays be m onolithic.
People do say one thing w hile expressing another. A t
the least, the m ix of nonverbal behaviors often shade
the m eaning of w hat is said or com m unicated nonverbally. Returning to the previous exam ple, if an agent
does com bine deictic gesture w ith gaze aversion,itm ay
shade the interpretation dram atically, towards an expression ofextrem e em otion and a desire to controlthat
em otion. For exam ple, the agent is so disgusted w ith
the "listener",they can'tbearto look atthem .
Im plicit in these various concerns is that the agent
has w hatam ounts to a resource allocation problem .The
agent has lim ited physical assets, e.g., two hands, one
body,etc.A tany pointin tim e,the agentm ustallocate
these assets according to a variety of dem ands,such as
perform ing a task, com m unicating, or em otionally
soothing them selves. For instance, the agent's dialog
m ay be suggestive of a specific gesture for the agent's
arm s and hands w hile the em otionalstate is suggestive
of another. The agent m ust m ediate betw een these alternative dem ands in a fashion consistent w ith their
goals and theirem otionalstate.

Im plem entation
Im plem entations dem and com prom ise.In our work w e
lim it the scope of m odels by w hat agent technology
currently does w ell,rather than trying to develop com prehensive butless generalsolutions.Thus,w e focus on
em otions arising from plan generation and execution,
and ignore a num ber of potential sources of em otion,
such as ego conflict. Sim ilarly w e focus on physical
behavior, expressing em otion through body gestures
and facialexpressions,ignoring the m yriad ways people
com m unicate em otion through speech (and instead rely
on pre-recorded voice clips forverbalcom m unication).
A n agent consists of three m ain com ponents. The
planner/executor m aintains a representation of the
w orld state, and develops, executes and repairs plans
thatachieve the agent’s goals.STEV E (Rickel& Johnson,1998) plays the role of the planner/executor in the

application described below,butvariety of A I planning
m ethods could serve this role. The other com ponents
im plem ent the cognitive appraisal of em otions and
m anage theirphysicalm anifestation.

C ognitive A ppraisal
A s w e alluded above,we focus on cognitive appraisals
as they relate to an agent’s plans and draw on the
strengths of m odern artificial intelligence planning
techniques.Specifically,w e build on Ém ile,a com putational realization of O rtony et al.’s cognitive appraisal
theory (G ratch,2000).The approach assesses the relationship betw een events and an agent’s disposition (described by its goals, social standards). U nlike m ost
com putational accounts,Ém ile explicitly considers the
role plans play in m ediating the relationship betw een
events and the agent’s disposition.Rather than appraising events directly,Ém ile appraises the state ofplans in
m em ory, as inferred and elaborated by a generalpurpose planning algorithm .This allow s Ém ile to avoid
the large num ber of dom ain-specific appraisal rules
needed by priorcom putationalapproaches (e.g.,Elliott,
1992).D om ain-specific inform ation,for the m ost part,
is restricted to the operator descriptions (the dom ain
theory) from w hich plans are built,and w hich an intelligent agent needs anyw ay to inform planning and action selection.
Ém ile also draw s heavily on the explicit plan representation to derive the intensity of em otionalresponse.
Ém ile incorporates the view of O atley and JohnsonLaird (1987) and N eal Reilly (1996) that em otions are
related to changes in the perceived probability of goal
attainm ent. Intensity is broken dow n into the probability of the eventin question (e.g.the probability of goal
achievem entor the probability of a threat) and the im portance (utility) of the event to the agent, both of
w hich are derived from the current plan structure. A s
intensity is based on the currentplans,the assessm entis
a reflection of their currentstate and changes w ith further planning. Individual assessm ents are aggregated
into a setof “leaky buckets” associated w ith each em otion,w here these buckets representthe currentintensity
ofdifferentem otions.

PhysicalFocus
The key challenge of the behavior com ponent is to
m anage the flexibility in an agent’s physicalpresence in
a w ay thatconveys a consistentem otionalstate.A gents
are represented by rich bodies w ith fully articulated
lim bs, facial expressions, and sensory apparatus. The
im plem entation m ust control the degrees of freedom
provided by the agent’s body in a w ay thatsatisfies the
constraints im posed by psychologicalfindings
To address this problem w e rely on the PhysicalFocus m odel(M arsella etal.2000),a com putationaltech-

nique inspired by w ork on nonverbalbehavior in clinical settings (Freedm an, 1972) and Lazarus’s (1991)
delineation of em otion-directed versus problem directed coping strategies. The Physical Focus m odel
bases an agent’s physicalbehavior in term s of w hatthe
character attends to,how they relate to them selves and
the w orld around them , specifically w hether they are
focusing on them selves and thereby w ithdraw ing from
the w orld or w hether they are focusing on the w orld,
engaging it.
The m odelorganizes possible behaviors around a set
of m odes.Behaviors can be initiated via requests from
the planner/executor or started spontaneously w hen the
body is nototherw ise engaged.A tany pointin tim e,the
agent w ill be in a unique m ode based on the current
em otionalstate.This m ode predisposes the agentto use
particular nonverbal behavior in a particular fashion.
Each behavior available to an agent is categorized according to w hich subsetof these m odes itis consistent
w ith. A ny specific nonverbal behavior, such as a particular nod of the head, m ay exist in m ore than one
m ode and conversely a type of behavior,such as head
nods in general,m ay be realized differently in different
m odes.Transitions betw een m odes are based on em otionalstate.
M odes also influence an agent’s sensitivity to external stim uli, currently in a sim plistic fashion. Rather
than m odeling the full flexibility of how people can
focus their perception and attention (W ells & M atthew s,1994),we provide a dom ain specific m echanism
for ranking stim uli by their intensity and filtering certain stim ulidepending on if the focus m ode is inner or
outerdirected.
G rouping behaviors into m odes attem pts to m ediate
com peting dem ands on an agent's physical resources,
especially gesturing and gaze, in a fashion consistent
w ith em otional state.This grouping m odel is designed
w ith the intent that it be general across agents. H ow ever, realism also requires that specific behaviors
w ithin each m ode incorporate individualdifferences,as
in hum an behavior.For exam ple,we would notexpect
a m other's repertoire of gestures to be identical to that
ofan arm y sergeant.
In the currentw ork,w e m odelthree m odes of physical focus: body-focus, transitional and com m unicative
(as opposed to the five m odes discussed in M arsella et
al.,2000).Body focus is m arked by a self-focused attention, away from the conversation and the problem solving behavior. Em otionally, it is associated w ith
considerable depression or guilt.Physically,it is associated with the tendencies of gaze aversion,paused or
inhibited verbal activity and hand to body stim ulation
that is either soothing (e.g.,rhythm ic stroking of forearm ) or self-punitive (e.g., squeezing or scratching of
forearm ). The agent exhibits m inim al com m unicative
gestures such as deictic or beatgestures (M cN eil1992,

D isables

Traffic
A ccident

Child
H ealthy
Lieutenant Enables
Arrives

Som eone
in
Charge

Enables
TreatChild

M edical
Facilities
A dequate

Figure 2:A n exam ple ofthe m other’splan

Cassell& Stone 1999) w hen in this m ode.Transitional
indicates an even less divided attention,less depression,
a burgeoning w illingness to take part in the conversation, m ilder conflicts w ith the problem solving and a
closer relation to the listener. Physically, it is m arked
by hand to hand gestures (such as rubbing hands or
hand fidgetiness) and hand to object gestures, such as
playing w ith a pen.There are m ore com m unicative gestures in this m ode but they are still m uted or stilted.
Finally, com m unicative indicates a full w illingness to
engage in the dialog and problem solving.Physically,it
is m arked by the agent’s full range of com m unicative
gestures,use ofgaze in turn taking,etc.

Illustration
W e illustrate the m odelby w alking through an exam ple
ofthe system ’s behaviorin the contextofa virtualenvironm entfor fam iliarizing soldiers with the dem ands of
peacekeeping operations.The M ission RehearsalExercise attem pts to create an im m ersive learning environm ent through the integration of high-fidelity real-tim e
graphics,intelligentagents,3D audio and an interactive
story w hose outcom e depends on the decisions and actions thatparticipants take during the sim ulation.
In our working scenario,the system m odels a m ix of
three interactive and about forty pre-scripted virtual
hum ans that play the parts of characters in the peacekeeping exercise.A hum an trainee com m ands a platoon
ofsoldiers thathave becom e involved in an autom obile
accidentw hile driving to m eetanother platoon in need
ofreinforcem ent. The studentm ustdecide how bestto
allocate his forces betw een the conflicting goals of
assisting an injured child and com pleting his m ission,
allunderthe w atchfuleyes ofa “ZN N ” cam eram an.
Currently, only the character portraying the injured
child’s m other incorporates our em otional m odel.Figure 2 illustrates a sim plified representation of the
m other’s plan atthe opening scene in the scenario.The
m other is w aiting for the lieutenant(the student) to arrive,w hich she view s as a precondition for her child to
be treated.She is som ew hat angry w ith the lieutenant,

perceiving him as responsible for the accident(the dom ain-theory hard-codes an attribution that the lieutenantis responsible for “accident” task).This appraisalis
m oderated by the im portance ofthe goal(high) and the
likelihood ofthe threatcannotbe overcom e (m oderate).
Initially she believes the m edicalfacilities are adequate
to treatthe child on scene,m eaning she has the sim ple
plan in m em ory thatthe lieutenantshould arrive and her
child w illbe treated,neithertask being underherdirect
control.Since her child is hurt,a threatto an im portant
goal,she has high levels of distress.The likelihood the
treatm entw illbe successfuleven ifapplied is relatively
low (im plying that there are m any non-specific threats
to its success) so she is also extrem ely anxious. The
sense ofhopelessness (and anxiety)leads herto have an
inner-directed Physical Focus. H er body gestures are
directed inward and she w illnotattend to m oststim uli.
W hen the lieutenant arrives, the m other perceives
that the sub-goal that som eone is in charge is now attained and all non-specific threats associated with its
attainm entdisappear.The probability thatthe child w ill
be treated grow s,and the m other’s distress dim inishes
enough to transition her into transitional focus. H er
gestures becom e m ore outw ard directed and she attends
to m ore perceptualstim uliand herchild.
Laterin the scenario,the lieutenantorders one ortwo
squads forward to reinforce the platoon dow ntow n.
The m otherinterprets this as disabling hersub-goalthat
the troops help herchild.The strength ofthis interpretation is influenced by the num ber of squads the student
orders forward (im plem ented by dom ain-specific rules
that infer the probability of the disablem ent based on
the num ber of m oving units). The appraisal m odel
treats this as a blam ew orthy event,causing the m other
to becom e angrieratthe troops. This angeris sufficient
to transition herinto com m unicative m ode.The planner
repairs the m other’s currentplan,deciding thatim ploring the troops to stay is a w ay of redirecting their behavior. H er body language in perform ing this action is
colored by her body focus and anger level, either rem aining seated and gesturing m ildly or raising to a
standing position and gesturing strongly (see Figure 1).

D iscussion
This projectis stillin its early stages (the initialprototype w as com pleted at the end of Septem ber 2000).
From a research perspective the biggestlim itation is the
lack ofevaluation. Is ita viable learning environm ent?
D oes the addition of em otional m odels increase the
realism ofthe scenario? D o people find the character’s
reactions plausible? H ow do em otionalm odels im pact
the learning experience? O ur plan is to begin form al
evaluations in the com ing year in conjunction w ith
other research groups in the psychology and com m unications departm ents atthe U niversity of Southern California. O ur anecdotal feedback has been encouraging.

W e have dem onstrated the system to a num ber of m ilitary personal and those w ho served in Bosnia or K osova seem ed strongly affected by the experience. O ne
U .S. A rm y Colonel began relating a related incident
after seeing the dem o, becam e quite em otional, and
concluded by saying, “this system m akes people feel,
and we need that.” In anotheranecdote,som eone playing the role of the lieutenantbecam e agitated w hen the
m other character began yelling at him and w hen she
w ouldn’t respond to his reassurances (she cannot be
m ollified w hen herangerexceeds som e threshold).
Finally,there are a num ber of lim itations in how the
system infers em otional state that need adjustm ent or
re-thinking in light of this application. A s m entioned,
cognitive appraisal only addresses em otions that arise
from a concrete representation of plans of goals. W e
only w eakly address the influence of em otion on perception and com pletely ignore the influence em otions
hold over beliefs. A nother key issue is the notion of
responsibility. For exam ple, w hom should the m other
blam e forthe accident? The troops? H erself? O ursense
is she should have a shared sense of responsibility and
that this sense should change dynam ically, influenced
by her em otional state and subsequent actions of the
troops. O ur treatm ent of anger is also too sim plistic.
A nger seem s influenced by the extentto w hich w e decide som eone intended the offending action and the
extentto w hich they show rem orse orattem ptto redress
the offence. W e suspect the explicit use of plans can
assistin form ing such assessm ents,butw e are stillsorting outhow .
These lim itations notw ithstanding,the integration of
plan-based appraisalof em otionalstate w ith the Physical Focus m odel provides a great deal of architectural
supportfor em otionalm odeling. Furtherm ore,anecdotalevidence suggests thatpeople find the agent’s em otions to be plausible,and,to our surprise,people occasionally responded em otionally to ouragents.

R eferences
A rgyle,M .,& Cook,M .(1976) G aze and m utualgaze.
Cam bridge U niversity Press.
Berkowitz, L. (2000). Causes and Consequences of
Feelings.Cam bridge U niversity Press..
Cassell,J.& Stone,M .(1999).Living H and to M outh:
PsychologicalTheories aboutSpeech and G esture in
Interactive D ialogue System s. A A A I Fall Sym posium on N arrative Intelligence.
Clore,G .,Schw arz,N .,& Conw ay,M .(1994).Cognitive causes and consequences ofem otion.In W yer &
Srull(eds.),H andbook ofsocialcognition,2nd ed.
Ekm an,P.and Friesen,W .V .(1971).Constants across
cultures in the face and em otion.Personality and SocialPsychology,17(2):124-129.

Ekm an,P.and Friesen,W .V .(1969).The Repertoire of
N onV erbalBehavior:Categories,O rigins,U sage and
Coding.Sem iotica 1:49-97.
ElliottC.D .(1992).The Affective Reasoner:A Process
M odel of Em otions in a M ulti-agent System . Ph.D
Thesis (TR#32),N orthwestern U niversity.
Freedm an,N .(1972).The analysis ofm ovem entbehavior during clinical interview . In Studies in D yadic
Com m uncation,153-175.
Fiedler,K .& Bless,H .(2000). The interface of affective and cognitive processes. In Frijda, M anstead &
Bem (eds.), Em otions and Beliefs. Cam bridge U niversity Press.
G ratch, J., (2000). Em ile: M arshalling passions in
training and education. Proc.ofthe 4th International
Conference on Autonom ous Agents Barcelona,Spain.
Lazarus,R.S.(1991).Em otion and Adaptation.O xford
Press.
M arsella,S.Johnson,W .L.& LaBore,C.(2000).Interactive PedagogicalD ram a.Proceedings ofthe Fourth
International Conference on Autonom ous Agents.
Barcelona,Spain,301-308.
M cN eil,D .(1992).H and and M ind.U niversity ofChicago Press,Chicago IL..
N ealReilly,W .S.,(1996).Believable Socialand Em otionalAgents.Ph.D Thesis CM U -CS-96-138.Carnegie M elon U niversity.
N icholson,A .E.,,Zukerm an,I.& O liver,C.D .(1998).
Towards a Society of A ffect-driven Agents. In Proceedings of the 20th Cognitive Science Society,M adison,W I.
O atley, K . & Johnson-Laird, P.N . (1987). Towards a
Cognitive Theory of Em otions.Cognition and Em otion,1 (1).
O rtony A ., Clore, G . L., & Collins, A . (1988). The
Cognitive Structure ofEm otions. Cam bridge U niversity Press.
Rickel, J. & Johnson, L. (1998). A nim ated agents for
proceduraltraining in virtualreality:perception,cognition, and m otor control. Applied Artificial Intelligence (13),343-382.
Sim on,H . A . (1967) M otivational and em otional controlofcognition.PsychologicalReview,74,29-39.
Slom an, A . (1987). M otives, m echanism s and em otions. Cognition and Em otion,1,pp 217-234.
Sw artout,W .,H ill,R.,G ratch,J.,Johnson,W .L.,K yriakakis, C., Labore, K ., Lindheim , R., M arsella, D .,
M oore,B.,M orie,J.,Rickel,J.,Thiebaux,M .,Tuch,
L.,W hitney,R. (2001).Tow ards the H olodeck:Integrating G raphics, Sound, Character and Story, in
Proceedings ofthe Fifth InternationalConference on
Autonom ous Agents,M ontreal,CA N A D A .
W eld,D .(1999).Recent A dvances in A I Planning.AI
M agazine 20(2):93-123.
W ells,A .,and M atthew s,G .(1994).Attention and em otion:a clinicalperspective.Law rence Erlbaum .
Zajonc,R.B.(1984).O n the prim acy of affect.Am erican Psychologist.V ol.39,N o.2,pp 117-123.

