UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Evaluation of If p then q Conditionals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87f7c704

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Hadjichristidis, Constantinos
Stevenson, Rosemary J.
Over, David E.
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Evaluation of If p then q Conditionals
Constantinos Hadjichristidis (constantinos.hadjichristidis@durham.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Durham
Durham, DH1 3LE, UK

Rosemary J. Stevenson (rosemary.stevenson@durham.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Durham
Durham, DH1 3LE, UK

David E. Over (david.over@sunderland.ac.uk)
School of Social Sciences, University of Sunderland
Sunderland, SR1 3SD, UK

Steven A. Sloman (steven_sloman@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive & Linguistic Sciences, Brown University
Box 1978, Providence, RI 02912, USA

Jonathan St. B. T. Evans (j.evans@plymouth.ac.uk)
Centre for Thinking and Language, Department of Psychology
University of Plymouth, Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK.

Aidan Feeney (aidan.feeney@durham.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Durham
Durham, DH1 3LE, UK

Abstract
We propose that when evaluating conditionals, people
construct an imaginary world that contains the antecedent,
and then evaluate the plausibility of the consequent being
true in the same world. Thus, when asked for an estimate of
the probability of the conditional, people should produce the
conditional probability of its consequent given its
antecedent. We contrast this view with a view based on the
theory of mental models, in which the judged probability of
a conditional is derived from the proportion of models in
which the premises are true. Study 1 examined this
hypothesis by comparing probability estimates for (i)
category-based conditional arguments (e.g. If robins have
ulnar arteries then sparrows have ulnar arteries), (ii)
corresponding conditional probabilities in the form of
suppositions (e.g. Suppose you knew that robins have ulnar
arteries. How likely would you think it was that sparrows
have ulnar arteries?) and (iii) the argument strength of
corresponding inductive arguments (e.g. Fact: Robins have
ulnar arteries. Therefore: Sparrows have ulnar arteries.
How convincing do you find this argument?) All three
estimates were highly correlated, a finding that supports our
hypothesis. The similarity between the two categories (e.g.
robins and sparrows) was also manipulated. Similarity
affected all three estimates equally, similar items being
given higher estimates than dissimilar items. This finding
indicates that similarity is one basis for the plausibility
judgements. Study 2 tested our hypothesis using conditional

statements with known probabilities. The results favoured
our hypothesis. We discuss these results in terms of
philosophical and psychological views of conditionals, and
suggest that they bring together kinds of reasoning that are
traditionally studied separately, such as conditional
reasoning, induction, and judgements of probability.

Introduction
Psychological research on inductive and deductive
reasoning has traditionally examined reasoning based
on premises classified as true. Such research ignores
most everyday reasoning, which is based on uncertain
premises. Premise uncertainty, in turn, rightly
influences the degree of certainty in the conclusion of
an inference (e.g. Stevenson & Over, 1995).
Understanding everyday reasoning, therefore, involves
understanding subjective premise uncertainty, and the
way in which such uncertainty gets translated into
uncertainty about the conclusion of an inference. The
present article investigates subjective uncertainty about
conditional premises of the form If p then q.
The article focuses on the way in which people
evaluate conditional arguments and how they arrive at
judgements of the probability of a conditional. We
propose that people evaluate conditionals with
reference to imaginary situations that they mentally

construct; in particular, people evaluate the plausibility
of the consequent in an imaginary situation in which the
antecedent is true. For example, on encountering the
conditional If you study hard then you will pass the
exam, we propose that reasoners mentally construct an
imaginary situation in which they study hard and then
pass the exam. This imagined situation may be judged
more plausible than one in which they study hard and
do not pass the exam. Such a judgement might be
mediated by causal schemas, e.g. one’s intuitive
theories about studying and success or failure (Collins
& Michalski, 1989). In other situations, similarity
(Osherson et al, 1991) or a judgmental heuristic, such as
representativeness or availability (Kahneman et al,
1982) might be used. If people do indeed evaluate
conditionals in the above manner, then when asked to
estimate the probability of the conditional, they should
state the probability of the consequent given that the
antecedent is true; that is, they should give the
conditional probability.
The view presented above is similar to Ramsey' s
(1931) notion of how a conditional is evaluated, and
also has some similarities to proposals made by Adams
(1975) and Edgington (1995). Ramsey' s idea was that
when we evaluate a conditional, we add the antecedent
to our stock of beliefs, leaving everything else as
undisturbed as possible, and then examine whether our
new stock of beliefs contains the consequent. Our
proposal that people construct an imaginary world that
contains the antecedent is comparable to updating one' s
knowledge base by adding the antecedent and making
the minimal changes resulting from the presence of the
antecedent. People then assess the likelihood that the
consequent also holds, using either heuristics or
sometimes beliefs about relative frequencies. The
psychological validity of this "imaginary worlds" view
of conditionals has not yet been tested, although
conditionals have been linked to conditional
probabilities in other psychological work (Stevenson &
Over, 1995; Oaksford, Chater, & Larkin, 2000). The
present experiments test this view.
The mental models theory provides a contrasting
view of how individuals untrained in logic evaluate the
probability of conditional statements. Johnson-Laird et
al. (1999) propose that such individuals infer the
probability of events by reasoning extensionally. They
construct mental models representing true possibilities
(the principle of truth) and estimate the sum of the
probabilities of the models in which the event occurs. If
p then q conditionals are understood by representing up
to the following three explicit mental models ( ¬ stands
for the negation of a premise):
p
q
¬p
q
¬p ¬q

“p ¬q” is not represented because it is a false
possibility, though it can be inferred as the complement
of the fully explicit models, although this rarely
happens (see Barres & Johnson-Laird, 1997). However,
consideration of the false possibility is critical for the
conditional probability interpretation of conditional
statements; the conditional probability of q/p depends
on the relative ratio of pq to p¬q possibilities, i.e.
Pr(q/p) = Pr(pq)/ [Pr(pq)+Pr(p¬q)]. Therefore, evidence
for a conditional probability interpretation of
conditional statements would challenge the mental
models theory.

Study 1: Subjective probabilities
In Study 1 we compare the imaginary world hypothesis
with the mental models hypothesis by obtaining
judgements of (1) the probabilities of conditional
arguments, (2) conditional probabilities, and (3)
judgments of the convincingness of inductive
arguments, that is, judgements of argument strength.
Examples of the materials are shown in Table 1.
We propose that when asked to estimate the
probability of the conditional shown on the top panel of
Table 1, participants will evaluate the conditional in the
same way as they evaluate the conclusion of the
conditional probability statement shown in the middle
panel of Table 1. That is, the reasoning in both cases
will be based on the same representation, an imaginary
world in which horses have stenozoidal cells and in
which the plausibility of cows having stenozoidal cells
is assessed.
We also propose that participants evaluate inductive
arguments, like the one in the last panel of Table 1, in a
similar way. Inductive argument tasks ask participants
to assume that p is a fact. Our hypothesis, that when
judging the probability of conditional, people imagine a
world in which p is true and make judgements about
that world, predicts that they should give the same
judgement as they give when explicitly told that p is in
fact true (i.e., when making argument strength
judgements).
Because an imaginary world in which both horses
and cows share a property is more representative of the
real situation than a world in which horses have the
property but cows don’t, we expect all three types of
judgments to be relatively high. Furthermore, we expect
the probability of the conditional to be highly correlated
with the conditional probability judgements on the one
hand and judgements of argument strength on the other,
since we argue that they all measure the same process.
Note that an association between argument strength and
conditional probability judgements has been
presupposed in psychological research (e.g. by Sloman,
1998). By contrast, the mental models view of
conditionals does not consider the case in which horses

have the relevant property but cows do not.
Consequently it would not predict that judgements of
the probability of the conditional would be highly
related to either conditional probability judgements or
argument strength judgements.
Table 1. Study 1: An example of materials
used in Study 1. [Note: The example is from
the similar condition. Half of the materials
were in the dissimilar condition.]
Probability of conditional condition
Peter said the following: If horses have stenozoidal cells, then
cows will have stenozoidal cells. How likely do you think it is
that what Peter said is true?
0
1
2
not at all likely

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10
very likely

Conditional probability condition
Suppose you knew that horses have stenozoidal cells. How
likely would you think it was that cows have stenozoidal
cells?
0
1
2
not at all likely

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10
very likely

Inductive argument condition
Fact: Horses have stenozoidal cells
-------------------------------------------------Conclusion: Cows have stenozoidal cells
0
1
2
3
not at all convincing

4

5

6

7

8
9 10
very convincing

Study 1 also examined the hypothesis that the
similarity between the two categories mediates the
judgments in all three conditions. The more similar the
categories, the more structure (features and
dependencies) their representations share. Thus people
are likely to infer that the more known structure two
categories share, the more novel structure they are
likely to share. We expect, for instance, an imaginary
situation, in which similar categories (e.g. cows and
horses) share a novel property, will be judged more
plausible than an imaginary situation, in which
dissimilar categories (e.g. cows and mice) share a novel
property. (See Osherson et al, 1991, for a model of how
conditional probabilities can be derived from similarity
judgements.) Consistent with our view, research on
category-based inductive arguments (like the one in the
last panel of Table 1) has shown a robust effect of
similarity (see e.g. Rips, 1975; Sloman, 1993).
Moreover, to the extent that such similarity-based
reasoning is non-extensional (see Johnson-Laird et al.,
1999), it falls outside the scope of mental models
theory, which only considers extensional reasoning.

Method
Participants. Forty-one first-year psychology students
volunteered to participate in this study.
Design. Type of Measure (probability of conditional vs.
conditional probability vs. argument strength) was
crossed with Similarity (similar vs. dissimilar category
pairs) in a mixed design with repeated measures on the
last factor.
Procedure. Participants were presented with booklets
containing 18 examples in one Type of Measure
condition. Half of the examples in each condition
contained similar and half dissimilar mammal pairs.
The assignment of category pairs to similarity
conditions was controlled by an independent group of
twelve participants who were asked to rate the
biological similarity of the 16 mammal pairs in a 0-10
scale, were 0 was labeled as “highly dissimilar” and 10
as “highly similar.” The mean ratings for the similar
and dissimilar items were, respectively, 7.39 (min=5.92,
max=8.92) and 1.74 (min=.92, max=2.33). The results
therefore justify the assignment of items to the similar
or dissimilar conditions.
Participants in the probability of the conditional
condition (N=16) were told that they would be
presented with statements uttered by a person. Their
task was to say how likely they thought it was that what
the person said was true on a 0-10 scale, where 0 was
labeled as “not at all likely” and 10 as “very likely.” We
used this task to obtain judgements of the probability of
the conditional to ensure that our instructions did not
encourage participants to give conditional probability
judgements for superficial reasons1. If participants
were simply asked “How likely do you think it is that If
p then q?” they might interpret the question as asking
the question “If p, what is the probability that q?” That
is, as a direct request for the conditional probability of
the consequent given the antecedent. This problem
arises because a conditional consists of a main (the
consequent) and a subordinate (the antecedent) clause,
and it has been shown that, when processing sentences
containing main and subordinate clauses, people often
assume that the subordinate clause is true (Baker &
Wagner, 1987). Our instructions were designed,
therefore, to avoid responses based on this kind of
linguistic paraphrase and to ensure instead that they
were based on a conceptual understanding of the
conditional.
Participants in the conditional probability condition
(N=10) were told that they would be presented with
examples asking them to suppose that a statement is
1
We thank Phil Johnson-Laird and Vittorio Girotto for
suggesting these instructions for the framing of the
conditional probability condition.

true. Based upon this supposition, they had to judge the
likelihood that a second statement is true. The same
scale was used as for the Probability of the conditional
participants. Participants in the argument strength
condition (N=15) were told that they would be
presented with a series of arguments, each containing a
fact (which should be taken as true) separated from a
conclusion by a line. Their task was to describe how
convincing they found each argument on a 0-10 scale,
where 0 was labeled as “not at all convincing” and 10
as “very convincing.” Participants in all conditions
worked through examples similar to the test items
before starting the experiment.

Results and Discussion
Correlation statistics Table 2 presents the mean
correlation coefficients relating the three types of
measures across items. As predicted by the imaginary
worlds view, the three measures were significantly
correlated (beyond the .001 level).

influenced by similarity. The mental models view,
however, cannot account for either the correlational
results or the effect of similarity.

Study 2: Objective probabilities
Study 2 also investigated how people evaluate
conditional statements but with conditionals of known
conditional probabilities. The use of known
probabilities provides a direct test of our two competing
hypotheses, because it allows judgements about the
probability of the conditional to be directly compared
with the objective conditional probability.
Participants were given three different versions of a
text describing a probability problem. For example, a
third of the participants read the following text and
were then asked to estimate the probability that what
Peter said was true:
In an effort to boost its image, Waterstones bookstore
organised lotteries in several Primary schools in Durham.
In each school, only the 10 best students participated in the
lottery. The name of each participant was written on a piece
of paper and was put in a hat. A blindfolded teacher drew a
piece of paper from the hat. The student whose name was
written on that paper won an autographed storybook. In
Durham Gilesgate Primary School the participants were 8
boys and 2 girls. A piece of paper was drawn from the hat.
Peter, the father of one of the participants, cannot see the
winner's name but says: "If a boy has won the lottery, then
my son won it."

Table 2. Mean correlation coefficients by items for each
of the three conditions. CP=conditional probability.
PC=probability of conditional. AS=argument strength.

PC
CP
AS

PC
1.0

CP
.99
1.0

AS
.94
.96
1.0

Similarity Table 3 presents mean Type of measure by
Similarity estimates. In each Type of measure
condition, ratings for similar items were higher than
ratings for dissimilar items.
Table 3. Mean Type of Measure by Similarity estimates
CP=conditional probability. PC=probability of
conditional. AS=argument strength.

PC
CP
AS

Similar
Items
5.78
6.66
5.40

Dissimilar
Items
2.76
2.83
2.30

The data from each measure were analyzed by
pairwise t-tests for participants, and independent t-tests
for items. Pairwise tests were used in preference to a
single ANOVA because we cannot assume that the
three measures are comparable. For each type of
measure, both across participants and items, similarity
had a significant effect (beyond the .005 level). These
results suggest that the plausibility judgements
underlying the imaginary worlds view can be

According to the imaginary world hypothesis,
participants should construct an imaginary situation in
which a boy wins the lottery and then consider how
likely it is that the boy is Peter’s son. Since there are 8
boys all together, this conditional probability is 1/8.
According to the theory of mental models, the correct
answer depends upon considering the fully explicit
models of the proposition and finding the proportion of
models in which the proposition is true. These explicit
models, which represent the true possibilities, are
shown below, with tags indicating their relative
frequencies. (Boy stands for the antecedent; Son stands
for the consequent).
Boy
¬Boy
¬Boy

Son
Son
¬Son

1/10
02
2/10

The proportion of models, therefore, in which the
proposition is true is 3/10. We call this the material
implication (MI) evaluation of the conditional.
2

No doubt participants will rule out the possibility of ¬Boy
and Son on pragmatic grounds. However, for the above
problem, this does not affect the predicted probability
judgement.

The probability estimates that agreed with one or
other of these two evaluations (the conditional
probability or material implication) were coded as
supportive of either the imaginary world view or the
mental models view respectively.

Method
Participants Forty-eight first-year undergraduate
volunteers participated in Study 2. The sample included
the same forty-one students that participated in Study 1.
Procedure Each participant was presented with a
booklet containing one version of the problem given
above. In one version the sample of children consisted
of 2 boys and 8 girls (the 2b-8g version), in a second of
5 boys and 5 girls (the 5b-5g version), and in a third of
8 boys and 2 girls (the 8b-2g version). Table 4 lists the
predictions for the imaginary world and the mental
models view for each of the three versions of the
problem.
Table 4. Conditional probability and material
implication predictions for each of
the 3 versions of the problem.

2b-8g version
5b-5g version
8b-2g version

Imaginary world
view
(Conditional
probability)
1/2
1/5
1/8

Mental models
view
(Material
implication)
9/10
6/10
3/10

Results
Table 5 presents the number of participants in each
version of the problem whose response agrees with one
of the two evaluation modes for each version. Out of
the 48 participants, 44 gave numerical answers.
Table 5. Number of participants in each version whose
response falls in one of the two evaluation modes.
N=number of participants who gave a
numerical response for each version.

N
2b-8g version
5b-5g version
8b-2g version
Total

13
14
17
44

Imaginary
world
View
9
5
9
23

Mental
models
view
0
0
1
1

Out of those 44, 24 gave a response that could be
classified in one of the two response modes. The results
reported in Table 5, therefore, account for 55% of those

responses. The results of all except one of these 24
participants agreed with the conditional probability
evaluation (X2 = 20.17). These data clearly favor the
imaginary worlds view of conditionals over the mental
models view.
The main numeric responses made by the remaining
20 participants were “1/10” or its arithmetic equivalent
(N=6), “1/2” or its arithmetic equivalent (N=7), “2/10”
or arithmetic equivalent (N=5)3. The “1/10” responses
are consistent with the mental models view that
participants represent an explicit model of the premise
and ignore other possibilities. The remaining two
responses may reflect failures to understand the
conditional.

General Discussion
These results with both subjective and objective
probabilities support the imaginary worlds view.
Judgements of the probability of a conditional
correlated highly with conditional probability
judgements and argument strength judgements in Study
1, and they matched the objective conditional
probabilities in Study 2. Mental models theory cannot
explain these results because it only considers true
possibilities. Even if we grant that mental models
theory allows that the false possibility may be inferred,
the theory still cannot explain our results because it has
no mechanism for calculating conditional probabilities
when presented with a conditional (see Johnson-Laird
et al, 1999).
Furthermore, mental models theory fails to explain
the similarity effect found in Study 1. By contrast, this
effect follows from the imaginary worlds view, which
claims that reasoners evaluate conditionals by
representing the antecedent and consequent in an
imaginary world and then evaluating the plausibility of
this world. Since similarity is a key component of
plausible reasoning (Osherson et al, 1991), it follows
that similarity should also be a key component in
judgements of the plausibility of the consequent being
true in a world in which the antecedent is true.
The results of Study 2 also suggest that explicitly
presenting the negated antecedent is, in itself,
insufficient to promote its inclusion in a mental
representation. People might represent such possibilities
when background knowledge makes them salient. For
example, “If John is in Paris then he is in France” might
make people represent the possibility “If John is not in
Paris then he is not in France.” But as far as the basic
evaluation of a conditional is concerned, our results
3
Some of the responses in the 2b-8g version that are
classified as “conditional probability” responses may in fact
be “fifty/fifty” responses. However, even if the 2b-8g version
is omitted from the analysis, the results still clearly favor the
conditional probability view.

suggest that people construct an imaginary world in
which the antecedent holds and then consider the
likelihood that the consequent holds in the same world.
Our notion of imaginary worlds could be seen as an
example of mental models. However, our results
suggest that mental models are represented and
deployed in ways other than those proposed by
Johnson-Laird (e.g. Johnson-Laird et al, 1999) when
evaluating the probability of conditionals. For example,
the principle of truth cannot apply to uncertain
conditionals, since the “false possibility” (p ¬q), must
be at least implicitly considered to arrive at the
conditional probability. Furthermore, the role of
similarity in evaluating an uncertain conditional needs
to be included in such a theory.
Our proposal has something in common with possible
worlds analyses of ordinary conditionals (Stalnaker,
1968; Lewis, 1973). However, if these conditionals are
analyzed in this way in formal semantics, then there are
technical reasons why the probability of a conditional
cannot be absolutely identified with the corresponding
conditional probability. (See Jackson, 1991, for the
main technical papers on this issue.) But the technical
issue not withstanding, there is reason to hold that the
assertion and evaluation of most ordinary conditionals
will make them closely related to the corresponding
conditional probabilities (Stevenson & Over, 1995;
Edgington, 1995). This is all we need for
our psychological claims here. Our view is that the
judged probability of an ordinary conditional will
usually be estimated by assessing the plausibility of the
consequent being present in a model that contains the
antecedent. Finally, since our views derive from
philosophical accounts of conditionals, the present
studies also provide a bridge between philosophical and
psychological accounts of If p the q conditionals. They
also bring together components of reasoning that have
been traditionally studied separately such as conditional
reasoning, induction, and judgements of probability.

Acknowledgements
The present research was supported by ESRC grant No.
R000239074 on Belief Revision and Uncertain
Reasoning. We thank Vittorio Girotto and Phil
Johnson-Laird for helpful discussions and an
anonymous reviewer for very useful comments.

References
Adams, E.W. (1975). The logic of conditionals.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Baker, L. & Wagner, J.L. (1987). Evaluating
information for truthfulness: The effects of logical
subordination. Memory & Cognition, 15, 279-284.
Barres, P.E.& Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1997). Why is it
hard to imagine what is false? Proceedings of the 19th

Annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
pp. 475-478.
Braine, M.D.S. & O'Brien, D.P. (1991). A theory of If:
A lexical entry, reasoning program, and pragmatic
principles. Psychological Review, 98, 182-203.
Collins, A. & Michalski, R. (1989). The logic of
plausible reasoning: a core theory.
Cognitive
Science, 13, 1-49
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104, 235
329.
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole
and J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics. Vol. 3
Speech acts. New York: Seminar Press.
Jackson, F. (Ed.) (1991). Conditionals. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N.
(1983). Mental Models.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Byrne, R.M.E. (1991).
Deduction. Hove: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Byrne, R.M.E. (2000).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics and
inference. Unpublished manuscript.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V.,
Legrenzi, M., & Caverni, J-P. (1999). Naive
probability: a mental model theory of
extensional reasoning. Psychological Review,
106, 62-88.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P. & Tversky, A. (1982).
Judgements under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases.
Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lewis, D.K. (1973). Counterfactuals. Basil Blackwell.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000).
Probabilities and polarity biases in conditional
inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 26, 883-899.
Osherson, D.N., Stern, J., Wilkie, O., Stob, M, &
Smith, E.E. (1991). Default probability. Cognitive
Science, 15, 251-269.
Ramsey, F.P. (1931). Foundations of Mathematics.
Routledge Keagan Paul.
Rips, L. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural
categories. Journal of Verbal Learning, and verbal
Behavior, 14, 665-681.
Sloman, S.A. (1993). Feature-based induction.
Cognitive Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Sloman, S.A. (1998). Categorical inference is not a tree:
The myth of inheritance hierarchies. Cognitive
Psychology, 35, 1-33.
Stalnaker, R.C. (1968). A Theory of Conditionals. In
N. Rescher (Ed.) Studies in Logical Theory,
American Philosophical Quarterly monograph series.
No. 2, 98-112. Basil Blackwell.
Stevenson, R.J., & Over, D.E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain premises. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48A (3), 613-643.

