UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preserved Implicit Learning on Both the Serial Reaction Time Task and Artificial Grammar
in Patients with Parkinson;s Disease

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/57r0j980

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Smith, Jared G.
Siegert, Richard J.
McDowall, John
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preserved Implicit Learning on both the Serial Reaction Time Task and Artificial
Grammar in Patients with Parkinson’s Disease
Jared G. Smith (smithjare@scs.vuw.ac.nz)
School of Psychology, Victoria University of Wellington,
PO Box 600, Wellington, New Zealand

Richard J. Siegert (Richard.Siegert@vuw.ac.nz)
School of Psychology, Victoria University of Wellington,
PO Box 600, Wellington, New Zealand

John McDowall (john.mcdowall@vuw.ac.nz)
School of Psychology, Victoria University of Wellington,
PO Box 600, Wellington, New Zealand

David Abernethy (david.abernethy@clear.net.nz)
Wellington School of Medicine, University of Otago,
PO Box 600, Wellington, New Zealand

Abstract
Thirteen non-demented patients with Parkinson’s disease
(PD) were compared with age matched controls on two
standard tests of implicit learning. A verbal version of the
Serial Reaction Time (SRT) task was used to assess sequence
learning and an artificial grammar (AG) task assessed
perceptual learning. It was predicted that PD patients would
show implicit learning on the AG task but not the SRT task,
as motor sequence learning is thought to be reliant upon the
basal ganglia which is damaged in PD. Patients with PD
demonstrated implicit learning on both tasks. In light of these
unexpected results the research on SRT learning in PD is
reconsidered, and some possible explanations for the
sometimes conflicting results of PD patient samples on the
SRT task are considered. Factors which merit further study in
this regard are: The degree to which the SRT task relies on
overt motor responses; the effects of frontal lobe dysfunction
upon implicit sequence learning; and the degree to which the
illness itself has advanced.

Current theoretical accounts of human memory draw an
important distinction between implicit and explicit learning
processes (e.g., Squire, 1994; Squire & Zola, 1996). Explicit
(or declarative) learning and memory is characterized by the
acquisition and retrieval of information accompanied by
awareness of the learned information and its influence.
Implicit learning refers to similar acquisition without
awareness of the learned information or its influence. Such
learning occurs in situations and tasks whereby the ability to
consciously or deliberately recall the episode in which
learning took place, or to describe the rules underlying the
task, typically fall well behind the level of performance. It is
thought that explicit learning is dependent upon medial

temporal lobe and diencephalic brain structures, while habit
learning and implicit skill learning is closely associated with
neostriatal structures such as the basal ganglia (Squire,
1994; Squire & Zola, 1996).
One striking characteristic of implicit learning has been
its demonstrable robustness even in the face of quite major
brain damage. For example, using the serial reaction time
(SRT) task researchers have shown implicit learning to be
preserved in normal ageing (Howard & Howard, 1989),
Korsakoff patients (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987), closed head
injury patients (McDowall & Martin, 1996) and
Alzheimer’s disease (Knopman & Nissen, 1987). However,
the fact that the very brain structures thought to be closely
associated with certain forms of implicit learning are the
most impaired by Parkinson’s disease (PD), makes PD of
special interest for implicit learning researchers. The
characteristic neuropathology of PD includes marked
degeneration and atrophy of the basal ganglia and substantia
nigra, particularly the caudate nucleus or the neostriatum
(Knight, 1992). In the present study we were interested to
compare the performance of PD patients with controls on
two tests of implicit learning: the serial reaction time (SRT)
task and the artificial grammar (AG) task.
In the SRT task participants respond as quickly as
possible to the presentation of an asterisk on a computer
monitor. The asterisk can appear at any one of several
different locations and participants must respond by
pressing a key which corresponds to the spatial location of
the asterisk. Unknown to the participants, the location of the
stimulus follows a sequence which is repeated over a
number of trials. Sequence learning is assumed to occur
when, over the course of successive trials, the reaction times
(RT) of participants decrease significantly and when there is
a significant increase in the RT of participants upon the

administration of a block of trials where the position of the
asterisk is random. Of particular interest, is that while
participants display significant learning over trials, they are
often unaware that such learning has occurred and mostly
unable to correctly report the actual sequence followed
(Nissen & Bullemer, 1987).
In the first study of PD patients using the SRT task
Ferraro, Balota and Connor (1993) reported that nondemented individuals with PD showed less sequence
specific learning than healthy controls. Similarly, PascualLeone et al. (1993) found patients with PD acquired some
SRT procedural knowledge although its degree was less
than in healthy volunteers. However, perhaps the clearest
evidence for an implicit visuomotor learning deficit in
patients with basal ganglia dysfunction comes from a study
by Jackson et al. (1995). The authors found no significant
SRT learning in PD patients and concluded that the results
suggest a role for the basal ganglia in SRT learning or the
expression of serially-ordered action. Westwater et al.
(1998) employed a verbal version of the SRT task, designed
to minimize the influence of the motor symptoms of PD,
and reported similar results. In summary, there is a growing
number of studies suggesting that implicit learning in PD, at
least as measured by the SRT task, is reduced or impaired in
people with PD.
AG learning involves presenting participants with a set of
rule-governed stimuli (typically cards consisting of letter
strings belonging to a finite-state grammar) for observation,
and asking them to commit the letter strings to memory. The
set of stimuli typically consists of exemplars which cover
the entire range of transitions of the grammar, providing
exposure to all the rules of the grammar albeit in an indirect
fashion. On completion of the orientation task, participants
are informed of the existence of a complex grammatical
system governing the stimuli presented. Participants are
then shown a new set of cards, only half of which conform
to the grammar, and asked to decide whether each item
conforms to the structure of the grammar. The assumption
behind this paradigm is that tacit knowledge, which is
abstract and representative of a complex grammar system,
can be learnt independently of conscious efforts (Reber,
1989).
One important theoretical issue for the study of implicit
learning concerns the degree to which different types of
implicit learning are separate or dissociable both
functionally and at an anatomical level. For instance, while
formally similar to habit learning paradigms such as the
SRT task, AG participants typically evidence abstract
knowledge about a complex rule system on grammaticality
tests, while the measure used in SRT tasks is reaction time,
which is more likely to tap visuomotor knowledge (Seger,
1998). The examination of abstract judgment-linked
learning (e.g., AG learning) and visuomotor learning in a
group such as PD patients, where brain structures assumed
to be involved in implicit learning processes are damaged,
provides a method to investigate the possibility that these
forms of implicit learning may be independent.
While several studies have examined the performance of
PD patients on the SRT task (and generally found deficits or
impairments), to our knowledge only two published studies

have reported using the AG task with PD patients. Thierry,
Peigneux and Van der Linen (1998) observed the same level
of performance in controls and patients with PD on initial
trials which suggested preserved AG learning in PD, and
more broadly, that the basal ganglia may not be crucially
involved in the rule-extraction mechanisms engaged in AG
learning. Recently, Reber and Squire (1999) investigated the
ability of patients with PD to learn AG in both a standard
condition and a letterset transfer version of the task. They
observed learning under both conditions and concluded that
the learning of AGs appeared not to depend on the integrity
of the neostriatum. They also commented that the
dissociation between SRT and AG performance in patients
with PD relies upon comparisons across studies, and that a
dissociation within the same group of patients would be
even stronger evidence.
The finding that patients with PD exhibit intact AG
learning but show impairment on SRT tasks suggests
implicit learning is not a single entity and that different
neural systems may mediate performance on particular
implicit learning tasks. In the present study we set out to
compare the performance of a group of patients with PD on
the SRT task with their performance on an AG task. The
verbal version of the SRT task replaced the standard
button-pressing response with a vocal response in an
attempt to reduce the motor component of the task. We
hypothesized that patients with PD would show impaired
performance on the SRT task but not on the AG task in
comparison to healthy controls.

Method
Participants
Participants consisted of 14 patients with PD recruited from
the Neurology outpatients’ service of Wellington Hospital,
and 14 volunteers from the community who served as
healthy controls. The diagnosis of PD was confirmed by a
senior staff neurologist. One member of the PD group
scored below the standard cut-off of 24 points on the MiniMental Status Examination (MMSE; Folstein, Folstein, &
McHugh, 1975), used as a screening measure for abnormal
cognitive decline, and was excluded from further analyses.
The PD group comprised eight males and five females,
with a mean age of 66.42 years (range = 37 to 79 years). In
the control group, eight were male and six were female, and
the mean age was 68.36 years (range = 53 to 74 years).
Each of the patients with PD in the present study fell within
the early to middle/late stages of severity as assessed by the
Hoehn and Yahr (1967) degree of clinical disability scale.
Ten of the patients were in Stage Two (bilateral midline
involvement without loss of balance), two were in Stage
Three (first signs of impairment in equilibrium, significant
slowing of body movements), and one was in Stage Four
(fully developed PD, still able to stand and walk, but
markedly incapacitated). At the time of testing all patients
with PD were under the care of a neurologist and all but two
were receiving anti-Parkinsonian medication. None had a
history of head injury within the preceding ten years, or had
a history of alcohol abuse, stroke or epilepsy, and all

subjects had normal or corrected to normal vision. The
administration of a standardized measure of depression
indicated an absence of depression for all participants.

they noticed anything about the nature of the stimuli.
Although some participants reported being aware of some
form of pattern to the stimuli, none were able to correctly
reproduce it when asked to do so.

Materials
All participants were administered the National Adult
Reading Test (NART; Nelson & Willeson, 1991) to
compare performance on intellectual ability. Additionally,
the Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT;
Benton & Hamsher, 1976) was administered in order to
assess verbal fluency. There were no significant group
differences on variables of age, gender, or number of years
spent in formal education. A summary of the group
demographics is displayed in Table 1.
Table 1. Demographic Data.
______________________________________
PD
Controls
Measure
M (SD)
M (SD)
______________________________________
Age (yrs)
66.4 (11.0)
68.3 (8.4)
Education (yrs) 12.2 (2.7)
12.3 (2.6)
MMSE
27.3 (2.0)
29.0 (1.3)
COWAT
33.6 (12.2)
47.6 (2.1)*
NART
116.5 (5.0)
122.0(10)*
___________________________
* p<.05
Note: MMSE = Mini Mental Status Examination; COWAT
= Controlled Oral Word Association Test - age corrected
scores: NART = National Adult Reading Test, expressed as
a Wechler Adult Intelligence Scale - Revised full scale
equivalent.

Apparatus and Procedure
All participants were tested individually beginning with the
NART, followed by the MMSE. Following this participants
either completed the SRT, the COWAT, and then the AG
task, or performed these three tasks in reverse order. The
ordering of these three tasks was counterbalanced within
both the PD patient group and the control participant group.
SRT Task. The SRT task was a verbal version of the classic
SRT task, as devised by Nissen and Bullemer (1987),
replicating the SRT task used by Westwater et al. (1998)
(refer to Westwater et al. for a more detailed description of
the procedure). Briefly, all participants completed five
blocks of trials, each consisting of 100 trials. In each trial a
stimulus (an asterisk) appeared in one of four positions
along the bottom of a computer monitor. In the first four
blocks the asterisk appeared in a sequential manner (the 10item sequence used in Nissen and Bullemer (1987)). In the
fifth block the location of the asterisk was determined
pseudorandomly. All participants were asked to respond as
quickly as possible to the location of each stimulus by
saying aloud the number corresponding to its location. Upon
a response the stimulus disappeared and 400ms later the
next stimulus appeared in one of the other locations. At the
conclusion of the task all participants were asked whether

Artificial grammar task. Grammatical letter strings were
generated from a finite-state Markovian rule system
identical to that used by Dienes, Broadbent, and Berry
(1991). This structure was used to generate both 23 training
and 23 test items, each three to six letters in length.
Twenty-three non-grammatical test items were also
generated from the rule system by substituting an
inappropriate letter for an appropriate letter in an otherwise
grammatical string. Each letter string was presented on a
7.5 x 12.7 cm index card.
The procedure for the training and testing phases closely
followed the standard AG procedure and is fully described
by Dienes et al. (1991: Experiment 1., “grammatical”
participants). At the conclusion of the task, participants were
asked: "What were the grammatical rules or strategies on
which you were basing your judgments of grammaticality or
classification”. No participant was able to accurately identify
the rules with any significant success.

Results
SRT task. The results of one patient with PD were omitted
from SRT data analyses because of a technical problem with
the microphone and the voicebox, which led to invalid data.
Error rates were defined as verbal responses which were
incorrect with regard to the position of the stimuli, as well
as any omissions. Both groups averaged well below a 5%
error rate across blocks and did not differ significantly in
total error rate, t (24) = -1.22, p>.05. Incorrect responses
were not included in the RT analyses. For each set of 10
trials (the sequence pattern in blocks 1 to 4), each
participant’s median RT of correct responses was computed.
Figure 1. shows the mean of those median scores for each
block (ten repetitions of 10 trials) for the PD and control
groups. All analyses involved a mixed Group x Block
ANOVA with Block as a within-group factor. A 2 (Group)
x 5 (Block) mixed factor ANOVA showed a significant
Group effect, F(1,24) = 6.34, p<.05, and a significant effect
of Block F(4,96) = 11.75, p<.0001. There was no significant
Group x Block interaction, F(4,96) = 0.56, p>.05.
In order to examine both sequence learning and nonspecific practice effects a 2 (Group) x 4 (Block) ANOVA
with repeated measures on the last factor was computed
over the first four blocks. This revealed a significant main
effect for Block, F(3,72) = 15.89, p<.0001, and a significant
main effect for Group, F(1,24) = 6.02, p<.05. There was no
Group x Block interaction, F(3,72) = 0.45, p>.05.
Decreased RT over the first four blocks can result from both
sequence learning and non-specific practice effects. To
examine sequence-specific learning, a 2 (Group) by 2 (Block)
mixed factor ANOVA was computed for Block 4 and Block 5.
This resulted in main effects for Group, F(1,24) = 7.72, p<.05,
and Block, F(1,24) = 24.21, p<.0001. There was no Group x
Block interaction, F(1,24) = 0.01, p>.05.

strings. A two-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect of
the Grammaticality variable, F(1,25)= 25.24, p<.0001, but
no significant Group effect, F(1,25)= 0.0003, p>.05. There
was no significant Group x Grammaticality variable
interaction, F(1,25)= 0.57, p>.05.

900

REACTION TIME (ms)

850
800

Discussion

750
700
650

Control
Series1
Series2
PD

600
550

1

2

3

4

5

BLOCKS

Figure 1. Mean RT across blocks for PD and Control
groups.
A preliminary inspection of the effects of disease severity
on sequence learning was performed by dividing patients into
two groups according to their Hoehn and Yahr scores: Stage 2
(n=9) and Stage 3-4 (n=3). However, the data suggested there
was no effect of severity of disease on SRT performance.
These results have to be interpreted with caution because of
the small number of patients especially in the severe group. A
similar pattern of results emerged using both the COWAT and
NART as covariates.
Frontal lobe dysfunction has also been associated with
impairment in performance on a visuomotor sequence learning
task (Beldarrain et al., 1999). However, correlation analysis
failed to show a significant association between performance
on the COWAT (a test that has been associated with frontal
lobe functioning) and sequence specific learning (as measured
by the increase in mean reaction time from trial 4 to 5) for
patients with PD, r = -0.56, p>.05. Once again, small numbers
preclude any serious conclusions on this matter.
Artificial grammar task. Participants' scores were
calculated firstly, by the percentage of grammatical strings
classified correctly and the percentage of ungrammatical
strings classified correctly, and secondly, by the percentage
of grammatical strings classified as grammatical relative to
the percentage of grammatical strings classified as
ungrammatical.
Average percentage correct for making grammaticality
judgments for the patients with PD was 55.9% (standard
error of the mean (SEM) = 2.1%), a performance
significantly better than chance, t (12) = 2.85, p<.01.
Controls obtained 57.9% (SEM = 1.9%) correct for
grammaticality judgments, and also performed better than
chance, t (13) = 4.32, p<.001. There was no significant
difference in classification performance between the groups,
t (25) = 0.75, p>.05.
Patients with PD classified as grammatical 61.2% (SEM =
3.4%) of the grammatical strings and 49.5% (SEM = 4.7%)
of the ungrammatical strings. Control participants classified
as grammatical 63.4% (SEM = 3.9%) of the grammatical
strings and 47.5% (SEM = 3.7%) of the ungrammatical

The present study compared the performance of patients
with PD with matched controls on two distinct tests of
implicit learning, a verbal version of the SRT task and an
AG task. Contrary to our first hypothesis the participants
with PD demonstrated implicit learning on the SRT task. As
predicted, they also showed implicit learning on the AG
task. The control group also demonstrated implicit learning
on both tasks. These results are further testimony to the
robustness of implicit learning in the face of both age (given
the mean ages of both groups) and neurological damage. At
the same time the failure to observe impaired learning on the
SRT task, by the PD participants, is inconsistent with other
recent studies (e.g., Jackson et al., 1995; Westwater et al.,
1998).
Perhaps the first point to consider is that findings
regarding implicit learning and PD have been quite diverse
and sometimes conflicting. For example, findings of deficits
in performance of patients with PD on rotor-pursuit tasks
(Harrington et al., 1990; Heindel et al., 1989) and mirror
reading skill acquisition tasks (Allain et al., 1995; Yamadori
et al., 1996) are tempered by findings of preserved learning
on both the former (Bondi & Kasniak, 1991), and the latter
(Bondi & Kasniak, 1991; Harrington et al., 1990).
Moreover, attempts to relate findings at a behavioral or
cognitive level, with likely neuroanatomical substrates have
also produced a complex picture. For example, some
authors attribute performance deficits to the disrupted basal
ganglia in PD, or argue for a more specific emphasis on
brain stem structures of the basal ganglia such as the
substantia nigra, or other basal nuclei including the caudate
nucleus or the putamen (e.g., Doyon et al., 1997). Others
attribute the primary role to impaired neuroanatomical
circuitry in PD (e.g., Bondi & Kaszniak, 1991; Heindel et
al., 1989; Taylor, Saint-Cyr, & Lang, 1986), or more
specifically the “complex loop” (e.g., Bondi & Kaszniak,
1991), whereas some authors have emphasized the
importance of disturbed striatofrontal or caudate outflow in
PD (e.g., Saint-Cyr, Taylor, & Lang, 1988). In summary,
research on implicit learning in PD has produced conflicting
results and also a wide range of possible explanations at the
anatomical level.
However, studies employing the SRT task have been
generally more consistent. Jackson et al. (1995) reported
impairments on a variant of the SRT task in a group of 10
non-demented PD patients compared with healthy controls.
Pascual-Leone et al. (1993) reported that patients with PD
“achieved procedural knowledge” on the SRT task but at a
slower rate than healthy controls. Ferraro et al. (1993)
concluded that “there does appear to be some breakdown in
implicit learning in non-demented PD individuals....”
(p.175). Doyon et al. (1997) observed an impairment late in
the sequence acquisition process on a version of the SRT for
PD patients with a bilateral striatal-dysfunction. Finally,

Westwater et al. (1998) using a verbal version of the SRT
task found implicit learning was impaired in PD. In
summary, the evidence that procedural learning is impaired
in PD, at least as measured by the SRT task, is generally
more consistent that for other dimensions of implicit
learning. In light of the SRT studies reviewed above, it is
interesting to speculate as to why the PD patients in the
present study demonstrated preserved implicit learning.
One possible explanation for this discrepancy then
concerns the verbal version of the SRT task adopted for this
experiment. Specifically, the current investigation was
structured as to minimize the extent to which deficits
displayed by the patient group could be artifacts of
bradykinesia, akinesia, and/or motor arrests (symptoms
commonly associated with PD), rather than failure to
demonstrate implicit learning per se. The present findings
suggest that difficulties in executing a motor response may
be responsible for the impairment in implicit learning of
patients with PD, as gauged by the standard SRT tasks
which include an overt motor component in the method of
response (e.g., Ferraro et al., 1993, Jackson et al., 1995;
Pascal-Leone et al., 1993). However, this line of thought
must be viewed with some reservations. Firstly, the SRT
task used here replicated that of Westwater et al. (1998) who
obtained results which conflict with this study. Secondly,
findings of impaired PD patient performance on habit
learning tasks that do not include a motor component
(Knowlton, Mangels, & Squire, 1996) strongly suggest that
the neostriatum is important not just for motor learning but
also for acquiring non-motor dispositions that depend on
new associations. Finally, the verbal response retains a
motor element in which the deficiency is a salient feature of
PD. For instance, bradykinesia has been associated with
inappropriate and/or lengthy hesitations and a softening of
the voice (becoming less audible), often accompanied by
monotonous and hurried speech sounds (Knight, 1992).
Therefore, while the exclusion of an overt motor component
in the SRT task is useful in light of the motor difficulties
experienced by patients with PD, it is by itself unlikely to
account for the unexpected preserved learning exhibited by
patients with PD in the current investigation.
A second reason that could account for the inconsistent
SRT performance of PD patient samples observed in studies
involves the possible role played by the frontal lobes in
visuomotor sequence learning. Jackson et al. (1995)
reported evidence for a procedural learning deficit in PD
patients on the SRT task. However, when they compared PD
patients who scored poorly on the Wisconsin Card Sorting
Test (WCST) (suggesting a degree of frontal lobe
dysfunction), with patients who scored normally on this test,
the “frontal” group appeared to perform considerably worse
than either the “non-frontal” group or the healthy controls.
Unfortunately, their small sample size (11 PD patients)
precluded a meaningful statistical comparison of these subgroups. Beldarrain et al. (1999) examined SRT learning in
22 (non-PD) patients with unilateral prefrontal lesions and
observed that learning was impaired in patients with lesions
greater than 2cm in diameter. In concluding they argued for
the “crucial role of the prefrontal cortex in procedural
implicit learning” (p.1859). By contrast, Doyon et al.

(1997), who studied PD patients specifically, concluded that
implicit learning depended upon the “integrity of both the
striatum and the cerebellum, but not of the frontal lobes”
(p.219). In the present study, pairwise correlations between
COWAT performance and sequence specific learning on the
SRT failed to reach significance supporting Doyon and
colleagues’ findings. However, these results must be
interpreted with caution given that numbers were small and
the COWAT is a measure of verbal fluency and not frontal
lobe integrity per se. Future research would be advised to
adopt more precise measures of frontal lobe functioning
such as the WCST. In summary, there is some evidence,
although far from unequivocal, that the intact functioning of
the prefrontal cortex may be important for procedural
learning. If this can be substantiated, then it has obvious
relevance for clarifying the performance of PD patients on
the SRT task, given that “frontal dysfunction” is such a
common symptom of PD (Taylor et al., 1986).
A third possible explanation for the inconsistent findings
in this area concerns the stage of the disease. Presumably, if
the implicit learning deficit is related to damage to the basal
ganglia, then this will become increasingly obvious as the
disease advances. In support of this Doyon et al. (1997)
found that “only PD patients in more advanced stages of the
disease showed an impairment in acquiring the repeating
sequence” (p.235). Similarly, on the rotary pursuit task, also
an example of implicit motor skill learning, Harrington et al.
(1990) reported that procedural learning was impaired but
only in patients with more advanced symptoms of PD.
Interestingly, in the present study, a preliminary analysis of
severity did not show any effect, although as 9 of the 12
patients were in Stage 2 on the Hoehn and Yahr scale, this is
perhaps not surprising. Another, preferably continuous,
measure of motor function or severity that allowed for a
more even distribution of the subjects into two groups
would have perhaps been more useful given the small
number of patients.
Finally, it is important to note that implicit learning on the
AG task was also preserved among the PD patients. Overall,
both groups classified strings according to their grammatical
status at a level above chance, demonstrating learning for
the AG system, learning that could not be consciously
articulated by participants in either group. These findings
are consistent with those of both Reber and Squire (1999)
and Thierry et al. (1998) who also observed preserved AG
learning in patients with PD and is in accord with current
notions that such learning of perceptual knowledge is more
cortically mediated and less reliant upon subcortical
structures (Reber & Squire, 1999). Though we have devoted
most of the discussion to considering explanations for the
unpredicted results on the SRT task, the results on the AG
task are also important, as this is only the third published
study to date reporting preserved implicit learning on this
task in PD patients. As such it adds to the growing body of
evidence for the robustness of this dimension of implicit
learning even in the face of neurological illness.

References
Allain, H., Lieury, A., Quemener, V., Thomas, V.,
Reymann, J., & Gandon, J. (1995). Procedural memory
and Parkinson’s disease. Dementia, 6, 174-178.
Beldarrain, M. G., Grafman, J., Pascual-Leone, A., &
Garcia-Monco, J. C. (1999). Procedural learning is
impaired in patients with prefrontal lesions. Neurology,
52, 1853-1860.
Benton, A. L., & Hamsher, K. (1976). Multilingual
aphasia examination. Iowa City: University of Iowa.
Bondi, M. W., & Kasniak, A. W. (1991). Implicit and
explicit memory in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's
disease.
Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 13, 339-358.
Dienes, Z., Broadbent, D., & Berry, D. (1991). Implicit and
explicit knowledge bases in AG learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 17, 875-887.
Doyon, J., Gaudreau, D., Laforce, R., Castonguay, M.,
Bedard, P. J., Bedard, F., & Bouchard, J-P. (1997). Role
of the striatum, cerebellum, and frontal lobes in the
learning of a visuomotor sequence. Brain and Cognition,
34, 218-245.
Ferraro, F. R., Balota, D. A., & Connor, L. T. (1993).
Implicit memory and the formation of new associations in
nondemented Parkinson's disease individuals and
individuals with senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type:
A serial reaction time investigation. Brain and Cognition,
21, 163-180.
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975).
"Mini-Mental State": A practical method for grading the
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 12, 189-198.
Harrington, D. L., Haaland, K. Y., Yeo, R. A., & Marder, E.
(1990). Procedural memory in Parkinson's disease:
Impaired motor but not visuo-perceptual learning.
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology,
12, 323-339.
Heindel, W. C., Salmon, D., Shults, C., Walicke, P. A., &
Butters, N. (1989). Neuropsychological evidence for
multiple implicit memory systems: A comparison of
Alzheimer's, Huntington's and Parkinson's disease
patients. Journal of Neuroscience, 9, 582-587.
Hoehn, M. M., & Yahr, M. D. (1967). Parkinsonism:
Onset, progression, and mortality. Neurology, 17, 427442.
Howard, D. V., & Howard, J. H., Jr. (1989). Age
differences in learning serial patterns: Direct versus
indirect measures. Psychology and Aging, 4, 357-364.
Jackson, G. M., Jackson, S. R., Harrison, J., Henderson, L.,
& Kennard, C. (1995). Serial reaction time learning and
Parkinson's disease: Evidence for a procedural learning
deficit. Neuropsychologia, 33, 577-593.
Knight, R. G.
(1992).
The neuropsychology of
degenerative disorders.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Knopman, D., & Nissen, M. J. (1987). Implicit learning in
patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology,
37, 784-788.

Knowlton, B. J., Mangels J. A., & Squire, L. R. (1996). A
neostriatal habit learning system in humans. Science, 273,
1399-1402.
McDowall, J. & Martin, S. (1996). Implicit learning in
closed-head-injured subjects: Evidence from an event
sequence learning task.
New Zealand Journal of
Psychology, 25, 2-6.
Nelson, H. E., & Willeson, J. R. (1991). National Adult
Reading Test (2nd ed.). Windsor, UK: NFER-Nelson.
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirements of learning: Evidence from performance
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Pascual-Leone, A., Grafman, J., Clark, K., Stewart, M.,
Massaquoi, S., Lou, J., & Hallett, M. (1993). Procedural
learning in Parkinson's disease and cerebellar
degeneration. Annals of Neurology, 34, 594-602.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219235.
Reber, P. F., & Squire, L. R. (1999). Intact learning of AGs
and intact category learning by patients with Parkinson's
disease. Behavioral Neuroscience, 113, 235-242.
Saint-Cyr, J. A., Taylor, A. E., & Lang, A. E. (1988).
Procedural learning and neostriatal dysfunction in man.
Brain, 111, 941-959.
Seger, C. A. (1998). Multiple forms of implicit learning. In
M. A. Stadler, and P. A. Frensch (Eds.), Handbook of
implicit learning. London: Sage.
Squire, L. R. (1994). Declarative and nondeclarative
memory: Multiple brain systems supporting learning and
memory. In D. L. Schacter, and E. Tulving (Eds.),
Memory systems. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Squire, L. R., & Zola, S. M. (1996). Structure and function
of declarative and nondeclarative memory systems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93,
13515-13522 .
Taylor, A. E., Saint-Cyr, J. A., & Lang, A. E. (1986).
Frontal lobe dysfunction in Parkinson's disease. Brain,
109, 845-883.
Thierry, M., Peigneux, P., & Van der Linen, M. (1998).
Preserved AG learning in Parkinson's disease. Brain and
Cognition, 37, 109-112.
Westwater, H., McDowall, J., Siegert, R., Mossman, S., &
Abernethy, D. (1998). Implicit learning in Parkinson's
disease: Evidence from a verbal version of the serial
reaction time task. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 20, 413-418.
Yamadori, A., Yoshida, T., Mori, E., & Yamashita, H.
(1996). Neurological basis of skill learning. Cognitive
Brain Research, 5, 49-54.

