UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prototype Abstraction in Category Learning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1g804664

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Palmeri, Thomas J.
Flanery, Marci A.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prototype A bstraction in C ategory Learning?
Thom as J.Palm eri(thom as.j.palm eri@ vanderbilt.edu)
M arciA .Flanery (m arci.flanery@ vanderbilt.edu)
D epartm entofPsychology;V anderbiltU niversity
N ashville,TN 37240 U SA

A bstract
D o people learn categories by abstracting prototypes,
form ing sim ple rules, rem em bering specific exem plars,
or by som e com bination of these? A lthough som e consensus seem s to be em erging for a com bination of rule
form ation and exem plar m em orization,recent w ork has
revived interest in prototype abstraction (e.g., Sm ith et
al., 1997; Sm ith & M inda, 1998). W e reexam ined this
recentevidence w ith an eye tow ard an alternative sim ple
strategy subjects could use w ithin those particular studies.A very sim ple strategy,available in som e categorization tasks in w hich corrective feedback is supplied,is to
classify the currentstim ulus in the sam e category as the
previous stim ulus if the tw o are sufficiently sim ilar to
one another.This sim ple strategy m akes no recourse to
stored category representations of any kind. A nd this
strategy w illbe usefulonly under certain circum stances.
Reexam ining the w ork by Sm ith and colleagues, w e
found that those category structures that produced evidence for prototype abstraction could be “learned,” at
least to som e degree, using this sim ple strategy. M oreover,sim ulated data sets created using this sim ple strategy w ere better fitted by a prototype m odelthan an exem plar m odel.W e argue thatevidence for prototype abstraction from the studies by Sm ith and colleagues m ay
be w eakerthan they originally claim ed.

Introduction
D o people learn categories by abstracting prototypes,
form ing rules,rem em bering exem plars,or som e com bination ofthese? In the dom ain oflearning novelperceptualcategories,we can trace an evolving dom inance of
various theoreticalaccounts from rule form ation via hypothesis testing in the early years of categorization research (e.g., Bruner et al., 1956; Trabasso & Bower,
1968),to prototype abstraction (e.g.,H om a,1984;Posner & K eele, 1968; Reed, 1972), to exem plar storage
and retrieval(e.g.,H intzm an,1986;M edin & Schaffer,
1978;N osofsky,1986).M ore recently,there has been a
reem erging interestin the im portance ofrule learning in
categorization (e.g.,A llen & Brooks,1991;N osofsky et
al.,1994;N osofsky & Palm eri,1998).This has led to a
variety of hybrid accounts proposing a com bination of
rule learning and exem plar m em orization (e.g., Erickson & K ruschke, 1998; Johansen & Palm eri, 2001;
Palm eri, 1997; Palm eri & Johansen, 1999; see also
A shby et al., 1998). A rguably, there seem s to be an
em erging consensus for som e kind of com bination of

rule form ation and exem plar m em orization in category
learning. H owever, there has also been reem erging interest in the potential role of prototype abstraction in
category learning as well,at least under certain conditions (e.g., Sm ith et al.,1997; Sm ith & M inda,1998).
The goalof the presentarticle was to critically reexam ine this evidence forprototype abstraction thathas been
provided by Sm ith and colleagues.

Evidence for Prototype A bstraction
A ccording to prototype m odels,people learn categories by averaging their experiences with specific exem plars to derive an abstract prototype and classify new
objects according to sim ilarity to stored prototypes.By
contrast,according to exem plar m odels,people rem em ber inform ation about specific exem plars, with no abstraction of prototypes or other sum m ary representations,and classify new objects according to their sim ilarity to the stored category exem plars.N um erous studies have com pared and contrasted the ability of exem plar m odels and prototype m odels to account for observed categorization data – the m ajority of studies
found thatexem plar m odels provided a far superior account,both qualitatively and quantitatively (e.g.,BuseTable 1 :A n exam ple category structure from
Sm ith and M inda (1998),Experim ents 1 and 2.
Category A
Category B
Structure
Stim uli
Structure Stim uli
Categories Linearly Separable
000000
banuly
111111 kepiro
010000
benuly
111101 kepilo
100000
kanuly
110111 keniro
000101
banilo
101110 kapiry
100001
kanulo
011110 bepiry
001010
bapury
101011 kapuro
011000
bepuly
010111 beniro
000000
100000
010000
001000
000010
000001
111101

Categories N otLinearly Separable
gafuzi
111111 w ysero
w afuzi
011111 gysero
gyfuzi
101111 w asero
gasuzi
110111 w yfero
gafuri
111011 w ysuro
gafuzo
111110 w yseri
w ysezo
000100 gafezi

m eyer etal.,1984;M edin & Schaffer,1978;Palm eri&
N osofsky,2001;Shin & N osofsky,1992).
Challenging this previous work,there have been som e
recent studies that have reexam ined the potential explanatory power of prototype m odels com pared to exem plar m odels under a variety of conditions. In this
work,prototype m odels have been found to provide superior fits to som e data (Sm ith et al,1997),especially
early in category learning (Sm ith & M inda,1998).
Sm ith et al. (1997) conducted a series of category
learning experim ents using structures and stim uli quite
sim ilar to those shown in Table 1. Stim uli were sixletter (6D )pronounceable nonsense words com posed of
alternating consonants and vowels.A t each position in
the word,one oftwo possible letters could appear(e.g.,
the firstletter could be either g or w ).The two categories were generally form ed around a prototype (e.g.,gafuziversus w ysero) with m ostcategory m em bers differing from their category prototype along one or two
dim ensions (e.g., gasuzi). Category structures were
either linearly separable (LS) or nonlinearly separable
(N LS).Linearly separable categories are those thatcan
be partitioned on the basis of som e weighted additive
com bination ofinform ation along the individualdim ensions (M edin & Schwanenflugel, 1981). A s shown in
Table 1, the nonlinearly separable categories have an
exception item that is sim ilar to the prototype of the
contrasting category (e.g., w ysezo in the gafuzi
category).In the firstexperim entofSm ith etal.(1997),
one setof category structures was relatively easy (ELS
and EN LS) and another set of category structures was
relatively difficult(D LS and D N LS).
Each subject learned one of the four possible category structures. O n each trial of the experim ent, the
subject was presented with one of the item s random ly
selected from one of the two categories to be learned.
The subjectclassified the item as a m em berofcategory
A orcategory B and then received corrective feedback.
Sm ith etal.(1997) tested the ability ofprototype and
exem plar m odels to account for the probabilities of
classifying each stim ulus as a m em ber ofcategory A or
B on an individualsubjectbasis.A cross allfour conditions of Experim ent 1, they found that the prototype
m odel provided a better account of the observed data
than the exem plarm odelforhalfoftheirsubjects.Their
evidence for a prototype m odel advantage is sum m arized in Table 2.A Y ES in the second colum n signifies
that at least som e proportion of the individualsubjects
were displaying categorization behaviorthata prototype
m odelwas betterable to accountfor.
To illustrate, focusing on the EN LS category, the
subgroup of subjects that a prototype m odel better accounted for averaged 92% , 78% , and 23% correct on
the prototypes, norm al item s, and exception item s, respectively.Consistentwith the predictions ofthe prototype m odel,these subjects erroneously classified the exception item s as being m em bers of the category of the
prototype they were m ost sim ilar to. By contrast, the

subgroup of subjects thatan exem plar m odelbetter accounted for averaged 81% , 79% , and 51% correct on
the prototypes,norm alitem s,and exceptions.
Sm ith et al. (1997) and Sm ith and M inda (1998)
provided further evidence for a prototype m odeladvantage across a series of experim ents. O ne m anipulation
they perform ed varied the num ber of dim ensions presentin the stim uli.W ith six dim ensions (6D )itis possible to create well-differentiated categories (those with
high within-category sim ilarity and low betweencategory sim ilarity)with m any m em bers.H owever,with
only four stim ulus dim ensions (4D ),categories tend to
be m uch less differentiated and tend to be m uch sm aller.
Sm ith and colleagues have argued that prototype m odels show their advantage where prototype abstraction is
m ost likely to succeed, under those conditions where
categories are com posed of stim uli with m any dim ensions, where categories are large in size, and where
categories are welldifferentiated.(A s a furtherm anipulation,in som e experim ents nonsense words were used,
while in other experim ents cartoon anim als were used.)
A s sum m arized in Table 2, Sm ith et al. (1997) docum ented a series ofconditions underwhich som e proportion of subjects used prototype abstraction. In Sm ith
and M inda (1998), evidence for prototype abstraction,
if present,was observed in the early stages of category
learning; exem plar m odels generally fared better than
prototype m odels in later stages of learning. For experim ents from thatarticle,a Y ES in the second colum n
of Table 2 signifies that a prototype m odel provided a
superior account of early stages of category learning.
A s shown in Table 2, for som e of the category structures Sm ith and colleagues tested,no evidence for prototype abstraction was observed.

A Sim ple C ategorization Strategy
In allofthe experim ents cited in Table 2,prototype and
exem plar m odels were tested on their ability to account
for category learning data.This data was obtained from
trials in which subjects were presented a stim ulus,m ade
a response,received feedback,were presented the next
stim ulus, m ade a response, received feedback, and so
on.O ur goal was to investigate whether som e subjects
could be using som e form of the following very sim ple
strategy to provide the correct answer without relying
on abstracted prototypes orlearned exem plars.
W e willuse the category structure shown in Table 1
as an exam ple. Suppose on som e trial, a subject is
shown the following stim ulus
gafuzi

and is then asked to classify itas a m em ber ofcategory
A or category B.The subjectresponds    and
the com puterprovides the following feedback
CO RRECT,gafuziis a m em berof  
Suppose the subjectis nextpresented this stim ulus
gafuri

and is asked to classify it.The subjectcould rely on abstracted prototypes, or rem em bered exem plars, or

form ed rules. But perhaps a far sim pler strategy is to
classify itin the sam e category as gafuzisince they are
so sim ilar to one another. The com puter just verified
thatgafuziis a m em berof   so itis reasonable
to guess thatgafurim ightalso be a m em berof  
 as well. The subject responds     and the
com puterprovides the following feedback
CO RRECT,gafuriis a m em berof  
Suppose the subjectis nextpresented this stim ulus

D oes the Sim ple Strategy W ork?

W ell,this stim ulus looks very differentfrom the previous one,w asero,so itm ightm ake sense to classify itin
the opposite category.The subjectresponds   
and the com puterprovides the following feedback
W RO N G ,gafeziis a m em berof  7
Exam ining Table 1,we see thatthis stim ulus is the exception to category B.U sing this very sim ple strategy,
our subjectwould seem to perform quite wellatclassifying everything butthe exceptions.RecallthatSm ith et
al. (1997) reported that their subjects whose data was
bestfitby a prototype m odelconsistently classified the
exceptions in the wrong category as well.

This is certainly a strategy that subjects could use to
classify stim uli in an experim ent. But, does it really
work? In m any cases,no.For exam ple,letus consider
the experim ents reported by M edin and Schwanenflugel
(1981). D ifferent groups of subjects learned linearly
separable and nonlinearly separable categories. Their
results were im portant because they found
that N LS categories could be easier to learn than LS
categories,a resultinconsistentwith additive prototype
m odels.By contrast,this result was an a prioriprediction of m ultiplicative exem plar m odels.Letus firstexam ine the category structure from the third experim ent
from M edin and Schwanenflugel(1981) in som e detail.
U sing an abstractnotation,for the LS structure,stim uli
in category A were 0111,1110,and 1001 and stim uliin
category B were 1000, 0001, and 0110. For the N LS
structure, stim uli in category A were 1100, 0011, and
1111,and stim uliin category B were 0000,0101,1010.
W e perform ed a M onte Carlo sim ulation of the sim ple
strategy using these two category structures.Foreach of
1000 sim ulated subjects for each structure, we generated a random sequence of stim ulus trials. O n each
sim ulated trial,if the currentstim ulus m atched the previous one on m ore than two dim ensions,then the sam e
category response as the previous stim ulus was used.If
the currentstim ulus m atched the previous one on fewer
than two dim ensions, then the other category response
was used.If the current stim ulus m atched the previous
one on exactly two dim ensions,then a random response

Table 2 :Evidence for Prototype A bstraction from
Sm ith etal.(1997)and Sm ith & M inda (1998).See
textfora key to the experim entnotation.

Table 3 : Best fitting m odel (exem plar or prototype) to data sim ulated using the sim ple strategy.
See textfora key to the experim entnotation.

Experim ent

Experim ent

w asero

and is asked to classify it. W ell, this stim ulus looks
quite different from the previous stim ulus,gafuri,so it
m ightm ake sense to classify itin the opposite category
as gafuri. The subjects responds    7 and the
com puterprovides the following feedback
CO RRECT,w asero is a m em berof  7
Finally,suppose the subjectis presented this stim ulus
gafezi

Prototypes?
Sm ith etal.(1997)
Experim ent1 6D ELS
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D D LS
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D EN LS
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D D N LS
Y ES
Experim ent2 4D N LS
NO
Experim ent2 6D N LS
Y ES

Strategy?
Y ES
Y ES
Y ES
Y ES
NO
Y ES

Sm ith & M inda (1998)
Experim ent1 6D LS
Y ES
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D N LS
Y ES
Y ES
Experim ent2 6D LS
Y ES
Y ES
Experim ent2 6D N LS
Y ES
Y ES
Experim ent3 4D LS
NO
NO
Experim ent3 4D N LS
NO
NO
Experim ent4 4D N LS
NO
NO
Experim ent4 6D N LS
Y ES
Y ES
 ; The second colum n (Prototypes) indicates
whether evidence forprototype abstraction was observed. The third colum n (Strategy) indicates
whether the sim ple strategy yields above chance
perform ance.

Prototypes?
Sm ith etal.(1997)
Experim ent1 6D ELS
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D D LS
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D EN LS
Y ES
Experim ent1 6D D N LS
Y ES
Experim ent2 4D N LS
NO
Experim ent2 6D N LS
Y ES

M odel
Prototype
Prototype
Prototype
Prototype
−
Prototype

Sm ith & M inda (1998)
Experim ent1 6D LS
Y ES
Prototype
Experim ent1 6D N LS
Y ES
Prototype
Experim ent2 6D LS
Y ES
Prototype
Experim ent2 6D N LS
Y ES
Prototype
Experim ent3 4D LS
NO
−
Experim ent3 4D N LS
NO
−
Experim ent4 4D N LS
NO
−
Experim ent4 6D N LS
Y ES
Prototype
 ; The second colum n (Prototypes) indicates
whether evidence forprototype abstraction was observed. The third colum n (M odel) indicates
whetherthe Prototype orExem plarm odelprovided
a betterfitto the sim ulated data.

was generated. A veraging across 1000 sim ulated subjects,this strategy produced just34.1% accuracy on the
LS structure and 33.7% accuracy on the N LS structure.
To see why this sim ple strategy produced accuracy far
worse than justguessing,letus exam ine the N LS structure.Both N LS categories contain stim ulithatm ism atch
each other on every dim ension (1100 and 0011 in category A , 0101 and 1010 in category B). W hen these
m ism atching stim uli follow one another, they always
produce the wrong response (e.g., erroneously categorizing 0011 as a m em ber of category B because it is
preceded by 1100 which was labeled a m em berofcategory A ). M oreover, on other pairs of sequential trials,
stim uli that follow one another m atch on exactly half
the dim ensions,producing a random response.
This sim ple strategy fails atother category structures
as well. For the second experim ent of M edin and
Schwanenflugel (1981), the sim ple strategy produced
46.6% accuracy for their LS structure.For the category
structure from Experim ent 4 of M edin and Schaffer
(1978), the sim ple strategy produced 44.6% accuracy.
A pplying the sim ple strategy to the classic category
structures from Shepard,H ovland,and Jenkins (1961),
we obtain predicted accuracies for their problem Types
I-IV as following: Type I : 70.8% , Type II : 42.7% ,
Type III : 57.3% , Type IV : 57.0% , Type V : 43.1% ,
Type V I : 15.2% . In addition to underpredicting the
overall level of accuracy observed when subjects learn
these various categories, this sim ple strategy m ispredicts the order of difficulty of the various problem
types.For separable-dim ension stim uli,the difficulty of
the problem s is ordered I < II < III,IV ,V < V I (N osofsky et al., 1994; see also N osofsky & Palm eri, 1996).
Clearly,this sim ple strategy is notwhatsubjects can use
in m any categorization experim ents.
But,the sim ple strategy does work wellwhen “learning” other category structures. Let us turn now to the
category structures shown in Table 1,which were used
in Experim ents 1 and 2 of Sm ith and M inda (1998).
Following the procedure described above, we used a
M onte Carlo sim ulation procedure to generate categorization responses for the LS and N LS categories using
the sim ple strategy. For each of 1000 sim ulated subjects,we generated a random sequence of stim uli,with
each stim ulus presented once perblock.O n each trial,if
the currentstim ulus m atched the previous one on m ore
than three dim ensions,then the category ofthe previous
stim ulus was used.If the current stim ulus m atched the
previous one on fewer than three dim ensions,then the
othercategory was used.Ifthe currentstim ulus m atched
the previous one on exactly three dim ensions, then a
random response was generated.
U sing this sim ple strategy,accuracy ofapproxim ately
73% correct was possible for both the LS and N LS
category structures (excluding the two exceptions in the
N LS structure, which the strategy erroneously classified, the overall accuracy for the rem aining item s was
over 84% ).The overallperform ance is less than the ac-

curacies achieved by subjects in Sm ith and M inda
(1998) by the end of learning,which was slightly over
80% correct for both structures. H owever, in their experim ent, evidence for the use of prototypes was only
observed during the early blocks oflearning.Sm ith and
M inda fitted the prototype and exem plar m odels to
blocks of 56 trials and found that the prototype m odel
fitted better than the exem plar m odel during the early
blocks of learning.Itseem s quite possible thatsubjects
m ightstartoutusing the sim ple strategy during the early
blocks of learning, especially since the strategy correctly classifies nearly three out of four item s.A s subjects acquire m ore experience with the categories,they
m ay begin to shiftto using stored exem plarinform ation
to im prove perform ance.
W e next tested the ability of this sim ple strategy to
correctly categorize stim uli from the other category
structures used by Sm ith and colleagues. A s sum m arized in Table 2, the sim ple strategy produced above
chance categorization in just those category structures
thatSm ith and colleagues found evidence for prototype
abstraction. For notation, those category structures for
which the sim ple strategy works are indicated by a Y ES
in the third colum n of Table 2.Could the apparentuse
of prototypes actually be a signature for the use of this
very sim ple strategy instead?

W hich M odelFits Better?
Suppose thatsubjects are engaging in this sim ple strategy ofcom paring the currentstim ulus with the previous
one and selecting the category labelaccordingly.Letus
further assum e thatthey are notabstracting prototypes,
are not learning rules,and are not rem em bering exem plars. Sm ith and colleagues obtained data from their
subjects and com pared how wella prototype m odeland
an exem plar m odel accounted for categorization judgm ents.Ifsubjects are using the sim ple strategy,would a
prototype m odelor an exem plar m odelprovide a better
accountofthe categorization judgm ents produced using
this sim ple strategy?
W e will focus on just those structures for which the
sim ple strategy actually yields above chance categorization,as indicated by a Y ES in the third colum n ofTable
2. U sing the sim ple strategy, we em ployed the M onte
Carlo sim ulation techniques discussed earlier to generate data from a large num ber of sim ulated subjects for
each of the indicated category structures. W e then exam ined how well a prototype m odel or an exem plar
m odel accounted for this sim ulated data. Clearly one
possibility is that the prototype m odel accounted for
som e of the sim ulated data and an exem plar m odelaccounted forthe restofthe sim ulated data.A farm ore interesting possibility is thateither an exem plar m odelor
a prototype m odelprovided a better accountfor the entire set of sim ulated data.This would pose an interesting problem of identifiability.The data were generated
using a sim ple strategy of local stim ulus com parisons
without storing long-term category representations of

any kind.Y etby com paring justa prototype m odeland
an exem plar m odel, we m ay erroneously conclude on
the basis of m odel fits that subjects were actually abstracting prototypes orrem em bering exem plars.
To be specific, we fitted a prototype m odel and an
exem plar m odel to the sim ulated data generated using
the sim ple strategy.For the exem plar m odel,an item to
be classified is com pared with the stored exem plars of
category A and category B.The probability ofclassifying the item into one ofthose categories is given by the
relative sum m ed sim ilarity of the item to the stored exem plars ofthe two categories.For the prototype m odel,
the probability of classifying the item is given by the
relative sim ilarity to the prototypes of the two categories.Sim ilarity between an item  and a stored exem plar
< (oran abstracted prototype <)is given by

S ij = ∏ smδ (i,j)
m

where the 0<<1are free param eters along all  dim ensions.The į>!<? is a function thatreturns a 0 if and
< m atch along dim ension  and returns a 1 if  and <
m ism atch.A sm allvalue of  indicates thatdim ension
 is particularly diagnostic.Because of the m ultiplicative sim ilarity rule, m ism atches along that dim ension
willhave a large effecton decreasing sim ilarity.
Forthe exem plarm odel,evidence forcategory A ,,
is found by sum m ing the sim ilarities of an item to all
exem plars in category A ,and evidence for category B,
B , is found by sum m ing the sim ilarities to all exem plars in category B.For the prototype m odel,evidence
for category A , , is the sim ilarity to the category A
prototype, and the evidence for category B, B , is the
sim ilarity to the category B prototype.The probability
ofclassifying iinto category A is then given by

P (A |i)=

bA E A
bA E A + bB E B

where @ is the category A bias (as m ightbe expected,
the bias term s did not contribute to any significantly
im proved fits to the sim ulated data). The prototype
m odeland the exem plar m odelwere fitted to the sim ulated data using a hill-clim bing procedure that located
param eters thatm inim ized the sum ofsquared error between sim ulated observations and m odelpredictions.
The sum m ary of this m odeling was straightforward.
The prototype m odel provided a better account of the
data that was sim ulated using the sim ple strategy than
did the exem plar m odel.This finding is sum m arized in
Table 3.A s shown in the third colum n,for every structure which could be “learned” using the sim ple strategy,
and for which Sm ith and colleagues found evidence for
prototype abstraction, the prototype m odel provided a
superior account of the sim ulated data. A lthough the
data was generated using a strategy that m ade no recourse to abstractprototypes,the prototype m odelfitted
that sim ulated data better than the exem plar m odel. If
subjects were indeed using this sim ple strategy, one
m ight erroneously conclude that they were abstracting

prototypes when in fact they were relying on local
stim ulus inform ation to m ake a categorization decision.

Sum m ary and C onclusions
Sm ith and colleagues (Sm ith et al., 1997; Sm ith &
M inda,1998) have provided evidence forprototype abstraction in category learning. W e noted that in their
experim ents,they exam ined data from learning trials in
which feedback was always provided.W e investigated
the possibility that subjects could use this corrective
feedback to classify the subsequentitem in the category
learning task without m aking recourse to long-term
category representations of any kind.A ccording to this
sim ple strategy,subjects m ustonly com pare the current
item with the previous one.The previous item had been
labeled explicitly by the experim enter in the form of
corrective category feedback.The currentitem is classified in the sam e category as the previous one ifthey are
sufficiently sim ilarto one another,otherwise the current
item is classified in the othercategory.
First, we observed that those structures that Sm ith
and colleagues found evidence forprototype abstraction
were those category structures which could be “learned”
using this sim ple strategy.In other words,engaging in
these localstim ulus com parisons could produce categorization accuracy greater than chance.For com parison,
we docum ented a num ber of other category structures
forwhich this sim ple strategy would be unsuccessful.
Second,we sim ulated data using this sim ple strategy
for those structures for which the sim ple strategy would
work. W e then fitted a prototype and an exem plar
m odel to this sim ulated data.In every case,the prototype m odel fitted the sim ulated data better. If subjects
were to use this sim ple strategy, without relying on
stored category representations, we m ight erroneously
conclude from these m odel fits that subjects were abstracting prototypes when they were not.
In a recent paper, Stewart, Brown, and Chater (in
press)docum ented evidence forthe use ofsequentialinform ation in categorization sim ilar to whatwe are proposing.U sing what they called a m em ory and contract
(M A C) strategy,they tested whether subjects would respond with the sam e category as on the previous trialif
there was a sm all difference between the two stim uli,
and a differentlabelifthe difference was large,justlike
the sim ple strategy we investigated. N ot only did they
dem onstrate that the M A C strategy could achieve well
over 80% accuracy on the category structures they
tested, but they also reported highly system atic sequence effects in the experim ents they reported,which
were consistentwith the use ofa M A C strategy.The sequence effects they observed were inconsistentwith exem plarm odels and otherm odels they investigated.
So, the conclusion of our work along with that of
Stewart and colleagues is perhaps best described as a
cautionary tale. W hen we engage subjects in category
learning experim ents,ourgoalis typically to understand
som ething aboutthe long-term category representations

that subjects m ay have form ed about those categories.
Y et, subjects will use whatever inform ation they have
available to them to m ake a correct response, perhaps
without even using any long-term category knowledge.
They can clearly use feedback from previous trials to
categorize on a current trial, at least under som e circum stances.O r they can learn som ething aboutcategories during testing in ways that m ay be entirely unanticipated by the investigator.

A cknow ledgm ents
This work was supported by V anderbiltU niversity Research Council G rants, G rant BCS-9910756 from the
N ational Science Foundation, and G rant 1R01
M H 61370 from the N ationalInstitute ofM entalH ealth.

R eferences
A llen, S.W ., & Brooks, L.R. (1991). Specializing the
operation ofan explicitrule.     
 DG   !*,3-19.
A shby, F.G ., A lfonso-Reese, L.A ., Turken, A .U ., &
W aldron,E.M .(1998).A form alneuropsychological
theory of m ultiple system s in category learning.K
    !*M,442-481.
Bruner,J.S.,G oodnow,J.J.,& A ustin,G .A .(1956).
 '.N ew Y ork:W iley.
Busem eyer, J.R., D ewey, G .I., & M edin, D .L. (1984).
Evaluation of exem plar-based generalization and the
abstraction ofcategoricalinform ation.  K
     D O ! U !  
!*,638-648.
Erickson, M .A ., & K ruschke, J.K . (1998). Rules and
exem plars in category learning.      K
   DG   !V,107-140.
H intzm an,D .L.(1986)."Schem a abstraction" in a m ultiple-trace m em ory m odel.    !-%,
411-428.
H om a,D .(1984).O n the nature ofcategories. K
O   U !W,49-94.
Johansen, M .K ., & Palm eri, T.J. (2001). Representational shifts in category learning. U    
  .
M edin,D .L.,& Schaffer,M .M .(1978).A contexttheory of classification learning.    ,
WM,207-238.
M edin, D .L., & Schwanenflugel, P.J. (1981). Linear
separability in classification learning.   K
     D Z   O    U K
!VM,355-368.
N osofsky, R.M . (1986). A ttention, sim ilarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship.    
    DG   ,M,39-57.
N osofsky, R.M ., G luck, M ., Palm eri, T.J., M cK inley,
S.C., & G lauthier, P. (1994). Com paring m odels of
rule-based classification learning: A replication and
extension of Shepard, H ovland, and Jenkins (1961).
U [!,352-369.

N osofsky, R.M ., & Palm eri, T.J. (1996). Learning to
classify integral-dim ension stim uli.7 K
[  !%,222-226.
N osofsky, R.M ., Palm eri, T.J., & M cK inley, S.C.
(1994). Rule-plus-exception m odel of classification
learning.    ,*,53-79.
N osofsky,R.M .,& Palm eri,T.J.(1997).A n exem plarbased random walk m odel of speeded classification.
    ,*#,266-300.
N osofsky, R.M ., & Palm eri, T.J. (1998). A rule-plusexception m odelforclassifying objects in continuousdim ension spaces.  7
 [  !
M,345-369.
Palm eri, T.J. (1997). Exem plar sim ilarity and the developm ent of autom aticity.        
 D O ! U !   ! %,
324-354.
Palm eri, T.J., & Johansen, M .K . (1999). Prototypes,
rules,and instances in category learning.@ 
   $ D #*   U ! #,
98.
Palm eri, T.J., & N osofsky, R.M . (2001). Central tendencies, extrem e points, and prototype enhancem ent
effects in ill-defined perceptual categorization. & 
\             ! M#,
197-235.
Posner,M .I.,& K eele,S.W .(1968).O n the genesis of
abstract ideas.          !
VV,353-363.
Reed, S.K .(1972).Pattern recognition and categorization.  !%,382-407.
Shepard,R.N .,H ovland,C.L.,& Jenkins,H .M .(1961).
  U !VM(13,W hole N o.517).
Shin,H .J.,& N osofsky,R.M .(1992).Sim ilarity-scaling
studies of dot-pattern classification and recognition.
         D G   ! ,
278-304.
Sm ith, J.D ., M urray, M .J., & M inda, J.P. (1997).
Straighttalk aboutlinear separability.  K
     D O ! U !  
!%,659-680.
Sm ith, J.D . & M inda, J.P. (1998). Prototypes in the
m ist: The early epochs of category learning.  
    DO !U !  
!#,1411-1436.
Stewart, N ., Brown, G .D .A ., & Chater, N . (in press).
Sequence effects in categorization of sim ple perceptual stim uli.          D
O !U !  .
Trabasso,T.,& Bower,G .H .(1968).  K
D&     .N ew Y ork:W iley.

