UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rational imitation of goal-directed actions in 14-month-olds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47c9x17n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Gergely, Gyorgy
Bekkering, Harold
Kiraly, Ildiko

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rational imitation of goal-directed actions in 14-month-olds
György Gergely (113524.2623@compuserve.com)
Institute for Psychology of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
1132 Budapest, Victor Hugo u. 18-22, Hungary

Harold Bekkering (H.Bekkering@ppsw.rug.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psychological Research
Amalienstr. 33, D 80799 Muenchen, Germany

Ildikó Király (kiralyi@mtapi.hu)
Institute for Psychology of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
1132 Budapest, Victor Hugo u. 18-22, Hungary

Abstract
The study sheds new light on the nature of imitative
learning in 14-month-olds. It is demonstrated that while
infants of this age can indeed imitate a novel means
modelled to them, they do so only if the action is seen by
them as the most rational alternative to the goal available
within the constraints of the situation. The findings
support the ‘rational imitation’ account over current
‘imitative learning’ or ‘emulative learning’ accounts in
explaining re-enactment of goal-directed action in 14month-olds.

familiar, and easier-to-perform action alternative
available to them)?
In his work on the social transmission of tool use in
chimpanzees, Tomasello (1999) differentiated between
‘imitative learning’ – which seems to be a humanspecific capacity – and ‘emulation learning’ that is
characteristic of nonhuman primates.

Introduction
In a well-known study Meltzoff (1988, 1999)
demonstrated that 14-month-olds are already capable of
delayed imitation of a novel goal-directed action.
Infants observed a salient novel action performed by an
adult model on a black box with a translucent orange
plastic panel for a top surface. The box had a light bulb
hidden in it. The model leaned forward from the waist
and touched the panel with his/her forehead as a result
of which the box was illuminated. The infants were
given the box only on a separate visit a week later when
67% of them imitated the salient novel action: they
leaned forward themselves to touch the box with their
forehead (see Figure 1); an action they would not
spontaneously perform (as shown by a control base-line
condition). This demonstration indicates the remarkably
early presence of imitative learning. Meltzoff argues
that 14-month-olds differentiate between the actor’s
goal (the visible outcome of the box lighting up) and
the specific means (head-on-box) performed and “they
imitate the means used, not solely the general ends
achieved” (1995, p. 509). The present study addresses
two important questions that arise in relation to
Meltzoff’s intriguing demonstration: 1) Why do infants
imitate the specific novel action modelled? 2) Why
don’t they simply push the panel with their hand to
achieve the outcome (this being a simpler, more

Figure 1: Touching the box with the forehead
Briefly, when primates observe a novel instrumental
action that brings about an interesting outcome, they
seem to focus on the salient outcome only without
differentiating it from the particular means used. This is
suggested by the fact that when they attempt to bring
about the same outcome themselves – in contrast to
young children – they do not directly imitate the
specific means modelled. Rather, they perform a series
of motor actions directed to the outcome that are
already available in their motor repertoire, until –
through a process of trial-and-error learning - they hit
upon the same effective means that was modelled for
them, as if ‘reinventing’ it by chance.
Tomasello (1999) points out that if infants used
emulation learning in the Meltzoff situation, one could
expect that instead of imitating the novel and unfamiliar

‘head-on-box’ action, they would tend to perform a
simpler, more natural, and already familiar motor action
to achieve the outcome: they would touch the box with
their hand (but, apparently, they did not). Therefore,
Tomasello (1999) argues that infants in the Meltzoff
study “understood a) that the adult had the goal of
illuminating the light; b) that he chose one means for
doing so, from among other possible means; and c) that
if they had the same goal they could choose the same
means – an act in which the child imagines herself in
the place of the other” According to this simulationist
account “imitative learning of this type thus relies
fundamentally on infants’ tendency to identify with
adults…” (p. 82).
At first sight, infants’ readiness to faithfully imitate
the novel and unfamiliar ‘head-on-box’ action also
seems unexpected in the light of Gergely and Csibra’s
recent theory of the one-year-old’s ‘naïve theory of
rational action’ (Gergely, Nádasdy, Csibra, & Bíró,
1995; Gergely & Csibra, 1997; Csibra & Gergely,
1998). In a series of habituation studies these authors
and their colleagues (Gergely et al., 1995; Csibra,
Gergely, Bíró, Koós, & Brockbank, 1999) demonstrated
that 9 to 12-month-old infants (but not 6-month-olds)
can already interpret the behaviour of an abstract
computer-animated figure as a goal-directed rational
action. For example, infants were habituated to a visual
event in which a small circle repeatedly approached and
contacted a larger circle by jumping over a rectangular
figure (the ‘obstacle’) that was placed in between them.
During the test phase, the ‘obstacle’ was removed, and
infants were presented with either of two events. In the
‘old action’ event (non-rational approach) the small
circle performed the same jumping approach as before
to get to the large circle, even though - for adult
observers – this jumping-over-nothing action did not
seem a ‘sensible’ goal approach given the absence of
the ‘obstacle’. In the ‘new action’ event (rational
approach) the small circle performed a novel but (for
adults) ‘sensible’ action: it approached the large circle
by following the most direct horizontal straight-line
pathway that has become available leading to the large
circle. Corresponding to adult intuitions, 9- and 12month-olds looked longer at the non-rational ‘old
action’ event than at the (rational) ‘new action’ event,
while showing no dishabituation to the latter.
According to Gergely and Csibra’s theory this
finding demonstrates that when interpreting a goaldirected behaviour, one-year-olds evaluate the
rationality of the particular action as a function of the
visible goal and the physical constraints of the actor’s
situation (here the presence of the ’obstacle’). When
the situational constraints change (i. e., when the
’obstacle’ is removed), infants can infer what particular
novel action the actor ought to perform in the new
situation to achieve the goal in the most rational or

efficient manner. It is hypothesised that in doing so
infants rely on the inferential principle of rational action
that assumes that to achieve its goal an agent will
choose to perform the most rational action available
given the constraints of the situation (Gergely & Csibra,
1997; Csibra & Gergely, 1998).
Extending this theory to imitative learning situations
one would expect infants to imitate the model’s novel
means only if it appeared to them to be the most
rational or efficient alternative to the goal within the
constraints of reality. On this assumption, however, it is
not immediately clear why Meltzoff’s subjects would
consider the novel ‘head-on-box’ action as the most
rational means to the goal, when clearly there is a much
simpler, more familiar and for them obviously easierto-perform motor alternative: they could touch the box
simply by placing their hands on it (‘hand-on-box’
action). Why do they imitate the novel ‘head-on-box’
action then?
To solve this riddle, we hypothesised that it is
possible that the action modelled by Meltzoff contained
certain situational features that allowed infants to
‘rationalize’ the ‘head-on-box’ action as the most
efficient alternative available to the goal. In particular,
it seems possible that infants noticed and interpreted the
fact that while the model’s hands were free to act, s/he
nevertheless chose to touch the box with his/her
forehead rather than with his/her hands. Assuming that
the adult is a ‘rational agent’, the infants may have
concluded that ‘there must be a good reason’ for this
choice, and that the ’head-on-box’ action must have
advantages over the simpler-looking ‘hand-on-box’
action in achieving the goal. Therefore, when getting a
chance to reproduce the effect, the infants themselves
would opt to perform the novel ‘head-on-box’ action
that had been inferred to be the most rational alternative
to the goal.
What would happen if the model’s hands were visibly
occupied while s/he was performing the ‘head-on-box’
action? This would make it explicit that in the given
situation the simpler ‘hand-on-box’ action is not
available to the model, and so the performed ‘head-onbox’ action would clearly appear to be the most rational
alternative to the goal. What would infants do in this
case, if after having observed the modelled ‘head-onbox’ action, we made the box available for them to act
on? Note that here the situational constraints on
available means would be different in the infant’s case
than in the case of the adult model, since, unlike the
adult’s, the hands of the infants would remain free to
act. Therefore, while the modelled ‘head-on-box’ action
may have seemed rational for the adult to perform, in
case of the infants it would cease to be the most rational
alternative available. For them there would clearly be a
simpler and more rational means accessible in the form
of the familiar and well-practiced ‘hand-on-box’ action.

Therefore, on the basis of the ‘principle of rational
action’ we would expect that in this situation infants
would not faithfully imitate the adult’s ‘head-on-box’
action, but rather they would be more likely to touch the
box with their hands: an action that is more rational
given the constraints of their own situation.
In sum: our ‘rational imitation’ account outlined
above differs from Meltzoff’s and Tomasello’s
‘imitative learning’ accounts in two significant respects.
First, the ‘imitative learning’ model, as it stands,
predicts that infants would imitate the particular means
modelled by an adult irrespective of whether the
specific action is seen as the most rational alternative to
the goal or not (cf. Nagell, Olguin, & Tomasello, 1993).
In contrast, our ‘rational imitation’ account emphasizes
that infants do not imitate faithfully or automatically an
adult model’s goal-directed action. Rather, they would
first evaluate the modelled behaviour from the point of
view of the ‘principle of rational action’ and imitate it
only if they managed to ‘rationalize’ it as the most
efficient alternative to the goal available given the
constraints of the particular situation. Second, the
‘rational imitation’ model predicts that infants will
imitate the model’s means that was judged to be
rational only if the situational constraints of the adult
model are similar to those of the infants. If the
situational constraints are different, however, and there
is a more rational alternative available to the infant that
was not available to the model, infants are expected to
perform this more rational means rather than imitating
faithfully and automatically the specific action
modelled by the adult.
We have modified the original Meltzoff (1988)
situation in such a way that would allow us to test the
above predictions.

Method
Subjects
We tested 30 14-month-old infants (+/- 1 week) in two
experimental conditions. Three babies were dropped
because they were not brought back for the second test,
so overall we report data from 27 infants.

experimenter modelled the target act three times
making sure that the infant paid attention.
The ‘Hands free’ condition (n=13) was a slightly
modified1 version of Meltzoff’s (1988) original study.
In this condition, even though the model’s hands were
visibly free, she did not use them. Instead, by leaning
forward from the waist she touched the lamp on the box
with her forehead (‘head-on-box’ action) and the lamp
lit up. Note that in this situation the actor’s reason for
not using his free hands to touch the box is not directly
demonstrated: it is only implied by her choice to use her
head rather than her hand to light up the lamp.
In the ‘Hands occupied’ condition (n=14), before
presenting the ‘head-on-lamp’ action the model,
pretending to be freezing, told another experimenter
that “she was cold and would like to have her blanket”.
After it was handed over to her, she wrapped it around
her shoulders and held it tightly with both hands. (In the
‘Hands free’ condition the model also asked for her
blanket, but then she put the blanket around her
shoulders leaving her hands visibly free in front of her.)
Note that in this condition the relevant situational
constraints are different in the case of the model than in
the case of the infant: while the hands of the adult were
occupied, the hands of the infant were free. In both
conditions the model went on to perform the very same
‘head-on-box’ action lighting the lamp by touching it
with her forehead. (She repeated this three times.)
The test phase: Infants returned a week later. Sitting
in their mother’s lap they were allowed to act on the
‘magic lamp’ themselves. The model sat on the other
side of the table as before. The infants actions were
videotaped from behind a one-way mirror.

Data analysis and scoring
The video records of the test phase were scored by two
independent observers who were uninformed as to
which of the two conditions the subject belonged to. If
the infant attempted to imitate the ‘head-on-box’ target
action within a 20 sec time window s/he received 1
point, if s/he did not, s/he got 0 point. An attempt was
defined as either touching the lamp with the head, or
leaning forward in such a way that the subject’s head
approached the lamp within 10 cm or less (this is
1

Procedure
The infants were brought to our lab twice with a oneweek delay in between. On the first visit infants were
seated in their mother’s lap in front of a table that had 3
toy objects covered with cloths. (Here we are reporting
data only for the ‘magic box’ object.) The experimenter
sat at the other side of the table, while the infants were
seated about one meter away from the table so that they
could not reach the toys. The sessions were video taped
from behind a one-way mirror. On the first visit the

Our ‘magic box’ was slightly different from the one used by
Meltzoff (1988) in that we have mounted a circular
translucent table lamp on top of the box that could be
activated by touch (see Figure 1). We have used this
arrangement because in a pilot study identical to Meltzoff’s
experiment we noticed that the head and hair of the adult
model often blocked the light effect from the infants when she
touched the surface of the box with her forehead leaning over
it. As a result some of the infants seemed to notice the light
effect (showing surprise) only when they themselves touched
the box during their second visit. By mounting the circular
touch-sensitive table lamp on the box the resulting light effect
was clearly visible to all infants already during the modeled
action.

identical to Meltzoff’s (1988) original criterion). The
observers also coded the number of ‘hand-on-box’
actions and the number of times infants pointed to the
model within the 20 sec time window. There was a 97%
agreement between the two independent coders.

Results
To test our hypothesis that the different situational
constraints on action in the two conditions influence the
likelihood of the target action being imitated, we first
compared the relative amount of imitated ‘head-on-box’
target acts in the two conditions. As Figure 2 shows, the
two conditions differed significantly in this respect (
Chi-square = 6.238 (df=1) p<.013). In the ‘Hands free’
condition 75% of the infants imitated the modelled
‘head-on-lamp’ action replicating Meltzoff’s original
result (he found 67% imitation). In contrast, when the
model’s hands were occupied (‘Hands occupied’
condition), only 27% of infants imitated the target act.
The rest of the infants tried to light the lamp by
touching it with their hands only.
Furthermore, there was a clear indication that the
majority of infants who did not imitate the target act in
the ‘Hands occupied’ condition did not fail to do so
because they forgot the target act after the one week
delay.

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Hands Occupied
Head action

Pointing at model

Figure 3a: Pointing to the model

Figure 3b: Touching with hand
Moreover, the large majority of infants (9 out of 12)
who re-enacted the modelled action, performed the
‘hand-on-box’ action before imitating the ‘head-onbox’ action (Figure 4). Finally, in all cases where a
‘hand-on-box’ action was performed before the ‘headon-box’ action, the hand-on-box’ action was successful
in bringing about the goal (i.e. the light was
illuminated).

Hands Free
Hand action only

Figure 2:The amount of head and other types of actions
in the two conditions
This is shown by the fact that 6 out of the 11 subjects
(55%) not imitating the target act in this group
produced a playful pointing gesture, pointing to the
model (often smiling or giggling) (Figure 3a). This
clearly indicates that they did recall the salient ‘headon-box’ action of the model. In spite of this, however,
they chose not to imitate, but proceeded to make the
lamp light up by touching it with their hand (Figure 3b):
a means that was simpler and more rational alternativa
in their situation than the novel target act modelled.
Furthermore, we found that all subjects in both
conditions did produce at least once the ‘hand-on-box’
action within the 20 sec time window. In fact, the
‘hand-on-box’ action was typically performed more
than once (Mean=2.1) by most subjects.

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Hands Occupied
Hand action first

Hands Free
Head action first

Figure 4: Relative order of hand action vs. head action
among imitators

Discussion
The results provide support for the assumptions of the
‘rational imitation’ account. The differential degree of
imitating the same target act found in the two
conditions demonstrates that novel goal-directed actions
modelled by an adult are not automatically imitated by
14-month-olds. The likelihood of reenacting a novel
means observed was clearly a function of the infants’

interpretation of the rationality of the instrumental act
in relation to the situational constraints on the actor’s
possible actions. We found that infants only imitated
the ‘head-on-box’ action, if the contextual constraints
of the adult’s situation were the same as those of the
infants themselves (‘Hands free’ condition). In this case
75% of the infants imitated the novel action, replicating
Meltzoff’s (1988) original finding. In contrast, when the
model’s hands were occupied (‘Hands occupied’
condition), the very same ‘head-on-box’ target act was
imitated only by 27% of the infants. Given that their
own hands were free to act, 73% of the 14-month-olds
chose not to imitate the model in this condition, but
performed a more rational alternative action available to
them: they simply touched the lamp with their hand
(Figure 3b).
We find especially informative the fact that in the
‘Hands occupied’ condition, in which the majority
(73%) of the infants did not imitate the novel ‘head-onbox’ action, more than half of the non-imitating
subjects pointed at the model while showing
amusement (Figure 3a). This pointing gesture clearly
indicates that after a week delay these infants
successfully recalled the modelled ‘head-on-box’
action. Nevertheless, they chose to perform the (nonmodelled) ‘hand-on-box’ action that was seen as a more
rational means available to them in their own situation.
But why did the majority of infants reenact the novel
‘head-on-box- action after having succeeded in lighting
up the lamp by simply pushing it with their hands
(Figure 4)? One possibility is that this imitative act
served a communicative function: maybe to remind the
model after a week that they remembered his funny
action or to make him repeat his act. Alternatively, the
reenactment may have served an epistemic function.
Our data suggest that the infants inferred from seeing
the model’s free hands that ‘there must be some reason’
behind his choice to use his head instead of his hands to
touch the box. Therefore, they may have expected the
‘head-on-box’ action to be in some (yet unknown) ways
more advantageous. So maybe they reenacted the novel
head action to discover the ‘reason’ behind the model’s
choice by experiencing the potential differences
between the two alternative means. (We are currently
running studies to test these hypotheses.)
To conclude:
1. The results successfully extend our ’naive theory
of rational action’ from the domain of action
interpretation to the domain of action production and
imitative learning.
2. We have demonstrated that evaluating the
rationality of intentional action in relation to visible
goals and situational constraints takes place at two
different levels: a) during interpreting goal-directed
actions performed by others (ENCODING), and b)
during selecting an appropriate motor response to
achieve the same goal by the self (RESPONSE
GENERATION).

3. Our findings show that re-enactment of a modelled
goal-directed action is not an automatic process
triggered by identification with a human actor. While
identification may be involved in imitation, it is not
sufficient to account for the differential pattern of reenactment in our two conditions.
4. Instead, re-enactment of intentional action is a
selective interpretative process driven by the inferential
principle of rational action. Re-enactment takes place
only a) if the action is judged as rational given the
situational constraints of the model, and b) if the action
is judged as potentially more rational than other
available alternatives given the situational constraints of
the infant herself.

Acknowledgements
This research was carried out as part of an ongoing
cooperation between the Institute for Psychology of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences and the Max Planck
Institute for Psychological Research in Munich.

References
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (1998). The teleological
origins of mentalistic action explanations: A
developmental hypothesis. Developmental Science, 1,
255-259.
Csibra, G., Gergely, G, Bíró, S., Koós, O., &
Brockbank, M. (1999). Goal attribution without
agency cues: the perception of 'pure reason' in
infancy. Cognition, 72, 237-267.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (1997). Teleological
reasoning in infancy: The infant's naive theory of
rational action. A reply to Premack and Premack.
Cognition, 63, 227-233.
Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Bíró, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age.
Cognition, 56, 165-193.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1988). Infant imitation after a 1-weekdelay: Long term memory for novel acts and multiple
stimuli. Developmental Psychology, 24, 470-476.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). What infant memory tells us
About infantile amnesia: Long term recall and
deferred Imitation. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 59, 497-515.
Nagell, K., Olguin, K., & Tomasello, M. (1993).
Processes of social learning in the tool use of
chimpenzees (Pan troglodytes) and human children
(Homo sapiens). Journal of Comparative Psychology,
107, 174-186.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The Cultural Origins of Human
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press

