UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Real Wordl Constraints on the Mental Lexicon: Assimilation, the Speech Lexicon and the
Information Structure of Spanish Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rs7g5vr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Tamariz, Monica
Shillcock, Richard C.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Real World Constraints on the Mental Lexicon: Assimilation, the Speech
Lexicon and the Information Structure of Spanish Words
Monica Tamariz (monica@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Department of Linguistics, AFB, 40 George Square
Edinburgh EH8 9LL, UK

Richard C. Shillcock (rcs@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive Science, 2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK

Abstract
This paper focuses on the optimum use of
representational space by words in speech and in the
mental lexicon. In order to do this we draw the concept
of entropy from information theory and use it to plot the
information contour of words. We compare different
representations of Spanish speech: a citation vs. a fastspeech transcription of a speech corpus and a dictionary
lexicon vs. a speech lexicon. We also compare the
information profiles yielded by the speech corpus vs. that
of the speech lexicon in order to contrast the
representation of words over two representational spaces:
time and storage space in the brain. Finally we discuss
the implications for the mental lexicon and interpret the
analyses we present as evidence for a version of
Butterworth’s (1983) Full Listing Hypothesis.

Introduction
In this paper we focus on the optimum use of
representational space by words over time (the
sequence of sounds in speech) and over space (the
storage site of the mental lexicon in the brain). We draw
the concept of entropy from information theory and
propose that it can be used to study the information
structure of the set of words uttered in speech and of
those stored in the mental lexicon in the face of the
constraints of communication and of storage,
respectively, in a potentially noisy medium.
We have two representational spaces for words: time
and storage space. Further, we will consider the
phonology and morphology of word systems. Our data
sets are phonetic representations of words, and recent
research demonstrates that information on the
probabilistic distribution of phonemes in words is used
in language processing (see Frisch, Large & Pisoni,
2000 for review). Morphology is involved in this
research because we will be comparing groups of words
with different inflectional and derivational features. We
will initially assume the Full Listing Hypothesis

(Butterworth, 1983): every word-form, including
inflected and derived forms, is explicitly listed in the
mental lexicon.
Shillcock, Hicks, Cairns, Chater and Levy (1995)
suggest the general principle of the presentation of
information in the brain that information should be
spread as evenly as possible over time or over the
representational space. Therefore, if the entropy of the
mental lexicon is to be maximized so that the storage
over a limited space is most efficient, then all the
phonemes will tend to occur as evenly as possible in
each segment position of the word. The phonology of
each individual word, because it will have an effect on
the entropy of the system, affects whether it is likely to
become part of the mental lexicon.
Shillcock et al. stated that “the optimum contour
across the phonological information in a spoken word is
flat; fast-speech processes cause the information
contour to become more level”. We generalize this
notion and propose the Levelling Effect of Realistic
Representations (LERR): processes that make the
representation of words more accurate will flatten the
information profiles.
In order to test this, we will use Spanish word
systems to calculate the slope and overall level of
entropy of a citation (idealized pronunciation of the
word in isolation) transcription and of a fast-speech
(more realistic) transcription and of a dictionary lexicon
and the speech lexicon. Our prediction is that the
second system in each comparison should yield flatter
information contours. We also compare a representation
of words over time and another one over storage space a speech corpus and the speech lexicon.

Entropy
We will use the concept of entropy in the context of
information theory (Shannon, 1948), also employed in
speech recognition studies (e.g. Yannakoudakis &
Hutton, 1992). Entropy H is defined for a finite scheme

(i.e., a set of events such that one and only one must
occur in each instance, together with the probability of
them occurring) as a reasonable measure of the
uncertainty or the information that each instance
carries. E.g. the finite scheme formed by the possible
outcomes when throwing a dice has maximum entropy:
each side of the dice has 1/6 probability of occurring
and it is very difficult to predict what the outcome will
be. A loaded dice, on the other hand, has an unequal
probability distribution, and the outcome is less
uncertain. In this research, the possible events are the
phonemes and allophones, and for each word only one
of them can occur at each segment position.
For probabilities (p1, p2, p3...pn):
H = - Σ (pi · log pi)
The relative entropy Hrel is the measured entropy
divided by the maximum entropy Hmax, which is the
entropy when the probabilities of each event occurring
are equal and the uncertainty is maximized. Using Hrel
allows us to compare entropies from systems with a
different number of events (in this case, a system with
30 phonemes with another one with 50).
Hmax = log n
Hrel = H / Hmax
Redundancy R is a measure of the constraints on the
choices. When redundancy is high, the system is highly
organized, and more predictable, i.e. some choices are
more likely than others, as in the case of the loaded
dice.
R = 1 - Hrel
In order to obtain the information profiles of words
(see Figure 1), the entropy was calculated separately for
each segment position in a set of left-justified words of
equal length, i.e., for the first phoneme in the words, the
second phoneme etc.






























+







!

"



"

#

$

%

&

'

(

)

*

+

"

)

"



(-m)=0.0256. The flatness of the slope refers literally to
how horizontal the trendline is.

Transcriptions
We have restricted ourselves to phonemic
representations of word and will not report data
concerning the distributions of phonemic features. We
have used citation transcription rules (the idealised
pronunciation of the isolated word) and fast-speech
rules (an attempt to represent normal speech more
realistically). Both citation and fast-speech rules were
applied uniformly to the whole data sets. For the
citation transcription we used 29 phonemes including 5
stressed vowels; for the fast-speech transcription we
used 50 phonemes and allophones:
Citation transcription: Vowels: /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/, /á/,
/é/, /í/, /ó/, /ú/. Consonants: /p/, /b/, /t/, /d/, /k/, /g/, /m/,
/n/, / /, / /, /r/, /f/, / /, /s/, / /, / /, /l/, / /, / /.
Fast-speech transcription: The above plus semivowel
/i/, /u/, voiced approximants / /, / /, / /, voiceless
approximants / /, / /, / /, labiodental /m/, dental /n/ and
/l/, palatalised /n/ and /l/, velarized /n/, /z/, dental voiced
/s/, dental /s/, fricative / /, voiced / / and a silenced
consonant / . The transcription was made following
the rules for consonant interactions, such as feature
assimilation, set out by Rios Mestre (1999, chapter 5).
Diphthongs were treated as two separate segments, as is
usual in Spanish. Rules to mark stressed vowels were
applied to all but monosyllabic words without an
orthographic accent. For the corpus, the whole text was
used, including repetitions and false starts of words.
After deleting all the tags, the corpus was divided into
chunks separated by pauses (change of speaker, comma,
full stop, or pause marked in the transcription). The
resulting text was transcribed automatically word by
word (orthographic forms being replaced by phonetic
forms) and then word boundary effects were introduced
within the chunks, following the same rules as for the
intra-word transcription.


























(

"



Data
,

"



"

%



"

$

+

*

#

,

.



/

0

$

1

/















%







Figure 1: Information profile of 7-segment words from
the citation transcription of the speech corpus.
The information profile of the word was measured as
the linear trendline of these individual segment
entropies. The slope (m) (multiplied by (-1)) of these
trendlines and the mean relative entropy for each word
length are shown in the figures below. E.g. In Figure 1,

We used these three sets of data:
The speech corpus: a 707,000 word Spanish speech
corpus, including repetitions and unfinished words.
This corpus was developed by Marcos Marín of the
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid in 1992 and contains
transcribed speech from a wide range of registers and
fields, from everyday conversation to academic talks
and political speeches.
The dictionary lexicon: a 28,000 word Spanish word
lexicon (the Spanish headword list of the Harrap
Compact Spanish Dictionary, excluding abbreviations).
This list does not include inflections, but approximately
40% of the words are derived words (we take the
infinitive of verbs and the simple form of the noun as

the basic forms). This word system could represent a
mental lexicon where that only word stems are listed
and where inflected words are assembled during speech
production.
The speech lexicon: the 42,000 word types found in
the corpus. Some 80% of these types were derived and
inflected words. We take this word system to be the
most realistic representation of the mental lexicon,
assuming Butterworth (1983)’s Full Listing Hypothesis,
where all the wordforms are individually represented in
the mental lexicon.
The dictionary lexicon and the speech lexicon share
only ~30% of the words. The remaining ~70% of the
words in the dictionary lexicon are mostly low
frequency words which do not appear in our sample of
speech. The new ~70% in the speech lexicon are verbal
inflections (~35%), plurals and feminine inflections
(~25%), some derived words absent from the dictionary
lexicon (~4%), unfinished or mispronounced words
(~4%) and proper nouns (~2%).
From these data, we used 4, 5, 6 and 7-segment
transcriptions. Words were separated by length in order
to see a clearer picture of the information profiles,
especially as far as the word-ending contribution is
concerned. Considering that the information profiles of
Spanish words follows the same pattern as those of
English words as seen in Shillcock et al. (1995), we can
extend research in English to Spanish words. In
English, word recognition typically occurs before the
end of the word is uttered (Marslen-Wilson & Tyler,
1980), and information about word-length is typically
available once the nucleus is being processed
(Grosjean, 1985). It is, therefore, legitimate to assume
that recognition processes are restricting their activities
to the subset of words in the lexicon that match the
word being uttered both in terms of initial segments and
approximate overall length. The particular word lengths
were chosen because the structure of shorter words is
simpler, and the effects are less likely to be obscured by
greater variation in the internal structure of each wordlength group. These word lengths are equidistant from
the modes of the word-length distribution of the three
data sets (lexicon: mode = 8, speech lexicon: mode = 7
and speech corpus: modes = 2, 4 – the mode of the
normal distribution is 4, but the proportion of 2segment words is even higher, accounting for 32% of
all tokens). The sum of these four word lengths
accounts for 41% of the dictionary lexicon, 45% of the
speech lexicon and 37% of the speech corpus.

corpus transcribed with citation rules and with fastspeech rules.
As predicted by the LERR principle, Figure 2
confirms that this is also the case for Spanish. The
information profile is consistently flatter for the more
realistic fast-speech transcriptions in all word lengths.
Note that in the figure, a higher value of (–m) indicates

The effect of the transcription

Figure 3 shows how the overall entropy is lower for
the fast-speech transcription: when we introduce the
allophones and the assimilation rules, the system
becomes more redundant and thus, more predictable.

Shillcock et al. (1995) showed that fast-speech
processes cause the information contour to become
more level for English, German, Welsh, Irish and
Portuguese. Here we compare the slope of the
information profiles of 4-7 segment words from the

0.07
Citation
0.06

Fast-speech

slope (-m)

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
4

5
6
w ord length

7

a steeper profile.
Figure 2: Slopes of the information profiles of the
citation and the fast-speech transcriptions applied to the
corpus, over the four word lengths.

Citation
Fast-speech
0.8

mean Hrel

0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
4

5
6
w ord length

7

Figure 3: Mean relative entropy of the citation and fastspeech transcriptions over the four word lengths.

Some current models of lexical access propose two
parallel word recognition routes, a whole-word route
and a morpheme-based one (e.g. Wurm (1997) for
English; Colé, Segui & Taft (1997) for French; Laine,
Vainio & Hyona (1999) for Finnish). Following this
hypothesis, the full forms of words need to be stored in
the mental lexicon (cf. Butterworth, 1983). It is
relevant, then, to study the behaviour of the set of all
word types, including derived and inflected words, that
appear in speech: the speech lexicon.
We have seen that fast-speech transcriptions yield
flatter information contours than citation transcriptions,
so we will use the fast-speech transcriptions of the
speech lexicon, the lexicon and the corpus.
Comparing the slopes of the information profiles of
the speech lexicon on the one hand and the dictionary
lexicon and the corpus on the other hand will help
characterize the active mental lexicon.

possible. The results from both the slopes and the
entropy levels support the Full Listing Hypothesis that
all wordforms, particularly inflected forms, are listed in
the mental lexicon – the system that includes all
wordforms (the speech lexicon) could be stored more
efficiently over a limited representational space.

Dict. Lex
Speech Lex

0.8
mean rel. entropy

The Speech Lexicon

0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6

Speech lexicon vs. dictionary lexicon

4

The speech lexicon contains inflected and derived
forms, and does not contain the more obscure words
that can be found in the dictionary. The LERR principle
that data that are closer to real speech should produce
flatter information contours is confirmed in Figure 4,
where we see that the values of the slope of the
information profile of the speech lexicon are lower than
those of the dictionary lexicon.

0.07

Dict. Lex

0.06

Speech Lex

slope (-m)

0.05

5
6
w ord length

7

Figure 5: Mean relative entropy of the dictionary
lexicon and the speech lexicon over the four word
lengths.

Speech lexicon vs. corpus
The fact that entropy and redundancy statistics obtained
from a lexicon are different from those obtained from a
corpus has been noted by Yannakoudakis and
Angelidakis (1988). Here we are comparing the word
tokens with the word types in a speech corpus. Figures
6 and 7 show that the speech lexicon has consistently
flatter slopes and higher entropy levels than the corpus.

0.04
0.03

Corpus
Speech Lex

0.07

0.02

0.06

0
4

5
6
w ord length

7

Figure 4: Slopes of the information profiles of the
dictionary lexicon and the speech lexicon over the four
word lengths.

slope (-m)

0.01

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
4

Figure 5 shows that the overall entropy level is higher
for the speech lexicon. This means that the speech
lexicon is less redundant than the dictionary lexicon.
The representational space is now a limited amount of
memory storage space in the brain, and for maximal
efficiency redundancy has to be reduced as much as

5
6
word length

7

Figure 6: Slopes of the information profiles of the
corpus and the speech lexicon across the four word
lengths.

We are comparing two representational spaces:
words in the brain are constrained by a limited space
and words uttered over time are constrained by the
efficiency of communication. We saw in the last section
that the flat slopes and high entropy levels of the speech
lexicon information profiles are best suited to enhance
storage efficiency. Slopes in the corpus are relatively
flat, but still steeper than those of the speech lexicon.
This may reflect the fact that there are other factors
affecting the information contour of words in speech,
such the need to encode cues to lexical segmentation
(signals that indicate where words begin and end).
These other factors may be interacting with the
optimization of communication.

Corpus
Speech Lex

mean rel. entropy

0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
4

5
6
w ord length

7

Figure 7: Mean relative entropy of the corpus and the
speech lexicon across the four word lengths.
The corpus presents lower entropy levels than the
speech lexicon. Speech over time is not constrained by
space limitations, but rather by the need to
communicate efficiently. The higher redundancy means
that this system reduces the uncertainty and is indeed
better for communication.

Discussion
The present study points in the direction of the LERR
principle that the more realistic data - the fast-speech
transcription and the speech lexicon - produce flatter
information profiles.
The flatter profile of the fast-speech transcription can
be partly explained in terms of the Markedness
Ordering Principle (Shillcock et al., 1995) that when
consonant
interactions
introduce
phonological
ambiguity, the ambiguity introduced is always in the
direction of a less frequent phoneme. As for the
comparison between lexicons, let us remember that the
70% of words in the speech lexicon that do not appear
in the dictionary lexicon are mostly inflected words,

and the 70% of words in the dictionary lexicon not
present in the speech lexicon are mainly low-frequency
words. The flatter profile of the speech lexicon is due to
the fact that the inflected words (which are derived
from one third of the dictionary lexicon words) yield a
flatter profile than the low-frequency dominated group.
This suggests that inflected words are included in the
mental lexicon, and so it supports the Full Listing
Hypothesis.
Additionally, the overall level of entropy and
redundancy gives us an insight into the degree of
complexity of a system. Highly organized systems will
show low entropy and high redundancy. Fast-speech
rules make the system more redundant than the citation
rules. This higher predictability helps to deal with the
loss of information produced by noise and thus enhance
communication. The speech lexicon is less redundant
than the dictionary lexicon. Here again, the higher
entropy must be attributable to the fact that the
phonemes in inflected forms are more evenly
distributed over the phonological space than the more
obscure words present in the dictionary lexicon.
The comparison between the corpus and the speech
lexicon shows the features of the representation that has
evolved to enhance communication and storage,
respectively. Both systems are “realistic”, and indeed
both show relatively flat information contours, but more
so the speech lexicon, suggesting that communication
has other constraints that interact with this measure,
such as word-boundary recognition. This is true
particularly for shorter words. The fact that the corpus
is markedly more redundant than the speech lexicon is
only to be expected, since it reflects the added
complexity of different word-frequencies.
In conclusion, we have shown that it is possible to
use psychological theories of the mental lexicon and
spoken word recognition to make testable predictions
concerning distributional information in large samples
of language, and, conversely, that data from
information distribution may potentially falsify
particular aspects of those psychological theories. Our
current conclusions from the analyses of Spanish favour
versions of Butterworth's original Full Listing
Hypothesis, in which all the wordforms encountered in
speech are individually stored.

Acknowledgments
This research has benefited from the support of EPSRC
studentship award nr. 00304518.

References
Butterworth, B. (1983). Lexical representation. In B.
Butterworth (Ed.), Development, writing and other
language processes, Vol. 2, London: Academic Press.

Colé, P., Segui, J., & Taft, M. (1997, Words and
morphemes as units for lexical access, Journal of
memory and language, 37 (3), 312-330.
Frisch, S. A., Large, N. R. & Pisoni, D. B. (2000).
Perception of wordlikeness: Effects of segment
probability and length on the processing of nonwords,
Journal of Memory and Language, 42 (3), 481-496.
Grosjean, F. (1985). The recognition of words after
their acoustic offset: Evidence and implications.
Perception and Psychophysics, 38, 299-310.
Laine M., Vainio, S., & Hyona, J. (1999). Lexical
access routes to nouns in a morphologically rich
language, Journal of memory and language, 40 (1),
109-135.
Marcos Marin, F. (1992). Corpus oral de referencia del
español, Madrid: UAM.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The
temporal structure of spoken language understanding,
Cognition, 8, 1-71.
Ríos Mestre, A. (1999). La transcripción fonética
automática del diccionario electrónico de formas
simples flexivas del español: estudio fonológico en el
léxico, Estudios de Lingüística Española, 4.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of
communication, Bell System Technology Journal, 27
(July), 379-423 and (October), 623-656.
Shillcock, R.C., Hicks, J., Cairns, P., Chater, N., &
Levy, J. P. (1995). Phonological reduction,
assimilation, intra-word information structure, and
the evolution of the lexicon of English: Why fast
speech isn’t confusing. Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 233-238), Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Yannakoudakis, E. J. & Hutton, P. J. (1992). An
assessment of N-phoneme statistics in phoneme
guessing algorithms which aim to incorporate
phonotactic constraints, Speech communcation, 11,
581-602.
Yannakoudakis, E. J. & Angelidakis, G. (1988). An
insight into the entropy and redundancy of the
English dictionary, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 10 (6), 960-970.
Wurm L. H. (1997). Auditory processing of prefixed
English
words
is
both
continuous
and
decompositional, Journal of memory and language,
37 (3), 438-461.

