UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Referential Form, Word Duration, and Modeling the Listener in Spoken Dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6v9797v2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Bard, E.G.
Aylett, M.P.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Referential Form, Word Duration, and Modeling the Listener in Spoken
Dialogue
E. G. Bard (ellen@ling.ed.ac.uk)
HCRC and Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, Adam Ferguson Building, University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9LL, U.K

M. P. Aylett (matthewa@cstr.ed.ac.uk)
HCRC and Rhetorical Systems, 2 Buccleuch Place, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, U.K

Abstract
Referring expressions are thought to be tailored to the
needs of the listener, even when those needs might be
costly to assess, but tests of this claim seldom
manipulate listener’s and speaker’s knowledge
independently. The design of the HCRC Map Task
enables us to do so. We examine two ‘tailoring’
changes in repeated mentions of landmark names: faster
articulation and simplified referring expressions.
Articulation results replicate Bard et al. (2000),
depending only on what the speaker has heard. Change
between mentions was no greater when it could be
inferred that the listener could see the named item (Expt
1), and no less when the listener explicitly denied
ability to do so (Expt 2). Word duration fell for speakerGiven listener-New items (Expt 3). Reduction was
unaffected by the repeater’s ability to see the mentioned
landmark (Expt 4). In contrast, referential form was
more sensitive to both listener- (Expt 3) and speakerknowledge (Expt 4). The results conform most closely
to a Dual Process model: fast, automatic, processes let
the speaker-knowledge prime word articulation, while
costly assessments of listener-knowledge influence only
referential form.

Introduction
Speakers are said to design their utterances to suit
the needs of their listeners, insofar as those needs can
be known (Ariel, 1990; Clark & Marshall, 1981;
Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993; Lindblom,
1990). Certainly, there is variation in form. Clarity of
pronunciation varies with predictability from local
context (Hunnicutt, 1985; Lieberman, 1963) and with
repeated mention (Fowler & Housum, 1987).
Referential forms are syntactically simpler the more
readily interpreted or ‘accessible’ their antecedents,
are (a blacksmith’s cottage v it) (Ariel, 1990, Fowler,
Levy, & Brown, 1997; Gundel, et al., 1993; Vonk,
Hustinx, & Simmons, 1992). Yet maintaining an
incrementally updated model of what the listener
knows, what is established common ground, and what
the listener needs to know is a considerable cognitive
task. Because speaker’s and listener’s knowledge

overlap and because it may be impossible to assess the
latter accurately, speakers may default to an account of
their own knowledge as a proxy for the listener’s
(Clark & Marshall, 1981). In fact, many studies simply
assume that the two are the same: they manipulate the
speaker’s
knowledge
without
independently
manipulating the listener’s (see Keysar, 1997).
This paper compares two versions of the hypothesis
that referring expressions are genuinely tailored to the
addressee. One deals with the articulation of individual
words, the other with the syntactic form of referring
expressions. Under current models of language
production, NP structure and articulation are generated
within units of different sizes, intonational or syntactic
phrases on the one hand and phonological words,
lexical words, or syllables on the other (Levelt &
Wheeldon, 1994; Smith & Wheeldon, 1999; Wheeldon
& Lahiri, 1997). Moreover, speech appears to be
produced in a cascade, with a sequence of smaller
units being prepared for articulation even as the
succeeding larger unit is being designed. Thus,
incrementally updating a listener model in order to
articulate each phonological word appropriately would
impose a much heavier computational burden than
updating it phrase by phrase. Making both kinds of
update for the processes running in parallel would be
even more demanding, with the listener model
operating both in the state appropriate to the most
recently produced word and in the state created by the
most recently planned phrase.
We will first develop existing hypotheses about how
speakers model listeners while planning and producing
speech. Then we will report four studies which test
these hypotheses on materials from a single corpus.
They follow the comparisons made by Bard et al.
(2000) on a psychological measure of clarity, the
intelligibility to naïve listeners (recognition rate) of a
balanced sample of excised spoken words. The present
paper reports a phonetic measure of clarity (word
duration), and a syntactic measure of referential form
for all suitable cases in a dialogue corpus. Finally, we
will discuss the implications of the comparison.

Modeling Listeners while Speaking
Existing accounts of tailoring to listeners’ needs make
different computational demands on speakers. Where
they are not designed with a view to on-line
processing, we will attempt to interpret their
implications.
Lindblom’s H-and-H Hypothesis (1990) makes the
heaviest computatonal demands. It posits that speakers
adjust the articulation of spoken words to the
knowledge which the listener can currently recruit to
decoding the speech signal: speakers hyper-articulate
when listeners lack such auxiliary information and
hypo-articulate when redundancy is high. More
redundant linguistic environments do contain word
tokens articulated with greater speed and less precision
(Bard & Anderson, 1983, 1994; Fowler & Housum,
1987; Hunnicutt, 1985; Lieberman, 1963; Samuel &
Troicki, 1998). The question is whether this
relationship depends on the speaker's consulting an upto-date model of the listener’s current knowledge each
time s/he prepares the prosodic character of a
phonological word or the articulation of its syllables.
Though H-and-H does not preclude defaulting to
speaker-knowledge, it is framed in terms of genuine
listener-knowledge and implies that speakers should
observe listeners continuously for signs of
misunderstanding
or
disagreement.
Wherever
speaker’s and listener’s knowledge differ, the latter
should take precedence.
In contrast, Brown and Dell (1987) propose a
modular division between the initial formulation of
utterances and the revision of output which does not
adequately convey the intended concepts. The
listener's knowledge is implicated only in revision
(Dell & Brown, 1991, pp. 119-120). Called the
Monitor and Adjust Hypothesis (Horton & Keysar,
1996), this model defaults to speaker-knowledge first
and pays later – if necessary. As originally formulated,
Monitor and Adjust does not explain how the hitherto
speaker-driven processes assess the adequacy of an
utterance from the listener’s point of view. We assume
that each interlocutor’s knowledge includes a record of
what the other has actually said. Listeners' occasional
explicit feedback, a minimal listener model, could
therefore influence a modular system which revises
inadequate utterances. Under this Extended Monitor
and Adjust Hypothesis, post-feedback utterances could
reflect any listener-knowledge which the feedback has
conveyed. Otherwise, listener-knowledge should be
irrelevant to production.
The third proposal deals with co-presence,
characteristics of listeners which affect likely overlap
with speakers’ own knowledge (Brennan & Clark,
1996; Fussell & Krauss, 1992; Isaacs & Clark, 1987;
Schober, 1993). The manifestations of co-presence in
the dialogue literature are many, but the notion was

originally used to reduce the computation which a
speaker must perform to determine the unknown
component of mutual knowledge, i.e. what the listener
knows. Under this heading, Clark & Marshall (1981)
list shared community membership, physical copresence of interlocutors and the objects under
discussion, and knowledge both of the dialogue and of
a suitable scenario. Since much of co-presence is longlasting, it can reduce both the depth and the frequency
of listener modeling. To exploit these economies,
speakers should attend to evidence for and against copresence, and they should maintain defaults for some
undefined time after positive evidence. We will call
this the Co-presence Default Hypothesis.
Finally, Bard et al. (2000) develop a suggestion of
Brown and Dell (1987) which we will call the Dual
Process Hypothesis. It proposes a division between
fast, automatic processes, which have no
computational cost, and slower, more costly processes
requiring inference or attention. The former include
priming. (Balota, Boland, & Shields, 1989; Mitchell &
Brown, 1988), an effect of the speaker’s own recent
experience. The latter include the kind of complex
reasoning usually implicated in constructing a model
of the listener. In competition with listener-modelling
are the computations which support planning a
dialogue or tracking a shared task. When there is
competition for time and attention, (Horton & Keysar,
1996), the inferential processes may suffer, leaving the
speaker with only cost-free defaults in the form of his
or her own knowledge.

Studies of Intelligibility and Referring
Expression
Givenness and Referring Expressions
To test these hypotheses, we made use of two effects
of Given status broadly defined. First, spoken words
introducing New items are longer and clearer than
those in repeated mentions (Fowler & Housum, 1987)
but only when the two tokens are co-referential
(Fowler, 1988; Bard et al, 1991). Initial mentions of
items uttered without visible referents (Prince’s (1981)
'brand new') are also longer and clearer than those with
visible referents (Prince’s (1981) ‘situationally’ Given)
(Bard & Anderson, 1994). Second, referring
expressions simplify with repeated mention (a
blacksmith’s cottage.... it) as their antecedents become
more accessible (Ariel, 1990, Gundel, Hedberg, &
Zacharski, 1993). To compare the two systems, we
used a single coded corpus of spontaneous speech
which made it possible to select items which were
Given to one or both interlocutors on the basis of what
each saw, said, or heard in the dialogue.

Method

Experiment 1: Inferable Listener Knowledge

Materials. Materials came from the HCRC Map Task
Corpus (Anderson et al., 1991), 128 unscripted
dialogues in which pairs of Glasgow University
undergraduates (N = 64) communicated routes defined
by labeled cartoon landmarks on schematic maps of
imaginary locations. Instruction Giver’s and Follower’s
maps for any dialogue matched only in alternate
landmarks. Participants knew that their maps might
differ but not where or how. Players could not see each
other’s maps. Familiarity of participants and ability to
see the interlocutor's face were counterbalanced. Each
participant served as Instruction Giver for the same
route to two different Followers and as Instruction
Follower for two different routes.
Channel per speaker digital recordings were wordsegmented. All words of any expression referring to a
landmark were coded for the landmark, tagged for
part-of-speech, and parsed. Interrupted or disfluent
items were excluded. All remaining expressions
making repeated reference to a landmark and meeting
experiments' design criteria were used. Duration was
measured only if both mentions include the same
words. All repeated mentions were are assessed for
syntactic form.
Dependent Variables
K-reduction. Normalized duration (Campbell & Isard,
1991) assigns each word token a value, k, representing
its position in the expected log length distribution for
words of its dictionary phoneme composition and
stress pattern. K-reduction is the difference between
the k-durations of a read control form and of the
corresponding item in running speech. Faster
articulation with repeated mention would enhance kreduction.
Form of referring expression. The 27 items with
relative clauses in their first mentions were excluded
because of a conflict in coding schemes. All other first
and second mentions of landmarks (N = 1136) were
classed on the scale displayed in Table 1, where ‘0’
indicates least simplified/accessible. Simplification
score should increase with repeated mention.

Design. Experiment 1 compared repeated mentions of
landmarks appearing on both players’ maps in two
conditions, self- and other-repetition. The key to the
design is the fact that a speaker who first mentions a
landmark must have it on his or her own map. Thus, in
an other-repetition the repeater can easily infer that the
introducer can see the landmark. The second token,
therefore, refers to an object which is Given both to the
repeater who has heard it mentioned and can see it, and
to the current listener who has also heard it mentioned,
who can see it, and who has mentioned it. Selfrepetitions differ in two respects: the repeater who
introduced the landmark does not know if the listener
can see it. Thus, the design contrasts a case where the
listener can easily be concluded to have more
knowledge of the referent with one where the listener’s
knowledge is in doubt. The inference about shared
visual resource is both simple and important to the
task. Since visibility can affect clarity of mention (Bard
& Anderson, 1994), tailoring to the listener here should
enhance change across mentions (more k-reduction,
greater simplification of expression) where the listener
has more information - in other-repetition.
Not all hypotheses make this prediction. H-and-H
predicts that articulation will be sensitive to the
listener's needs in this way. Dual Process predicts
instead that any effect will be found in referential
form, which is designed over intervals long enough to
allow for completing the necessary inference.
Copresence predicts effects to what the listener can
see. Monitor and Adjust makes no special prediction
because speakers are not obliged to model listeners
cotinuously to conduct dialogues.
Table 2. Changes with self- v other-repetition:
Measure
Articulation: k-reduction
Form of referring expression

Original
speaker
Self Other
0.127
0.878

0.192
0.745

Table 1. Simplification scale for referring expressions
Code
0
1
2
3

Definition
numeral +
noun sequence
indef art +
def art +
nominal
poss +
possess pro
deictic pro
deictic adj+ nominal
other pro

Example
one mountain
a mountain
the mountain
my one
mine
that
this mountain
it

Results. Table 2 shows similar changes in articulatory
clarity for self- and other-repetition. As in Bard et al.
(2000), words were said faster on repeated mention (F2
(1,691) = 63.75, p < .0001) but with no significant
difference in reduction between the 263 otherrepetitions and the 430 self-repetitions (mention x prior
speaker: n.s.). Form of referring expression simplified
with repeated mention (F2 (1,269) = 177.12, p < .0001)
but again did not distinguish the 90 other-repetitions
from the 430 self-repetitions (mention x prior speaker:

n.s.). Contrary to the H-and-H predictions, the
listener’s experience was not critical. Repetitions of
any mentions of visible objects which the repeater had
heard were treated alike.

Experiment 2: Listener Feedback
Design. Experiment 2 provides a more direct test of
the effects of listener knowledge. When one speaker
introduces an unshared landmark, the listener, who
lacks it, may provide corrective feedback indicating
the discrepancy between the players’ maps.
Sometimes, however, the listener fails to do this. We
compare repeated mentions of the names of unshared
landmarks by the same speaker in these two cases. In
both, the repeater has said and heard the initial
mention and can see the object. When the listener
denies having it, the repeater knows that the listener
has heard the word but cannot see the object.
Otherwise, the repeater cannot tell if s/he can see the
landmark.
Cooperative behavior would yield a more restricted
effect of repetition where the listener has denied
ability to find the object. This comparison is important
for the Extended version of Monitor and Adjust, which
predicts that feedback at least could make a difference
to subsequent mention design. Only Dual Process
holds that pronunciation must and syntactic form may
be designed without regard to the listener’s comments.
Table 3. Changes for repetition with v without
feedback on listener's inability to see the landmark:
Measure
Articulation: k-reduction
Form of referring expression

Visibility to listener
Not
Denied
denied
0.070
0.140
0.470
0.410

of the same shared landmarks in Givers’ two trials with
the same map. In the first trial, the landmark is New for
both players. In the second, it is Given for the speaker,
an Instruction Giver who has mentioned it before,
heard that mention, and seen the landmark. However, it
is New to each successive listener. Adjustment to the
new listener should block any tendency to utter a
second introduction as a shorter, more accessible Given
item.
In fact, this experiment offers the classic test of Copresence. Mentions to new listeners should be geared
to their ignorance. H-and-H posits that listener
modeling will block at least articulatory change.
Monitor and Adjust predicts changes in articulation
and form, because the speaker’s knowledge controls
language production, not the listener’s. Dual Process
predicts a loss of clarity because articulation depends
on the speaker’s previous mention, not on the
listener’s knowledge. Only form of referring
expression may reflect the listener’s ignorance and
remain unchanged.
Results. Table 4 shows that second introductions are
significantly shorter than first for 239 pairs of words
(F2 (1,238) = 12.48; p < .0005). In contrast,
simplification of referring expression does not
significantly increase over 116 pairs of introductory
mentions (F2 (1,115) < 1). Thus, word reduction
appears to reflect the Given status of the item for the
speaker, while referential form reflects the fact that the
freshly introduced landmark is New for each listener.
Greater sensitivity in form of referring expression is
predicted only by the Dual Process Hypothesis.
Table 4. Change with reintroductions to new listeners.
Measure
Articulation: k-reduction
Form of referring expression

Results. Table 3 shows that both articulation and form
of referring expression were unaffected by feedback.
The 73 repetitions with intervening denial and the 122
without abbreviated with repetition significantly and
equally (F2(1,193) = 9.45, p = .0024; mention x denial:
n.s.). The simplification of referring expressions on
second mention was similar for the 44 cases with
intervening denials and the 86 without (F2 (1,128) =
18.49, p < .0001; mention x denial: n.s.). Feedback
that could block defaulting under Monitor and Adjust
does not do so. Only what the repeater has seen, heard,
and said seems to play a role.

Experiment 3: Listener Identity
Design. Experiment 3 examines introductory mentions

Introduction
1
2
0.498
0.558
0.466
0.552

Experiment 4: Speaker Knowledge
Design. In Experiment 4, only other-repetitions were
used, but now the landmark in question was either
shared by both speakers or absent from the repeater’s
map. In both cases, the original introducer, who is the
listener at the point of second mention, can see the
item, has mentioned it, and has heard it mentioned.
The repeater has also heard it mentioned, but has not
mentioned it and may or may not be able to see it.
Because this experiment holds listener knowledge
constant, adjustment to the listener cannot yield any
differences between conditions. If the speaker's visual
surroundings are important, then changes across

repeated mentions will be greater for visible, shared
landmarks than for unshared.
H-and-H predicts no effect of what the speaker can
see. Monitor and Adjust allows the speakers’
knowledge to affect both dependent variables. Dual
Process claims that auditory priming keys articulation
to speaker-knowledge, but also allows for costly
access to additional information, which would permit
effects of speaker-knowledge on referential form.
Table 5. Changes on other-repetition of shared v
unshared landmark names
Measure
Articulation: k-reduction
Form of referring expression

Visibility to speaker
+
–
0.114
0.183
0.745
0.240

Results. Table 5 shows reduction of word tokens with
repeated mention (F2 (1,224) = 12.37, p < .0005) but
.no significant difference between the outcome for the
144 shared, visible landmarks and the 82 unshared
(mention x visibility: n.s.). Referential form, however,
is speaker-centric. Second mentions are more
simplified than first overall (F2 (1,138) = 24.67, p <
.0001), but the change is greater for the 90 shared
items than for the 50 unshared (mention x visibility: F2
(1,138) = 6.48, p < .02).
This outcome is not consistent with adjustment to
listeners alone or with overall use of speakers'knowledge as a proxy for listeners'. It conforms best to
the notion that referential form is sensitive to a wider
range of information than articulatory clarity.

Discussion
The experiments reported here and in Bard et al.
(2000) test for effects on repeated mentions of several
aspects of speaker- or listener-knowledge. Experiment
1 pitted the speaker’s own experience in seeing and
hearing against the listener’s under two conditions,
when it could and could not readily be inferred that
those listeners could see the landmark. Experiment 2
pitted the speaker’s experience of seeing, saying, and
hearing against the listener’s declared inability to see
the item in question. Experiment 3 pitted the speaker’s
experience in having seen the mentioned landmark,
mentioned it, and heard it mentioned against the new
listener’s ignorance of the item as the landmark was
introduced in a second trial. Experiment 4 kept the
listener’s knowledge constant as well as the speaker’s
experience in hearing a prior mention, but manipulated
the speaker’s ability to see the landmark.
In all these cases, the repeating speaker had heard
the original mention. In all, clarity of articulation was

sensitive only to what the speaker had heard. These are
exactly the results found by Bard et al. (2000) for a
balanced but restricted sample of materials and with
intelligibility to naïve listeners directly measuring
clarity. Thus, reduction and consequent reduction in
articulatory detail with repeated mention is
conditioned by the repeater’s experience. There is no
indication that models of the listener are consulted.
Referential form showed a different pattern. Like
articulation, it was insensitive to some information
which should have entered a model of the listener: an
indications of what the listener could or could not see
(Expts 1 and 2). Yet, it did show two effects which
articulation did not. First, referential form did not
simplify on re-introduction to new listeners (Expt 3)1.
In this case, form of referring expression was tailored
to the listener’s needs. Second, simplification of form
across repeated mentions was enhanced when the
speaker could see the named landmark (Expt 4). Thus,
referential form is more sensitive than articulation but
to both interlocutors’ knowledge.
Why should form have these characteristics? Form
of referring expression does not respond on-line to
aspects of co-presence delivered via feedback or
inference. It shows neither the complete insensitivity
to listeners that Monitor and Adjust predicts for initial
design, nor the sensitivity to feedback which should
guide redesign. We would argue that Map Task
participants juggled competing demands on their
attention, as the Dual Process Hypothesis predicts.
Unlike the fast automatic processes through which
speaker memory affects articulation, slower processes
can compete for attention with the communicative task
in hand. In this task, however, listener modeling does
not take precedence. Only the listener factor most
grossly related to the task -- who is participating –
affects the design of referring expressions. It shares
that honor with an equally basic speaker factor -- what
is on the speaker's own map.
The difficulty of the communicative task may well
influence the degree to which speakers appear to be
modeling their listeners. Certainly direct manipulation
of communicative tasks changes speakers’ priorities
(see Horton & Keysar, 1996). Presumably, speakers
could be more sensitive to listener-knowledge if some
kind of external record-keeping were to ease the
computational burden. The Dual Process Hypothesis
predicts that both task and memory load should
influence the design of referring expressions, but that
neither should affect the articulation of individual
words.

1

While Jurafsky et al. (2001) have recently reported less
reduction for reintroduction to new listeners than to old, they
find significant reduction to both.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by ESRC (UK) main grant to
the Human Communication Research Centre.

References
Anderson, A. Bader, M., Bard, E.G., Boyle, E.,
Doherty, G., et al. (1991). The H.C.R.C. Map Task
Corpus. Language and Speech, 34, 351-366.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents.
London: Routledge/Croom Helm.
Balota, D. A., Boland, J. E., & Shields, L. W. (1989).
Priming in pronunciation: Beyond patternrecognition and onset latency. Journal of Memory
and Language, 28, 14-36.
Bard, E. G., & Anderson, A. (1983). The
unintelligibility of speech to children. Journal of
Child Language, 10, 265-292.
Bard, E. G., & Anderson, A. (1994). The
unintelligibility of speech to children: Effects of
referent availability. Journal of Child Language, 21,
623-648.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M.
Doherty-Sneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000).
Controlling the intelligibility of referring
expressions in dialogue. Journal of Memory and
Language, 42, 1-22.
Brennan, S., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition, 22, 1482-1493.
Brown, P., & Dell, G. (1987). Adapting production to
comprehension -- the explicit mention of
instruments. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 441-472.
Campbell, W. N., & Isard, S.D. (1991). Segment
durations in a syllable frame. Journal of Phonetics,
19, 37-47.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite
reference and mutual knowledge. In A.K. Joshi, B.
Webber, & I. Sag (Eds.), Elements of Discourse
Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dell, G., & Brown, P. (1991). Mechanisms for
listener-adaptation in language production: Limiting
the role of the "model of the listener.” In D. J.
Napoli & J. A. Kegl (eds.), Bridges Between
Psychology and Linguistics. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Fowler, C. (1988). Differential shortening of repeated
content words produced in various communicative
contexts. Language and Speech, 28, 47–56.
Fowler, C., & Housum, J. (1987). Talkers' signaling of
‘new' and ‘old' words in speech and listeners'
perception and use of the distinction. Journal of
Memory and Language, 26, 489-504.
Fowler, C., Levy, E. & Brown, J. (1997). Reductions
of spoken words in certain discourse contexts.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 24-40.
Fussell, S., & Krauss, R. (1992). Coordination of

knowledge in communication: Effects of speakers’
assumptions about what others know. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 378-391.
Gundel, J.K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993).
Cognitive status and the form of referring
expressions in discourse. Language, 69, 274-307.
Horton, W., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers
take into account common ground? Cognition, 59,
91-117.
Hunnicutt, S. (1985). Intelligibility vs. redundancy —
conditions of dependency. Language and Speech,
28, 47-56.
Isaacs, E., & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in
conversation between experts and novices. JEP:
General, 116, 26-37.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., Raymond, W., &
Girand, C., (2001). Probabilities in the mental
grammar: evidence from language production in
natural conversation. Proceedings of CUNY2001,
Philadelphia, PA..
Levelt, W., & Wheeldon, L. (1994). Do speakers have
access to a mental syllabary? Cognition, 50, 239269.
Lieberman, P. (1963). Some effects of the semantic
and grammatical context on the production and
perception of speech. Language and Speech, 6, 172–
175.
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaining variation: a sketch of
the H and H theory. In W. Hardcastle & A. Marchal
(Eds.), Speech Production and Speech Modelling.
Dordrecht,
Netherlands:
Kluwer
Academic
Publishers.
Keysar, B. (1997). Unconfounding common ground.
Discourse Processes, 24, 253-270.
Mitchell, D. B., & Brown, A. S. (1988). Persistent
repetition priming in picture naming and its
dissociation from recognition memory. JEP:LMC,
14, 213-222
Prince, E. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given-new
information. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical Pragmatics.
New York: Academic Press.
Samuel, A., & Troicki, M. (1998). Articulation quality
is inversely related to redundancy when children or
adults have verbal control. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 175-194.
Schober, M. (1993). Spatial perspective taking n
conversation. Cognition, 47, 1-24.
Smith, M, & Wheeldon, L (1999). High level
processing scope in spoken sentence production.
Cognition, 73, 205-246.
Vonk, W., Hustinx, L., & Simmons, W. (1992). The
use of referential expressions in structuring
discourse. Language and Cognitive Processes, 7,
301-33.
Wheeldon, L., & Lahiri, A. (1997). Prosodic units in
speech production. Journal of Memory and
Language, 37, 356-81

