UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representational Form and Communicative Use

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56r2v11b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Healey, Patrick G.T.
Swoboda, Nik
Umata, Ichiro
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representational Form and Communicative Use
Patrick G.T. Healey (ph@dcs.qmw.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science;
Queen Mary, University of London, UK.

Nik Swoboda (nswoboda@cs.indiana.edu)
Department of Computer Science;
Indiana University, Bloomington, USA

Ichiro Umata (umata@mic.atr.co.jp)
Yasu Katagiri (katagiri@mic.atr.co.jp)
Media Integration and Communications Laboratories;
ATR International, Kyoto, Japan
Abstract
The form of representations is typically considered to be
conditioned by three things: the nature and availability
of domain regularities, the perceptual and cognitive abilities of individuals, and the properties of the medium used
to construct a representation. This paper reports on an
experimental investigation of a fourth constraint on representational form; communicative use. Subjects were
given a graphical interaction task in which they produced
drawings of pieces of music. The results demonstrate that
both level of interaction and communicative context have
a marked influence on the form of the representations produced. The results parallel findings for dialogue and indicate that communicative use may be a key constraint on
representational form.

Background
In order to be effective in communication, a representation must address, in some reliable way, regularities
in the represented world or domain. This intuition naturally suggests a focus on characterising the relationship between the form of representations and the form
of a particular domain. For example, between the elements of a picture and the scene or object it represents,
or between the structure of a sentence and a mathematical model of the domain. Of course, this relationship
may be indirect and arbitrary but where it can be characterised it provides a basis for comparing representations
according to properties such as: abstraction, conventionalisation, expressiveness, iconicity, schematisation, and
specificity. In cognitive science, three factors are typically cited as moderating these properties. Firstly, the
domain to be represented must be sufficiently regular or
structured. Secondly, individual perceptual and cognitive
limitations constrain both the types of regularity that are
identified and the form of the representation used to capture them. Thirdly, representational form is conditioned
by the properties of the medium used to produce them.
Significant attention has been directed to analysing
the importance of cognitive-perceptual factors and the
properties of the medium in conditioning the form of
graphical representations (see Scaife & Rogers, 1996,
for a review). For example, some authors have highlighted how graphical representations can exploit spatial
layout to reduce memory load and facilitate reasoning
about a domain (e.g., Stenning & Oberlander, 1995; Shimojima, 1996). The influence of conceptual limitations

and perceptual processes in normalising and conventionalising the form of graphical representations has also
been investigated (Bartlett, 1932; Tversky, 1981, 1989,
1995). The specific physical properties of graphical media have also been cited as a constraint on representational form. For example, clay discourages the fluent
use of detailed graphical forms, favouring simplified, reduced symbols or scripts instead. Historical transitions
from pictographic to more abstract scripts have been attributed, in part, to the introduction of clay tablets as the
principal writing medium (Tversky, 1995).
These considerations overlook what we take to be the
primary function of graphical and linguistic representations: use in communication. Evidence is accumulating
to indicate that distinctively interactional or communicative factors constrain the form of descriptions used in dialogue. For example, Garrod and Doherty (1994) showed
experimentally that choice between alternative forms of
spatial description is primarily influenced by pressure to
establish conventions within a sub-community. Importantly, these effects arise independently of domain structure and independently of cognitive-perceptual factors
such as individual task expertise (Healey, 1997, 2001).
Schwartz (1995) also provides evidence of significant
communicative constraints on the form of graphical representations. He studied the differences between the
graphical representations produced during problem solving by pairs or individuals. Dyads produced abstract
problem representations, such as matrices and graphs,
significantly more often than individuals working alone.
This paper reports two experiments that investigate the
influence of domain structure, media type, and communicative use on representational form. Our task was designed to meet three basic requirements. Firstly, the precondition that the task domain should exhibit a number
of basic regularities which could be captured in a representation. Secondly, that there should be no strong preexisting representational conventions for carrying out the
task. The rationale for this is that our focus on changes in
representational form requires a domain for which participants can, in principle, deploy a variety of possible
representations and which does not encourage them (or
us) to suppose there is a particular ‘correct’ representation. Existing experimental studies of graphical representation have focussed almost exclusively on tasks and
materials, such as maps, Euler circles, circuit diagrams

and program flow charts, which have standard interpretations and which individuals must learn to read in the
intended way (cf. Scaife & Rogers, 1996). Thirdly, we
wanted a task that is accomplished by exclusively graphical means. This facilitates comparison with other communicative modalities, especially language and is more
likely to promote the development of novel conventions.
To this end we developed a music communication task.
This task involves people producing pictures of pieces of
music so that a second person can use them to identify
the piece drawn. Music provides a highly structured task
domain because of the availability of parameters such as:
tempo, intensity, texture, scale and mode. It also provides a domain for which, with the exception of formal
notations used by musicians, participants have no preexisting representational conventions to call on.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigated the effects of domain structure on the form of drawings produced. Musical genre
(Jazz vs. Classical) was used as the basic manipulation
of domain structure. Two quantitative dependent measures were selected: accuracy of identification of the music from the drawings and time to respond.
Materials 36 pieces of piano solo music were chosen;
18 Jazz pieces and 18 Classical pieces. Each piece was
by a different composer or artist and easily recognisable
pieces were avoided. The Jazz pieces all included some
improvisation and used non-diatonic chord progressions
or tones whereas the Classical pieces did not.
All drawing was carried out and captured on a shared
virtual whiteboard written specially for the task. The
whiteboard was displayed on two LCD tablets (combined graphics tablet and screen) connected to two desktop computers. The whiteboard consisted of a shared
drawing area, a strip palette of eight colours and a set
of buttons for controlling playback and indicating selections at the top. Subjects could draw using a stylus and
lines could be erased by using the reverse end of the stylus.
Subjects 24 participants were recruited from local universities and divided into 12 pairs. They were paid an
honorarium for taking part.
Procedure On each trial one participant, the Giver,
drew a picture of a target piece of piano music. Givers
were free to draw anything they like, subject to the restriction than no letters or numbers should be used. The
other member of the pair, the Follower, saw the Giver’s
drawing developing on the whiteboard and their task was
to use this picture to select which of two pieces; the target and a distractor, it corresponded to. Playback and
selection of the target and distractor pieces, controlled
by buttons at the top of the screen, was self-paced. Followers were asked to make their choice as quickly and as
accurately as possible. If a two minute time limit expired

before the Follower decided then further drawing by the
Giver was blocked and a dialogue window appeared to
prompt a final choice. After each trial subjects received
feedback about whether the choice was correct. This was
repeated for 24 trials with the roles of Giver and Follower
alternating between the members of a pair. Music was
randomly assigned subject to the constraints that no individual heard the same piece of music twice (as target
or distractor), each piece of music occurred equally often
as target and distractor, choice of pieces was counterbalanced across pairs and conditions, and order of presentation was randomised for each pair.

Results
Despite some initial hesitation, participants found the
task intelligible and engaging. They were able to perform consistently above chance getting, on average, 68%
correct (t(44) = 6.38, p (two tailed) = 0.00.)1 . To evaluate
effects of the manipulation of genre, two analyses were
carried out. Firstly the type of target drawn by the Giver;
Classical vs. Jazz. Secondly, the type of discrimination
performed by the Follower; same genre (Jazz vs. Jazz
and Classical vs. Classical) or different genre (Jazz vs.
Classical). The average proportion of correct responses
for each pair were analysed in a 2 factor analysis of variance: There was no simple main effect of target type
(F(1,11) = 2.10, p = 0.17) or discrimination type (F(1,11)
= 2.10, p = 0.66) and no interaction (F(1,11) = 0.58, p =
0.46). The corresponding analysis for average response
times also showed no simple main effect of either target type (F(1,11) =0.84, p = 0.38) or discrimination type
(F(1,11) = 2.92, p = 0.12) and no interaction (F(1,11) =
2.87, p = 0.12).
Informal inspection suggested that some of the drawings appeared to be coding emotional affect (e.g., sad vs.
happy faces). It was hypothesised that this might reflect
the influence of a second aspect of musical form; mode
(Major or Minor). To test for this the mode of each target and distractor piece was coded. Analysis of variance
with Target type (Major/Minor) crossed with Discrimination type (Same/Different mode) again showed no evidence of a main effect on proportion correct of either
target type (F(1,11) =0.32, p=0.58) or discrimination type
(F(1,11) =2.87, p=0.12) and no interaction. The analysis
for average response times also provided no evidence of
an effect of either target type (F(1,11) =1.312, p=0.28) or
discrimination type (F(1,11) =0.87,p=0.37) and no interaction.
Drawing Types The drawings produced fell into two
broad categories. The first category of drawings, ‘Abstract’ (illustrated in Figure 1), involve some representation of musical form, e.g., intensity, pitch, melody,
rhythm or tempo, typically represented as a contour. Attempts to use formal music notation were also coded as
Abstract. It was notable, however, that use of formal notation was rare and, except in once case, subjects did not
1 An

alpha level of .05 was used for all statistical tests.

Figure 1: Example Abstract Drawing

Figure 2: Example Figurative Drawing

persist with it. This was probably attributable to the difficulty of real-time transcription and the fact that it is only
useful if both members of a pair are sufficiently expert
with it. The second category of drawings, ‘Figurative’
(illustrated in Figure 2), is a more heterogeneous category involving depictions of e.g., faces, figures, objects
or situations. A third, smaller category of Composite
drawings was noted in which some abstract and figurative elements had been combined.
Two of the authors independently coded 287 drawings
as either Abstract, Figurative or Composite. Inter-judge
agreement on the coding was high (Kappa = 0.9, N =
287, k= 2).
It was initially hypothesised that the use of Abstract
or Figurative drawings types might be influenced by the
manipulation of genre. Jazz is often considered a more
abstract form than Classical music and this might be
reflected in the use of Abstract representations. Conversely, the selection of non-diatonic Jazz pieces containing some improvisation ensured that, relative to the Classical pieces, they had a less regular structure. On these
grounds the form of Classical targets might be more easily detected and drawn. However, as Table 1 indicates,
there appears to be no pattern in the distribution of drawing types according to the genre of the pieces. An analysis of the frequency of Abstract and Figurative drawings
for Jazz and Classical pieces respectively suggests no reliable difference in pattern of use (Chi(1) = 0.45, p=0.50).

To test for effects of communicative context on choice
of drawing type, measures of entrainment or matching
were used (see Garrod & Anderson, 1987). This is the
number of drawings produced by an individual that are of
the same type (in this case Abstract, Figurative or Composite) as the immediately preceding drawing produced
by their partner. It indexes the degree to which the members of a pair are tending to coordinate their choice of
drawing type over and above what would be expected by
chance given the frequency of use across the population
as a whole. The average score for pairs in experiment 1
was 0.71 compared with a chance level of 0.49 (chance
is calculated as the sum of the squared proportions of
each drawing type in the corpus as a whole). These were
reliably different (t(11) =4.03, p (2 tailed) = 0.00).

Table 1: Frequency of Drawing Types According to Musical Form

Classical
Jazz

Drawing Type
Abstract Figurative
37
94
42
89

Composite
12
12

Discussion of Experiment 1
Although the results show that subjects are able to carry
out the task they provide no evidence of an effect of
domain structure on task performance. Neither musical
genre nor mode, as operationalised here, influenced the
effectiveness with which pairs could perform the communication task. The difficulty of producing a drawing,
as assessed by the effects of target type, was unaffected
by musical form. The difficulty of distinguishing between pieces, as assessed by the effects of discrimination
type, was also unaffected. Of course, it is possible that
the experiments were insufficiently sensitive to detect an
effect or that other aspects of musical form be influencing
performance. Nonetheless, two intuitively salient aspects
of form; genre and mode, did not affect the difficulty of
the task.
More importantly, although the drawings can be reliably classified as Abstract or Figurative, the distribution
of these representation types shows no influence of musical form, Jazz and Classical pieces are equally likely
to be drawn in a Figurative or Abstract style. The form
of the drawings is, however, predicted by communicative
context. Pairs tend to entrain to one another, producing

matching drawing types more frequently than would occur by chance. These findings are consistent with our
proposal that communicative coordination provides one
of the principal influences on choice of representation
type. However, the level of communication possible in
experiment 1 was very limited. The interaction consisted
only in the alternation between the roles of Giver and
Drawer and the feedback about whether the last drawing
had been correctly identified at the end of each trial. In
effect, each trial is analogous to a single conversational
turn. If communicative use constrains representational
form then manipulation of the level of interaction should
affect choice of representation type.
Experiment 2 was designed to address two issues.
Firstly to investigate whether altering the richness of
the communicative exchange would affect use of drawing types. Secondly to investigate the prediction that a
medium which tended to discourage fluent production of
graphics would favour more reduced, abstract, forms.

Experiment 2
In experiment 2 the richness of the communicative interaction was increased by allowing both participants to
draw and erase freely on the shared whiteboard at any
time. The manipulation of medium was introduced by
contrasting two conditions, one with the same stylus
based interaction as experiment 1, in which subjects draw
directly onto the screen, and one with mouse based input.
This served to reduce fluency of movement and introduced a spatial separation between input and the screen.
Materials A total of 112, 30 second, piano solo pieces,
were used. This included the pieces used in experiment
1 as a subset. The pieces were selected according to the
same criteria as in experiment 1 with the exception that
each composer was used twice.
Subjects 24 participants, (16 male and 8 female, average age 19) were recruited from a variety of disciplines
at local colleges and universities. They were paid an honorarium for taking part.
Procedure Broadly the same procedure as experiment
1 was followed. However, because the restriction to a
single person drawing on the whiteboard was removed,
subjects were shown a demonstration of simultaneous
drawing on the whiteboard. Two versions of the interactive experimental task were used. In the ‘matching’ version both members of a pair had one piece of piano music each and the task was for them to determine whether
these pieces were the same or different. In the ‘discrimination’ version each member of the pair had two pieces
of music and the task was for them to decide which of the
two pieces was the same. Although we do not discuss
the task manipulation here, the analysis reported below
is based on data from both tasks to preserve the balance
of conditions and materials.
Design Experiment 2 employed a within-subjects, factorial design with task (Matching vs. Discrimination)

crossed with Media (Mouse vs. Stylus). Selection of
music was constrained so that the combinations of form
(Jazz, Classical) and Mode (Major vs. Minor) were
counterbalanced across conditions. Each piece was also
classified according to its tempo with selection of tempo
randomised across conditions. As before, no one heard
the same piece of music twice. This design resulted in
a total of 68 trials per pair with order of conditions and
materials counterbalanced.

Results
The effects of media and experience on task performance
were assessed in two analyses of variance. To index experience, the trials were divided into four blocks. For
each quarter of the experiment, and each pair, the proportion of correct responses and the average time to respond
were calculated. Analysis of variance on the proportion of correct responses, with media and experience as
within subjects factors, showed a reliable main effect of
experience (F(3,24) = 4.84, p=0.01) but no effect of media
(F(1,24) = 0.04, p=0.84) and no interactions. Linear trend
analysis confirmed that participants became more accurate with experience (t(33) = 3.48, p(one tailed) = 0.00)
. The parallel analysis for time to respond also showed
a main effect of experience (F(3,47) = 4.07, p=0.18) and
again, no effect of media (F(1,47) = 0.01, p=0.92). Linear
trend analysis confirmed that participants were becoming faster at the task with experience (t(33) = 2.38, p(one
tailed) = 0.01). The results suggest that the manipulation
of medium does not affect participants’ ability to carry
out the task.
Drawing Types The drawing activity of each member
of a pair was separated into two files and independently
coded, as before, for the categories Abstract, Figurative
or Composite. An additional category of ‘None’ was
introduced to deal with a small number of cases (3%)
where one or both of the partners had not drawn a picture of a piece on a given trial. The distribution of each
drawing type across all trials is given in Table 2.
The prediction that medium should affect distribution
of drawing types was assessed by scoring, for each pair,
the proportion of drawings that were classified as Abstract. This was analysed in an analysis of variance with
medium, task and experience as within subjects factors.
There was no simple main effect of media (F(1,24) = 2.22,
p= 0.15) and no reliable interactions.
Table 2: Distribution of Drawings, Experiment 2.

Frequency
Proportion

Drawing Type
Abstract Figurative
970
345
59%
21%

Composite
257
16%

Entrainment scores were calculated, as before, to provide an indication of the extent to which the members
of a pair were coordinating their choice of representation

70
Experiment 1

Percentage of Drawings

60

Experiment 2
50
40
30
20
10
0
Abstract

Figurative

Mixed

Drawing Type

Figure 3: Choice of Drawing Types in Experiments 1 and
2

type. In this case scores were calculated as the proportion of trials in which drawings of the same type were
produced, excluding trials in which one or both participants produced no drawing. The average entrainment
score was 0.79, reliably above the chance level of 0.42
(t(11) = 6.75, p = 0.00).

Comparison of Experiments 1 and 2
To test for effects of the difference in level of interactivity
between experiments 1 and 2 only data from the first 12
trials of experiment 2 were used. This was in order to
restrict comparisons to the situation in which participants
had completed the same number of drawings of different
pieces.
To compare level of coordination in choice of drawing type a t-test was performed on the average entrainment scores for each pair with experiment (1 vs. 2) as
a between subjects factor. This indicated that levels of
matching were not reliably different (t(22) = 0.74, p (2
tailed) = 0.46). The ability to interact directly did not affect the extent to which pairs tended to match their choice
of representation type.
Although degree of matching did not differ between
experiments 1 and 2, a reversal in patterns of choice in
drawing types was observed. As Figure 3 illustrates, during the first 12 trials of experiment 2 almost twice as
many Abstract drawings were produced than in experiment 1. The contrast in relative frequency of Abstract
and Figurative drawings confirmed the reliability of this
pattern (Chi2 (1) = 50.7, p = 0.00). The results indicate
that the ability to interact directly has a substantial effect
on the use of drawing types leading, in particular, to a
much greater use of Abstract drawings.

General Discussion
Considered together, the results provide evidence that
communicative use has a strong effect on representational form. Although intuitively genre and mode are

important elements musical form, they had no effect on
task performance or on choice of representation type in
the present study. Additionally, although the manipulation of medium between mouse-based and stylus based
input provides a contrast in levels of control and fluency
it had no demonstrable effect on either performance or
representational form. In particular, no evidence was
found for the prediction that the simpler contours of Abstract drawings would be favoured when subjects used
a mouse. In contrast to medium and domain, two effects of communicative use were noted. Firstly, subjects’
choice between Abstract and Figurative representations
was sensitive to their partner’s choice of representation.
People were much more likely to produce a drawing of a
similar type to the one last produced by their partner than
could be expected by chance. This pattern of entrainment parallels findings for dialogue. Garrod and Anderson (1987) found that, while domain structure favours
some types of verbal description over others, the main
constraint on choice of representation type is the pressure to coordinate with an interlocutor. Secondly, the pattern of use of drawing types between experiment 1 and
2 effectively reverses with approximately twice as many
Abstract drawings and half as many Figurative drawings
used in experiment 2. This suggests that level of interaction has an especially marked effect on choice of drawing
type and this occurs even though the level of entrainment
or matching in the two experiments is not reliably different.
One potential issue with this interpretation is that additional pieces of music were used in the second experiment, raising the possibility that these pieces particularly
favoured Abstract drawings. However, the selection criteria for pieces were the same across both experiments
and it seems unlikely that a specific bias was introduced.
A second issue is that the difference in level of interaction is not the only difference between the tasks in experiments 1 and 2. Although number of pieces drawn and
taken into account in the analysis, other task differences
might have contributed to the observed effect on drawing
types. Arguably, the interactive versions of the task are
more comparative because more than one piece is drawn
on each trial. This would not explain the tendency to entrain but it could contribute to choice of drawing type.
This possibility is being investigated in further work.
The issues raised above notwithstanding, the results
provide evidence of a substantial influence of communicative constraints on representational form. This does
not necessarily undermine the claim that domain structure and media type influence representational form.
Amongst other things, it is possible that genre and mode
are relatively unimportant aspects of musical form and
other aspects of domain structure would have a more
marked effect. Similarly, the difference in ease of execution between a mouse and a stylus, although significant,
may be insufficient to affect representational form. These
questions can only be resolved by further empirical work.
However, the present study suggests that constraints deriving from communicative use can have a strong, per-

haps key, influence on representational form.
The interpretation of these results depends on providing an account of what the difference between Abstract
and Figurative drawings consist in. The Abstract category consisted of drawings that appeared to pick up on
formal aspects of the music. Contour lines and blobs
were used to represent a potentially wide variety of possible regularities, e.g., pitch, stress, harmonic structure,
chord structure, rhythm, tempo, texture and intensity.
For each of these possibilities a further number of variations are possible including choice of axes, choice of
scale, and level of granularity (whole piece, first few
bars etc.). A specific type of Abstract drawing imposes
a systematic interpretation. It generalises to any piece of
music and can sustain internal structural inferences for
a piece, e.g., one chord is twice as long or intense as
another. Relative to Abstract drawings, Figurative drawings, are highly heterogeneous. They employ a range
of ad hoc devices such as visual emblems (city skylines
for Jazz) symbols of emotive affect (sad faces, graves),
pictures of rabbits or cars to indicate tempo, pictures of
landscapes to suggest moods and so on. In contrast to
Abstract drawings they provide only weak support for
generalisations. There is not a street scene or landscape
for every piece and they provide almost no information
about the internal structure of a piece.
The present proposal is that the key constraint on the
use of Abstract or Figurative drawings in the present task
is the degree of coordination they require. In particular,
successful use of Abstract drawings demands a higher
degree of semantic coordination. To use Abstract drawings successfully subjects must attempt to coordinate on
which aspect of musical form is being used, on which
axes, at what level of granularity. Figurative drawings,
by contrast, can be used in a more ad hoc manner. They
can exploit different interpretations in each case and do
not impose a particular structure on the music. We propose that direct interaction sustains the use of Abstract
drawings by providing mechanisms that facilitate the coordination of interpretation. For example, in experiment
2 subjects were seen to circle and underline parts of each
other’s representations. This could function as a means
of isolating and repairing problems with particular elements of a drawing. Lines and arrows between different contours were also used to indicate possible alignments or changes of scale. In experiment 1 such exchanges were impossible even though, in principle, the
same types of representation could have been used.
The implication of these considerations is that properties of representations, such as abstraction, may depend
more on the character of the interactions in which they
are used than on the character of the represented domain.
This is not to suggest that effective representations do not
address regularities in the represented domain but rather
that representational form is conditioned, first and foremost, by the structure of interaction and the kinds of coordination that it makes possible, and only contingently
by the structure of the domain.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank ATR Media Integration and Communications Laboratories, Kyoto Japan and the ESRC and
EPSRC (grant L328253003) for generous support. A
previous version of this paper was presented under the
title: ”Graphical Interaction and the Emergence of Abstraction” at the First International Workshop on Interactive Graphical Communication, Queen Mary, University
of London. Aug 30-31st , 2000.

References
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. CUP.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic
co-ordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Garrod, S., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation, coordination and convention: An emprirical investigation
of how groups establish linguistic conventions. Cognition, 53, 181-215.
Healey, P. G. (1997). Expertise or expert-ese: The emergence of task-oriented sub-languages. In M. Shafto &
P. Langley (Eds.), Proceedings of the ninteenth annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 301–
306). Stanford University, CA.
Healey, P. G. (2001). Semantic coordination in dialogue.
(Manuscript in preparation)
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition:
How do graphical representations work? International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 4(3), 321–354.
Shimojima, A. (1996). Operational constraints in diagrammatic reasoning. In G. Allwein & J. Barwise
(Eds.), Logical reasoning with diagrams (pp. 27–48).
Oxford.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory of graphical and linguistic reasoning: Logic and
implementation. Cognitive Science, 19, 97–140.
Tversky, B. (1981). Distortions in memory for maps.
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 407–433.
Tversky, B. (1989). Perceptual and conceptual factors in
distortions in memory for graphs and maps. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 118(4), 387–398.
Tversky, B. (1995). Cognitive origins of graphic conventions. In F. Marchese (Ed.), Understanding images
(pp. 29–53). New York: Springer-Verlag.

