UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Roles of Shared Relations in Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gw3361k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Ohnishi, Hitoshi

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Roles of Shared Relations in Induction
Hitoshi Ohnishi (ohnishi@nime.ac.jp)
National Institute of Multimedia Education
2–12 Wakaba Mihama Chiba 261–0014, Japan

Abstract
Two experiments examined the roles of shared relations
between representations in induction. Lassaline (1996)
found that shared attributes contribute to the inductive
strength, but shared relations do not, whereas both shared
attributes and shared relations contribute to similarity
judgment. A structural alignment view of induction was
generalized to account for these phenomena. According
to the structural alignment view proposed in this paper,
(1) insufficiency of the number of shared relations caused
the dissociation between shared relations and inductive
strength, and (2) structural alignment during similarity
judgment made shared relations so salient as to increase
similarity. Experiment 1 examined the first hypothesis.
Participants judged inductive strength of arguments that
had a crossing number of shared attributes and shared
relations. The results showed that shared relations contribute to the inductive strength if a sufficient number of
relations are shared. Experiment 2 examined the second
hypothesis. The participants who rated similarity between
categories of arguments prior to judgment of inductive
strength judged arguments having a shared relation to be
stronger, whereas the participants who only judged inductive strength did not judge so. The results support the proposed structural alignment view of induction.

Category-based Induction
People frequently make inferences and expand their
knowledge in uncertainty. This type of inference is generally referred to as induction. One form of induction
where the premises and the conclusion are of the form
“All members of a category C have property P” is referred to as category-based induction.
In category-based induction, a categorical argument is
said to be strong when the premises increase the degree
of belief in the conclusion. Osherson, Smith, Wilkie,
Lopez, and Shafir (1990) proposed that the strength of
an inductive argument increases with (a) the degree to
which the premise categories are similar to the conclusion category, and (b) the degree to which the premise
categories are similar to members of the lowest-level category that includes both the premise and the conclusion
categories. They implemented their idea as a mathematical model that is called similarity-coverage model. The
similarity-coverage model provides a comprehensive explanation to a variety of phenomena in category-based
induction.
As an alternative to the similarity-coverage model,
Sloman (1993) proposed a connectionist, feature-based,

model of induction. According to the feature-based
model, an argument whose conclusion claims a relation
between category C (e.g., Zebras) and property P (e.g.,
love onions) is judged strong to the extent that the features of C have already been associated with P in the
premises.

Structural Alignment
According to the similarity-coverage model, strength of
induction is based on similarities between categories.
Recent studies on similarity have revealed flexible and
dynamical properties of similarity (Goldstone, 1994;
Goldstone, Medin, & Gentner, 1991; Markman & Gentner, 1993; Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993).
One of the most important findings is that similarity judgment involves a process of alignment of structured relational representations (Markman & Gentner,
1993). In structural alignment, the correspondences between pairs of representations are computed by seeking
matches that are structurally consistent. A structurally
consistent match means that each attribute or relation in
one representation is placed in correspondence with, at
most, one attribute or relation in the other representation.
The structural alignment view accounts for important
empirical results of similarity and analogy. An important
result that is relevant to induction is that attributes and
relations in representations are distinguished. This result
suggests the possibility that attributes and relations are
also distinguished in induction.

Roles of Attributes and Relations in
Induction and Similarity
Structural Alignment in Induction
Lassaline (1996) proposed a structural alignment view
of induction based on structural alignment of similarity
and analogy, and examined roles of attributes and relations in induction and similarity. She hypothesized that
(1) shared attributes and shared relation between categories contribute to increasing similarity, whereas (2)
nonshared binding relations that connect the target attribute (the attribute being mapped from one category
to the other in an inductive judgment) to an attribute
shared by the two categories contribute to increasing the
strength of inductive arguments.

Inductive arguments related to Hypothesis 1 are illustrated in Figure 1. The four arguments have crossing
numbers of shared attributes (2 and 3) and shared relations (0 and 1). In argument (a), two attributes “X and
Z” are shared by two animals. Argument (c) is formed by
adding a common causal relation to argument (a). Therefore arguments (a) and (c) have two shared attributes,
and zero and one shared relation, respectively. Argument
(b) and (d) are formed by adding a common attribute to
(a) and (c), respectively. Therefore argument (b) and (d)
have three shared attributes, and zero and one shared relation, respectively.
According to Hypothesis 1, animal A and B in arguments (c) and (d) are respectively judged more similar
than those in arguments (a) and (b) because arguments
(c) and (d) have more shared attributes. Similarly, animal
A and B in arguments (b) and (d) are respectively judged
more similar than those in arguments (a) and (c) because
arguments (b) and (d) have a shared relation. Note that
shared relations in argument (c) and (d) do not connect
the target attribute “Y” and a shared attribute. Therefore
these shared relations are not binding relations. Her hypotheses do not make any specific prediction about the
contribution of nonbinding shared relations to inductive
strength.
(a)
Animal A has X and Z.
Animal B has X, Z and Y.
Animal A also has Y?
(2A-0R)

(b)
Animal A has W, X and Z.
Animal B has W, X, Z and
Y.
Animal A also has Y?
(3A-0R)

(c)
Animal A has X and Z.
Animal B has X, Z and Y.
For both animals, X causes
Z.
Animal A also has Y?
(2A-1R)

(d)
Animal A has W, X and Z.
Animal B has W, X, Z and
Y.
For both animals, X causes
Z.
Animal A also has Y?
(3A-1R)

Figure 1: Abstract structure of stimuli used in Lassaline
(1996)’s Experiment 1. xA-yR indicates that the number of shared attributes is x, and the number of shared
relations is y. W, X, Z, and Y represent attributes of the
stimuli.
Hypothesis 2 is relevant to induction. Inductive arguments related Hypothesis 2 are illustrated in Figure 2.
The four arguments have crossing numbers of shared attributes (0 and 3) and binding relation (0 and 1). Argument (e) has a shared attribute “X.” Argument (g)
is formed by adding a nonshared binding causal relation to argument (e). Therefore arguments (e) and (g)
have a shared attributes, and zero and one binding relation, respectively. Arguments (f) and (h) are formed
by adding two common attributes to (e) and (g), respectively. Therefore argument (f) and (h) have three shared
attributes, and zero and one binding relation, respectively.

(e)
Animal A has X and Z.
Animal B has X and Y.
Animal A also has Y?
(1A-0R)

(f)
Animal A has W, X and Z.
Animal B has W, X, Z and
Y.
Animal A also has Y?
(3A-0R)

(g)
Animal A has X, W and Z.
Animal B has X and Y.
For animal B, X causes Y.
Animal A also has Y?
(1A-1R)

(h)
Animal A has W, X and Z.
Animal B has W, X, Z and
Y.
For animal B, X causes Y.
Animal A also has Y?
(3A-1R)

Figure 2: Abstract structure of stimuli used in Lassaline
(1996)’s Experiment 2. xA-yR indicates that the number
of shared attributes is x, and the number of binding relations is y. W, X, Z, and Y represent attributes of the
stimuli.
According to Hypothesis 2, arguments (g) and (h) are
respectively judged as stronger inductive arguments than
arguments (e) and (f) because argument (g) and (h) have
a binding relation.
She examined roles of attributes and relations in induction and similarity. In her Experiment 1, the roles
of shared attributes and shared relations in induction and
in similarity were examined. One group of participants
rated strength of inductive arguments that had crossing
numbers of shared attributes and shared relations as illustrated in Figure 1. The other group of participants
rated similarities of pairs of the animals described in each
premise of those arguments. The results showed different
pattern between inductive strength judgments and similarity judgments. Inductive strength ratings increased by
adding a shared attribute, but did not increase by adding
a shared relation. In contrast, similarity ratings increased
by adding of the shared attribute and the shared relation.
In her Experiment 2, the roles of binding relations
were examined. Participants did the same tasks as in
Experiment 1 except that arguments included a binding
relation as illustrated in Figure 2. The results showed
inductive strength ratings increased by adding a binding
relation as well as shared attributes. Similarity ratings
also increased by adding a binding relation as well as
shared attributes.
Both of her hypotheses that were derived from the
structural alignment view were supported. Hypothesis 1 is consistent with previous research on similarity(Goldstone, 1994; Goldstone et al., 1991). Hypothesis 2 is consistent with structure mapping theory based
on structural alignment of analogy. More specifically,
Hypothesis 2 corresponds to systematicity principle in
structure mapping theory of analogy (Gentner, 1983).

Roles of Shared Relations in Induction
Lassaline’s structural alignment view does not make a
specific prediction about roles of shared attributes and
shared relations in induction. The results showed that

inductive strength increased by adding a shared attribute.
This is consistent with two facts that shared attributes
increase similarity and that similarity between categories
increases strength of induction.
In contrast, the results about roles of shared relations
are problematic. Inductive strength did not increase
by adding a shared relation although similarity did increase. Lassaline concluded that a relation must bind
the target attribute and a shared attribute to increase inductive strength. However her conclusion cannot explain the results that shared attributes increased inductive strength, but shared relations did not. A hypothesis
that binding relations contribute to increasing induction
corresponds to systematicity principle in analogy. As
most researchers agree, systematicity principle is indeed
a strong constraint of analogical mapping, but it is not
a unique constraint. In fact, Gentner, Rattermann, and
Forbus (1993) revealed that shared relations that are not
connected to a common relational structure contribute to
soundness ratings of analogy between stories as well as
similarity ratings between stories. In addition, shared
relations are treated as a constraint of analogy in some
computer models (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Thagard,
Holyoak, Nelson, & Gochfeld, 1990).
In this paper, the structural alignment view of induction is generalized to account for roles of shared relations
in induction. Two experiments were conducted to reexamine the roles of shared relations in induction from the
viewpoint of a generalized structural alignment. Experiment 1 examined the possibility that the shared relations
affect inductive strength. Experiment 2 addressed dissociative roles of shared relations in induction and similarity.

from 0 to 4 and from 0 to 3, respectively. Figure 3 shows
examples of the pairs. In pair (i) genotypes A and B have
a shared attribute and 2 shared relations because both A
and B have “” in the same place and have the same
relations, “on(X, X)”: two symbols of the same type are
stacked, at the first and third columns. In pair (j) genotypes A and B have a shared attribute and 3 shared relations. The other pairs were constructed in the same
manner.
Participants were showed pairs “genotypes of creatures of outer space,” referred to as Creature A and Creature B, and were told that each description was intended
to refer to a different pair of creatures. They were showed
the color of Creature A as a premise. Then they were
asked to rate the degree of confirmation that Creature B
had the same color as Creature A by selecting a number
from 1 (not confirmed) to 9 (completely confirmed) to
indicate their judgment.
Four arguments were printed per page. Participants
were instructed to spend about 30 seconds in rating the
inductive strength of each argument. The orders of the
arguments were randomized.

Experiment 1

(1A-3R)

Goldstone et al. (1991) found that a shared attribute has
more weight on similarity than a shared relation when
shared attributes are dominant, whereas a shared relation has more weight on similarity than a shared attribute
when shared relations are dominant.
The arguments used in Lassaline’s Experiment 1 had
only zero or one shared relation and two or three shared
attributes. Therefore a shared relation might have insufficient saliency on inductive strength. If this hypothesis is
correct, shared relations contribute to inductive strength
when the arguments have a sufficient number of shared
relations.

Method
Participants Fifty-six Keio University undergraduates
participated in the experiment as part of the requirements
of an introductory psychology course.
Materials and Procedure Each participant was given
a booklet that described all tasks and instructions.
Each participant was given a set of 20 pairs of “genotypes of creatures of outer space” that had crossing numbers of shared attributes and shared relations. The number of shared attributes and shared relations were varied

(i)
B

A

(1A-2R)
(j)
B

A

Figure 3: Example of stimuli used in Experiment 1. xAyR indicates that the number of shared attributes is x, and
the number of shared relations is y.

Results and Discussion
Since inductive strength judgments of 7 participants included missing values, they were eliminated from later
analysis. As a result, 49 participants’ data sets were analyzed.
Results are shown in Figure 4. Inductive strength increased with the addition of shared relations as well as
the addition of shared attributes. Mean inductive strength
when the arguments had 0, 1, 2, and 3 shared relations
were 2.67, 2.95, 3,47, 4.06, respectively. The results
showed that inductive strength increased with addition
of shared relations. A two-way ANOVA was conducted
on inductive strength, with number of shared attributes (0
to 4) and number of shared relations (0 to 3) as withinsubject variables.
The ANOVA on inductive strength showed the main
effects of number of shared attributes, F(4, 192) =

Mean Inductive Strength Judgment

60.12, p < . 01, and number of shared relations,
F(3, 144) = 25.71, p <. 01.
LSD (Least Significant Difference) post-hoc multiple comparison tests showed that inductive strength
increased simply with the addition a shared attribute
(MSe = 2.77, LSD = .33, p <. 05), and that inductive
strength increased simply with the addition a shared relation (MSe = 3.56, LSD = .34, p <. 05). As an exceptional case, there was no significant difference between the conditions where number of shared relation
were 0 and 1. There was no interaction between number of shared attributes and number of shared relations,
F(12, 576) = .578, p > .1.

5

4

3
R=0
R=1
R=2
R=3

2
0

2
Number of Shared Attributes

4

Figure 4: Mean inductive strength judgments from Experiment 1 as a function of number of shared attributes
and number of shared relations. R = 0, 1, 2, and 3 indicate that numbers of shared relations are 0, 1, 2, and 3,
respectively.
The results support the hypothesis that the shared relations contribute to increasing inductive strength judgments when a sufficient number of relations are shared.
In addition, there was no significant difference between
the conditions where number of shared relation were 0
and 1. This is consistent with Lassaline’s results and can
be accounted for by insufficiency of the number of shared
relations.
A structural alignment view of induction is consistently generalized through Experiment 1. However, the
results of Experiment 1 cannot explain dissociative roles
of shared relations between induction and similarity because Lassaline’s results showed shared relations contributed to increasing similarity but did not contribute
to increasing inductive strength. Experiment 2 was conducted to explain these dissociative roles of the shared
relations in inductive strength and similarity.

Experiment 2
A structural alignment view of similarity also suggests
an explanation for the dissociative roles of shared re-

lations in inductive strength and similarity. Markman
and Gentner (1993) proposed that similarity judgment
involves a process of structural alignment. A central
prediction of structural alignment is that similarity judgments lead people to attend to the matching relational
structure in a pair of items. Participants were given
a pair of pictures containing cross-mappings where an
attribute-based mapping and a relation-based mapping
compete, and were asked to select other object in one
picture that went with the cross-mapped object in the
other. All of these stimuli were explicitly designed so
that the participants’ natural tendency was to select the
similar object that shared an attribute with the other. The
participants who rated the similarity of the scenes prior
to performing the mapping tasks more often selected the
relation-based mappings than the participants who simply performed the mapping tasks without prior similarity
judgments.
These results suggest the hypothesis that the shared relations contribute to increasing inductive strength if participants rate similarities prior to inductive strength judgments even when few relations are shared. If the hypothesis is supported, the dissociative roles of shared relations in inductive strength and similarity in Lassaline’s
results are explained as follows. In inductive strength
judgments, since only a relation was shared, a shared relation was not so salient as to contribute to increasing
inductive strength. In similarity judgments, a structural
alignment during similarity judgment made a shared relation so salient to contribute to increasing similarity.
Experiment 2 examined whether contribution of
shared relations to inductive strength increases because
of similarity judgments prior to inductive strength judgments.
Participants were assigned to one of the three inductive task conditions. Participants in the “Inductiononly” condition performed inductive strength judgment
in the same manner as in Experiment 1. Participants
in the “Similarity-first” condition first performed similarity rating of categories in the premise and then performed inductive strength judgment. Participants in the
“Nonaligning-first” condition first performed the nonaligning task and then performed inductive strength judgment. The Nonaligning-first condition was added in order to rule out the possibility that the difference of inductive strength between Induction-only and Similarity-first
conditions was reduced to the difference in the time that
participants looked at stimuli.
According to the hypothesis, the inductive strength
judged by the participants in the Similarity-first condition is more affected by the shared relation compared
with its strength judged by the participants in the two
other conditions.

Method
Participants One hundred and sixty Keio University undergraduates participated in the experiment as
part of the requirements of an introductory psychology
course. They were randomly assigned to one of the three

4.5

Materials and Procedure Each participant was given
a booklet that described all tasks and instructions in the
same manner as in Experiment 1.
Participants in the Induction-only condition performed
the same tasks as those in Experiment 1 except for the
presented arguments. Each participant was given a set of
8 pairs of “genotypes of creatures of outer space.” The
number of shared attributes and shared relations were
varied from 0 to 3 and 0 to 1, respectively. Figure 5
shows examples of the pairs.

B

A

Mean Inductive Strength Judgment

between-subject inductive task conditions.

4

3.5
Induction−only
Similarity−first
Nonaligning−first
3

0

1
Number of Shared Relations

(3A-0R)
Figure 6: Mean inductive strength judgments from Experiment 2 as a function of number of shared relations.
B

A

(3A-1R)
Figure 5: Example of stimuli used in Experiment 2. xAyR indicates that the number of shared attributes is x, and
the number of shared relations is y.
Participants in the Similarity-first condition first rated
similarities of “genotypes” in the arguments by selecting a number 1 (not similar at all) to 9 (very similar) to
indicate their judgment. They then performed inductive
strength ratings in the same manner as the participants in
the Induction-only condition.
Participants in the Nonaligning-first condition first
judged whether each creature was an animal or a plant.
They then performed inductive strength ratings in the
same manner as the participants in the Induction-only
condition.
Participants were instructed to spend about 30 seconds
in each judgment task.

Results and Discussion
Since judgments of 8 participants included missing values, they were eliminated from later analysis. As result,
51, 51, and 50 participants’ data sets in the Inductiononly, the Similarity-first, and the Nonaligning-first conditions were analyzed, respectively.
Results are shown in Figure 6. Inductive strength
ratings increased by 1.13 points with the addition of a
shared relation in the Similarity-first condition whereas
inductive strength ratings increased by 0.43 and 0.30
points with the addition of a shared relation in the
Induction-only and Nonaligning-first conditions, respectively.
A three-way ANOVA was conducted on inductive
strength with inductive task conditions (Induction-only,
Similarity-first, Nonaligning-first) as a between-subject

variable, and with number of shared attributes (0 to 3)
and number of shared relation (0, 1) as within-subject
variables.
The ANOVA on inductive strength showed the main
effects of number of shared relations, F(1, 149) =
38.46, p <. 01, and number of shared attributes,
F(3, 447) = 242.91, p <. 01. There was no effect of inductive task condition, F(2, 149) = .69, p > .1.
There was a significant interaction between inductive task conditions and number of shared relation,
F(2, 149) = 6.60, p <. 01. There was also a significant interaction between number of shared attributes and
number of shared relation, F(3, 447) = 2.84, p <. 05.
There was no interaction between inductive task conditions and number of shared attributes, nor a three-way
interaction (F(6, 447) = 1.49, p > .1 and F(6, 447) =
.51, p > .1, respectively).
A significant interaction between inductive task condition and number of shared relation supports the hypothesis that similarity judgments prior to inductive
strength increase contribution of shared relation to inductive strength. The results cannot be reduced to the
difference of the time that participants looked at stimuli
because nonaligning tasks did not increased contribution
of shared relation to inductive strength judgments.
There were simple main effects of shared relation in
the Induction-only and the Nonaligning-first conditions
as well as in the Similarity-first condition (F(1, 149) =
6.21, p <. 05, F(1, 149) = 3.01, p <. 1, and F(1, 149) =
42.45, p <. 01, respectively). The most likely explanation for these effects is that pictorial representations of
stimuli made participants sensitive to shared relation.
The mean ratings of inductive strength in the
Similarity-first condition was lower than two other conditions although there was no effect of inductive task
condition. A possible interpretation is that maximal inductive strength was restrained because no pair of stimuli

was not so similar, and the absence of a shared relation
decreased inductive strength.
A significant interaction between number of shared attributes and number of shared relation does not have specific interpretation. This interaction was caused by that
effects of shared relation were smaller when the shared
attribute was zero. The ANOVA was conducted again,
this time eliminating the conditions where number of
share attributes was zero. The results showed no interaction between number of shared attributes and number of
shared relation. The other interactions and main effects
did not change.
The results support the hypothesis that the shared
relations contribute to increasing inductive strength if
participants rate similarities prior to inductive strength
judgments even when few shared relations are shared.
The results also confirm the explanation for the dissociative roles of shared relations in inductive strength
and similarity in Lassaline’s results. In her results, a
shared relation did not contribute to increasing inductive strength because the shared relation was not salient
in this case, whereas a shared relation contributed to increasing similarity because structural alignment during
similarity judgment made the shared relation salient.

General Discussion
The structural alignment view proposed by Lassaline
(1996) can be consistently generalized as follows. First,
attributes and relations are distinguished in induction as
well as in similarity judgment. Second, a relation binding the target attribute and shared attributes is a strong
constraint in induction. Third, in addition, shared attributes and shared relations are also constraints in induction if they are sufficiently salient. If shared relations
are salient, participants easily align relations as well as
attributes.
According to the structural alignment view proposed
here, shared relations contribute to increasing inductive
strength if they are sufficiently salient. In Experiment 1,
a sufficient number of shared relations increased to make
relations salient. The results showed that shared relations
contributed to increasing inductive strength when a sufficient number of relations were shared.
In Experiment 2, participants rated similarity prior
to inductive strength judgment to make a shared relation salient. According to the structural alignment view
of similarity, similarity judgment involves a structural
alignment that leads participants to attend to the matching relational structure. Therefore participants who rated
similarity prior to inductive strength judgment were expected to be able to easily align a shared relation. The
results showed that a shared relation contributes to increasing inductive strength if participants rated similarity
prior to inductive strength judgment.
The results of Experiment 1 and 2 are consistent with
the proposed structural alignment view, and are also consistent with the fact that shared relations contribute to
soundness ratings of analogy. The proposed structural
alignment view of induction more consistently corre-

sponds to a structural alignment view of similarity and
analogy than does Lassaline’s.

References
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: Theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2),
155–170.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524–575.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Similarity, interactive activation, and mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 23, 3–
28.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the nonindependence of
features in similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 222–262.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science,
13, 295–355.
Lassaline, M. E. (1996). Structural alignment in Induction and Similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 22,
754–770.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431–467.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review,
100, 254–278.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological Reiview, 97, 185–200.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 231–280.
Thagard, P., Holyoak, K. J., Nelson, G., & Gochfeld, D.
(1990). Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction.
Artificial Intelligence, 46, 259–310.

