UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Experience, Sensory Qualitities, and the Visual Field

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9dr9q2sk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Meehan, Douglas B.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Experience, Sensory Qualities, and the Visual Field
Douglas B. Meehan (dbmeehan@yahoo.com)
Department of Philosophy, CUNY Graduate Center
365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016-4309 USA

Abstract
An explanation of the qualitative nature of visual
experience must account for the spatial character of
visual sensations. We need mental locations and a
mental visual field to explain how visual sensations
enable us to perceive physical entities as located, to
explain the differences in the spatial characters of
sensations revealed in introspection, and to explain
the spatial character of visual anomalies such as
nonillusory afterimages. But mental locations are
properties of mental states, not objects, so they must
not be spatial locations.
I argue that the
homomorphism view of sensory qualities, pioneered
by Wilfrid Sellars (1956, 1959, 1960, 1967) can best
explain the nature of mental space.
This view
explains mental locations as nonspatial mental
counterparts of physical locations. Austen Clark
(1996, 2000) rejects mental location, claiming that
the spatial character of sensory experience can be
explained in terms of the spatial properties of distal
stimuli and of sensory receptors. I argue that Clark’s
theory fails in two respects: 1) it fails to explain how
it is that we individuate our sensory experiences with
respect to apparent spatial differences, and 2) we
cannot make the psychophysical identifications
needed to get Clark’s theory off the ground without
first picking out the sensations by their mental
properties.

Introduction
The current philosophical literature on visual experience
is rife with debate on the issue of the qualitative
character of sensory experience. The debate focuses
largely on the topic of color and color qualia. But an
explanation of color qualia will not exhaust a
philosophical account of the qualitative nature of visual
experience. We must also explain the nature of the
spatial character of visual experience. Just as there is a
qualitative difference between seeing something red and
seeing something green, there is a qualitative difference
between seeing a red patch off to one’s right and seeing
a red patch off to one’s left. What it is like to see a red
patch off to one’s right is different from what it is like
to see a red patch off to one’s left.
But what are these qualitative spatial properties and
relations? Are they actually spatial? When one has a
visual experience of a red patch to the left of another red
patch are there two phenomenal red entities located next
to one another? And if they are located in any sense,

where are they located? Are they located in some
mental space—a visual field?
I argue that we do need to posit a mental space or
visual field to explain the spatial character of visual
experience. And I argue that the homomorphism view
of sensory qualities, pioneered by Wilfrid Sellars
(1956, 1959, 1960, 1967)1 offers the best solution. In
so doing I examine and reject Austen Clark’s (1996,
2000) recent repudiation of mental space.

1. From Sensations to Sensory Fields
At the most basic level, we become conscious of our
surroundings by having sensations that represent those
surroundings. Sensations have perceptual roles. We
see a red firetruck because we have a sensation of a
certain type. We see a yellow Volkswagen because we
have a sensation of another type. We see a red firetruck
to the left of a yellow Volkswagen because we have a
sensation of yet another type. Visual sensations enable
us to perceive the firetruck next to the Volkswagen.
If we detect differences in visual stimuli by having
different sensations, those sensations must vary in ways
corresponding to perceptible differences in visual
stimuli. Since we see entities by seeing differences in
color, visual sensations must have properties
corresponding to physical color properties. I will call
these properties mental colors.
I adopt Sellars’s
notational device of suffixing a ‘*’ to color predicates
to indicate reference to mental colors—e.g., red* is the
sensory quality that enables us to perceive surfaces we
call red.
We also perceive visual stimuli as having spatial
properties. That we perceive the red firetruck as being
to the left of the yellow Volkswagen seems to entail
that our visual sensations have properties corresponding
to the locations of the firetruck and Volkswagen. If
sensations enable us to perceive stimuli as being
located, sensations must have properties corresponding
to locations. They must have mental locations, or
locations*. Seeing an entity off to the right requires
that one has a visual sensation with a property
corresponding to being off to the right. Thus, we can
infer that there are mental locations from the fact that

The homomorphism view has also been argued for more
recently by David Rosenthal (1998, 1999, 2000) and
Sydney Shoemaker (1975). The version I argue for is
closest to Rosenthal’s.

1

we can perceive distal stimuli as occupying physical
locations.
We can also introspect our sensations. When we do,
we are conscious of them as having certain qualities.
For instance, when introspecting the sensation that
enables us to perceive the red firetruck to the left of the
yellow Volkswagen, we are conscious of the sensation
as being of a certain type—a sensation of a big red
patch to the left of a little yellow patch. Introspection
reveals the ways that sensations differ from one another,
so it reveals something about the mental properties of
those sensations. Inasmuch as sensations can differ
with respect to apparent color and apparent location,
they must have colors* and locations*.
In fact, we have sensations even in the absence of the
appropriate stimuli. For instance, I can have a
sensation of red at the center of my visual field without
there being anything red directly in front of my eyes.
We might claim that I am in the kind of sensation
normally had when there is a red thing in the center of
my distal visual field. Inasmuch as this state differs
from the kind of sensation normally had when there is a
red thing in the periphery of my distal visual field, we
need to explain how it differs. This suggests some
property of the sensations corresponding to the
locations of their normal distal causes.
A strong example of sensations in the absence of
stimuli is the phenomenon of nonillusory afterimages.
A nonillusory afterimage is a sensation of a bright
pattern one has after a flashbulb goes off in one’s eyes.
The afterimage seems to occlude objects in the distal
visual field.
When one moves one’s eyes, the
afterimage appears to occlude different objects.
But these afterimages are nonillusory. One does not
think that there is some bright patterned object moving
along with one’s eyes. One thinks that it just appears
that way. As Paul Boghossian and David Velleman
put it, "The after-image must … be described as
appearing in a location without appearing to be in that
location ..." (1989, p. 91). An explanation of this fact,
according to Boghossian and Velleman, is that the
afterimage is located in a visual field. This visual field
overlays the distal visual field, so the afterimage
occludes whatever its region of the visual field happens
to overlay. Since an afterimage appears in a location
without appearing to be in a location, there must be
mental space in addition to physical space.
But how do we explain mental space? Is it actually
spatial? Is the afterimage located on some two
dimensional transparency? This hardly seems feasible.
If the mental visual field is an overlay through which
we look at the world, we still need to explain how it is
that we look through the overlay. Such an explanation
must posit further states to mediate our seeing through
the overlay. This will require another overlay, and so
on ad infinitum.
Further, sensations are mental states, or events, not
objects. Although a state is a state of some entity

located somewhere, it is not clear how that location
helps explain differences in the apparent locations of
sensations.
If we must posit mental space, we must explain it as
nonspatial. And if mental space is nonspatial, we must
explain how mental locations correspond to spatial
locations.
The homomorphism view of sensory
experience meets these challenges.

2. The Homomorphism View
The homomorphism view explains the relationship
between a physical stimulus property and its mental
counterpart property in terms of a common structure
between their respective quality families. I will
motivate the view with respect to color vision, and I
will then explain how it extends to spatial experience.
According to the homomorphism view, physical red
and red* are not the same property, nor do they
resemble each other. They are counterparts in virtue of
a similarity between the property families of which they
are members—the color and color* families.
A property family is comprised of properties that
resemble and differ from one another in varying
degrees. For instance, the color family is comprised of
perceptible colors.2 Red is more similar to orange than
it is to green. Green is more similar to blue than it is
to pink. It is a similarity between the relationships
among their respective members that make two property
families counterpart families. Two properties of
different property families are counterparts in virtue of
occupying the same positions in their respective quality
families. And a property’s position is determined by
the similarities and differences it bears to all of the
other members of the quality family.
For instance, just as red is more similar to orange
than it is to green, red* is more similar to orange* than
it is to green*. Red* resembles and differs from the
other colors* in ways that are homomorphic to the
ways that red resembles and differs from the other
colors. In virtue of this, red* and red occupy the same
place in their respective quality families.
The homomorphism view also explains the
correlations between the spatial properties of distal
stimuli and the mental spatial properties of sensations.3
I take physical colors to be sets of reflectance properties.
Two surfaces that appear in normal lighting conditions to
be the same shade of red are the same color. But such
surfaces can have very different physical makeups. These
surfaces, called metamers, pose a problem for the view that
colors are physical light-reflectance properties of surfaces
(see C.L. Hardin, 1993). But the problem can be countered
by taking colors to be sets of reflectance properties, all of
which yield the same ratio of light wavelength.
3
This paper concerns the issue of location. But the
homomorphism view accounts for other spatial properties,
such as shapes and sizes. Squares are more similar to
trapezoids than they are to circles. Likewise a square*
sensation is more similar to a trapezoidal* sensation than
2

Sensations have apparent locations that normally
correspond to the locations of distal stimuli. A red*
sensation at the center of the visual field is normally
caused by a red stimulus at the center of the distal
visual field. The homomorphism view posits two
distinct properties: Center-of-the-visual-field* and being
at the center of the visual field. Stimuli in the center of
the distal visual field normally cause sensations at-thecenter-of-the-visual-field (CVF*, hereafter). A red*
sensation to-the-left-of* a green* sensation is normally
caused by a red stimulus to the left of a green stimulus,
both of which are located in the distal visual field.4
The sum total of location* properties of visual
sensations at a given time constitute the mental visual
field at that time. So the CVF* is that location*
equidistant* from all opposing points on the boundary*
of the visual field, where the boundary* is defined by
the limits of locations*. For instance, the left*
boundary is set by the sensation to which no other
sensation is to-the-left* of it.
Locations* within the mental visual field correspond
to locations of entities in the distal visual field in
virtue of resembling and differing from other locations*
in ways homomorphic to the ways locations in the
distal visual field resemble and differ from one another.
Two stimuli can resemble each other more than either
resembles a third with respect to location in a distal
visual field. Two objects to my left are more similar to
each other than either is to an object to my right, with
respect to at least one dimension of location. Both
have the property of being to the left of me, while the
third has the property of being to the right of me. The
left objects will be more similar with respect to
location to a fourth object directly in front of me than
they will be to the object on the right. This is because
being to the left of me is more similar to being directly
in front of me than it is to being to the right of me
(with respect to the left/right axis of location
properties).
And sensations can resemble and differ with respect
to mental location. Take a red* sensation off-to-theleft*, a yellow* sensation in the CVF*, and a blue*
sensation off-to-the-right*.
The red* sensation
resembles the yellow* sensation more than it resembles
the blue* sensation, with respect to location*. This is
because to-the-left* is more similar to CVF* than it is
to to-the-right*.
The structures of the quality families of the distal
visual field locations and of the location* properties are
homomorphic to one another. So CVF* and being in
it is to a circular* sensation. The structure of the shape
quality family and that of the shape* quality family are
homomorphic to one another. Square* occupies the same
position in its quality family as square occupies in its
quality family.
4
Stimulus location properties are determined relative to a
perceiver. Which stimulus is to the left of another depends
on the location from which one sees them.

the center of the distal visual field are counterpart
properties in virtue of their occupying the same place in
their respective quality families, as fixed by the ways
they resemble and differ from other properties of those
families.
The result of this view is an explanation of how we
see objects as being located where they are. We have
visual sensations with location* properties. These
sensations are not really located in any two-dimensional
overlay visual field. Rather, the sensations are located*
in the mental visual field. An afterimage appears where
it appears because it has a certain location*. It appears
to occlude the photographer’s face because its being in
that location* means that no sensations of his face can
have that location* at that time.
Location* properties help explain how it is that
having a CVF* sensation enables us to locate a distal
stimulus directly in front of us. CVF* sensations carry
information to the effect that there is something directly
in front of one’s eyes in virtue of CVF* being the
counterpart property of being in the center of the distal
visual field. It is in virtue of this counterpart relation
that having a CVF* sensation helps us locate an object
in the center of the visual field, as opposed to one off
to the left of the visual field. And it is important to
note that the homorphism view explains the counterpart
relation in terms of similarity matrices that are readily
accessible to us in ordinary visual experience and
introspection.
When we introspect our sensations we pick them out,
not by their perceptual role, but by their sensory
qualities—that is, by their *-properties.
When I
introspect my sensation of a red patch to the left of
another red patch, I pick out two sensations in virtue of
their different locations*. That is, I pick them out in
virtue of the ways they resemble and differ from one
another and other sensations.

3. Clark’s Rejection of Mental Space
Austen Clark (1996, 2000) rejects the existence of
mental sensory fields. He claims that we need not
mention locations of sensations to explain spatial
experience. And he offers his feature-placing theory to
this end.
Feature-placing aims to explain spatial experience in
terms of the spatial properties of distal stimuli, the
spatial properties of sensory receptors, and neural
activation patterns. The only space needed is physical
space.
According to Clark, "Sensing proceeds by picking
out place-times and characterizing qualities that appear
at those place-times." (2000, p. 74) A sensation
identifies a location and qualifies it as being a certain
way.5 It does this in virtue of two variables. The
Stimulus location properties are determined relative to a
perceiver. Which stimulus is to the left of another depends
on the location from which one sees them.

5

sensation characterizes the place-time as being some
way in virtue of its sensory qualities. A sensation
qualifies a place-time as being red in virtue of the
sensation’s being red*. Clark’s theory is in keeping
with the homomorphism view with respect to so called
secondary qualities.
But which place-time is qualified as being red is
determined, not by some location* property, but by the
firing of what Clark calls a sensory name—a stand-in
for the mechanisms of spatial discrimination. These
mechanisms identify place-times by what Clark calls
place-coding, which he describes with respect to
somesthetic experience.
A group of sensory receptors on the surface of the
skin fire when stimulated, sending a neural impulse to
the somatosensory cortex, where a certain neural
activation pattern occurs. That neural activation pattern
is the neural correlate of some bodily sensation—e.g.,
that of an itch (pp. 169-170). Where it is that the
physical itch is felt to be depends on which groups of
receptors fire (p. 173). These receptor groups are picked
out by n-tuples of coordinates corresponding to the
different dimensions in which the receptor groups vary
in location. Similarly, the qualities of sensations can
be coordinatized according to the dimensions in which
those sensations vary (p. 176).
Accordingly, in a visual experience a surface is
represented as being red in virtue of receptor groups on
the retina firing in a certain way, leading to an
activation in the visual cortex corresponding to red*.
The red surface is represented as being off to the left in
virtue of receptor groups on the left side of the retina
firing. The red* state realized in the cortex is indexed
to a particular place-coding n-tuple picking out that
receptor group.
Having a sensation of red in the left of the visual
field is a function of which receptor groups fire, and
how they fire. The difference between a sensation of
red in the left of the visual field and a sensation of red
in the center of the visual field is just a difference in
which retinal receptor groups fire. Cases of sensations
without distal causes, and anomalies like afterimages
are just misfirings of receptor pools. Feature-placing
appears to have solved the problem of the spatial
character of sensations without reference to mental
space.

4. Why We Need Mental Space and Why
Clark Does Too
But feature-placing cannot account for differences in
the apparent locations of sensory qualities for two
reasons. First, we cannot pick out our sensations
without reference to some kind of spatial properties of
those states. And second, we cannot identify the
neurophysiological processes responsible for such
variations without first individuating sensations by
their mental spatial properties. Clark avoids positing
mental space by resorting to spatial properties of

stimuli and neurophysiological mechanisms. But his
theory can only get off the ground if it accepts some
sort of locations for sensations.
A visual sensation of a red patch to the left of a green
patch is different from an experience of a red patch
above a green patch. All of us who have visual
experiences know this. We are conscious of these states
as differing in some locational way. Without properties
of sensations corresponding to spatial properties, we
cannot discriminate between these two states. They
would both be states of just a green patch and a red
patch. So, unless the color* patches are located in
physical space6, and thus have spatial properties, they
must either (a) be located in some sensory field, or (b)
not exist. Clark must reject the existence of sensory
states, or accept the existence of sensory fields and the
sensory locations that comprise them.
But Clark does not reject sensations. He claims that
sensations have sensory qualities such as red*, itchy*
and high-C*. These are properties sensations must
have if they fill the perceptual roles they fill. And they
are properties in virtue of which we become conscious
of those sensations when introspecting them. When I
introspect the sensation I have when looking at a red
firetruck, I am conscious of it as a red* sensation.
But I am conscious of such sensations as varying in
apparent location as well. And two sensations can only
help in discriminating between two differently located,
but otherwise identical objects if those sensations differ
in ways relating to the differences in object locations.
The best explanation is that sensations have mental
locations.
Further, we need to pick out our sensory experiences
by their mental properties in order to identify their
neurophysiological correlates. In order to identify the
neurophysiological processes responsible for the
appearance of a red patch in the center of my visual
field, we need to pick out the appearance of a red patch
in the center of my visual field. We do not do this by
identifying properties of sensory receptors, nor of neural
activation patterns. We pick out the appearance by its
properties. Since such appearances can differ with
respect to apparent location, there must be mental
location properties.
Clark claims that variation in the spatial character of
appearances is explained in terms of the spatial
locations of distal stimuli and sensory receptors. Clark
thus appeals to the properties of neurophysiological
processes to explain spatial variations in experience.
But we determine that firings of receptor groups are
responsible for certain locational features of sensory
experience by discovering that those firings occur when
Frank Jackson (1977) has argued that colors are mental
entities that exist in physical space. An important
distinction between his account of colors and Clark’s
account is that Jackson takes colors to be sense-data,
whereas Clark takes mental colors to be properties of
mental states.

6

and only when subjects have sensory experiences with
those locational features. To determine which receptor
groups are firing we monitor neurophysiological
activity in the subjects. To determine the kind of
sensory experience the subject is having we monitor the
subject’s overt and verbal behavior.7 If the subject
reports having a sensation of red in the center of the
visual field, we infer that he has a sensation of red in
the center of the visual field. These inferences rely on
the presumed ability of the subject to pick out sensory
experiences by their mental properties—in these cases,
in part by their mental spatial properties. So Clark’s
explanation of the spatial character of experience relies
on the existence of spatial qualities of sensations by
which we pick out these sensations.
But the homomorphism avoids these problems. We
pick out our sensations by their sensory qualities.
These qualities include mental locations. And since we
can pick out our sensations by these location*
properties, we can come to
identify the
neurophysiological correlates of these states. Further,
the homomorphism view explains the spatial character
of visual experience without the implausible claim that
such character depends on actual spatial locations of
sensations and sensory qualities.

References
Boghossian, Paul & Velleman, David (1989) Colour as
a Secondary Quality. In A. Byrne & D. Hilbert
(Eds.) Readings on Color, volume 1. MIT.
Clark, Austen (1993) Sensory Qualities. Oxford
University Press.
Clark, Austen (1996) Three Varieties of Visual Field.
Philosophical Psychology, 9, no. 4, 477-495.
Clark, Austen (2000) A Theory of Sentience. Oxford
University Press.
Dretske, Fred (1995) Naturalizing the Mind. MIT
Press.
Hardin, C.L. (1993) Color for Philosophers:
Unweaving the Rainbow, expanded edition. Hackett.

I am sympathetic to David Lewis’s (1972) account of
psychophysical identifications.
Lewis claims that
identifying the neural correlates of mental states requires
an understanding of the platitudes about mental states.
This seems the right way to go about identifying the
neural correlates of mental states inasmuch as mental
states are the sensations, thoughts, desires, emotions, etc.
that we report having. This should not preclude the
importance of scientific psychology in making the
identifications. Scientific psychology will have to draw
distinctions that the folk do not always make themselves
with respect to their mental states. These distinctions are
drawn by running controlled experiments designed to
isolate certain phenomena. But the psychologist can only
design the experiments to draw these distinctions if he
accepts that what he is trying to determine is somehow
determined first by folk psychology.

7

Harman, Gilbert (1990) The Intrinsic Quality of
Experience. Philosophical Perspectives, 4, 31-52.
Harman, Gilbert (1996) Explaining Objective Color in
Terms of Subjective Reactions. In A. Byrne & D.
Hilbert (Eds.) Readings on Color, volume 1. MIT.
Jackson, Frank (1977) Perception. Cambridge.
Lewis, David (1972) Psychophysical and Theoretical
Identifications. Australasian Journal of Philosophy,
L, 3 (December), 249-258.
Peacocke, Christopher (1992) A Study of Concepts.
MIT.
Rosenthal, David M. (1998) Sensory Quality and the
Relocation Story. Philosophical Topics, 26, 1 and 2
(Spring and Fall), 321-350.
Rosenthal, David M. (1999) The Colors and Shapes of
Visual Experience. In
Consciousness
and
Intentionality:
Models and Modalities of
Attribution, Denis Fisette (Ed.). Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Rosenthal, David M. (2000) Color, Mental Location,
and the Visual Field. Consciousness and Cognition
9.
Sellars, Wilfrid (1956) Empiricism and the Philosophy
of Mind. In W. Sellars, Science, Perception and
Reality. Ridgeview, 1963.
Sellars, Wilfrid (1959) Being and Being Known. In W.
Sellars, Science, Perception and Reality. Ridgeview,
1963.
Sellars, Wilfrid (1960) Phenomenalism. In W. Sellars,
Science, Perception and Reality. Ridgeview, 1963.
Sellars, Wilfrid (1967) Sensibility and Understanding.
In W. Sellars, Science and Metaphysics. Ridgeview,
1992.
Shoemaker, Sydney (1975) Functionalism and Qualia.
Philosophical Studies XXVII, 5 (May), 292-315.
Tye, Michael (1995) Ten Problems of Consciousness.
MIT Press.
Tye, Michael (1996) Perceptual Experience is a ManyLayered Thing. In E. Villanueva (Ed.) Philosophical
Issues, 7, 1996, 117-126.

