UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Superstitious Perceptions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c65m61x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Gosselin, Frederic
Schyns, Philippe G.
Bonnar, Lizann
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Superstitious Perceptions
Frédéric Gosselin (GOSSELIF@PSY.GLA.AC.UK)
Philippe G. Schyns (PHILIPPE@PSY.GLA.AC.UK)
Lizann Bonnar (LIZANN@PSY.GLA.AC.UK)
Liza Paul (LIZA@PSY.GLA.AC.UK)
Department of Psychology, University of Glasgow, 58 Hillhead Street
Glasgow, Scotland, G12 8QB UK

Abstract
It has long been observed that we sometime perceive
complex scenes in blots, rocks, or clouds, but the
phenomenon has attracted little scientific attention. We
propose that a weak–or superstitious–match between a
memory template and a sparse stimulus is responsible for
such perceptions. We provide reverse-correlation evidence
for this theory.

Introduction
If you look at walls that are stained or made of different
kinds of stones […] you can think you see in them certain
picturesque views of mountains, rivers, rocks, trees, plains,
broad valleys, and hills of different shapes […] battles and
rapidly moving figures, strange faces and costumes, as well
as an infinite number of things […]
(Leonardo da Vinci, Notebooks)

We have all seen a human face or a landscape in a
cloud floating by, in a pebble lying on a beach, or in
blots on a wall.
Notorious examples of this
phenomenon include the Mars channels and the Man on
the Moon; Hermann Rorschach has even made it the
basis of a projective test. The earliest known reference
to the phenomenon reaches back as far as classical
antiquity, and thousands of others have been
enumerated (Janson, 1973; Gombrich, 1960). Given
this human fascination for the phenomenon, it is
surprising how little–if any–scientific attention it has
received. Here, we provide evidence that these
perceptions result from a weak–or superstitious–match
between a memory template and a sparse stimulus.
Beyond the anecdotes, a rigorous study of superstitious
perceptions could reveal important properties of
internal object representations. It is one aim of our
research to illustrate this point.
We instructed naïve observers to decide whether
one particular target (the letter 'S' in Experiment 1 and a
smiling face in Experiment 2) was present or not in
stimuli. No signal was ever presented in the stimuli.
Each stimulus comprised only two-dimensional static
bit “white” noise. White noise has several desirable
properties: It has equal energy across the entire spatial
frequency spectrum and does not correlate across trials.
In other words, white noise does not in itself represent
coherent structures in the image plane and across trials.
These properties make white noise the perfect basis
for reverse correlation (see Appendix), a statistical

technique that uses noise to derive the information the
observer uses to respond in a particular visual task (e.g.,
Ahumada & Lovell, 1971; Beard & Ahumada, 1998;
Neri, Parker & Blakemore, 1999; Gold, Murray,
Bennett & Sekuler, 2000). In Experiment 1, we used
reverse correlation (supplemented with careful
debriefing) to assess the properties of the letter ‘S’ that
the observers superstitiously perceived (remember that
they only saw white noise). Experiment 2 replicated the
findings in the more realistic case of faces.

Experiment 1: ’S’ as in Superstitious
In this experiment, we asked a first subject to detect in
white noise the presence of a black 'S' on a white
background filling the image. As just explained, only
bit noise was presented.

Method
Subject
One 24-year old female student from the University of
Glasgow with normal vision was paid £50 to participate
in this study. She was an experienced psychophysical
observer, but had no knowledge about the goals of the
experiment.
Procedure
The experiment ran on a Power PC Macintosh using a
program written with the Psychophysics Toolbox for
Matlab (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997). It comprised
20,000 trials equally divided into 40 blocks. The
subject took two weeks to complete the experiment. A
trial consisted in the presentation of one 50 x 50 pixels
(2 x 2 deg of visual angle) static bit noise image with a
black-pixel density of 50%. No signal was ever
presented. The subject was told, however, that she was
participating in a detection experiment. She was
instructed to say whether or not a black letter 'S' on a
white background filling the image was present. No
more detail was provided about the 'S'. We told her that
50% of the trials were positive. The subject was under
no time pressure to respond.
When the 20,000 trials were completed, we
debriefed the subject. We asked her the following
questions: How often did she see the letter? When she

saw it, how noisy was it? What strategy did she use to
respond?
Results and discussion
On 22.7% of the trials the subject pressed on the ’yes’
key, indicating that an ’S’ was present. During
debriefing, she said that she saw an ’S’ each time she
responded positively, and she estimated the quantity of
noise in the letter ’S’ to vary between 30% and 50%.
She summarized her strategy as follows: "I simply
waited to see if the S "jumped out at me"."
All the static bit noise images leading to a ’yes’
response were added together and so were those leading
to a ’no’ response. The two resulting images, the ’yes’
and the ’no’ images, were normalized.
A raw
classification image was then computed by subtracting
the normalized ’no’ image from the normalized ’yes’
image. This classification image is the linear template
that best explains the behavior of the subject in the least
square sense of the term (see Appendix).
There is an objective method to understand the
information that drove the illusory perceptions of the
‘S’ in the experiment. As explained earlier, white noise
is completely unbiased. If the observer responded
randomly (i.e., without having the illusion of the
presence of an ‘S’), the classification image would itself
be unbiased. From this reasoning, any bias appearing in
the spectral analysis of the observer’s classification
image should indicate the structures underlying the
illusory perceptions. The spectral analysis reveal a bias
for information concentrated between 1 and 3 cycles
per image, with a peak at 2 cycles per image (see arrow
in Figure 1a). This is consistent with Solomon and
Pelli's (1994) finding that letter identification is most
efficient around 3 cycles per letter.

Figure 1. (a) Distribution of energy across the spectrum. (b)
Classification image low-passed at 3 cycles per image.

We can visualize the information that drove the
illusory detection by filtering the raw classification
image with a low-pass Butterworth filter with a cutoff
at 3 cycles per image. To provide a better depiction, we
further remove all the outlier pixel intensities (two
standard deviations away from the mean).
The
resulting image is a black 'S' on a white background.
To summarize, we have induced illusory
perceptions of an ‘S’ by asking one subject to detect
this letter in noise. Unknown to her, the stimuli did not
comprise the letter, but only white noise. If the subject
had been performing only according to the stimulus
(i.e., in a bottom-up manner), her classification image
should have had the same properties as noise—i.e.,
having identical energy across all spatial frequencies.
However, there was a marked peak of energy between 1
and 3 cycles per degree that could only arise from topdown influences on the interpretation of white noise.
Further analyses revealed the precise shape of the letter
that the subject thought she saw. Specifically, it is
worth pointing out that the best depiction of the
information used

Experiment 2: Simile smile
In Experiment 2, we generalized the technique to a
more complicated stimulus, using another subject. The
task was to discriminate between a smiling and nonsmiling face. However, the face presented in noise had
no mouth whatsoever.

Method
Subject
One 26-year old female student at the University of
Glasgow with normal vision was paid £50 to take part
in this study. She was naïve with respect to the goals of
the experiment, but was an experienced psychophysics
observer.
Procedure
The experiment ran on a Macintosh G4 using a program
written with the Psychophysics Toolbox for Matlab
(Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997). It consisted in 20,000
trials equally divided in 40 blocks. The subject took
three weeks to complete the experiment. In each trial,
one sparse image spanning 256 x 256 pixels (5.72 x
5.72 deg of visual angle) was presented. This image
comprised 27.5% of the black pixels of the contours of
a mouthless face (see the white marker in Figure 2b)
randomly sampled and, for the remainder, of bit noise
with the same density of black pixels. No signal was
therefore presented in the mouth area.
The subject was instructed to decide whether the
face was smiling or not–no detail was provided
regarding the alternative expressions. This ensured that
the subject focused on seeking information for "smile".
We also told her that the face would be smiling in 50%

of the trials. The subject was under no time pressure to
respond. Following the 20,000 trials, we debriefed the
subject as in Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
On 7.07% of the trials the subject pressed on the ’yes’
key, indicating that the "noisy" face was smiling.
During debriefing, she explained that she had been very
conservative and that she had only responded ’yes’ when
she was absolutely certain that the face was indeed
smiling. The subject looked for teeth and used the eyes
and the nose to localize the mouth.
All the static bit noise images leading to a ’yes’
response were added to form a ’yes’ image, and all those
leading to a ’no’ were added to form a ’no’ image. A
raw classification image was then computed by
subtracting the normalized ’no’ image from the
normalized ’yes’ image.
The distribution of energy in the spectrum for the
raw classification image is represented in Figure 2a.
The energy is concentrated in the bandwidth ranging
from 1 to 20 cycles per image (from 0.35 to 12.29
cycles per face–see arrow in Figure 2a). This roughly
corresponds to the most efficient bandwidth found by
Bayer, Schwartz and Pelli (1998) in an expression
identification task (i.e., maximum efficiency centered at
8 cycles per face).

Conclusion
The evidence we have gathered in two experiments
corroborates the idea that superstitious perceptions
result from a weak match between a memory template
and a sparse stimulus. We have shown that we could
induce superstitious perceptions of a letter ('S',
Experiment 1) and part of a face (a mouth expressing a
smile, Experiment 2) in bit noise. Reverse correlation
demonstrated that observers in these experiments used
information from memory ressembling an 'S' and a
smile, respectively. It is important to stress that this
information did not originate from the signal, by from
their memory. It is only because these memory
representations are partially correlated with white noise
that the superstitious perceptions occur. But then,
because white noise is weakly correlated with every
visual stimulus, this technique could in principle extend
to depicting a wide range of visual representations. In
our experiments, these representations had properties
expected from what is know in the recognition
literature. So, the superstitious perceptions were not
random hallucinations, but instead well-constrained
perceptions derived from specific knowledge.
Superstitious perceptions could therefore be used to
explore the properties of representations in the absence
of any bottom-up information.

Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded by ESRC grant R000
237 901.

References

Figure 2. (a) Distribution of energy across the spectrum. (b)
Classification image low-passed at 20 cycles per image.

Figure 2b is the raw classification image low-passed
at 20 cycles per image with a Butterworth filter–with
outlier pixel values removed, followed by a
normalization. A white mouthless face marker has been
superimposed on filtered classification image. A smile
revealing teeth is clearly visible (see circled area in
Figure 2b).

Ahumada, A. J. & Lovell, J. (1971). Stimulus features
in signal detection. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 49, 1751-1756.
Bayer, H. M., Schwartz, O. & Pelli, D. (1998).
Recognizing facial expressions efficiently. IOVS, 39,
S172.
Beard, B. L. & Ahumada, A. J. (1998). "A technique to
extract the relevant features for visual tasks" In B. E.
Rogowitz and T. N. Pappas (Eds.), Human Vision
and Electronic Imaging III, SPIE Proceedings, 3299,
79-85.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox.
Spatial Vision, 10, 433-436.
Gold, J., Murray, R. F., Bennett, P. J. & Sekuler, A. B.
(2000). Deriving behavioral receptive fields for
visually completed contours. Current Biology, 10
(11), 663-666.
Gombrich, E. H. (1960). Art and Illusion: A Study in
the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. London:
Phaidon Press Ltd.

Janson, H. W. (1973). "Chance images" In Philip P.
Wiener (Ed.), Dictionary of the History of Ideas.
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Neri, P., Parker, A. J. & Blakemore, C. (1999). Probing
the human stereoscopic system with reverse
correlation. Nature, 401 (6754), 695-698.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for
visual psychophysics: Transforming numbers into
movies. Spatial Vision, 10, 437-442.
Solomon, J. A. & Pelli, D. G. (1994). The visual filter
mediating lettre identification. Nature, 369, 395-397.
Sprent, P. (1969). Models in Regression and Related
Topics. London: Methuen & Co Ltd.

Appendix
We suppose that the observer matches two vectors at
each trial of the experiment: a stimulus vector of
dimensionality k and a template vector ß of the same
dimensionality representing the memorized pattern to
match against the input (e.g., the letter ‘S’ or a smiling
face).
Suppose further that we arrange the n stimuli of the
experiment in the n * k matrix X. The behavior of the
observer for the whole experiment is described by
y = ßX+ε,
where y is an n-dimensional vector of decision
responses, and ε is an n-dimensional vector of "error"
random variables with E(ε) = 0 and V(ε) = σ2I.
For simplicity, the “target present” and “target
absent” responses in y as well as the white and black
pixels in X are encoded with values of 1 and –1,
respectively.
Given that we know X and can observe y, we can
resolve the linear system of equations by finding ß.
The least square solution requires that we minimize the
scalar sum of squares
S = (y-Xß)’(y-Xß)
for variations in ß. Differentiating, we have
2X’(y-Xß) = 0,
which gives, for our least square estimator, the vector
ß = (X’X)-1X’y.
This is the logic of standard multiple regression (e.g.,
Sprent, 1969). Because our stimulus vectors are
uncorrelated, we have
(X’X)-1 = (kI)-1 = k-1I,
Therefore,
ß = k-1X’y.
Leaving the constant k aside, this equation reduces to
summing all stimuli that led to a ’yes’ response and
subtracting from it the sum of all the stimuli that led to
a ’no’ responses. This is the essence of reverse
correlation.

