UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Taxonomic relations and cognitive economy in conceptual organization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34p1h4m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Borghi, Anna M.
Caramelli, Nicoletta

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Taxonom ic relations and cognitive econom y in conceptualorganization
A nna M .Borghi(borghi@ psibo.unibo.it)
D epartm entofPsychology,5 V ialeBertiPichat
Bologna,40127 ITA LY

N icoletta C aram elli(ncaram elli@ psibo.unibo.it)
D epartm entofPsychology,5 V ialeBertiPichat
Bologna,40127 ITA LY

A bstract
This study,perform ed on children aged 5,8,and 10,and
on adults,deals w ith conceptualknow ledge organization
using a w ord association task. Participants w ere
presented w ith conceptnouns atsuperordinate,basic,and
subordinate level. Their productions w ere coded
according to 4 kinds of relations: taxonom ic, them atic,
attributive, and evaluative relations. The follow ing
results w ere found atallthe considered ages:a.notonly
low er but also superordinate level concepts elicit
attributive relations; b. the production of them atic
relations outnum bers that of taxonom ic relations thus
show ing that there is no them atic to taxonom ic shift.
These results suggest a revision of the criteria on w hich
cognitive econom y rests in know ledge organization that
w ill probably lead to a m ore com plex view of the
cognitive econom y principle.

Introduction
M any m odels ofconceptualorganization,from the
classical theory and its revised version, the binary
theory, to the prototype and som e connectionist
m odels, but not the exem plar m odels, rest on the
assum ption that the cognitive econom y principle
underlies both the storing and the retrieval of
conceptual inform ation. A ccordingly, concepts are
defined by the properties and the attributes that
establish theiridentity as w ellas by theirrelationships.
It is the hierarchical organization of taxonom ic
relations binding them together that allow s people to
infer the shared properties and attributes w hich m ake
the conceptualnetw ork coherent.
In this perspective, cognitive developm ent is a
progression tow ards the attainm ent of this
taxonom ically and hierarchically organized know ledge
structure. D uring developm ent children undergo a
them atic - to - taxonom ic shiftthatis responsible for
their m astering their dealings w ith the environm ent.
This is possible thanks to a w ellstructured know ledge
organization that rests on the hierarchical array of
taxonom ic relations. Thus, cognitive developm ent
involves the transition from a contextual or them atic
know ledge, based on the acquisition of recurrent
properties of objects and events directly experienced,

to a m ore abstractknow ledge based on the taxonom ic
relations responsible forthe w ay objects and events are
grouped into categories (Lucariello & N elson, 1985;
Lucariello,K yratzis& N elson,1992).
It is reasonable to argue, how ever, that also
inform ation that is not necessarily inferred from the
hierarchicallevels of concept plays a relevant role in
conceptual organization. It has been claim ed that
conceptualknow ledge is situated and contextually set
up (Tschacher & Scheier, 1999). In everyday life, at
differenttim es,people perceive differentobjects in the
sam e spatial context. O n the other hand, the sam e
object can be perceived in different spatial contexts
(Barsalou, 1993, 1999; Barsalou & H ale, 1993;
Barsalou & Prinz,1997).
In cognitive developm entthese argum ents lead to
the questioning of the traditional cognitive econom y
principle based on the hierarchical organization of
conceptualknow ledge.Som e authors have pointed out
that the kind of task given to children biases their
preference for them atic or taxonom ic relations
(W axm an & K osow sky, 1990; W axm an & N am y,
1997) and that them atic relations still play a role in
both older children's and adults' conceptual
organization (M arkm an, 1989; Sell, 1992). Therefore
there should be no reason to suppose that children
undergo a them atic -to -taxonom ic shift,i.e.that,w ith
age, the taxonom ic organization of conceptual
know ledge replaces them atic know ledge (O sborne &
Calhoun,1998).
M oreover, other approaches assum e that even
abstract inform ation is grounded in perception and
action (Barsalou, 1999; G lenberg, 1997; M andler,
1992; 1997; Sm ith, 1995; Sm ith & H eise, 1992).
H ow ever,these view s based on the role of perception
and action in shaping conceptualknow ledge dealw ith
difficulty w ith superordinate level concepts, i.e.
concepts,as ‘anim al’,thatdo notrefer to a particular,
concrete referent.
This study is aim ed atshedding som e lighton tw o
points: a. does them atic know ledge concur w ith the
taxonom ic organization of concepts in shaping
know ledge in children as w ell in adults, instead of

loosing its relevance? b. Can superordinate level
concepts, not referring to concrete objects, convey
perceptualinform ation?
In order to answ er these questions, the follow ing
hypothesescan be advanced:
1. H ierarchical Levels: if perceptual and action
view s of categorization hold, superordinate level
concepts, not referring to concrete objects, should
convey not only abstract but also perceptually and
action grounded inform ation.A s theiractivation should
involve the activation of their exem plars,they are also
expected to elicitattributive relations (Callanan,Repp,
M cCarthy, & Latzke, 1994; M arkm an, 1985).
M oreover, the relations elicited by basic and
subordinate level concepts should be m ore sim ilar to
each other than those elicited by superordinate level
concepts as both of them refer to concrete objects.
Therefore their activation should elicit m ainly
attributive and them atic relations.
2. Conceptual Relations: assum ing the perceptual
and action view s ofcategorization,the perceptually and
contextually grounded them atic and attributive relations
should characterize notonly children's butalso adults’
conceptual organization. Therefore no them atic - to taxonom ic shiftshould occur.
These hypotheses w ere tested on children aged 5,
8,10 in experim ent1,and on adults in experim ent2.
Participants w ere given a w ord association task to be
perform ed on concepts atdifferenthierarchicallevels,
i.e.superordinate (e.g. anim al), basic (e.g. dog), and
subordinate (e.g. hunting dog) level. The conceptual
relations produced by participants w ere classified as
taxonom ic, them atic, attributive, and evaluative
(Chaffin,1992;1997).

Experim ent1

Procedure The children w ere interview ed, one at a
tim e, in their kindergarten or school. They w ere
presented w ith a booklet. O n each page there w as a
circle and atits center there w as a concept-noun.They
w ere asked to say and then to w rite on the circle from a
m inim um of5 to a m axim um of10 associations to each
concept-noun. The circle w as supposed to prevent
children from producing chain-like associations. The
free association task, already used w ith success also
w ith very young children (N elson, 1986; Sell, 1992),
w as introduced to the children as if itw ere a gam e.A t
the end of the task, to better assess the intended
m eaning ofthe produced associations,the experim enter
asked the children w hy they had said or w ritten w hat
they had said or w ritten for each produced association
and tape-recorded theiransw ers.
C oding The data w ere transcribed and coded by tw o
independent judges (2% cases of disagreem ent solved
afterbriefdiscussion),according to 4 differentkinds of
relations (A ) Taxonom ic Relations: including
superordinate, subordinate, and co-ordinate relations:
e.g. 'bird-anim al', 'bird-parrot', 'sparrow -parrot'. The
production of taxonom ic relations does not im ply that
children m aster class inclusion (G reene, 1994); (B)
Them atic Relations: including spatial (physicianhospital),tem poral (bird-spring),action (agent,object,
and action) (bird-flies), function (chair-to sit on), and
event relation w hen the child reported a w hole story;
(C) A ttributive Relations:including partonom ic (chairleg),property (chair-brow n),and m atterrelation (chairw ood); (D ) Evaluative Relations: including m etalinguistic evaluations (oculist-I don't like him /her) as
w ellasstereotyped associations(bird-airplane).
The relations that could not be included in the
previous categories,2% ofthe relations produced,w ere
notanalyzed.

M ethod
Participants O ne-hundred and tw enty m iddle class
children,40 aged 5,40 aged 8 and 40 aged 10,living in
Bologna and the surrounding area took part in the
study.
M aterials To m aintain children’s attention, only 9
concept-nouns w ere selected, 3 superordinate (e.g.
furniture),3 basic (e.g.chair),and 3 subordinate level
concepts (e.g.high chair).The basic levelw as defined
by the com m on shape criterion according to w hich
basic level concepts w hose m em bers share a com m on
shape are the m ost inclusive ones (Lassaline,
W isniew ski,& M edin,1992). The superordinate and
the subordinate levels w ere defined respectively as
m ore generaland inclusive and m ore specific than the
basic level. A ll the selected concepts w ere countable
nouns.

D ata analysis and results
To test the hypothesis 1, the percentage of the 4
kinds of the produced relations w as com puted for each
age leveland foreach hierarchicallevel(see Table 1,2,
and 3). Three Correspondence A nalyses w ere
perform ed in orderto verify w hether,ateach age level,
the distribution of the frequencies of the 4 groups of
relations varied across the hierarchical levels. In this
analysis,based on the chisquare test,the frequencies of
the produced relations,from w hich a broad data m atrix
is derived,allow the identification of the w eightof the
different coded dim ensions and their graphical
representation.O n the graph,the geom etricalproxim ity
of the points show s the degree of their association and
the sim ilarity of their distribution (H air, A nderson,
Tatham & Black,1992;G reenacre & Blasius,1994).

Table 1: Five year olds.Percentage of the 4 kinds of
relation ateach hierarchicallevel.
Relation
Taxonom ic
Them atic
A ttributive
Evaluative

Sup
33
48
10
9

Bas
20
61
15
4

Sub
11
69
12
9

The analysis on the relations produced by 8 year
olds show s thaton the firstdim ension,w hich explains
97% ofthe totalvariance,superordinate levelconcepts,
characterized by taxonom ic relations,differ from both
basic and subordinate level concepts characterized by
them atic relations.
Table 2:Eightyear olds.Percentage of the 4 kinds of
relation ateach hierarchicallevel.
Relation
Taxonom ic
Them atic
A ttributive
Evaluative

Sup
33
34
29
4

Bas
13
53
32
3

Sub
11
49
36
4

The analysis on the relations produced by 10 year
olds show s thaton the firstdim ension,w hich explains
alm ost all the variance (99% ), superordinate level
concepts, characterized by taxonom ic relations, differ
from subordinate level concepts characterized by
them atic relations.

Superordinate levelconcepts elicitm ore taxonom ic and
less them atic relations than the low er level concepts.
H ow ever, it is w orth noting that superordinate level
concepts elicitas m any attributive relations as the other
hierarchical levels. This could m ean that perceptual
inform ation that is involved in attributive relations is
conveyed notonly by low er butalso by superordinate
level concepts.This result brings new evidence to the
perceptual and action view s of conceptual know ledge
organization.Superordinate levelconcepts elicitm ainly
taxonom ic relations at the subordinate level, i. e.
instantiations(H eit& Barsalou,1996),(98% ,99% ,and
97% in 5, 8, and 10 year olds respectively), thus
show ing their ‘plural force’ (M arkm an, 1985; 1989;
M urphy & W isniew ski,1989).The sam e is found also
in basic level concepts (88% , 72% , and 76%
respectively), though the percentage of instantiations
decreases consistently. Subordinate level concepts,
instead, elicit m ostly item s at the superordinate level
(55% ,53% ,and 52% respectively).
To test hypothesis 2 a Correspondence A nalysis
w as perform ed on the 4 kinds of relation crossed w ith
the age levels.The firstdim ension,explaining 76% of
the variance,show s the difference betw een 5 yearolds,
w ho produce m ostly them atic relations, and 10 year
olds w ho produce m ostly attributive relations.The far
less relevantsecond dim ension,explaining 24% of the
variance,show s the difference betw een 8 and 10 year
olds as these last produce evaluative relations (see
Figure 1).

0,5
0,4

0,2

Relation
Sup
Taxonom ic 30
Them atic
26
A ttributive
32
12
Evaluative

Bas
15
42
32
11

Sub
12
46
32
9

A s the percentages and the correspondence
analyses suggest, at all the ages considered, the m ain
difference betw een superordinate and low er level
concepts does not depend on the production of
attributive and evaluative relations, but on the
production of taxonom ic and them atic relations.

0,1
taxonom ic
0
them atic
-0,2
-0,1 0 A G E 8

A G E 10

AGE 5
-0,4

Table 3: Ten year olds. Percentage of the 4 kinds of
relation ateach hierarchicallevel.

evaluative

0,3

D im ension 2

The analysis on the relations produced by 5 year
olds show s thaton the firstdim ension (explaining 85%
of the total variance) superordinate level concepts,
characterized by taxonom ic relations, differ from
subordinate relations characterized by them atic
relations.O n the second dim ension (explaining 15% of
the variance), attributive relations, that characterize
basic levelconcepts,differfrom evaluative relations.

0,2attributive0,4

-0,2
D im ension 1

Figure 1:Correspondence A nalysison the 4 kinds
ofrelation ateach age level.D im ension 1 = 76% D im ension 2 = 24% .
Even though the production of them atic relations
decreases w ith age,atallthe age levels the production
of them atic relations outnum bers that of the other
relations, w hile that of taxonom ic relations does not
consistently change (see Table 4).Thus,there seem s to
be no evidence of a them atic - to - taxonom ic shift.

Furtherm ore, the production of perceptually grounded
relations,i.e.attributive relations,increases consistently
from 5 to 8 years.
Table 4:Percentage ofthe 4 kinds ofrelation produced
ateach age level.
Relation

Age
5
Taxonom ic 23
Them atic
57
A ttributive 12
Evaluative 8

Age
8
20
45
32
4

Age
10
19
38
32
10

5).A Correspondence A nalysis w as perform ed on the
frequencies of the relations produced crossed w ith the
hierarchical levels of the concept-nouns. O n the first
dim ension, explaining alm ost all the variance (98% ),
superordinate level concepts, that elicit taxonom ic
relations, differ from subordinate level concepts that
elicitthem atic relations.
Table 5:A dults.Percentage ofthe 4 kinds ofrelation at
each hierarchicallevel.
Relation
Sup Bas Sub
Taxonom ic
30
19
15
Them atic
29
37
42
A ttributive
21
21
23
Evaluative
20
22
21

This lastresultcan be interpreted in the lightofthe
grow ing analytical attitude children develop w ith
schooling.The production ofevaluative relations drops
in 8 yearoldsand then increasesagain in 10 yearolds.

Experim ent 2 w as a replica of Experim ent 1 but w ith
adultparticipants and hence w ith slightvariations.The
aim w as to testw hetherthe trends found in Experim ent
1 in 10 yearold children are m aintained in adults.

M ethod
ParticipantsTw o hundred studentsofthe U niversity of
Bologna volunteered fortheirparticipation.
M aterials Tw enty-seven concepts w ere selected; each
presented atthe 3 hierarchicallevels.
Procedure The procedure w as the sam e as in
Experim ent 1 w ith m inor adaptations for the adult
participants.The task w as notpresented as a gam e and
participants w ere allow ed to w rite associations of
associations. W hen presented w ith 'flow er', for
exam ple, they could think of 'geranium ' and had to
w rite this w ord linked to 'flow er'. If 'geranium 'm ade
them think of 'vase',they had to w rite 'vase'linked to
'geranium '.Thus,itw as possible to distinguish betw een
direct and indirect associations elicited by the given
concept nouns. Participants could produce as m any
associations as they w anted in a m axim um tim e of 5
m inutes foreach concept.O nly directassociations w ere
analyzed in thisresearch

Both percentages and Correspondence A nalysis
replicate the sam e pattern of results as that found in
children. Superordinate level concepts elicit m ore
taxonom ic relations and less them atic relations than
low er level concepts. A gain, attributive relations are
elicited in the sam e proportion by superordinate level
conceptsasby low erlevelconcepts.

C om parison betw een Experim ent1 and 2
In order to testhypothesis 2,the relations produced by
children at the different age levels and by adults w ere
com pared.
A s Figure 2 show s,the production ofthem atic relations
gradually decreases betw een 5 and 10 years,and then it
increases again. It is also w orth noting that them atic
relations are the m ost frequently produced by both
children and adults. The production of taxonom ic
relations,instead,is m ore stable across the age levels
than that of them atic relation. A greater variability is
found in the production ofattributive relations.
80
Percentages

Experim ent2

taxon

60

attrib
40
them
20

eval

0

C oding The coding procedure and codes w ere the sam e
as those used in Experim ent1.The tw o judges solved
8% casesofdisagreem entafterbriefdiscussion.

D ata analysis and results
In orderto testhypothesis 1,the percentages ofthe
4 kinds of the produced relations w ere com puted for
each hierarchicallevelofthe concept-nouns (see Table

age 5 age 8 age 10 adults

Figure 2:Percentage ofthe 4 kindsofrelationsat
each age level.
A Correspondence A nalysis w as perform ed
crossing the 4 groups of relations produced w ith the 4

different age levels (children aged 5, 8, and 10, and
adults).The firstdim ension (explaining 67% ofthe total
variance) show s the difference betw een 5 year olds,
w ho produce them atic relations,and 10 year olds w ho
produce attributive relations.O n the second dim ension
(explaining 24% ofthe variance)both 5 and 8 yearolds
w ho produce attributive and them atic relations, differ
from 10 year olds w ho produce taxonom ic relations
(see Figure 3).In this analysis adult’s productions have
no w eight;this m eans thatthe pattern of relations they
produce doesnotdifferfrom thatproduced by children.
0,3

D im ension 2

0,2

AGE 8

0,1
AGE 5
them atic
attributive
0 A D U LTS
-0,4
-0,2
0
0,2
0,4
-0,1 taxonom icA G E 10
-0,2

evaluative

-0,3
D im ension 1

Figure 3:Correspondence A nalysison the 4 kindsof
relationsateach age level.D im ension 1 = 67% ;
D im ension 2 = 24%

G eneralD iscussion
The results verify the tw o hypotheses set forth at
the beginning and supportperceptualand action-based
view sofconceptualorganization.They show that:
1.A teach considered age,superordinate,basic and
subordinate level concepts convey attributive, i. e.
perceptually grounded, inform ation. Such finding is
consistent w ith the view advanced by Sm ith & H eise
(1992) and Jones & Sm ith (1998) that perceptual
properties are relevant in distinguishing betw een
different kinds of superordinate level concepts. For
exam ple, both textural inform ation and the difference
betw een biological and non-biological m ovem ent help
to distinguish betw een very general superordinate
conceptssuch asartifactsand naturalkind concepts.
The fact that superordinate level concepts convey
m ore taxonom ic and less them atic and contextual
inform ation than low er level concepts can be a
consequence of the instantiation principle (H eit &
Barsalou,1996).The activation of superordinate level
conceptselicitinform ation abouttheirexem plarsthanks
to their eliciting both attributive relations and
instantiations of the subordinate kind. This result is
consistent w ith the w idely acknow ledged result that
superordinate level concepts activate their exem plars

(Callanan & al.,1994; M arkm an,1985;1989;M urphy
& W isniew ski,1989).
2. Contextual and them atic inform ation plays a
relevant part in organizing know ledge not only in
children but also in adults.There is no evidence of a
shift from taxonom ic - to - them atic know ledge
organization atleastusing a production task,as is the
case in this study.In fact,the production oftaxonom ic
relations does notchange across the age levels.A tall
the ages considered, concepts convey m ore them atic
than taxonom ic inform ation w hile the w eight of
attributive inform ation becom es m ore relevant w ith
age in shaping conceptual know ledge.This finding is
supported also by recent evidence on the lack of a
consistentpreference for either them atic or taxonom ic
relationsby pre-schoolchildren (O bsborne & Calhoun,
1998; W axm an & N am y, 1997) and on conceptual
flexibility and variability (Sm ith & Sam uelson,1997).
This research show s that the cognitive econom y
principle, resting on a hierarchical organization of
taxonom ic relations, is not able to handle the w ay
conceptualknow ledge isreally organized (fora sim ilar
conclusion see Slom an,1998).The cognitive econom y
principle has to be revised so thatitcan handle allthe
nuancesknow ledge inheritsfrom ourcom plex dealings
w ith the environm ent. This does not m ean that
abstraction has no part in know ledge organization, it
only m eans that even abstract know ledge originates
from directexperience.
A cknow ledgm ents
W e thank Larry Barsalou forusefulcom m ents on som e
aspects of this research and A ngela M ontanari for
statistical advice. The research reported in this paper
w as supported by grants from CN R n. 9504047,
9601807,9700385,9800572CT11 to the second author.

R eferences
Barsalou, L. W . (1993). Flexibility, structure, and
linguistic vagary in concepts: M anifestations of a
com positionalsystem ofperceptualsym bols.In A .F.
Collins, S. E. G athercole, M . A . Conw ay, P. E.
M orris (Eds.), Theories of m em ory. H illsdale, N J:
Law renceErlbaum A ssociates.
Barsalou, L. W . (1999). Perceptual Sym bol System s.
Behavioraland Brain Sciences,22,577-609.
Barsalou,L.W .,& H ale,C.R.(1993).Com ponents of
conceptual representations: from feature list to
recursive fram es.In I.V an M echelen,R.S.M ichalski
(Eds.).Categories and concepts: Theoretical views
and inductive data analysis. London: A cadem ic
Press.
Barsalou, L. W ., & Prinz, J. J. (1997). M undane
creativity in perceptual sym bol system s. In T. B.
W ard, S. M . Sm ith & J. V aids (Eds.). Creative
thought: An investigation of conceptual structures

and processes. W ashington, D C: A m erican
PsychologicalA ssociation Press.
Callanan,M .A ., Repp, A . M ., M cCarthy, M . G ., &
Latzke, M . A . (1994). Children's hypotheses about
w ord m eaning: Is there a basic level constraint?
JournalofExperim entalChild Psychology,57,108138.
Chaffin,R.(1992).The conceptof a sem antic relation.
In E.K ittay & A .Lehrer (Eds.), Fram es,Fieldsand
Contrasts: New Essays in Lexical and Sem antic
O rganization. H illsdale, N J: Law rence Erlbaum
A ssociates.
Chaffin, R. (1997). A ssociations to unfam iliar w ords:
Learning the m eanings of new w ords. M em ory and
Cognition,25,2,203-226.
G lenberg, A . M . (1997). W hat m em ory is for.
Behavioraland Brain Sciences,20,1-55.
G reene,T.R.(1994).W hatK indergartners K now about
Class Inclusion H ierarchies.JournalofExperim ental
Child Psychology,57,72-88.
G reenacre, M ., & Blasius, J. (Eds) (1994).
Correspondence analysis in the social sciences:
recent developm ents and applications. London:
A cadem ic Press.
H air,J.F.,A nderson,R.E.,Tatham ,R.L.,& Black,W .
C. (1992). M ultivariate data analysis. N ew Y ork:
M acM illan.
H eit,E.,& Barsalou,L.W .(1996). The instantiation
principle in natural categories. M em ory, 4, 4, 413451.
Jones,S.S.& Sm ith,L.B.(1998).H ow children nam e
objects w ith shoes. Cognitive D evelopm ent,13,323334.
Lassaline,M .E., W isniew ski, E. J., & M edin, D . L.
(1992). Basic levels in artificial and natural
categories.In B.Burns (Ed.),Percepts,concepts and
categories.A m sterdam :Elsevier.
Lucariello, J., K yratzis, A ., & N elson, K . (1992).
Taxonom ic know ledge: w hat kind and w hen? Child
D evelopm ent,63,978-998.
Lucariello, J., & N elson, K . (1985). Slot-filler
categories as m em ory organizers for young children.
D evelopm entalPsychology,21,272-282.
M andler, J. M . (1992). H ow to build a baby: II.
Conceptual prim itives. Psychological Review, 99,
587-604.
M andler,J.M .(1997).D evelopm entof categorization:
Perceptualand conceptualcategories.In G .Brem ner,
A . Slater, & G . Butterw orth (Eds.), Infant
D evelopm ent. Recent Advances. Hove, UK:
Psychology Press.
M arkm an,E.M .(1985). W hy superordinate category
term scan be m assnouns.Cognition,19,311-353.
M arkm an,E.M .(1989).Categorization and nam ing in
children: Problem s of induction. Cam bridge, M A:
M IT Press.
M urphy,G .L.,& Lassaline,M .E.(1997).H ierarchical
Structure in Concepts and the Basic Level of
Categorization.In K . Lam berts & D .Shanks (Eds.),

Knowledge, Concepts, and Categories. H ove, U K :
Psychology Press.
M urphy, G . L., & W isniew ski, E. J. (1989).
Categorizing objects in isolation and in scenes:W hat
a superordinate is good for.JournalofExperim ental
Psychology: Learning, M em ory and Cognition, 15,
572-586.
N elson, K . (1986). Event knowledge. Structure and
function in developm ent.H illsdale,N J:Erlbaum .
O bsborne, G . J., & Calhoun, D . O . (1998). Them es,
Taxons, and Trial Types in Children’s M atching to
Sam ple:M ethodologicalConsiderations. Journal of
Experim entalChild Psychology,68,35-50.
Sell, M . A . (1992). The developm ent of children's
know ledge structure: events, slots, and taxonom ies.
JournalofChild Language,19,659-676.
Slom an, S.A . (1998). Categorical Inference Is N ot a
Tree:The M yth ofInheritance H ierarchies.Cognitive
Psychology,35,1,1-33.
Sm ith, L. B. (1995). Stability and V ariability: the
geom etry ofchildren’s novel-w ord interpretations.In
F.D .A braham & A .R. G ilgen (Eds.), Chaos theory
in psychology.London,U K :Praeger.
Sm ith,L.B.,& H eise,D .(1992).Perceptualsim ilarity
and conceptualstructure.In B.Burns (Ed.),Percepts,
conceptsand categories.A m sterdam :Elsevier.
Sm ith,L.B.& Sam uelson,L.L.(1997).Perceiving and
Rem em bering: Category Stability, V ariability and
D evelopm ent.In K . Lam berts & D . Shanks (Eds),
Knowledge, Concepts, and Categories. H ove, U K :
Psychology Press.
Tschacher,W .,& Scheier,C.(1999).Situated and selforganizing cognition.In P.V an Loocke (Ed.), The
nature ofconcepts.London,U K :Routledge.
W axm an, S. R., & K osow sky, T. D . (1990). Nouns
m ark category relations:Toddlers'and preschoolers'
w ord-learning biases.Child D evelopm ent,61,14611473.
W axm an,S.R.,& N am y,L.L.(1997).Challenging the
notion of a them atic preference in children.
D evelopm entalPsychology,33,555-567.
W isniew ski,E.J.,Im ai,M .,& Casey,L.(1996).O n the
equivalence ofsuperordinate concepts.Cognition,60,
269-298.

