UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of semantics on past-tense inflection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wd946pt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The influence of semantics on past-tense inflection
Michael Ramscar (michael@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, Scotland.
Abstract

Semantics and past-tense inflection
Previous theories of past-tense verb inflection have
considered phonological and grammatical information to be
the only relevant factors in the inflection process (e.g. Bybee
& Moder, 1983; Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986; Kim,
Pinker, Prince & Prasada, 1991). This paper presents three
experiments that show that semantic information plays a
decisive role in determining the inflection of both existing
and novel homophone verb stems. These findings indicate
that regular and irregular inflections are determined by
semantic and phonological similarities in memory, and
furthermore that people are not responsive to the kind of
grammatical distinctions amongst verb roots that default rule
theories of inflection (Pinker, 1999) presuppose.

Introduction
In most theories -- and studies -- of past-tense verb
inflection, phonological and grammatical information have
been considered to be the two relevant factors in the
inflection process (e.g. Bybee & Moder, 1983; Rumelhart
& McClelland, 1986; Kim, Pinker, Prince & Prasada, 1991;
Pinker, 1991; 1999). However, in some models of
inflectional processing (MacWhinney & Leinbach, 1991;
Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1999), semantic processes have
been included to help explain the processing of homophone
verbs (e.g. brake/break). Since brake and break both sound
the same, phonology alone cannot distinguish which of
broke or braked is to be the correct past tense form for the
input breIk.
Although using semantic information to guide this
process appears intuitively plausible, it has not been
supported empirically, and indeed this suggestion has been
fiercely criticised by Pinker and colleagues (Kim et al,
1991; Pinker, 1999), who put forward an alternative,
natavist account of homophone inflection (Pinker, 1991;
1999). This predicts that the regularisation of irregular
sounding verb stems is driven by innate grammatical
sensitivity: verbs that are instinctively perceived to be
denominal will be automatically regularised. This account
is supported by results reported by Kim et al (1991) which
indicate that grammatical factors correlate better than
semantic factors with people's ratings of the acceptability of
past tense forms in context, although these results do not
rule out any semantic role in inflection.
So do semantics have any influence on the past tense
forms speakers produce? This paper seeks to clarify and
directly address this question.

To initially test whether semantic similarity can affect the
inflection of verb past tenses, Experiment 1 examines the
past tense forms native English speakers produce for novel
(nonce) English verbs whilst holding phonological factors
constant and varying the semantic contexts in which the
verbs are presented. The phonologically similar nonces
sprink and frink are presented in contexts that primed either
the existing phonologically similar regular forms blink or
wink, or the existing phonologically similar irregular form
drink. It is hypothesized that if semantic similarity played a
part in the inflection process, then there will be significant
differences between the proportion of regular and irregular
forms produced, in line with whether the semantic context
favored an existing regular or irregular verb.

Experiment 1
Participants. Participants were 120 visitors a shopping
mall in Edinburgh, Scotland, and 40 students at the
University of Edinburgh. All were native English speakers
and participated voluntarily in the study
Materials. A set of cards were printed with a paragraph
that contained a highlighted nonce verb (sprink or frink) in
a context in which the nonce was in its infinitive tense, and
a blank that later required its past tense. Two of the
contexts were further manipulated so that they primed
either two existing regular verbs -- blink and wink -- that
are phonologically similar to the nonces, or an existing
irregular verb -- drink -- that is phonologically similar to
the nonces. The contexts constructed are shown in Table 1:
in the drink context, the nonce was shown in a context that
used it as a verb to describe the consumption of vodka and
fish, whereas in the blink and wink context the nonce was
shown in a context that used it as a verb to describe a
symptomatic affliction of the eye-lid associated with a
fictitious disease.
A third context was designed to semantically prime
neither drink nor blink or wink (instead the nonce was used
as a verb describing a hypnotic trance and was semantically
similar to the regular verb meditate; see Table 1), whilst a
control presented the nonce in a context that provided few
semantic clues ("John likes to frink. Last week he
________").
In order to control the phonological properties of the
nonces in the semantic contexts, both the initial
presentation of the nonce, and the blank which was used to
elicit the past tense form from participants were embedded
in the same sentence substructure in each of the three

semantic contexts. Each nonce and blank was preceded by
at least two identical words (containing at least three
identical syllables), and succeeded by at least one identical
word (containing at least one syllable).

Irregular
Produced
Regular
Produced

90
80
70
60
50
40

Table 1. Examples of the semantic context passages
used in Experiment 1. The nonce (in this case, frink) is
italicized. The text highlighted in bold was used to
phonologically control the presentation of the nonce
and then later the blank, and is identical in all of the
contexts.
In
a
traditional
spring
rite
at
Moscow
University Hospital, the terminally ill patients
all frink in the onset of good weather,
consuming vast quantities of vodka and pickled
fish. In 1996, his favourite vodka glass in
hand, cancer patient Ivan Borovich _______
around 35 vodka shots and 50 pickled sprats; it
is not recorded whether this helped in his
treatment.

Passage 1 - irregular context - primes drink.
In a classical symptom of Howson’s syndrome,
patients all frink in their right eye if they
are left handed or left eye if right handed,
their eyelids opening and closing rapidly and
uncontrollably. In 1996, in extreme discomfort
due to his bad eye, Howson’s patient Ivan
Borovich _______ around 35 times per minute for
two days, causing severe damage to the muscles
in his left eyelid.

Passage 2 - regular context - primes blink and wink
In a controversial alternative therapy at Moscow
University Hospital, the terminally ill patients
all frink in the afternoons on alternate days,
going into a trance-like state that lowers the
heartbeat to alleviate pain. In 1996, emitting a
steady, low humming sound, cancer patient Ivan
Borovich _______ around two weeks or so (the
nurses
lost
count!)
without
a
day
off.
Afterwards, doctors claim, his cancer was cured.

Passage 3 - context primes neither drink nor blink and wink
but rather is similar to meditate

Procedure. Participants were verbally briefed to "read a
piece of text. As you read through the text, you will see a
novel word that has been highlighted, and later a blank,
where a word has been left out. We would like you to tell
us the form of the highlighted new word that you think is
appropriate to the context in which you find the blank. It is
important that the form you choose matches the context of
the sentence." Participants were also told to "concentrate on
how the new form of the novel word 'sounds' in the context,
not on how it might be spelled". After this briefing,
participants were given a card containing the example “A
single wucterium can be very dangerous. When they breed
and multiply, a build up of ______ can prove lethal” and
verbally informed that they might choose to fill in the blank
with, wucteriums or wucteria, or anything else, depending
on which seemed appropriate to them. These cards were
then retrieved by the experimenter, and removed from the
sight of the participant. Once this was done, the participant
was given either a frink or a sprink card. Participants read
the passage on the card and produced a verbal response to
the fill-in-the-blank inflection task.
Participants verbalized all their responses, which were
transcribed by the experimenter.

30
20
10
0
Prime Drink

No Prime

Prime
Blink/Wink

Prime Other

Figure 1. Percentages of each form of inflection for each
condition in Experiment 1.

Results. The results obtained were consistent with the
hypothesis that semantic similarity could affect the
inflection of the past tenses of nonce English verbs when
phonological similarity constraints were satisfied. Overall,
96.3% of participants produced a recognizable past tense
form (3.7% produced inflected forms of the active past
perfect progressive form, adding +/ ing to the nonce stem,
and were discarded). Of those participants that produced
past tense forms, 75.3% responded in a prime-consistent
manner (see figure 1). The bias towards producing a form
consistent with the past tense form of the existing verb
primed by the semantic context was significant in a 2x2
chi-square analysis, χ2(1, N=77) = 19.669, p<.0001).
Analyses of the individual nonces also showed the
consistency bias to be significant: sprink, χ2(1, N=39) =
9.776, p<.005); frink, χ2(1, N=38) = 7.204, p<.01).1
Comparing the responses of participants who had seen the
nonces in the context that primed drink to those who had
inflected the nonces in the semantic context that primed
neither drink nor wink/blink -- but rather indicated that the
nonce verbs described a meditative state -- showed a
significant trend towards regularization; 71.8% of
participants in this condition produced a regular past tense
form.
On the other hand, in the control condition in which
participants encountered the nonce in a semantically neutral
setting, 77.5% of participants produced an irregular pasttense. Comparing this to the 73% of participants produced
regular form for the past tenses of frink and sprink when
they encountered them in a context that primed the regulars
blink and wink indicated a tendency to regularize in the
latter case: χ2(1, N=77) = 15.901, p<.0001; frink, χ2(1,
N=38) = 5.743, p<.05; sprink, χ2(1, N=39) = 7.621, p<.01).
Similarly, comparing the neutral respondents to participants
who encountered the nonces in a context that did not prime
drink, but which did prime existing regulars such as
meditate and heal, there was also a significant increase in
the number of regular forms produced χ2(1, N=79) = 15.5,
p<.0001; frink, χ2(1, N=38) = 7.204, p<.01; sprink, χ2(1,
N=40) = 7.621, p<.01), see figure 1. This suggests that the
1

The values given for the analysis of the individual nonces use
Yates’ corrected chi-square.

significant effect produced by semantically priming wink
and blink was to increase the proportion of regulars
produced, and that this effect was maintained when other
regular forms were contextually primed.
Discussion. This experiment set out to examine whether
semantic similarity might play a complimentary role to
phonological similarity in inflection, i.e. whether it might
have an influence on the form of semantically similar
words alongside phonological constraints. The results
obtained suggest that when people encounter a novel verb
form that is phonologically and semantically close to an
existing verb form, then the likelihood is that they will use
the same pattern of inflection to form the past tense of the
novel verb form as is used to inflect the past tense of the
existing verb form. This finding neatly compliments the
findings of Bybee and Moder (1983), who discovered that
encountering a novel verb form that is phonologically
similar to a cluster of phonologically similar irregulars
increases the likelihood that the nonce verb form will be
inflected irregularly. Once phonological similarity
constraints have been met, semantic information also
appears to play a role in inflection.

Semantics and grammatical analysis
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that semantic
information does influence the past tense inflection
process: the past tense forms of inputs that are
phonologically similar to phonologically similar regular
and irregular verb forms can be significantly influenced by
semantic information. Given that this finding suggests that
semantic information is at least sufficient for resolving the
inflection patterns of homophone verbs, it raises the
question of whether semantic information is also necessary
for this to occur. Are semantics always used to determine
the inflection of homophone verb forms? Or is other
information, such as the grammatical status of the verb
inputs, as suggested by Pinker and colleagues (Kim et al,
1991; Pinker, 1999) also sufficient to determine the
outcome of this process?
To examine these questions, Experiment 2 was designed
to test the hypothesis that semantic similarity, and not
formal grammatical analysis, would be the important
determining factor in the inflection of homophone verbs.
According to Kim et al (1991; see also Pinker, 1999), in
carrying out inflection people perform formal grammatical
analyses on lexical input. As a result of these analyses, only
verbs with verb roots (deverbal verbs) will be given an
irregular past tense form; verbs with noun roots
(denominals) will be inflected regularly.
“People should regularize headless [denominal] forms only
when they perceive the words to be headless… they should
have a sense of when a word is based on another word...
When they don’t – when they are oblivious to the noun in a
verb-from-a-noun and imagine that it is just a stretched verb
root – the theory predicts that they should stick with the
irregular.” (Pinker 1999, p. 171.)

The findings obtained so far support the view that
inflection is carried out as a result of competing constraints
(involving phonology, semantics and word frequency) in
memory. If such a similarity-based process was
determining the inflection of verbs, it was predicted that
when nonce verbs were presented to participants as
denominal verbs in a context that semantically primed an
irregular verb cluster, then they would be inflected
irregularly (contrary to the ‘formal grammatical analysis’
hypothesis).

Experiment 2
Participants. Participants were 80 visitors to a shopping
mall in Edinburgh, Scotland and 104 students at the
University of Edinburgh. All were native English speakers
and participated voluntarily in the study.
Materials
Inflection Task. The materials used in this study were
modified versions of the cards used in experiment 2. For
the purposes of this experiment, the contexts were modified
so that the first sentence in each introduced the nonce as a
noun, so that subsequent use of the nonce was clearly as a
denominal verb. Kim et al (1991, p. 207) claim that this
information is a “necessary and sufficient condition for the
regularization effect.” In the drink context, the nonce was
shown in a context that used it as a noun (a kind of tapa
comprising vodka and fish) and later as a verb to describe
the consumption of the tapa (and by extension, vodka and
fish), whereas in the blink and wink context the nonce was
shown in a context that used it as a noun to describe a
muscle, and later as a verb to describe a symptomatic
affliction of that muscle. In the meditate context, which
was designed to semantically prime neither drink nor blink
or wink (the nonce was used as a verb describing a hypnotic
trance), the nonce was first presented as the name of a
Siberian religious sect that mediated.
Grammatical Analysis Task. 60 participants completed a
questionnaire as part of a grammatical analysis
measurement condition. Participants were given booklets
containing one example of a "deverbal" nonce target
context, one example of a "denominal" nonce target context
and six other contexts relating to existing verbs. The verbs
in these contexts were loosely pre-classified as either
deverbal, denominal, or obscure but discenably denominal.
The contexts were designed to provide participants with
sufficient information to facilitate their making a
meaningful denominal/deverbal analysis.
Procedure
Inflection Task. The procedure for this task was the same as
for Experiment 1, above.
Grammatical Analysis Task. The presentation order of the
contexts was randomized and ordered so that each
participant saw one nonce denominal context and one
nonce deverbal context from different scenarios, along with
six other items. Participants were asked to indicate whether
in their judgement, the verb was 'being used in a normal

‘verb-like’ way, or whether it is being used as a verb in
relation to a noun. To take a word like 'drink' for example,
in (1) 'John likes to drink beer'... you might decide that
“drink” is being used as an ordinary verb. But, in the
example… (2) It's always a good idea to relax your guests.
Whenever guests arrive at my house, I immediately snack
them and drink them. I find that refreshments set them at
ease.' You might decide that 'drink' is being derived from
the noun 'drink' (such that it means something like 'to serve
drinks.'" Participants gave their ratings on a 7 point scale
where 1 = definitely normal 'verb-like' use and 7 =
definitely 'verb from noun' use.

Figure 2. Means plot for the verb categories in the grammatical
analysis condition in Experiment 2. The upper 2 plots show mean
ratings for the nonces in denominal (noncedenom) and deverbal
(noncedev) contexts. The bottom 3 plots show means rating for
the existing verb categories

Results. The results obtained were consistent with the
hypothesis that semantic similarity was affecting the
inflection of the past tenses of nonce English denominal
verbs when phonological similarity constraints were
satisfied; they were not consistent with any effect of formal
grammatical analysis affecting inflection.
Of those participants who encountered a novel denominal
verb in a context that primed an existing irregular verb (i.e.
in a context that made it appear semantically similar to that
verb), 72.5% produced an irregular past tense for sprink or
frink, whilst of those participants who encountered the
novel denominal verb in a context that primed an existing
regular, 75% produced a regular past tense for sprink or
frink (this prime consistency effect was significant: χ2(1,
N=80) = 18.061, p<.0001). The context which described a
meditative or hypnotic state) also promoted a regular
inflection of sprink and frink (71.8%).
The results of the grammatical analysis task are
summarized in figure 2. It appears that that participants
could distinguish the grammatical origins of the various
verbs in these contexts (this is reflected by the variance in
category means for the 'regular', nonce and obscure
denominals with respect to the regular and nonce
deverbals). A one way ANOVA indicated the variance in
the scores assigned by participants to the verb categories
with respect to their grammatical origins of the categories
was significant F(4) = 74.65, p<0.0001. T-tests between the
mean scores for the denominal and deverbal nonces in
context showed that participants had detected significant
differences in their grammatical origins t(56) = 6.45,

p<.0001 (individual nonces in contexts: nonce - drink, t(17)
= 3.47, p<.005; nonce - wink/blink, t(17) = 3.19, p<.01;
nonce - meditate, t(18) = 3.26, p<.005). These findings
indicate that the inflection results do not stem from any
failure on the part of participants to perceive the
grammatical categories of the nonce verbs.
Discussion. This experiment set out to establish whether
semantic similarity or formal grammatical analysis would
influence the inflection of novel denominals. The finding
that patterns of inflection were consistent with semantic
priming -- as found in experiment 2 -- is entirely consistent
with the hypothesis that semantic similarity is an important
constraint in determining inflection when phonological
constraints have been met. Moreover, the fact that a
majority of irregular forms were produced for both
denominal nonces when the context they were presented in
suggested that they were semantically similar to an existing
irregular verb directly contradicts the formal grammatical
analysis hypothesis, which predicted that because these
verbs had a noun root they would be inflected with a
regular past tense form.

Semantics or Grammar?
The evidence accrued against grammatical analysis in
Experiment 2 appears to conflict quite drastically with the
findings of Kim, Pinker, Prince & Prasada (1991) who
report that participants in their experiments did use
grammatical analysis in determining the past tenses of
verbs. As noted above, an experiment by Kim et al (1991)
appeared to show that grammatical analysis is a better
predictor of past tense forms than semantics. Since these
findings are clearly incompatible with the findings of
Experiment 2, it seems worth considering in some detail
this earlier study.
The most important thing to note about the experiment by
Kim et al (1991) that sought to discriminate between the
two competing accounts of homophonic inflection -grammatical analysis versus semantics -- is that judgments
of the grammatical status of verbs (whether they were
denominal or deverbal) were not collected from impartial
observers. Instead, the experimenters relied on their own
intuitions for deciding which verbs are denominal and
which deverbal. This practice raises several concerns when
Kim et al's materials are subject to close scrutiny. To take
one example, Kim et al classify the verb to lie (as in
confabulate) as denominal (in their materials, "Sam always
tells lies when he wants people to think he's better than he
really is, He lied/lay to me last night about how good a
golfer he is"). Presumably, this is because one can tell a lie;
a liar is someone who tells lies, etc. However, Kim et al
simultaneously classify the verb to drink as deverbal
(presumably, given that drink is an irregular, and the
grammatical analysis hypothesis suggests that all
denominals will be regular, Kim et al assumed drink had to
be deverbal). Yet it would appear that any reason that one
can think of for suggesting that lie is denominal applies

equally to drink: one can drink a drink; a drinker is
someone who imbibes drinks etc. Yet these factors -- and
the potentially flawed assumptions behind them -- are
critical to Kim et al's analysis of their results. If participants
were to judge the past tense of lie as lied and the past tense
of drink as drank (as indeed they did in Kim et al's
experiments), then this would count as evidence for the
grammatical analysis hypothesis in Kim et al's subsequent
analysis. Grammatical analysis would be credited with
predicting that drink is irregular whereas lie must be
regular, even though as far as one can see, the only reason
that lie was judged by Kim et al to be a denominal and
drink a deverbal was because the former was a regular and
a latter an irregular in the first place.
In the light of these considerations, the following
experiment was designed to re-examine the findings of Kim
et al (1991), subjecting both putative mechanisms for
predicting the inflection of homophonous verbs to the same
standard of testing. Participants in a semantic reminding
condition were presented with a target verb in context, and
an example of a homophonous irregular verb (the examples
had been adjudged by another group of participants in a
pre-trial to be very typical uses of the irregular).
Participants were asked to rate the extent to which the
action or activity associated with the verb in the target
context reminded them of the kind of activity or action
picked out by the example verb; participants were
encouraged to think of all of the activities they usually
associated with that use of the target. The semantic
hypothesis tested in Experiment 3 was simply that these
semantic reminding judgements would be a good predictor
of the acceptability of irregular past tense forms.
In contrast to this, the grammatical analysis hypothesis
tested in this experiment predicts that verbs that subjects'
perceive to be denominal will be regularized, thus the
grammatical analysis hypothesis would expect the
grammatical analysis of verbs as being denominal would be
a good predictor of the acceptability of regular past tense
forms (see Kim at al, 1991).

Experiment 3
Participants. Participants were 101 native English
speaking undergraduate students at the University of
Edinburgh who participated voluntarily in the study.
Materials. 24 contexts were used to present 12
phonologically similar verb pairs in the present tense, (e.g.
"Charlie Wilson of United is a real prima donna. He never
gets on with the game. Instead, he just shows off. He tries
to grandstand all the time, and it really gets on my
nerves."). In each context, the target verb was italicized and
underlined. A second set of 24 contexts presented the target
word first in its present tense, and later as either a regular
or an irregular past tense (e.g. " Charlie Wilson of United is
a real prima donna. He never gets on with the game.
Instead, he just shows off. He tries to grandstand all the
time, and it really gets on my nerves. In the game with

Rovers on Saturday he got an early goal and grandstood [or
grandstanded] the rest of the match.").
Procedure. 3 groups of participants were used to obtain
three rating measures: semantic reminding, grammatical
analysis and acceptability of past-tense form.
Semantic Reminding. Participants were presented with an
example 'typical use' of the irregular form of the
homophonic verb for comparison purposes (e.g. " The
soldiers were told to stand at ease."). Each of the examples
had been rated by 12 participants in a pre-test for typicality
and achieved a mean score of > 5.8 on a scale where 1 =
not at all typical and 7 = very typical. Participants were
instructed to compare the comparison verb (e.g. stand) and
the highlighted verb in the target (e.g. grandstand above)
and to rate the extent to which "the activity or action
described by the underlined word … -- taken in the whole
context -- remind[ed… them] of the comparison word."
Participants were additionally instructed to " to consider all
the possible things [they] usually associate with this use of
the word." Ratings were given on a 7 point scale where 1 =
strong reminding and 7 = no reminding.
Grammatical Analysis. Participants were asked to indicate
whether a verb was 'being used in a normal ‘verb-like’ way,
or whether it is being used as a verb in relation to a noun.'
Participants gave their ratings on a 7 point scale where 1 =
definitely normal 'verb-like' use and 7 = definitely 'verb
from noun' use.
Acceptability Of Past-Tense Form. The instructions in this
task mirrored those in Kim et al (1991). Participants were
told to "to concentrate on how the words 'sound' in their
context, as you read them, not on how they might be
spelled." Participants were asked to indicate "how likely it
is that the form you have seen is the correct one for that
context. By ‘correct’, we mean the one that other native
English speakers would naturally and intuitively use (i.e.
the form - or sound - that comes most naturally to you)."
Participants were also asked to note that correct did not
"refer to the kind of 'proper' English that gets taught in
grammar lessons or style manuals." Participants gave their
ratings on a 7 point scale: 1=not acceptable; 7=highly
acceptable.
Results. A multiple regression analysis of the relationship
between semantic reminding, grammatical analysis and
irregular past tense acceptability indicated that both
predictor variables accounted for 68% of the total variance
in the irregular rating scores (F(1, 21)=25.14, p<.0001). For
comparison purposes, a regression analysis of semantic
reminding to irregular past tense acceptability was
performed, which accounted for 67% of the total variance
in the irregular rating scores: F(1, 22)=47.71, P<.0001),
indicating that grammatical analysis uniquely accounted for
only 1% of the total variance observed. A regression
analysis of grammatical analysis to irregular past tense
acceptability accounted for 37.5% of the total variance in
the irregular rating scores: F(1, 22)=14.87, p<.001),

indicating that semantic reminding uniquely accounted for
a significant 29.5% of the total variance observed.
A multiple regression analysis of the relationship between
semantic reminding, grammatical analysis and regular past
tense acceptability indicated that both predictor variables
accounted for 36% of the total variance in the regular rating
scores (F(1, 21)=7.479, p<.005). Again as a comparison, a
regression of semantic reminding to regular past tense
acceptability was performed, which indicated that
semantics alone could account for 35% of the total variance
in the regular rating scores: F(1, 22)=13.52, p<.005),
indicating that again, just 1% of the observed variance
could be uniquely accounted for by grammatical analysis.
A regression analysis of grammatical analysis to regular
past tense acceptability accounted for 1.7% of the total
variance in the irregular rating scores: F(1, 22)=1.397,
p>.2), indicating that semantic reminding uniquely
accounted for a significant 33.3% of the total variance
observed
Discussion. In the light of some potential flaws identified
in the study comparing the predictive power of semantics
versus grammatical analysis reported by Kim et al (1991),
this experiment set out to re-examine those previous
findings using a suitably modified experimental paradigm.
Strikingly, once both predictor variables were subject to the
same standard of empirical scrutiny, the predictive effect of
grammatical analysis on past-tense acceptability reported
by Kim et al in their study has almost entirely vanished. In
this study unconfounded grammatical analysis predicted
only a very marginal, insignificant amount of the data
collected in the past-tense rating condition. On the other
hand, it appears that semantic reminding is a good predictor
of the acceptability of inflected forms. Semantic reminding
uniquely predicts a significant proportion of participants'
irregular and regular past tense acceptability scores (29.5%
and 33.4% respectively).

General Discussion
Inflectional morphology has become the example domain -and hence the battleground -- for wider debates about the
nature of linguistic knowledge and knowledge
representation, and in particular connectionist versus
symbolic (and particularly, rule-based) theories of mental
representation (Pinker & Prince, 1988; MacWhinney &
Leinbach, 1991; Pinker, 1999). Although single-route
(connectionist) and dual-route (symbolic) accounts of
inflection largely agree on the processes that determine
irregular inflection (a phonological pattern associator in
memory) the dual-route account differs from single-route
theories by claiming that only irregular forms are processed
in memory, and that a symbolic default rule determines
regular inflection.
The results presented here indicate: Firstly, that semantic
information derived from similarity measures in memory
plays a significant role in inflection. Secondly, that these
similarity measures seem to involve all verbs, both regular

and irregular. Thirdly, that grammatical information
regarding whether verbs are denominal or deverbal does
not have a significant effect on inflection patterns. And
fourthly, and finally, that semantic similarities between a
nonce verb and an existing regular verb in memory can
result in an increase in the amount of regular forms
produced.
What is interesting about these findings is that contrary to
earlier claims regarding the inability of single-route models
of inflection to account for the processing of homophone
verbs (Pinker & Prince, 1988; Pinker, 1991; 1999), these
results are entirely compatible with a single, similarity
based inflection process. On the other hand, they are not
compatible with a processing model where only irregular
inflections are processed according to similarity in
memory. The evidence presented here regarding the role of
semantics in inflection suggests that contrary to some
recent claims (Pinker, 1999), a full account of the processes
governing inflectional morphology has yet to be put
forward. The question of whether abstract mental rules are
necessary in morphological processing remains very much
open; the past-tense debate is still very much alive.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Lera Boroditsky, Dedre Gentner, Ulrike
Hahn, Marc Joanisse, Mark Steedman and Daniel Yarlett
for comments on, and discussions of, this work.

References
Bybee, J. L. & Moder, C. L. (1983). Morphological classes
as natural categories. Language, 59, 251-270.
Joanisse, M.F. & Seidenberg, M.S. (1999). Impairments in
verb morphology following brain injury: a connectionist
model. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 96(13), 7592-7597.
Kim, J. J., Pinker, S., Prince, A. & Prasada, S. (1991) Why
no mere mortal has ever flown out to center field,
Cognitive Science, 15, 173-218
MacWhinney, B., & Leinbach, J. (1991). Implementations
are not conceptualizations: Revising the verb learning
model. Cognition, 40, 121-157.
Pinker, S. (1991) Rules of language. Science, 253, 530-535
Pinker, S. (1999) Words and Rules, NY: Basic Books.
Pinker, S. & Prince, A., (1988). On language and
connectionism. Cognition, 28, 73--193
Rumelhart D. E. and McClelland J. L (1986) On learning
past tenses of English verbs. In Rumelhart D.E. &
McClelland J.L (eds) Parallel Distributed Processing:
Vol 2: Psychological and Biological Models. Cambridge,
MA: MIT press.

