UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Hot Hand in Basketball: Fallacy or Adaptive Thinking?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/056552kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Burns, Bruce D.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Hot Hand in Basketball: Fallacy or Adaptive Thinking?
Bruce D. Burns (burnsbr@msu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1117 USA
Abstract
In basketball, players believe that they should "feed the
hot hand," by giving the ball to a player more often if
that player has hit a number of shots in a row. However,
Gilovich, Vallone & Tversky (1985) analyzed basketball
players' successive shots and showed that they are
independent events. Thus the hot hand seems to be a
fallacy. Taking the correctness of their result as a starting
point, I suggest that if one looks at the hot hand
phenomena from Gigerenzer & Todd's (1999) adaptive
thinking point of view, then the relevant question to ask
is does belief in the hot hand lead to more scoring by a
basketball team? By simulation I show that the answer to
this question is yes, essentially because streaks are
predictive of a player's shooting percentage. Thus belief
in the hot hand may be an effective, fast and frugal
heuristic for deciding how to allocate shots between
member of a team.

The Hot Hand as Fallacy
Gilovich, Vallone and Tversky (1985) defined the “hot
hand” in basketball as the belief that during a particular
period a player's performance is significantly better
than expected on the basis of a player’s overall record.
Gilovich et al. found that 91% of fans agreed that a
player has “a better chance of making a shot after
having just made his last two or three shots” and 68%
said the same for free throws; 84% of fans believed that
“it was important to pass the ball to someone who has
just made several (two, three, or four) shots in a row.”
Numerical estimates reflected the same belief in streak
shooting, and most players on a professional team
endorsed the same beliefs. Thus belief in the hot hand
appears to be widespread, and Gilovich et al. suggest
that may it affect the selection of which player is given
the chance to take the next shot in a game. This
implication is captured by a phrase heard in basketball
commentary: "feed the hot hand."
To test if the phenomena described by the hot hand
actually exist, Gilovich et al. (1985) analyzed a
professional basketball team’s shooting over a season in
order to see if streaks occur more often than expected
by chance. They found that for each individual player,
the proportion of shots hit was unrelated to how many
previous shots in a row he had either hit or missed.
Analysis also showed that the number of runs of hits or
misses for each player was not significantly different
from the expected number of runs calculated from a
player’s overall shooting percentage and assuming that
all shots were independent of each other. The same

independence was found for free-throws, as the
probability of hitting a free-throw was the same after a
hit as after a miss for a group of professional players. A
controlled study of college players found the same
independence between shots and found that observers
could not predict which shots would be hit or missed.
Thus the hot hand phenomenon appears to be a fallacy.
Why do fans and players believe in the hot hand if
the empirical evidence shows that successive shots are
independent? Gilovich et al. (1985) suggest that the
persistence may be due to memory biases (streaks are
more memorable) and misperception of chance, such as
belief that small as well as large sequences are
representative of their generating process (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974). Falk and Konold (1997) see the hot
hand as a cognitive illusion that is another example of
people's inability to perceive randomness. Again we see
people inventing superfluous explanations because they
perceive patterns in random phenomena.
Gilovich et al.'s (1985) result has been cited over 100
times in journals. Many of these citations are in the
decision making literature, but it is also widely cited
across a variety of fields. There are many citations in
sports science (Vergin, 2000) and economics
(Pressman, 1998), but it has also been cited in literature
on law (Hanson & Kysar, 1999) and religion (Chaves &
Montgomery, 1997).
There have been some challenges to Gilovich et al.’s
(1985) conclusion that there are no more streaks than
expected by chance in basketball, or at least to the
finding's generalizability. Gilden and Wilson (1995)
found some evidence of more streaks than expected in
golf putting and darts, although they explain this as due
to fluctuations in performance producing more streaks
than expected rather than a real dependence between
events. Miyoshi (2000) used simulations to suggest that
Gilovich et al.’s analysis may not have been sensitive
enough to detect the hot hand if hot-hand periods are
relatively infrequent. However, in this paper I will
assume Gilovich et al.’s (1985) conclusion that
successive shots in basketball are independent events,
in fact, my analysis will depend on it.
One reason for the wide interest in Gilovich et al.'s
result may be the implications it appears to have for
behavior. As Gilovich et al. (p. 313) state “...the belief
in the ‘hot hand’ is not just erroneous, it could also be
costly.” This is because it may affect the way shots are
allocated between members of a team. However, I will
argue in this paper that this implication does not

necessarily follow from their analysis, rather belief in
the hot hand may actually be adaptive.

The Hot Hand as Adaptive Thinking
Gigerenzer and Todd (1999) emphasize that humans
and animals make decisions about their world with
limited time, knowledge, and computational power. So
they propose that much of human reasoning uses an
adaptive tool-box containing fast and frugal heuristics
that make inferences with limited time, knowledge and
computation. Their viewpoint is based on a conception
of bounded rationality. They contrast this with an
assumption of unbounded rationality, which leads to a
focus on the question: what is the normatively correct
answer? Gigerenzer and Todd instead argue that one
should ask: what is adaptive? That is, what behavior
will meet the person's goals and uses a process that
stays within the bounds of their resources?
From the point of view of basketball, whether
successive shots are independent may not be the most
relevant question to ask. What is adaptive for them is to
maximize the number of points their team scores, so the
question to be asked is does belief in the hot hand lead
to more scoring than would disbelief in the hot hand?
The practical effect of belief in the hot hand is that it
affects distribution of the ball. This is reflected in the
statement that Gilovich et al. (1985) presented to fans
and players, “it is important to pass the ball to someone
who has just made several (two, or three, or four) shots
in a row.” Who should take the next shot is a question
faced by the members of a team every time they have
possession of the ball. In the absence of a time-out, it is
a decision that each member of the team have to make
by himself or herself in, at most, 30 seconds. Every
player on a professional team is probably aware of the
shooting percentage (i.e., what percentage of a players
total number of shots a player hits) for each member of
the team. However, knowing that one player has a 55%

and another a 60% shooting percentage, does not tell
one how often to give the ball to each player, given that
one cannot simply give the ball to the player with the
higher shooting percentage every time. Players are
unlikely to be able to do a calculation to determine the
optimal distribution, so fast and frugal heuristics for
deciding who should take the next shot are likely to be
exploited if they are effective in increasing scoring.
I propose that belief in the hot hand is such a
heuristic. The basic argument is straight forward: if one
accepts Gilovich et al.’s (1985) finding that successive
shots are independent events, then the higher a player's
shooting percentage is, the larger the number of runs of
hits a player will have. Therefore, a bias to give the ball
to players with the hot hand is equivalent to a bias to
give the ball to players with higher shooting
percentages. Giving the ball to the player with the hot
hand requires no calculation, it requires only
remembering the most recent shots, and it can be
decided fast. Thus belief in the hot hand could be an
example of adaptive thinking.
I will support this analysis with computer simulations
testing whether a team that believes in the hot hand will
outscore one that does not. However, I will first show
empirically that players with higher shooting
percentages experience more runs of hits.

Empirical Analysis
Gilovich et al. (1985, Table 1) presented the
probabilities of players making a shot after runs of hits
or misses of length one, two and three, as well as the
frequencies of each run for players. The statistics came
from analysis of the 48 home games of the Philadelphia
76ers during the 1980-81 season. In Table 1, I have reanalyzed this data to calculate for each player the
proportions of his total number of shots (excluding a
player's first shot in a game) which were parts of runs
of hits or misses of length 1, 2, and 3.

Table 1: Proportions of players total shots that were parts of runs of 1, 2, or 3 hits, or 1, 2, or 3 misses. Correlations
are between these proportions and the players' season long shooting percentage (all significant at p < .01)
Shooting
Total
Player
percentage
shots
3 misses
Lionel Hollins
.46
371
.11
Andrew Toney
.46
406
.08
Caldwell Jones
.47
225
.09
Clint Richardson
.50
206
.06
Julius Erving
.52
836
.11
Bobby Jones
.52
310
.06
Steve Mix
.54
386
.06
Maurice Cheeks
.56
292
.04
Daryl Dawkins
.62
358
.02
Correlations with shooting percentage: -.804

2 misses
.25
.22
.21
.16
.23
.17
.17
.13
.09
-.874

1 miss
.54
.53
.52
.49
.49
.47
.46
.43
.38
-.993

1 hit
.46
.47
.48
.51
.51
.53
.54
.57
.62
.993

2 hits
.18
.19
.16
.22
.25
.25
.25
.26
.31
.954

3 hits
.07
.07
.05
.10
.12
.11
.09
.11
.15
.899

If shots are independent events, then the higher a
player's shooting percentage, the larger the number of
runs of hits he should have and the fewer number of
runs of misses he should have. Table 1 presents the
correlations between a player's shooting percentage and
the proportion of his shots that were parts of runs of
each length. As can be seen, all runs of misses are
highly negatively correlated with shooting percentage,
and all runs of hits are highly positively correlated with
shooting percentage (all p < .01). This supports
Gilovich et al.'s (1985) argument that successive shots
are independent events, and also the consequence of my
argument that runs are predictive of a player's shooting
percentage.

Design of the Computer Simulations
In creating the simulations I strove to make them as
transparent as possible and to utilize as few free
parameters as possible. The basic simulation of
basketball shooting had two parameters for each player:
an allocation and a shooting percentage. The allocation
is the probability of a player being given the next shot,
whereas the shooting percentage is how often the
player hits a shot. The sum of allocation parameters for
all players must be 1.0 and was used to represent some
underlying bias to give the ball to a player. No
assumption was made regarding the source of these
biases, but it was fixed for the length of a simulation.
Shooting percentage reflects a player's ability to hit
shots, and was also fixed for the length of a simulation,
as it was for Gilovich et al.'s (1985) analysis.
The program simulated basketball shooting, with one
shot per trial. On each trial a player was randomly
selected to be given the next shot, with each player
having the probability of being given the shot indicated
by their allocation. The player given the shot then
randomly hits or misses the shot with a probability
indicated by the player’s shooting percentage.
To simplify the simulations, rather than represent all
five members of a normal basketball team, only two
will be included. This reduces the number of
parameters and how many players are represented
should not matter with regard to the conclusions I wish
to draw from the simulations. To further reduce the
number of free parameters the allocation and shooting
percentages were only varied for one player, and the
other player's parameters were simply one minus each
of the first player’s parameters. Thus a whole
simulation was described by just two free parameters,
allowing the entire parameter space to be explored.
To simulate belief in the hot hand, a simple rule was
used that determine who should be given the next shot:
1) Give the next shot to a player which has the longest
run of hits (in effect, the one who hits its most recent
shot), then keep giving it to that player until a miss.

2) If both players have missed their last shot, then the
allocations parameters were used to select a shooter
randomly.
The hot-hand could be simulated in other ways, but this
seems a simple, easily understandable version, and it is
parameter-less. More complicated ways of calculating
who has the hot-hand would involve arbitrary
parameters but produce the same pattern of results.
To test the effect of belief in the hot-hand, two
simulations were run with each combination of the two
parameters. Simulations with a given combination of
parameters were run in pairs. In one run, the hot hand
rule was turned on, and in the other it was turned off so
the player to take the shot was always determined
randomly using the allocation parameter. All parameter
combination for allocation values from 0.01 to 0.99
were run in increments of 0.01, and shooting percentage
values from 0.50 to 0.99 in increments of 0.01 (0.00 to
0.49 would simply repeat the other combinations). Thus
4851 pairs of simulations were run.

Results of the Simulations
Each combination of parameters was run for 1,000,000
trials with the hot-hand rule, and 1,000,000 without it.
Each simulation produced a score, which was how
many of the trials were hits. To determine the effect of
belief in the hot-hand, for each parameter pair the score
for the simulation without the hot-hand rule was
subtracted from the score from the simulation with the
hot-hand. This difference was divided by the total
number of trials to yield an advantage score (adv):
(score with hot hand) - (score without hot hand)
adv = ---------------------------------------------------------total number of trials
Figure 1 presents a contour graph for the 4852
(49x99) pairs of simulations (the 0.50 shooting percent
parameter is excluded because when there is no
difference between players, there is nothing for the hot
hand to exploit). This graph represents three dimensions
of information: the allocation percentage, the shooting
percentage, and the adv score in favor of the hot hand
simulation for that combination of parameters. The
numbered contours define boundaries in the distribution
of adv scores found for parameter pairs. So, for
example, for every combination of parameters above
the line labeled "0.2" the hot hand simulation scores at
least 0.2 points per trial of the simulation (on every trial
the players score 0 or 1). The areas at the bottom of the
graph labeled "0.0" indicate regions in which the hot
hand lost in this set of simulations. (To creates these
plots I used Sigma graph, which tried to "smooth"
contours resulting in these odd shapes.)

Almost all the pairs of parameters yielded positive
advantage scores. Not surprisingly, the greatest
advantage occurs when shooting percentage is high and
allocations are low, as in effect the hot hand rule
increases the allocation for the player with the higher
shooting percentage. As Figure 1 shows, only when the
shooting percentage is low, which is when the two
players differ little in shooting percentage, does the hot
hand sometimes lose. Figure 1 also shows that there is
no systematic relationship between allocation and
shooting percentage which results in the hot hand doing
worse. When the hot hand does worse is essentially
random and only occurs when there is little difference
between the players for the hot hand to exploit. The
most negative advantage score obtained was -0.0018
points per trial.
Table 2 shows for how many of the simulations with
each shooting percentage (99 as the allocation varies
from .01 to .99) the hot hand wins. When shooting
percentage is equal to .50 then it should be random
which simulation wins because the hot hand cannot
help the better shooter when the two players do not
differ. As the shooting percentage increases, and thus
the difference between players increases, loses by the
hot hand simulation become rarer. There were no losses

by the hot hand for shooting percentages in excess of
.60. There was no systematic relationship between
allocation parameters and loses by the hot hand, except
for a few extra loses at allocations of 0.99.
Table 2: The number of allocation values (99) that the
hot hand simulation wins or loses for each shooting
percentage parameter less than .61.
Shooting
percentage
.50
.51
.52
.53
.54
.55
.56
.57
.58
.59
.60

Hot hand
loses
44
48
21
10
2
2
1
2
2
1
1

Hot hand
wins
55
51
78
89
97
97
98
97
97
98
98

.

Figure 1: Contour graph showing how many points per trial the simulation using the hot hand rule came out ahead of
the simulation not using the hot hand rule, for every pair of shooting percentage and allocation parameters. The
lowest shooting percentage is 0.51 and highest is 0.99. The range for allocation parameters were 0.01 to 0.99.

One question that may be raised is whether the results
are due to one player having a shooting percentage
below 50% and the other above 50%. To check this, a
set of simulations were run which were identical to the
above set, but the sum of the two shooting percentages
for the two players equaled 0.50. So the shooting
percentage parameter was varied from 0.25 to 0.49.
Very similar results were obtained with the hot hand
only recording loses when the two shooting percentages
were very close. Simulations of defenders acting on
belief in the hot has also shown that it helps them.
Why the hot hand wins is quite clear. The hot hand
rule has no effect on the percentage of shots hit by a
player and does not introduce any dependencies
between successive shots by the same player, instead it
leads to the player with the higher shooting percentage
being given more shots. In effect, the hot hand
increases the allocation parameter for the player with
the higher shooting percentage.
These simulations are of course not complete
simulations of basketball games. Realistic simulations
of ten players interacting on a basketball court are not
possible, and thus this simulation cannot be compared
directly to real data from basketball players. This
however is not the point of the simulations, instead they
are intended as an instantiation of the thought
experiment conducted above, that belief in the hot hand
should increase scoring by a team if successive shots
are independent events. The belief increases the
likelihood that the best scorers will take more shots,
thus it is adaptive. The simulations are actually
unnecessary if one already accepted the basic argument.
However if one accepts this argument then it changes
the interpretation of the data of Gilovich et al. (1985)
and any other belief regarding streaks when the events
making up the streaks are independent.

Fallacy and Adaptation
Is the hot hand a fallacy or adaptive thinking? In a
sense it can viewed as both, it depends on what
question one thinks is the most relevant one to ask.
The question that Gilovich et al. (1985) sought to
answer was whether basketball players produce more
streaks of hits or misses than expected by chance given
their underlying shooting percentage. Their analysis
showed that the answer to this question was "no", for an
individual. The analysis presented here in no way
challengers this result, in fact it is built into the
simulations as an assumption. It may seem obvious that
if a belief in the hot hand as defined for an individual is
erroneous, then it must also be erroneous when applied
to a team. Gilovich et al. (1985) make this quite
understandable connection without comment, and thus
make statements about the supposedly negative
consequences for a team of passing the ball to the
player with the hot hand.

The ease with which one can slip from referring to an
individual's behavior to a team's behavior is reflected in
the statements Gilovich et al. (1985) asked basketball
fans and players to consider. Gilovich regard both of
the following two statements as indicators of an
erroneous belief in the hot hand:
1) "[a player] has a better chance of making a shot after
having just made his last two or three shots than he
does after having missed his last two or three shots"
2) "it is important to pass the ball to someone who has
just made several (two, three, or four) shots in a row"
Statement 1 refers to an individual's streaks, and
Gilovich et al. (1985) show empirically that it is
incorrect. However, Statement 2 is about a team's
decisions about how to allocate shots between players.
Gilovich et al.'s data does not address this question, but
the arguments and simulations presented here show that
Statement 2 is correct. It is adaptive rather than an
erroneous belief. From this conclusion, it is interesting
to note that Statement 2 was the only statement given to
the professional players by Gilovich et al. that was
endorsed by every one of them.
The alternative question regarding the hot-hand is
suggested by Gigerenzer and Todd's (1999) approach:
is belief in the hot hand adaptive? Whether there
actually are streaks in individual players' shooting is
irrelevant from this point of view. The basketball
players' primary goal when his or her team has
possession of the ball is to maximize the number of
points that the team scores (notwithstanding the
behavior of some current NBA stars), as that is what
determines the outcome of the game. If belief in the hot
hand (as defined as giving the ball to the player
experiencing a streak) tends to increase point scoring as
compared to when the hot hand is disregarded, then the
hot hand is adaptive thinking rather than a fallacy.
"Feed the hot hand" can be seen as a fast and frugal
heuristic for making a critical decision: who should get
the next shot? Belief in the hot hand provides a quick
and easily assessable answer to this question. (This is
not to imply that the hot hand is the only way, or
always the best way, to make this decision. Like any
heuristic, it may fail.)
If there were fluctuations in a player's underlying
shooting percentage, which could arise for various
reasons, then the hot hand provides a further advantage
over any calculations based on a shooting percentage or
some other product of the history of a player. The hot
hand is immediately sensitive to fluctuations because if
a player's shooting percentage changes then his or her
expected number of streaks will be affected
immediately. The impact of fluctuations on a player's
season long shooting percentage, or any other statistics,

will be delayed. Gilden and Wilson (1995) argue that
such fluctuation could create streaks despite
independence between successive events. Whether
Gilovich et al.'s analysis was sensitive enough to detect
such streaks is a question raised by the analysis of
Miyoshi (2000) who points out that it would depend on
the frequency and duration of such events. However,
even if there are no fluctuation driven streaks in
basketball, there may be in other multi-trial tasks, and
thus belief in the hot-hand may be a general heuristic
that people learn is effective in a variety of situations.
It could be argued that even if the belief in the hot
hand is adaptive then it may originate and be sustained
by a fallacy regarding the streaks of individuals. Thus
basketball players may have just got lucky that their
fallacy helps rather than hinders them. I have presented
no evidence regarding the origin of the belief in the hot
hand, and I doubt that players are consciously using the
analysis I present here to support their belief in giving
the ball to the player with the hot hand. However, it
could be argued that what sustains belief in the hot hand
is simply that players have learned that giving the ball
to the player experiencing streaks has a positive
outcome. The work on implicit learning shows that
people may not necessarily know what they have
learned. Nisbett and Wilson (1977) review evidence
that people may make appropriate decisions without
conscious awareness of the true reasons why they made
that decision, and then they may make up plausible
sounding reasons for their behavior. The erroneous
beliefs fans and players make about the consequences
of streaks by individual players may simply be an
attempt to rationalize a behavior they have learned is
adaptive. Thus belief in streaks for individuals may be a
misanalysis of the reasons for an accurate perception of
the hot hand as it applies to a team play, rather than a
misperception of sequences which appears to be the
basis of the gambler's fallacy. The connection between
the gambler's fallacy and the hot hand, which may be
related but describe the opposite behavior (i.e., go with
the streak, verse go against the streak), may be a fruitful
area for future research.
In summary, the final answer to the question posed
by the title depends on which question one prefers to
ask. Either, what is a normatively correct way of
describing the performance of an individual basketball
player, or what may lead to a higher score in a game?
Even though the relevance of both questions can be

seen, to an adaptive organism the later question should
be more important on the basketball court.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Tom Carr, Bryan Corpus, Patrick
Gallagher, and Mareike Wieth, for ideas and comments
on earlier drafts of this paper.

References
Chaves, M., & Montgomery, J. D. (1996). Rationality
and the framing of religious choices. Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion, 35, 128-144.
Falk, R., & Konold, C. (1997). Making sense of
randomness implicit encoding as a basis for
judgment. Psychological Review, 104, 301-318.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Fast and frugal
heuristics: The adaptive tool box. In G. Gigerenzer,
P. Todd, & the ABC Research Group (Eds.), Simple
heuristics that make us smart (pp. 3-34). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gilden, D. L., & Wilson, S. G. (1995). Streaks in
skilled performance. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 2, 260-265.
Gilovich, T., Vallone, R., & Tversky, A. (1985). The
hot hand in basketball: On the misperception of
random sequences. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 295314.
Hanson J. D., & Kysar D. A. (1999). Taking
behavioralism seriously: The problem of market
manipulation. New York University Law Review, 74,
630-749.
Miyoshi, H. (2000). Is the "hot-hands" phenomenon a
misperception of random events? Japanese
Psychological Research. 42, 128-133.
Pressman, S. (1998). On financial frauds and their
causes: Investor overconfidence. American Journal
of economics and sociology, 57, 405-421.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124-1131.
Vergin, R. (2000). Winning streaks in sports and the
misperception of momentum. Journal of Sport
Behavior, 23, 181-197
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1978). Telling more
than we can know: Verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychological Review, 84, 213-259.

