UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Appearance of Unity: A Higher-Order Interpretation of the Unity of Consciousness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n20q4f9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Weisberg, Josh

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Appearance of Unity:
A Higher-Order Interpretation of the Unity of
Consciousness
Josh Weisberg (jwsleep@aol.com)
CUNY Graduate Center
Department of Philosophy, 365 5th Avenue
New York, NY 10016 USA

Abstract
Recent developments in neuroscience and
psychology have put pressure on the traditional
philosophical idea of the unity of
consciousness. Some have argued that splitbrain cases and multiple personality disorder
demand a rejection and elimination of the very
notion of a unified consciousness. In this
poster, I argue that David Rosenthal’s higherorder-thought theory of consciousness allows
for an explication of unity that provides for the
subjective appearance of unity, but respects the
actual and potential disunity of the brain
processes that underwrite consciousness.

Introduction
Researchers often have several distinct phenomena in
mind when they discuss the unity of consciousness.
One issue, which occupies a large part of the
neuroscientific focus on unity, is the “binding problem.”
How are features processed in disparate anatomical and
functional locations in the brain brought together into
one coherent experience?
Closely related is the
problem of accounting for the apparent “spatial”
relations that hold between our sensations, relations that
allow us to view one feature as next to another in the
same experience. A third phenomenon associated with
unity is the apparent clear and seamless nature of our
conscious experience. Finally, there are issues of
ownership and the self. Why is it that my conscious
perceptions belong, as it were, to me? What is the
nature of this “I” that the perceptions belong to?
In this poster, I propose to address the issue of
unity by first introducing a theoretical model of the
conscious mind, David Rosenthal’s higher-orderthought hypothesis, and then seeing which aspects of
unity can be explained in terms of nonconscious
neuroscientific or psychological processes. Then I will
attempt to show how the remaining elements of

unity can be adequately dealt with by the theory. I will
close by briefly considering some worries about
eliminativism that often accompany discussions of unity
and consciousness.1

The HOT Theory
To begin, I will outline Rosenthal’s higher-orderthought hypothesis. The view distinguishes between a
transitive and an intransitive use of the term
“conscious.” The transitive use occurs when we talk
about being conscious of something. The intransitive
use applies to mental states, which can be described as
conscious or nonconscious. The theory holds that for a
mental state to be intransitively conscious, we must be
transitively conscious of it in a suitable manner.
Arguably, this process is best explained by the presence
of a “higher-order thought” (HOT) to the effect that we
are in that mental state. HOTs are intentional states that
represent the subject as being in mental states. Being
the target of a HOT is what makes a state conscious.
Furthermore, the HOT must arise in the appropriate
way. To account for the seeming immediacy of
conscious experience, we must be unaware of any
inference or observation that causes the tokening of the
HOT. Mental states not targeted by HOTs are not
conscious states. so the HOTs themselves are generally
not conscious states, unless targeted by an additional
HOT. To summarize, the theory holds that mental
states are conscious when we represent ourselves as
being in those states, and this representation is achieved
by higher-order thought.2 .

1

It is important to note that my work on this topic is strongly
influenced by David Rosenthal’s writings and instruction.
Rosenthal has recently completed several articles concerning
Unity (Rosenthal, forthcoming a, forthcoming b), and my
work herein is meant to compliment that treatment.

2

Obviously, much more can be said concerning the theory. I
hope that this brief outline will suffice for the purposes at
hand, and I will fill in details as they become relevant. For a
full description and defense of the HOT theory, see Rosenthal

Lower-level Unity
Neuroanatomy tells us that the brain processes that
underwrite perception are widely distributed. This
raises the question of how the disparate elements of
perception are combined into a single coherent
experience. How does the brain bring it all together?
This is the famous binding problem. The layered
explanatory model of the HOT theory allows for this
issue to be dealt with largely at the level of
nonconscious processes. Promising work has been
done in laying out a temporal solution to the binding
problem (see, e.g., Crick and Koch, 1990; Llinás and
Ribary, 1993; Edelman and Tononi, 2000). Very
roughly, it is hypothesized that when groups of neurons
oscillate at the appropriate rate, they bind by firing in
synchrony. Arguably, this solution does not involve
consciousness mental states at all.
Unconscious perceptions, like those registered in
priming or subliminal perception, influence behavior in
virtue of their perceptible properties, and these
properties need to be bound, just as in conscious
perception. In order for a priming image to have an
appropriate semantic effect (for example, in influencing
the disambiguation of a sentence), we must perceive the
image’s features as unified, in order to make the proper
identifications. Perceptions are bound whether they are
conscious or not. The processes that bind the percepts
occur independently from consciousness, so this aspect
of unity is not one that a theory of consciousness has to
explicate.
Another aspect of unity, our awareness of
experienced objects as located in this or that portion of
a sensory field, can also be dealt with at the level of
nonconscious processing. In vision, for example,
various functional locations in the visual cortex
nonconsciously extract and organize information
concerning spatial orientation. However, this feature of
unity can be more fully explicated in terms of sensory
qualities. In any event, the explanation can proceed
independently of consciousness.3
Sensory qualities are properties of mental states
grouped in families that exhibit a structural relationship
with families of perceptual properties in the world. Our
commonsense taxonomy of perceptible color properties,
for example, includes similarity and difference
relations. Red is more similar to orange then it is to
green. The sensory states employed in color vision
must maintain these relationships. They must be in
families with similarities and differences homomorphic
to the similarities and differences that hold among
1986, 1991, 1993, 1997, 1999b. For critical views, see Byrne,
1997; Dretske, 1995; Stubenberg, 1998.
3
Rosenthal, 1991.

perceptible properties. The spatial properties of sensory
states can be dealt with in the same way. Sensory states
that underwrite visual spatial perception must possess
similarities and differences homomorphic to those
possessed by perceptible spatial properties.4
In this fashion, sensory qualities can be explained
independently of consciousness. What it is for a
sensation to be located next to, or above, or below,
another sensation in conscious awareness can be
explicated by referring to the sensory qualities already
possessed by those states. States have the features that
locate them in mental space independently of their
being conscious. So this feature of unity can be
explained without invoking a theory of consciousness.
Thus, these elements of unity, binding and location
in a sensory field, can be dealt with without reference to
conscious mental states. Our perceptions have these
features independently of consciousness. When we do
become conscious of perceptual states, our HOTs
represent them in terms of these antecedently present
features. The act of becoming conscious of these
features does not bring them into being. Our mental
states are bound and organized in sensory fields
independently of consciousness. Our HOTs simply
represent these states as they are: bound, unified
percepts, occupying this or that portion of the relevant
sensory field. In this way, we become conscious of a
bound, unified experience.

Conscious Unity
However, even though nonconscious perceptual
processes bind and organize our perceptual sensations,
it is clear that in some respects our conscious awareness
of the world outstrips what is delivered by our
perceptual mechanisms. This is exemplified by Daniel
Dennett’s discussion of a conscious perception of
wallpaper made up of many repeated images of Marilyn
Monroe (Dennett, 1991, pg. 354-355). When standing
in front of such an array, we seem instantly to see that
the wallpaper is all Marilyns, and what’s more, we see
this with an apparent clarity and depth that seems to
take in the whole scene with equal acuity. But
appearances may be deceiving here. Outside of the
small area of foveal vision, we do not actually process
visual stimuli with the fine-grainedness that we are
aware of in consciousness. But in conscious
experience, we seem to be aware of a full, rich, clear,
unified expanse. How are we to account for this?
Here, we can refer to the clarifying effect of HOT
to explain the appearance of unity. According to the
HOT theory, what our HOTs represent us as
4

See Rosenthal, 1991, 1999a, 1999b; Sellars, 1956;
Shoemaker, 1975; Clark, 1993.

experiencing is what we consciously experience. Our
nonconscious perceptual processes deliver a range of
information about the visual scene, which grades off
sharply as we move away from foveal vision. But in the
absence of any alarming discontinuity detectable
outside of the foveal area, our HOTs can simply
represent the scene in a “more of the same” manner.
HOT can represent to the effect that we are in a
perceptual state with such-and-such sensory qualities,
and those features repeat in a clear and unbroken
pattern to the edge of the visual field.
It might be argued that if this is the case, then the
homogenizing affect of the HOTs should be readily
noticeable in consciousness. However, we will not
ordinarily notice the smoothing over imposed by HOT
because whenever we look more closely at a scene to
see if it really is unbroken and repeating, we refocus our
attention, and token a more detailed, though less broad,
HOT. Then we become conscious of that particular
detail, but are no longer conscious of the whole scene.
So we won’t be aware of the cleaning-up effect of the
HOT when we try to attend to it. But given the
apparent clarity and depth of the original perception of
the Marilyns, and the absence of clear perception away
from foveal vision, the smoothing-over effect of the
HOT is the best explanation of our unified conscious
experience.

Ownership and the Self
Finally, I will turn to the sorts of issues that most often
arise in philosophical discussions of unity, the apparent
fact that our perceptions are in a sense “owned” by us,
and that this ownership points to the presence of a “self”
to do the owning. Interesting evidence from
neuroscience and psychology over the last several
decades (split-brain cases, hemineglect, and multiplepersonality disorder [MPD], for example) have put
pressure on the idea that there really is a unified self in
the brain which experiences all of our perceptions and
thoughts. But it sure seems to us that we are unified
individuals as we undergo conscious experience. How
can we account for this, on the HOT model?5
First, we need a little more detail concerning the
content of a HOT. A HOT represents to the effect that
“I, myself, am in a state with such-and-such properties.”
By representing in this manner, employing the concept
“I,” the HOT ascribes the mental state to “I,” the self.
In doing so, the HOT serves to tag the conscious state to
this self, and so the state is represented as being mine.
In this way, I “own” the state.

5

What follows is closely related to Rosenthal’s recent
treatment in (Rosenthal, forthcoming a, forthcoming b).

It is important to note the indexical features of the
concept “I.” “I” serves a function much like that of the
term “here,” which automatically refers to the location
of the utterance, and gets its more specific content on
the particular occasion its use from the location that it
occurs in. “I” works in a similar way. When “I” occurs
in a HOT, it refers back to the thinker that tokens the
thought. It is the function of a HOT to pick out various
states that the organism is in, and by employing the
indexical “I” there is a thin sort of immunity to error
present in the self-ascription by the HOT, reminiscent
of the way that uses of “here” are immune to error by
automatically referring to the location of utterance. Our
conscious states are owned by us because in becoming
conscious of them, we represent the states in
conjunction with “I,” which automatically refers back to
the producer of the thought (cf. Shoemaker, 1968).
So, when we become conscious of a mental state,
we token a HOT to the effect that we are in that state.
This provides us with a sense of self. We are, so to
speak, a creature that ascribes states as being present in
that very creature, and ascribes them by employing the
concept “I.” In this way we become conscious of our
states, belonging to us.
But more must be said about this “thinker” that “I”
refers back to. The concept “I” is best seen as a
theoretical term in the folk-psychological theory that
enables us to ascribe mental states to ourselves and
others. Folk psychology posits the self as the referent
of “I,” and it posits a variety of features of the self. The
self takes in perceptions and initiates action. It has
direct, infallible access to thoughts and sensations. It
accounts for the continuity we have as individuals, and
makes us who we are. But this notion of self has come
under strong pressure from philosophy, psychology, and
neuroscience. Is there anything left that can serve as the
referent of the concept “I”?
I believe that several components of the folkpsychological notion of self can be preserved. First,
there are the “biological” or “ecological” elements of
the self. These are the features that allow us to navigate
through the world, and to distinguish the boundaries of
our bodies from the external environment. They are
relatively low-level features of an organism’s
psychology. Primitive creatures like lobsters can
respond differentially to their bodies and the
environment, and so avoid eating their own legs. The
processes that underwrite this ability can serve as the
reference of “I.” (See Dennett, 1996; Bermúdez, 1998.)
In more developed creatures like us, “I” also picks
out those features that account for our psychological
continuity. “I” refers to a collection of moods,
memories, and abilities present in the individual. We
possess a core group of states that define us as a subject.
We have memories about who we are, various labels,

like a name, an address, a social security number, we
have abilities, like the ability to play the guitar, or to
drive, and we have deep seated moods and personality
traits, like being lazy, mellow, or high strung.
This group of states shifts over time, and the
boundaries between core states and more peripheral
states is not a firm one. Furthermore, we may not be
able to bring these states to consciousness with any
clarity. We may in fact confabulate the content of the
states as we become conscious of them, possibly
altering their content as we do so. The self is like a
novel that is constantly edited and revised as it is read.
So the “I” present in HOT refers to those elements of an
organism that allow it to negotiate through the
environment and distinguish its body from the world,
and it refers to the core psychological states that define
us as an individual. (See Damasio, 1994, Chp. 10;
Ramachandran and Blakeslee, 1998, Chp. 12.)
But what of the remaining elements of the folkpsychological notion of self? Why does it seem to us
that we are free agents with direct, infallible access to
the content of our own thought? Here, once again, the
HOT that makes us aware of our states misleads. The
concept of self that we employ in HOT is the unrevised
folk-psychological one. It goes beyond what is really
there in our minds. It seems to us that we are this sort
of being because our folk-psychological concept posits
such features, and our HOTs employ this concept in
making us conscious of our thoughts and experiences.
But on this score, we are in error.
So, some aspects of the folk-psychological
conception of self which informs our intuitions about
unity are mistaken. The self is not what it seemed to be.
Does this entail that we don’t really have selves, and
that the unity of consciousness is a fiction, an illusion?
I would argue that this worry rests on an overly-strong
criteria of what marks a concept for elimination. In this
case, we do maintain some aspects of our folkpsychological conception of self, namely its connection
with autobiographical continuity and ability. We also
can see how other aspects unity, like the presence of
bound, spatially located perceptions “owned” by a
subject, are maintained by our theory. I suggest that the
self is still there, and that consciousness is indeed
unified, but things are not exactly as they appeared prior
to our investigations.

Acknowledgments
A version of this poster was presented as a paper at the
ASSC 4 conference in Brussels, July, 2000. My thanks
to the audience there for helpful comments. Thanks
also to Roblin Meeks, Doug Meehan, and especially
David Rosenthal.

References
Bermúdez, J. L. (1998).
The Paradox of SelfConsciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Byrne, A. (1997). “Some Like it HOT: Consciousness
and Higher-Order Thoughts.”
Philosophical
Studies 24, 4 (Sept.) 1-27.
Clark, A. (1993). Sensory Qualities. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Crick, F. H. C., and Koch, C. (1990). “Towards a
Neurobiological Theory of Consciousness.” From
Seminars in the Neurosciences, 2, 263-275.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error. New York:
Avon Books.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness Explained.
Boston: Little Brown.
Dennett, D. C. (1996). Kinds of Minds. New York:
Basic Books.
Dretske, F.
(1995).
Naturalizing the Mind.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Edelman, G. and Tononi, G. (2000). A Universe of
Consciousness. New York: Basic Books.
Llinás, R. and Ribary, U. (1993). “Coherent 40-Hz
Oscillation Characterizes Dream State in Humans.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
90, 2078-2081.
Ramachandran, V. S. and Blakeslee, S. (1998).
Phantoms in the Brain. New York: Quill/William
Morrow.
Rosenthal, D. M.
(1986).
“Two Concepts of
Consciousness.” Philosophical Studies 49, 329359.
Rosenthal, D. M. (1991). “The Independence of
Consciousness and Sensory Qualities.”
In
Villanueva, ed. Consciousness:
Philosophical
Issues, 1. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing
Company.
Rosenthal, D. M. (1993). “Thinking that one Thinks.”
In M. Davies and G. W. Humphreys (Eds.)
Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell.
Rosenthal, D. M.
(1997). “A Theory of
Consciousness.” in Block, N., Flanagan, O., and
Guzeldere, G.,(eds.), The Nature of Consciousness:
Philosophical Debates, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 729-753.
Rosenthal, D. M. (1999a). “The Colors and Shapes of
Visual Experiences.” In Consciousness and
Intentionality: Models and Modalities of
Attribution, D. Fisette (ed.), Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Press, 95-118.
Rosenthal, David M. (1999b), “Sensory Quality and
the Relocation Story,” Philosophical Topics, 26, 1
and 2, (Fall and Spring), pp. 321-350.

Rosenthal, David M. (forthcoming, a), “Introspection
and Self-Interpretation,” Philosophical Topics
(Winter 2001).
Rosenthal, David, M. (forthcoming, b), “Persons,
Minds, and Consciousness,” in The Philosophy of
Marjorie Grene, in The Library of Living
Philsophers, Hahn, L. E. (ed.), La Salle, Illinois:
Open Court.
Sellars, W. (1956). “Empiricism and the Philosophy of
Mind.” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, vol. 1, ed. Herbert Feigl and Michael
Scriven, University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis.
Shoemaker, S. (1968). “Self-Reference and SelfAwareness.” Journal of Philosophy, 65/19, 555567.
Shoemaker, S. (1975). “Functionalism and Qualia.”
Philosophical Studies 27: 291-315.
Shoemaker, S. (1991). “Qualia and Consciousness.”
Mind 100:4, 507-524.
Stubenberg, L. (1998). Consciousness and Qualia.
John
Benjamins
Publishing
Co.,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

