UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Roles of Thought and Experience in the Understanding of Spatio-temporal Metaphors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zr1380r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Alloway, Tracy Packian
Ramscar, Michael
Corley, Martin

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Roles of Thought and Experience in the Understanding of
Spatio-temporal Metaphors
Tracy Packiam Alloway (Tracy.Alloway@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology
University of Edinburgh, 7 George Square Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK

Michael Ramscar (michael@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
School of Cognitive Science, Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW

Martin Corley (Martin.Corley@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology
University of Edinburgh, 7 George Square Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK

Abstract
Spatial and temporal metaphors are often used
interchangeably, and thus, offer a unique way of
exploring the relationship between language and thought.
Both spatial and temporal speaking incorporates two
systems of motion. The first is an ego-moving system,
when the individual moves from one point to another,
spatially, or from the past to the future, temporally. The
second is the object- (or time-) moving system, when the
individual is stationary and observes objects, or time,
moving towards him/her. This study explored the effect
of a spatial environment on the ambiguous temporal
question: Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved
forward two days--What day is the meeting now?
Results reveal that when participants are immersed in an
ego-moving spatial environment, such as a virtual reality
game, and receive a prime that causes them to think in an
object-moving way, they are more likely to perform a
target task in a way consistent with the way they have
been primed to think, although it contradicts the spatial
motion they subsequently experience in the testing
environment.

Introduction
What is the relationship between language and sensory
experience? According to one recent claim (Lakoff and
Johnson, 1999), abstract concepts, such as time, are
substrated in concrete concepts like space that can be
experienced directly. The representations of these
concrete concepts are formed directly, by experience.
Thus, our spatial experiences form "a neural structure
that is actually part of, or makes use of, the
sensorimotor system of our brains. Much of conceptual
inference is, therefore, sensorimotor inference" (Lakoff
and Johnson, 1999, p. 20). On this view, our
understanding of concepts such as time is predicated on
our spatial experiences, and thus the idea of motion in
time relies on our understanding of motion in space.

There is evidence for this relationship between
motion in space and time in the structure of language.
We can talk of putting things forward in time, as well
as moving forward through space (see Lakoff &
Johnson, 1999; 1980). According to Lakoff and
Johnson’s (1980; 1999) Conceptual Metaphor
hypothesis, metaphors are not justa manner of speaking
but a deeper reflection of human thought processes.
Metaphoric speaking is reflective, say Lakoff and
Johnson, of deeper conceptual mappings that occur in
our thinking and is depicted as an over-arching and
general metaphor termed asthe Conceptual Metaphor.
Consider the following statements:
Your claims are indefensible.
He attacked every weak point in my argument.
He shot down all of my arguments.
According to the Conceptual Metaphor (metaphoric
representation) hypothesis when we use statements such
as these we are making use of a larger conglomerate
metaphor, in this instance, ARGUMENT IS WAR.1
The thrust of the Conceptual Metaphor argument is as
follows: arguments are similar to wars in that there are
winners and losers, positions are attacked and defended,
and one can gain or lose ground. The theory of
Conceptual Metaphor suggests that we process
metaphors by mapping from a base domain to a target
domain. In this particular example, the base domain is
ARGUMENT IS WAR and the target domain is
asubordinate metaphor such as Your claims are
indefensible.

Motion in Space and Time
Lakoff and Johnson extend the idea of Conceptual
Metaphor to spatio-temporal metaphors by invoking the
1

Following Lakoff and Johnson’s convention (1980), all
Conceptual Metaphors are typed in the uppercase to
distinguish them from the subordinate metaphors

locative terms of FRONT/BACK to represent how we
view time and space. FRONT is assigned on the
assumption of motion (Fillmore, 1978). According to
this theory, in the ego-moving system, FRONT is used
to designate a future event because the ego is moving
forward and encounters the future event in front of him.
In the time-moving system, the FRONT term denotes a
past event where the ego or the individual is stationary
but the events are moving. Thus it is possible to define
(at least) two schemas of motion in space.
1)
Object-Moving Metaphor (OM)
In this schema of motion,the individual is seen as
stationary and objects seem to come towards him/her.
For an example of this schema, consider an individual
waiting at a bus stop and observing vehicles coming
towards him/her. In this schema of motion, the
individual assigns the term FRONT to the object closest
towards him. In the diagram below, the term FRONT
would be assigned to the white rock.

1) Time Moving metaphor (TM)
The motion of time provides the framework in which
temporal metaphors are comprehended. In this schema,
front, or ahead is determined by thefuture moving to
the past. For example, in the month of February,
Christmas is now in the future. In time it will move to
the present and then to the past (e.g. Christmas is
coming ). The individual is a stationary observer as
times "flows" past. This schema is the temporal
equivalent of the OM metaphor in the domain of space.
2) Ego-Moving metaphor (EM)
The ego or the individual moves from the past to the
future such as the sentence His vacation to the beach
lay ahead of him . In this metaphor, the observer is
seen as moving forward through time, passing temporal
events that are seen as stationary points. It is thus the
temporal equivalent of the spatial EM system, where
the observer moves forward through space
When discussing motion in time, temporal events are
viewed as points or locations in space, and a similar
rationale is used when assigning deictic terms such as
front and back. For example, in the EM system,
FRONT is used to designate a future event because the
ego is moving forward and encounters the future event
in front of him, while in the TM system the FRONT
term denotes a past event where the ego or the
individual is stationary but the events are moving.

Figure 1
2)
Ego-Moving Metaphor (EM)
Inthis schema of motion, the objects are stationary and
it is the individual that is in motion. Here, the term
FRONT would be assigned to the object furthest away
from the individual. In the picture below, it is the black
rock that would be labeled as FRONT.

Figure 2
Thus in the EM system, front is used to designate an
object furthest away from the individual, as the
trajectory of motion is in that direction. While in the
OM system, the term front is assigned to the object
closest to the individual.

Motion in Time
The schemas of motion represented in the domain of
time reflect the representation of motion in the domain
of space.

Studies of Spatio-temporal Metaphors
Gentner and Imai (1992), and McGlone and Harding
(1998) confirmed the idea that the different schemas of
motion (EM and TM in the domain of time) are indeed
psychologically real systems.Gentner and Imai found
that participants responded faster to questions that were
schema consistent with regards to temporal schemas in
priming than to questions that were inconsistent with
their primes. Gentner and Imai argue that this supports
the theory that metaphors are mapped in distinct
schemas: the shift from one schema to another causes a
disruption in the processing, reflected in increased
processing time. They argue that their study indicates
that the relations between space and time are reflective
of a psychologically real conceptual system as opposed
to an etymological relic.2
A study by McGlone and Harding (1998) involved
participants answering questions about days of the week
- relative to Wednesday - which were posed in either
the ego-moving or the time-moving metaphor. Egomoving metaphor trials comprised statements such as
We passed the deadline two days ago , whilst timemoving metaphor trials involved statements such as
The deadline passed us two days ago ; in each case,
2

Although McGlone and Harding (1998) criticised some
aspects of Gentner and Imai s methodology, their corrected
replication of the original study confirms its findings.

participants read the statements and were then asked to
indicate the day of the week that a given event had
occurred or was going to occur. At the end of each
block of such priming statements, participants read an
ambiguous statement, such as The reception scheduled
for next Wednesday has been moved forward two
days 3 and then were asked to indicate the day of the
week on which this event was now going to occur.
Participants who had answered blocks of priming
questions about statements phrased in a way consistent
with theego-moving metaphor tended to disambiguate
moved forward in a manner consistent with the egomoving system (they assigned forward - the front - to
the future, and hence thought the meeting had been rescheduled for Friday), whereas participants who had
answered blocks of questions about statements phrased
a way consistent with the time-moving metaphor tended
to disambiguate moved forward in a manner
consistent with the time-moving system (they assigned
forward - the front - to the past, and hence thought the
meeting had been re-scheduled for Monday).
This work has been further developed in a recent set
of experiments by Boroditsky (2000) which explicitly
explored the relationship between the domains of space
and time. Boroditsky found that temporal priming
significantly influenced temporal reasoning in a crossdomain extension of the paradigm used in earlier
experiments. Spatially priming participants with the ego
moving schema led them to infer that an ambiguous
meeting ("Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved
forwards two days") had been moved to Friday,
whereas spatially priming participants with the object
moving schema led them to assign the meeting to
Monday. This study provides good evidence to support
the notion that our representation of motion in space is
mapped on to our understanding of motion in time,
although it leaves open the question of what is directing
this representational mapping spatial representations
that are contiguous with our embodied experience, or
functionally separable, abstract conceptual
representations of space and time.

Experiment 1
This experiment directly explores the claim that our
embodied experiences in space direct our conceptual
understanding of time. Participants were immersed in
an embodied environment, a virtual reality game, and
were presented with an ambiguous spatial task, either
after either a purely embodied prime, or after embodied
priming during which a linguistic prime had cued them
to think in terms of a contrary spatial schema. The
experiment was designed to explore the role of
experience and thought between the two schemas of
motion in the domain of space.
3

All trials were conducted on a Wednesday.

Participants
61 University of Edinburgh students volunteered to take
part in this experiment.

Materials
In order to create a particularly convincing Ego Moving
environment, participants played a slightly modified
version of a pre-existing section of the virtual reality
computer game, U n R e a l . This is a first person
perspective game and involves the participant
walking through a courtyard environment to complete
a task. All monsters and other artifacts of the game that
were not relevant to the experiment were removed from
this section of the game. The objects in the target task
appeared upon completion of the game. These were
two chests, with no discernible front or back (unlike
other objects, such as a car, or a TV), one of which was
closer to the player than the other. The game was
projected onto a 368cm by 282cm size screen in order
to magnify the virtual effects of the game.

Procedure
Pre-Test
25 participants were tested individually seated in front
of the projector screen. The game was set at the point
in front of the two chests. Participants did not play the
game and were only instructed to Move to the front
chest . In this condition, the target task was performed
in isolation, and the results provided a baseline for how
the term front in this task is interpreted.
Out of the twenty-five subjects, twelve of them
interpreted the term front to refer to the chest closest
to them, while the rest assigned front to the chest
furthest from them, confirming the ambiguity of the
assignment of front in the target task.
Experimental Conditions
36 participants were tested individually. They were
asked to fill in a brief questionnaire requesting
demographic information, as well as familiarity with
video games and computers. At the end of the
questionnaire were the following instructions: Your
task is to find the location of a young woman. Try your
best to navigate around the environment in order to find
her. During this game, it is important to try to
remember some key landmarks, such as a pair of
brightly coloured pillars as you enter a path, as well
as the doors on the buildings. After you have been
playing for some time, you will hear a question
requiring a true or false answer. This question will be
about the game. Try to answer it correctly and speak
your answer loudly."
The participants were then shown how to use the
arrow keys on the keyboard when navigating through
the environment and then left alone to play the game.
(The experimenter was on hand, should the volunteers

have any difficulty maneuvering around the
environment; however, all volunteers seemed
adequately proficient at navigating around the
environment.)
There were two experimental conditions. In the first
condition, volunteers received a pre-recorded true/false
question specific to the assignment of the term front
approximately four minutes into playing the game. The
question they were posed -- During the game, the
green pillar is in front of the red pillar — prompted
them to think in an Object Moving manner about space
(the green pillar was closer to the participants than the
red pillar in the game environment, thus this question is
true from an OM perspective).4 We were interested to
see if the thinking in an OM way in answering the
question would result in a different assignment of front
from the EM perspective that was embodied in the
game.
The order of the pillars in the question was reversed
for half of the participants to counter-act an affirmative
response bias. Thus, half the participants answered the
true/false question: During the game, the red pillar is in
front of the green pillar . The answer to this question
was false from an OM perspective.
In the second condition, volunteers received a prerecorded non-spatial question rather than a spatial prime
approximately four minutes into playing the game.
They had to provide a true or false answer to the
following question: During the game, most of the
doors are open". The correct answer to this question
was true, however, the amount of doors the volunteer
saw depended on the route he or she chose in
navigating around the environment to complete the
task. However, the question was also presented in the
inverse to avoid any particular response bias, and half
of the participants in this condition answered the
following question: During the game, most of the
doors are closed". The question in this condition served
as a control to ensure that simply answering a question
would not cause people to re-represent their perspective
of front or back (but that rather a question must cause
people to specifically think in a way that involves a
representation of front/back for this to occur).
Playing the EM game served as the embodied prime
in this condition.
Once the participants had completed the task, the
virtual young woman they sought congratulated them
and they were asked to complete the target task: "Move
to the front chest". The two chests were located on the
left of the virtual woman and were added from the
4

Pre-testing had shown that this question, which is true from
an OM perspective, was unambiguous and ordinarily
answered from the OM perspective. Out of 20 participants,
90% allocated the term front in an OM perspective. A
binomial test confirmed this as significant; p<.001.

UnReal directory of furniture to maintain continuity in
the environment. Upon completion of the target task,
participants were given a short debriefing.

Results
Participants responses for the target task are shown in
Figure 3. Out of the total 36 participants, two (5%) did
not answer the prime question consistently (i.e., to the
OM prime: During the game, the green pillar is in
front of the red pillar , they answered false when the
correct answer was true). Their data were not used in
the following analyses.
Analysis showed that when participants received the
OM prime, requiring them to specifically think in a way
that represented a particular schema of motion, 75% of
them interpreted the front chest in an OM consistent
manner, despite playing the EM game for a further 2-3
minutes after answering the prime question. However,
when participants were simply immersed in a game
which embodied EM motion, and were not required to
specifically (or explicitly) think about that motion
(instead, they were required to think about doors),
83%of them were influenced by the nature of motion in
the game and interpreted the front chest command in an
EM schema consistent manner.
A chi-square analysis revealed a significant effect of
the type of prime participants received on how they
interpreted the term front to apply to an ambiguous
target task: 2(1)=11.691; p<0.001.
Primed by Question
Embodied Prime

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Target Furthest
away

Target Closest

Figure 3: Target responses in each prime condition

Discussion
This experiment seems to suggest that thinking about
space can override the role of spatial experience in our
understanding of spatial concepts. Participants who
were cued to think using a particular schema of motion
(OM), overcame the schema of motion they were
experiencing (EM), and responded ina consistent
manner with the way they had been cued to think about
space. Participants who received a random question,
unrelated to any system of motion, were influenced by
the schema of motion in the game (EM) and responded
to the spatial task consistently with their experience.

Although the video prime in this experiment involved
the participant in an EM schema of motion, there might
be some criticism against the embodied prime as
participants only perceived the visual environment,
rather than physically experienced it. Such criticism
seems unjustified in this case. As Lishman and Lee
(1973) argue, perception is powerful enough to direct
kinaesthesis or movement. They claim that a person
relies heavily on visual kinaesthesis, in many
situations, for example, driving, and swimming in a
current, a person is dependent on vision to sense how he
is moving relative to the static environment (p. 288,
emphasis theirs). They also argue that individuals
experience a sensation of motion when visual scenes
change, but they are stationary. They conducted a series
of experiments where individuals were placed in a
stationary trolley in a moving room. The room was
moved independently from the trolley located in it, so
the participants saw the room move, although thetrolley
they were standing in was completely stationary.
Lishman and Lee record participants as perceiving the
trolley to move as well, eventhough they were
stationary. The participant also swayed together with
the room in an apparent attempt to keep himself stable
with respect to his static environment (p.292).
Participants felt the experience was like being on a
boat, and several felt quite nauseated afterwards.
In this virtual reality experiment, several participants
had similar experiences and even commented on feeling
rather ill after playing the video game for a few
minutes. One participant asked if she could leave
because she felt so nauseated. Often, participants
shoulders were seen to move in sync with a right or left
turn they made in the virtual environment, and many
participants remarked on feeling dizzy after completing
the experiment. This confirms the importance of
perception in directing our sense of motion, and
suggests that visually experiencing motion in virtual
reality provides a similar sensation to a physical
experience of motion.

Experiment Two
While the first experiment examined the influence of
simple experience versus explicit thought in our
understanding of motion in space, this experiment
explored whether simple spatial experience or thinking
about space would be more influential in mapping
information about motion from the domain of space to
time. Participants were immersed in an embodied
environment and were presented with an ambiguous
target temporal task after receiving either a purely
embodied priming, or embodied priming during which
a linguistic prime had cued them to think in terms of a
contrary spatial schema.

Participants
Thirty-nine Edinburgh University students volunteered
to take part in this experiment.

Materials
The participants played the same video game as
described in Experiment 1.

Procedure
All trials were conducted on a Wednesday. Participants
were tested individually in the virtual reality lab and
were asked to fill in a brief questionnaire containing the
same instructions given in Experiment 1. They were
also informed that they would be required to return next
Wednesday if they were successful in accomplishing
the task in the game. This information provided a
connection between the target question (see below) and
the experiment, as the participants would interpret
Next Wednesday s meeting in the target question as a
further experiment, rather than an unrelated question.
Participants were then shown the game and began
playing. There were two conditions. Approximately
four minutes into playing the game, the participants in
the first condition received the linguistic prime cueing
them to think the in an OM perspective. Again, they
had to respond with either true or false to the
question During the game, the green pillar is in front of
the red pillar . (Once again, half of the participants in
this condition received the inverse question.)
In the second condition, instead of receiving a prime
that cued spatial thinking, the participants received the
non-spatial question approximately four minutes into
playing the game During this game, most of the doors
are open . (Again, half of the participants in this
condition received the question in the inverse.)
Once participants had successfully completed the
game task (finding a virtual young woman; all
participants were successful), the experimenter
congratulated them and then informed them that "Next
Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward two
days and asked What day is the meeting now that is
has been rescheduled?" (the ambiguous temporal
question used in McGlone and Harding, 1988, and
Boroditsky, 2000). After participants had given their
answer, they were given a short debriefing.

Results
Out of the total 39 participants, three of the participants
(8%) did not answer the prime question consistently
(i.e., to the OM prime: During the game, the green
pillar is in front of the red pillar , they answered false
when the correct answer was true). Data from those
participants who provided incorrect answers to the
prime were eliminated from the analyses.

Participants responses to the ambiguous target
question were examined, and once again, the results
revealed that the type of prime participants were
presented with significantly affected their
disambiguation of the target temporal question. The
participants who received the cued OM prime during
the game (which required them to adopt an OM schema
for thinking of motion in answering the question) were
more likely to interpret the term f o r w a r d from
Wednesday as Monday (65%) rather than Friday. In
comparison, 74% of the participants who were
influenced by the embodied EM game, but did not have
to explicitly think about schemas of motion in
answering the in-game question considered the new
meeting day to beFriday rather than Monday (see figure
4).
A chi-square revealed that the type of prime the
participants received significantly affected how they
disambiguated forward in the temporal target task:
2
(1)=5.355; p<0.05 (one-tailed).

functionally separable from their embodied experiences
of space and time (see also Boroditsky, Ramscar, &
Frank, this volume).

General Discussion
In two experiments, we have shown that explicitly
thinking about space — in order to provide answers to
questions cueing the object-moving metaphoric system could significantly reverse a task bias to assign
FORWARD in an ego-moving manner.
If, as Lakoff and Johnson (1999) suggest, language
is ultimately the slave of our (universal) embodied
thought, then we would have expected pure embodied
priming to have at least as much an influence as
abstract thought. However, this was not the case (see
also Boroditsky et al, this volume).
These results suggest that a proper characterization
of conceptual thought will need to look beyond the
information that comes from physical experience, and
consider as well the ways in which languages and
cultures affect thought.

Primed By Question

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Embodied Prime

Acknowledgements
We thank Lera Boroditsky for many insightful
discussions, and Jon Sykes for his assistance in
programming the virtual environment.

References
Target Friday

Target Monday

Figure 4: Target responses in each prime condition

Discussion
These results suggest that our concepts of motion in the
domain of space can influence how we understand
motion in the domain of time. However, while the
embodied position suggests that it is our experiences in
space that ultimately affect how we think of time, this
experiment reveals that how you think about motion —
even in abstract terms, such as in response to a question
— also plays a significant role in influencing our concept
of time. Although they participants continued to play a
game which embodied an EM spatial perspective after
they answered their question, participants who
answered questions which required them to think in an
OM manner answered an ambiguous temporal question
in a TM (and thus OM, see Boroditsky, 2000)
consistent manner, whereas participants who had played
the EM game but not been required to explicitly think
about time answered the ambiguous temporal question
in an EM consistent manner. This indicates that
although spatial experience can influence temporal
thought, this influence can be over-ridden by explicitly
thinking about space, suggesting that people s
conceptual representations of space and time are

Alloway, T.P., Ramscar, M., & Corley, M. (1999).
Verbal and Embodied priming in schema mapping
tasks. In Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. New
Jersey:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Pub.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors.
Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L., Ramscar, M. & Frank, M. (2001). The
roles of body and mind in abstract thought. This
volume.
Gentner, D., & Imai, M. (1992). Is the future always
ahead? Evidence for system mappings in
understanding space-time metaphors. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Bloomington, Indiana, 510-515.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live
by. Chicago: Univeristy of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the
Flesh. New York: Harper Collins Publisher.
McGlone, M., & Harding, J. (1998). Back (or
Forward?) to the Future: The Role of Perspective in
Temporal Language Comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 24, 1211-1223.
McTaggart, J. (1908). The unreality of time. Mind, 17,
457-474.

