UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Consistency of Children's Responses to Logical Statements: Coordinating Components
of Formal Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6x84z9ww

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Morris, Bradley J.
Klahr, David

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The consistency of children’s responses to logical statements:
Coordinating components of formal reasoning
Bradley J. Morris (bmorris@andrew.cmu.edu)
David Klahr (klahr@cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Dept of Psychology
5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract
Processing of formal statements has three distinct
phases: assessing truth-values a priori, requesting evidence,
and if requested, evaluating this evidence. Previous
investigations of children’s ability to process formal
assertions have studied each of these phases in isolation, but
have not asked whether responses to each processing phase
are coordinated into consistent response patterns. This study
examined the consistency of 28 third (M= 8.9) and 33 sixth
graders (M= 12.0) responses to four types of logical
statements: tautologies, contradictions, conjunctions, and
disjunctions. The results indicated that third graders’ betweenitem responses are significantly less consistent than sixth
graders, that sixth graders are more likely to give correct
response on each question phase than third graders, and that
development on each question phase may occur
independently.

An important milestone in the development of
scientific reasoning is the point at which children
recognize that some statements are true or false simply
because of the their formal structure while others
require the gathering and evaluation of empirical
evidence. We propose that there are three phases in
processing theoretical assertions: 1) evaluating a priori
truth values, 2) requesting evidence only if a
statement’s truth-value is unable to be determined a
priori, and 3) correctly mapping evidence to formal
states, for statements requiring evidence, so that correct
conclusions can be drawn. Thus, a complete account of
how children process formal properties requires an
examination not only of the development of all three
phases in isolation but also of their coordination.
Most previous research in young children’s
logical reasoning has focused only on one component at
a time. That is, research has focused separately on a
priori truth-values of statements (Braine & O’ Brien,
1998), evidence requests (Osherson & Markman,
1975), or evidence evaluation (Suppes & Feldman,
1971).
This piecemeal focus has led to seemingly
contradictory results. For example, preschool children
correctly evaluate the a priori truth-values of
contradictions as false but incorrectly request evidence
for these statements (Osherson & Markman, 1975;
Braine & Rumain, 1981). The goal of the present study

is to examine children’s coordination of all three
components involved in processing formal properties.

Logical Statements and Formal Properties
Formal properties describe the relationship
between form, evidence and truth-values. A logical
statement’s formal properties are defined by values on
three phases: 1) truth-values before evidence (true, not
true, can’t tell), 2) whether evidence is necessary (yes,
no), and 3) if evidence is necessary, correctly
evaluating evidence (true, not true, can’t tell). We will
focus on the following statement forms: conjunctions,
disjunctions, tautologies and contradictions. Each
statement type represents different formal properties.
The values on each phase distributes the statements into
two classes: logically indeterminate statements that
require evidence to determine their truth-values
(hereafter called indeterminate) and logically
determinate statements that do not require evidence to
determine their truth-values (hereafter called
determinate) (Suppes, 1957). The statements and
components are described in Table1.
Research into young children’s processing of
formal properties shows mixed evidence for children’s
competence. While preschool and elementary children
show some sensitivity to statements such as
contradictions (often evaluating them as false) (Braine
& Rumain, 1981) children of the same age tend to
request evidence for most problems even when
unnecessary and rarely coordinate evaluation and
evidence requests correctly (Osherson & Markman,
1975; Morris & Sloutsky, 1999; Ruffman, 1999).
To address this limitation, we examined
children’s response patterns to determine the degree of
between-phase dependence as an index of processing
competence. That is, if children correctly process
formal properties, then we would expect correct
responses in each of the necessary phases. For example,
correctly responding to a contradiction requires
processing two phases: an a priori evaluation of “not
true” and denying a request for evidence. However, a
child who lacks such an understanding may not only err
on individual question phases (e.g., "true" a priori
evaluation) but may fail to link response phases (e.g.,

Table 1- Comparison of Logical Statements by Dimension

Determinate

Statement

Example

A Priori?

Tautology

The shape is a circle or the
shape is not a circle
The shape is a triangle and the
shape is not a triangle
The shape is a square and the
shape is not red
The shape is a square or the
shape is not blue

Contradiction
Indeterminate

Conjunction
Disjunction

denying request for evidence). In examining this
question, we implicitly examined a related question:
Are children’s responses from a single dimension of
formal properties (e.g., a priori evaluations)
diagnostic of their overall processing competence?
To examine these research questions, we
presented a ‘game’ to a group of third and sixth
grade children in which they were asked to evaluate
16 logical statements. For each statement, each child
was asked up to three questions (“phases”) per
statement: a priori evaluation, a request for evidence,
and, if evidence was requested, evidence evaluation.
Each child’s response to each question phase was
coded as correct or incorrect then these question
phases were compiled into a response pattern for
each of the 16 statements. Response patterns were
aggregated and compared to levels predicted by
‘chance’ decisions at each question phase.

Method
Participants
A total of 28 third graders (8.5-9.5 years,
M= 8.9) and 33 sixth graders (11.3-13.6 years, M=
12.0) participated. The children were recruited from
three public schools in Pittsburgh, PA.

Materials
There were four examples of each of four
statement
types:
tautology,
contradiction,
disjunction, and conjunction. ‘Evidence’ was
provided in the form of a picture (approximately
5”x7”) that displayed information related to each
statement card. For example, given the statement
“The circle is red AND the circle is not red” the
picture displays a red circle. Four additional cards
and pictures were used for the warm-up tasks. The
statements and evidence were designed to allow us to
differentiate among response patterns.

True

Evidence
Necessary
No

Evidence/Form
Mapping
All True states

False

No

No True States

Can’t Tell

Yes

Can’t Tell

Yes

1 True State
(square, not red)
2 True States
(square) (not blue)

Procedure
The experiment was conducted in a single 15-20
minute session that included two segments: a warmup and an experimental segment. Each participant
was tested individually. In the warm-up segment, the
interviewer read a set of instructions explaining the
game’s purpose. The warm-up period lasted
approximately five minutes and consisted of four
trials. All instructions and statements for the
experimental segment were read to each participant
and repeated if requested. Two cards were placed in
front of each child: a statement card (face up) and a
picture card (face down). The order of presentation
was counterbalanced across participants. Each child
was given 16 trials, with 1 statement per trial.
For each trial, the following procedure was used.
The statement card and picture were placed in front
of the child. The child was read the statement card.
(Q1) The child was then asked the first question
phase: An evaluation of truth status of the statement
before evidence (a priori evaluation): “Is this
statement True, Not True, or Can’t Tell. (Q2) After
the child responded to the statement, they were asked
a second question: Do you need to see the picture to
help figure out the sentence? Yes or No. (Q3) If the
child requested to see the picture, then they were
shown the picture and asked the following: “Now
that you have seen the picture, is the statement True,
Not True, or Can’t Tell.”

Coding
Compiled Phase Analysis (CPA) Traditionally,
children’s responses to each phase of questioning
have been analyzed independent of their responses to
the other phases. We suggest an analysis of
children’s response patterns, that is, the frequency of
the different types of sequential responses that
children generated as they moved through each of
the three processing phases for each statement.
Because each pattern represents the compilation of

responses across the three phases, we call this the
Compiled Phase Analysis (CPA).
The set of all possible response patterns –
both correct and incorrect – is listed in Table 2. For
example, as shown in the top row of Table 2, if a
child’s responses to a Contradiction were A priori“False” and Evidence Request- “No”, we would code
that pattern as C-C because each phase was answered
correctly. But many other patterns could – and did occur. For example, one erroneous response pattern
for a contradiction is: A priori- “False”, Evidence
Request- “Yes” and, Evidence Evaluation- “True,”
which would be coded as C-I-I, (Table 2 last row of
upper section) because the answer to the first phase
is correct, but the other two are incorrect. This
pattern demonstrates correct a priori evaluation, but
incorrect evidence request and evaluation. Another
erroneous response pattern for a contradiction is A
priori- “Can’t Tell”, Evidence Request- “Yes”,
Evidence Evaluation- “False”. (Coded as I-I-C).
This pattern reveals a different type of
misunderstanding: one in which, because the
contradiction is not recognized as such, evidence is
(incorrectly) requested, but then correctly evaluated.
The other patterns listed in Table 2 imply other types
of errors. For the remainder of this section, we will
look more closely at the distribution of these
patterns, without further discussing their underlying
implications.
These distributions are informative because a
child responding at random to each phase could have
generated any particular response pattern. By
analyzing the relative frequency of different response
patterns – in particular the extent to which they
deviate from what would be expected from a random
responder - we can begin to understand whether
children are responding consistently, albeit
erroneously, to these statements or whether their
responses to each phase are random, and based only
on guessing.
Examining Response Patterns In this section we
investigate the extent to which children’s response
patterns deviate from a randomly generated set.
Chance values are based on the assumption that, for
each phase, each alternative response is equally
likely and is independent of all other phases.
Response patterns consisted of either three questions
(if evidence was requested) or two questions (if
evidence was not requested). The first, a priori
evaluation, has three possible responses: “true,” “not
true” or “can’t tell,” only one of which is correct,
with probability 1/3. The second phase, request for
evidence, had two possible responses: “yes or no”.
Thus the probability of correctly answering this
question was 1/2. The third phase, evidence

evaluation, occurred only if evidence had been
requested (and obtained). Like the first question, this
question had three possible responses, with the
probability of the one correct response being 1/3.
These probabilities were used to generate the
expected chance distribution of the different
response patterns for determinate and indeterminate
statements. The expected and observed results for
each type of pattern are displayed in Table 2 as
counts. Also displayed in Table 2 are the observed
proportions of each type of pattern for each grade
level.
For determinate and indeterminate statements,
there were 6 possible response patterns, one correct
and five incorrect. Chance values were calculated by
computing the probability of choosing a correct or
incorrect response on each question phase. For
example, for the determinate pattern (I-I-I), the
probability of an incorrect a priori response is 2/3, an
incorrect evidence request is 1/2, and an incorrect
evidence evaluation is 2/3. The conditional
probability of selecting this pattern of responses is
2/3*1/2*2/3=2/9. Once the conditional probability
was calculated for each possible response pattern, we
calculated the total number of patterns we would
expect by chance given the number of responses in
the data set (229, 3rd graders). So the numbers in
Table 2 reflect the number of times we would expect
to see each response pattern if a child simply ‘flipped
a coin’ at each decision point.
Finally, the response pattern analysis also
indicates the degree to which children correctly
process individual response phases. That is, if
children err in processing one question phase (e.g., a
priori evaluations only) then errors should focus on
those patterns that indicate correct response on two
phases and errors on one phase. Further, the overall
distribution of responses should deviate from chance
on patterns that reflect errors on this particular
response phase. Such evidence would support the
notion of independent developmental trajectories for
each question phase.

Results
Configurational Frequency Analysis
We conducted a configurational frequency
analysis to compare the observed and expected
values from the CPA analysis (von Eye, 1990). This
analysis uses assumptions similar to a chi-square
analysis to compare the distribution of expected and
observed response frequencies. This analysis
controls the overall significance level by using the
Bonferroni adjustment. The results provide a

significance level for the difference between the
observed and expected values. When these
differences are significant the CFA indicates two
classifications: types (in which the observed value is
significantly higher then the predicted value) and
antitypes (in which the observed value is
significantly lower then the predicted value). The
analysis was conducted using the ‘CFA program for
32 bit operation systems’ (von Eye, 1998). The
results of the analysis determinate the significance
levels indicated in Table 2. Recall that for each of the
possible CPA patterns, there is one correct and five
incorrect patterns for both determinate and
indeterminate statements.
For indeterminate statements, sixth grader’s
correct CPA responses deviate significantly from
chance, while third graders CPA responses do not
differ significantly from chance. Sixth graders are
below chance on one incorrect pattern. Conversely,
third grader’s response patterns were above chance
on one pattern- I-C-C- and below chance on two
patterns- C-I and I-I. This suggests that children
requested evidence for most problems failing to
distinguish when evidence was unnecessary and
often failed to assign correct truth-values before
evidence. For determinate statements, neither third
nor sixth graders’ correct patterns were above
chance. Of note however, is that both sixth and third
grader’s response patterns were significantly above
chance for one incorrect pattern- I-C- suggesting that
they were not processing a priori and evidence
request responses dependently. Third graders were
above chance for one incorrect pattern- I-I-I
indicating that they erred on all question phases.
Finally, an examination of the types
(observed levels are significantly above those
predicted by chance) and anti-types (observed levels
are significantly below those predicted by chance)
supports the notion of independent developmental
trajectories for each question phase. Third graders
response patterns demonstrated a lack of
understanding of the necessity of evidence often
erroneously requesting evidence for determinate
statements. Few third (or sixth) graders failed to
request evidence for indeterminate statements (I-I

and C-I patterns) suggesting that in general, children
erred on the side of evidence requests.
For determinate statements, third and sixth
graders also made fewer I-C patterns than expected
by chance. Thus, children rarely made an error on a
priori evaluations and were correct on evidence
requests suggesting that the former is better
established in third graders than the latter. Overall,
children’s patterns suggested that errors on evidence
evaluation were the least frequent while errors on
evidence requests were the most frequent.

Correct Response Patterns
In order to compare the number of correct
responses by age and type a 2 (grade) X 2 (statement
type: determinate v. indeterminate) ANOVA was
performed with grade as a between-subjects factor
and statement type as a within-subjects factor. Each
correct pattern was scored as 1 while each incorrect
pattern was scored as 0. Results indicated that sixth
graders gave significantly more correct responses on
both determinate F (1, 114) = 39, p <.001 and
determinate statements F (1, 114) = 42, p <.001 than
third graders.

CPA: Summary
The Compiled Phase Analysis examined the
degree to which children are correctly processing
each question phase. The formal properties of each
statement type require a particular response pattern
in which each question phase is dependent on the
previous response. The CPA compared the number
of responses due to chance responding on each phase
to the number of observed responses. The results
suggest 1) a high amount of variability in all
children’s between phase processing, 2) sixth graders
were more likely than third graders to correctly
process all phases, and 3) each processing phase
develops independently. However, while the CPA
indicated phase to phase dependencies, it does not
reveal the specific strategies that could produce these
patterns (see Morris & Klahr, in review for such as
analysis).

Table 2- Predicted and Observed Compiled Response Patterns
Number of responses of each typeb

Type of response patternsa
Statement
Type

A Priori

Evidence
Request

Evidence
Evaluation

Pattern
Code

Third Grade

Determinate

Correct

Correct

N/A

C-C

15

(38)

85

(44)

Incorrect

Correct

N/A

I-C

12

(74)+

21

(87)+

Incorrect

Incorrect

Incorrect

I-I-I

96

(50)*

86

(58)

Incorrect

Incorrect

Correct

I-I-C

51

(25)

40

(29)

Correct

Incorrect

Correct

C-I-C

27

(14)

17

(16)

Correct

Incorrect

Incorrect

C-I-I

23

(25)

14

(29)

224
Indeterminate

Sixth Grade

263

Correct

Correct

Correct

C-C-C

35

(13)

110

(16)*

Correct

Correct

Incorrect

C-C-I

25

(25)

40

(29)

Correct

Incorrect

N/A

C-I

1

(38)+

3

(44)+

Incorrect

Correct

Incorrect

I-C-I

57

(48)

22

(58)

Incorrect

Correct

Correct

I-C-C

78

(25)*

40

(29)

Incorrect

Incorrect

N/A

I-I

27

(74)+

47

(86)

223
262
a. Responses are coded as being ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ compared to optimal response patterns.
Correct response patterns are in bold.
b. Entries indicate the total number of individual response patterns summed over all children’s
responses in each grade. A total of 28 3rd graders and 33 6th graders were given 8 determinate and
8 indeterminate statements. Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of responses expected
from a random response pattern.
* Indicates a type (significantly above chance at the p< .05 level) while + indicates and anti-type
(significantly below chance at the p< .05 level).

Discussion
We have argued that one previously overlooked
component of logical reasoning is the coordination of
individual responses into consistent response patterns
that reflect an understanding of formal properties.
The present study attempted to examine
simultaneously children’s responses to each
component of formal properties (operationalized as
component question phases) and to compare the
distribution of children’s responses to what would be
expected if children answered each question phase as
if they were independent of each other.
The results indicated that sixth graders’ compiled
response patterns demonstrated a greater degree of
question phase dependence than the response patterns
of third graders.

When the aggregated patterns were compared to
chance, sixth graders’ responses were significantly
above chance for ‘correct’ patterns on indeterminate
statements while third graders patterns were above
chance only for a specific error pattern for
indeterminate problems (I-C-C). Overall, third
graders response patterns deviated from levels
predicted by ‘chance’ responding only on incorrect
response patterns.
The results suggest that each of the component
properties of formal properties has an individual
developmental course and that once each component
property is established, the individual components
must then be coordinated. The distributions of
response patterns suggest the following: 1) children
are likely to err when requesting evidence
demonstrated by high levels of incorrect evidence

requests for determinate statements and low levels of
evidence refusal for indeterminate statements, 2)
sixth graders often evaluated evidence correctly, even
when such evidence is unnecessary. Taken together,
the evidence suggests that correct processing on all
phases is not present early in development and that
correct processing may occur at different times for
each phase.
While sixth grader’s performance was
significantly better than third graders, they still erred
on a large number of statements suggesting that they
do not correctly process formal properties.
Finally, the large amount of variance in
children’s response patterns suggests that a focus on
one component of formal properties is not diagnostic
of children’s overall understanding of formal
properties. That is, children’s responses on one
component may erroneously suggest competence (or
lack of competence) when only partial competence
exists.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by a postdoctoral
fellowship to the first author from a NICHD
(HD08550) and in part by a grant to the second
author from NICHD (HD25211). Thanks to Anne
Siegel for data collection, coding and analysis and
Jen Schnakenberg and Amy Masnick for helpful
comments on a previous draft.

References
Braine, M., & Rumain, B. (1981). evelopment of
comprehension of "Or": Evidence for a sequence of
competencies. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 31, 46-70.
Braine, M. & O’Brien, D. (Eds.). (1998). Mental
Logic. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Morris, B. J., & Sloutsky, V. (1999).
Developmental differences in young children’s
solutions of logical and empirical problems. In M.
Hahn & S. C. Stoness (Eds.), Proceedings of the
twenty-first annual conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 432-437). Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Morris, B.J., & Klahr, D. (in review). The role of
evidence in children’s reasoning strategies.
Osherson, D., & Markman, E. (1975). Language
and the ability to evaluate contradictions and
tautologies. Cognition, 3(3), 213-226.
Ruffman, T. (1999). Children’s understanding of
logical inconsistency. Child Development, 70 (4),
872-886.
Suppes, P. (1957). Introduction to Logic. New
York: Van Nostrand.
Suppes, P. & Feldman, S. (1971). Young
children’s comprehension of logical connectives.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 12, 304317.
von Eye, A. (1990). Introduction to
configurational frequency analysis: The search for
types and antitypes in cross-classifications.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
von Eye, A. (1998). CFA program for 32 bit
operation systems. Methods of Psychological
Research - online, 3, 1 - 3.

