UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Practice on Strategy Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zj7k32m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Charman, Suzanne C.
Howes, Andrew

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Practice on Strategy Change
Suzanne C. Charman (CharmanSC1@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3YG, Wales, United Kingdom

Andrew Howes (HowesA@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3YG, Wales, United Kingdom

Abstract
Some effort has been made to examine why people often
do not adopt efficient strategies, however little attempt
has been made to determine the conditions that support
strategy generation. This study examines how practice
may lead to efficient strategy generation, through
perceptual noticing and the elaboration of a device
representation. Forty-three participants were required to
complete drawing tasks in MS PowerPoint, for which
there are a number of possible strategies that share the
same component operators, and yet vary in efficiency.
Merely by practicing a component of a less efficient
strategy, a more efficient strategy was generated earlier
on in the experiment. Further, the efficiency of the
strategy used at test was correlated with device
knowledge. It is proposed that through practice a user’s
device representation becomes elaborated, and this in
turn leads to strategy generation. The possibility of a
perceptual noticing mechanism for problem solving was
also investigated, however providing strong perceptual
groupings did not aid strategy generation.

Introduction
A reliable finding in experimental psychology is that
practice on a task leads to faster and less erroneous
performance of that task. In the 1920s Snoddy (1926,
as cited in Anderson, 1995) graphed learning data and
demonstrated that a power function characterises the
rate of improvement in the performance of a task. This
means that with practice the speed at which people
complete a task increases with diminishing returns
(Newell and Rosenbloom, 1981).
A growing body of evidence suggests that power law
learning occurs within strategy, and not with regards to
the task as a whole (Rickard, 1997; Delaney, Reder,
Staszewski and Ritter, 1998). Compton and Logan
(1991) suggest that improvement in the performance
speed of a task is often due to the adoption of more
refined and effective strategies.
However, there appears to be evidence that people do
not adopt efficient strategies as rapidly as might be
expected. Early explanations for this failure centred
around the Einstellung effect, where prior experience
results in a reluctance to investigate alternative
procedures for a novel task (Luchins, 1942). Inefficient
use of a device was also investigated using the ACT

theory of skill acquisition (Anderson, 1982) where
procedures that hinder completion of a task are
discarded upon detection, however procedures that are
sufficient and yet inefficient are less easily identified
and so are maintained. In considering the problem of
inefficient device use, Carroll and Rosson (1987)
suggest that people are trapped by a production
paradox, meaning that users are so focused on
completing tasks, that they are unlikely to take time out
to learn about a device. Paradoxically, if time were
spent learning about the device, performance might be
improved in the long term.
More recent evidence suggests that even people who
are very skilled at a set of tasks are also not likely to
operate as efficiently as might be expected (Nilsen et
al., 1993; Nilsen, Jong, Olson and Polson, 1992). For
example Young and MacLean (1988) found users do
not always choose the faster method when presented
with several different routines. Bhavnani and John
(1997) observed that even after several years of
experience and formal training in a particular CAD
package, many users had not adopted efficient
strategies. Further, the use of inefficient strategies
impacted upon completion times and caused an increase
in low level error. Bhavnani, John and Flemming
(1999) highlight the difficulty of moving from
"sufficient use to a more efficient use of computer
applications" (p.183). The reason for this inefficiency,
they suggest, is not related to the standard of interface
design or experience with the package, but to strategic
knowledge. Once participants received both traditional
command based training (‘learning to do’) and strategic
knowledge training (‘learning to see’ or recognize
opportunities for efficient strategies to be used), it was
found that most tasks were performed using efficient
strategies (Bhavnani et al., 1999; Bhavnani, in press).
However, the relative success of those who received
strategic knowledge training should not be too
surprising, as during the extensive training stages
participants were explicitly taught each strategy. The
tests therefore are more of an ability to recall and apply
efficient strategies to novel situations, rather than
strategy generation per se.
Some would argue that the use of strategies, that on
the surface appear inefficient, could actually be rational.

Potential costs associated with strategy generation, such
as time spent exploring the device and searching
through problem space, could outweigh the benefits that
a possible new strategy may deliver. It may therefore
be rational to maintain sufficient, yet inefficient
procedures. For example with regards to choice
between strategies, Young and MacLean (1988) found
that where the effort of using a strategy is perceived to
be high, people are prepared to 'trade off' the possible
benefits of using that strategy. Users choose to
continue with a method that is easier to implement, yet
results in a slower task completion time.
Early attempts at investigating strategy change by
Anzai and Simon (1979) found that participants
spontaneously advanced through several strategies
when solving the Tower of Hanoi task.
Their
explanations for efficiency gaining strategy changes
included both mechanisms that perform modifications
on existing procedures to make them more efficient
(such as the identification and removal of redundant
steps), and also a mechanism for perceptual noticing.
In the Tower of Hanoi, this perceptual noticing
mechanism identifies that the problem can be
restructured in terms of pyramids.
Recent attempts to model strategy generation and
change include Shrager and Siegler's (1998) SCADS
simulation. Mechanisms for strategy generation and
change proposed by Crowley, Shrager and Siegler
(1997) were used to simulate children's use of addition
strategies.
Shrager and Siegler's (1998) model
represents a significant step forward in understanding.
However, due to the focus of the model, the reasons
that people fail to apply the hypothesised mechanisms
for strategy generation are not considered.
The study reported provides evidence for the
conditions that support strategy generation. While
some effort has been spent examining the failure of
people to use optimal strategies, little evidence exists
about how and when people generate new strategies.
Crowley et al. (1997) suggest that during practice
people make a method more efficient by identifying and
eliminating redundant sub-procedures. However it is
possible that practice results in efficient performance
through other mechanisms such as perceptual noticing
of task related features and elaboration of the user’s
device representation. Perceptual noticing may involve
both noticing the structure of the task and the structure
of objects to which operators are applied. Known
operators could, as a result, be applied more efficiently.
Practice may also allow elaboration of the device model
through incidental learning, and this in turn may permit
a more comprehensive, high quality search for efficient
procedures.
The task used in the experiment is a computer-based
drawing task, similar to that used by Bhavnani et al.
(1999), and was selected for its ecological validity. The

task provides a rich domain for studying strategy
change as the basic fence, copy and paste operations
can be embedded within a range of relatively
sophisticated strategies for complex drawings. For
example, people asked to draw a series of repeated
items may use the recursive multiple-item-copy (MIC)
strategy. This is where a single item is copied, then the
resulting pair, and then all of the objects are copied
again. The number of objects increases exponentially.
Also, following the proposal of a perceptual noticing
mechanism by Anzai and Simon (1979), the task was
either presented with a strong pattern that contained
groupings useful to the development of the efficient
strategy, or with no groupings. A mechanism for
perceptual noticing should lead the user to be more
likely to generate a multiple item copy strategy where
groupings allude to the strategy.
The study is designed to determine whether merely
practicing known procedures makes the generation of
efficient strategies more likely. The importance of a
mental representation of both the device and task, and
their development through practice, will be examined.
It is hypothesised that practice on the components of a
non-optimal strategy can establish the prerequisites,
through elaboration of the device representation, for the
generation of a new strategy.

Method
Participants
Forty-three regular computer users, first and second
year psychology undergraduates ranging in age from 18
to 32, took part in the experiment for course credit. All
participants were given 2 hours of course credits to take
part in the study, no matter how long they took (the
average time taken was approximately 1 1/2 hours), in
order to encourage efficient completion of the tasks.

Design
The study involved two between subjects
manipulations. Although all of the participants knew
the component procedures necessary for the efficient
strategy to be used, the manner in which they were
practiced varied. Practice trials involved different
objects, same objects or same objects with space
between them (see Table 1). The second manipulation
was the pattern of the test item. In order to use MIC it
was hypothesized that a participant must make certain
perceptual groupings. Where there was a patterned test
item, the objects were arranged so that the groupings
necessary to use MIC were already present (Figure 1).

Procedure and Materials
The participants completed an informed consent form
and a brief questionnaire to determine prior experience

with Microsoft PowerPoint, as well as other software
packages with drawing functions. The tuition phase
was then completed, which ensured that the participants
mastered basic drawing skills (such as drawing, moving
and altering shapes, and selection of single items by
fencing), and were also made aware of the existence of
some functions, including copy and paste.
The
participants were informed that they should only use
functions identified in the tutorial stage.
These
included fencing, copying and pasting, but, for
example, excluded duplication and grouping.
After the tuition phase the participants completed an
open-ended questionnaire designed to assess knowledge
about the device. Ten questions relevant to the key
concepts particular to the MIC strategy were included.
Five questions related to fencing multiple objects with
space between them and five related to the
manipulation of multiple objects. The participants were
then given the same pre-test version of the test stimuli
and asked to complete the drawing in as few moves as
possible. The pre-test item consisted of eight equally
spaced two-item objects (P- in Figure 1). If a
participant completed the pre-test using any form of
MIC (see Table 2) they were excluded from the
analysis.
The main series of items were then presented. Each
participant carried out four practice trials (see Table 1),
filled in the device representation questionnaire (same
as before), and then completed a saturation trial. The
saturation trial involved drawing one shape, fencing it
and using copy and paste to create another identical
shape. This was designed to make sure all participants
had fence, copy and paste functions readily available to
them in memory. Half of the participants were then
presented with a patterned test trial (P+) and half were
presented with a non-patterned test trial (P-).
P-

P+

Table 1: Practice trials
Practice group
1: Different objects

2: Same objects

3: Same objects with
space

Explanation
Participants drew each
shape one-by-one, as it
was not possible to use
fence, copy and paste.
The participants drew the
first two shapes that
constitute the first object,
and used fence, copy and
paste to complete the task.
Participants drew the two
shapes on the left and used
fence, copy and paste to
complete the drawing.

If participants had not used the exponential MIC
strategy during the first five test trials they were given
five more opportunities to do so. They were instructed
to complete the task as efficiently as they could,
minimising the number of steps taken to complete the
task.
Microsoft PowerPoint '97 was used to carry out the
drawing tasks, these were all video recorded.

Coding of Strategies
There are at least seven strategies that can be used to
complete the task with the functions made available to
the participants (those identified in the tuition phase).
Multiple Items Copy (MIC) is the most efficient
manner of performing the task. This strategy involves
fencing (as depicted in Figure 2), where all objects
within the fence become selected, and the manipulation
of more than one object at a time.
Cursor
start point

Figure 1: Non-patterned and patterned test trials
End point
Four practice trials, the device representation
questionnaire, saturation trial and test stage were
repeated four times. All participants received exactly
the same instructions and drew the same stimuli, except
for the type of practice trials and the pattern of the test
trials. Therefore each group had the same opportunity
(in five test trials) to use the efficient strategy.
Table 1 shows examples of the practice tasks. The
different practice trials allowed differential experience
with the operators fence, copy and paste. All the
participants used the operators in the saturation trial, yet
in the practice trials they were used in different ways.

Figure 2: Fencing, by using the mouse to click and
drag from the start point and releasing at the end point
There are some key concepts that must be understood
before each strategy (see Table 2) can be used. Each
practice group differs in their experience of these
concepts. Firstly it must be appreciated that copy and
paste can be used on a single item once it is selected,
this being a central concept for the use of Element Copy
strategy. All practice groups experience this through
the saturation trial. Secondly it must be understood (to
use DAC and MIC) that more than one item may be

selected by using a fence, and that copy and paste can
be performed on all selected items at once. Only the
two ‘same objects’ practice groups (2 & 3) experienced
this. Finally, to use MIC it must be appreciated that
items with space between them can be selected by using
a fence, and that all selected items can then be
manipulated together. Only the ‘same objects with
space’ practice group experienced this.
Table 2: Possible strategies for completion of the task,
result of GOMS analysis and points awarded
Strategy name,
points for use
and
GOMS
analysis result
Element-byelement (EBE)
1
153s
Division (D)
2
133s
Element copy
(EC)
3
101s
Detail
Aggregate
Copy (DAC)
4
64s
Multiple Items
Copy (MIC1)
5
53s
Multiple Items
Copy (MIC2)
6
50s
Exponential
MIC (MICexp)
7
47s

Classification requirements and
Example
Each two item picture is drawn
element by element (a square would
be drawn and then a triangle,
process repeated 7 times).
All of the first shape are drawn and
then all of the other shape (all the
squares drawn, then all triangles).
Copy and paste are used on single
shapes (one square would be drawn,
copied and pasted 7 times, and then
the same for the triangle).
All the details are completed in the
first object, then it is fenced, copied
and pasted seven times (a house
would be drawn and then fenced,
copied and pasted 7 times).
As with DAC, but once the first 4
copies are in place, they are all
fenced, copied and pasted to make
8.
As with DAC, but once the 2nd copy
is in place, both are fenced, copied
and pasted to make 4, pasted again
to make 6, and pasted again to
make 8.
As with DAC, but once the second
copy is in place both are fenced,
copied and pasted to make 4. The 4
are then fenced, copied and pasted
to make 8.

A GOMS analysis was carried out to determine the
efficiency of each strategy. Points for each strategy are
allocated on the basis of this analysis (see Table 2).
Where available the moves were assigned the length of
time specified by Olson and Olson (1990). Times for
moves not covered in the literature were determined
from an observational pilot study. The seven strategies
were classified on a seven-point scale with 1 being the
least efficient and 7 being the most efficient strategy.

Results
Seven of the forty-three participants used a form of
MIC during the pre-test stage, and so were excluded
from the analysis, leaving thirty-six. All participants
were experienced users of at least one Microsoft
package, yet inexperienced with Microsoft PowerPoint.
At the pre-test stage of the experiment there were no
between group differences in time taken to perform the
task, strategy used and device knowledge. An overall
speed up in the performance of the task was observed,
and by the fifth trial a main effect of practice on
completion time was approaching significance
[F(2,30)=3.082, p=0.06, MSE=405.3] (different objects
M=69s, same objects M=56s, and same objects with
space M=49s,).

Best Strategy Used at Test
Participants were given a strategy score ranging from
one (inefficient strategy) to seven (efficient strategy) for
each of the five test trials (see Table 2), and for the
second set of test trials undertaken at the end of the
experiment (in the event that MIC was not used earlier).
A between subjects three by two ANOVA found a
significant main effect of practice on the best strategy
used at test [F(2,30)=7.784, p<0.01, MSE=1.6]. No
main effect of pattern was found.
A Tukey HSD test confirmed a significant difference
between the different (M=4.4) and same (M=5.9)
objects conditions (p<0.05) and between the different
and same objects with space (M=6.3) conditions
(p<0.01). The difference between the two same objects
conditions did not reach significance. The same pattern
of significant results was found when considering the
best strategy used over all ten test trials.

Strategy Use Score
For each participant the sum of strategy scores over the
five test trials was taken as the strategy use score, and
was essentially a measure of overall efficiency. A two
by three between subjects ANOVA was performed on
the data, and as before a significant main effect of
practice was found [F(2,30)=6.405, p<0.01,
MSE=20.6].
A Tukey test confirmed a significant difference
between the different (M=20.2) and same objects
(M=25.0) conditions (p<0.05) and between the different
and same objects with space (M=26.5) conditions
(p<0.01). The two same objects conditions were not
significantly different.

Discovery Trial
A significant main effect of practice (but not pattern)
was found for the trial (1-10) upon which one form of
MIC was first used by a participant (those that did not
use MIC at any time in the experiment were given a

score of 10), F(2,30)=13.826, p<0.001, MSE=3.7. A
Tukey test found significant differences between the
different (M=6.9) and same objects (M=3.5) conditions
(p<0.001), and between the different and same objects
with space (M=3.2) conditions (p<0.001).
There was no significant main effect of pattern,
although a significant interaction (shown in Table 3)
was found [F(2,30)=6.337, p<0.01] between pattern and
practice. Simple effects tests found practice had a
significant effect where the test item was patterned
[FA@b1(2,30)=19.400, p<0.01], and pattern had a
significant effect where practice trials involved drawing
different objects [FB@a1(1,30)= 8.046, p<0.01].
Table 3: The mean trial upon which MIC was first used

Patterned
Non-patterned

Different
Objects

Practice
Same
Objects

8.5
5.3

2.8
4.2

Same
Objects
with Space
2.2
4.2

Device Representation and Strategy Generation
The device representation questionnaire (DRQ)
provided a score, out of ten, that reflected the
knowledge each participant had about the device. This
measure was repeated throughout the experiment and
was specific to aspects of the device central to a MIC
strategy. A Spearman’s non-parametric correlation
between improvement in the performance of the task
(difference in strategy score from test trial one to test
trial five) and the improvement in DRQ score was
significant (rs=0.384, p<0.05).
A two by three between subjects ANOVA was
conducted on the score for each DRQ. Before practice,
scores on the DRQ did not differ between groups.
Results for all DRQs administered after practice (DRQs
2-5) followed the same pattern, and so the scores were
combined. No main effects of pattern and practice on
DRQ score were found, however interactions between
practice and pattern were significant [F(2,30)=7.312,
p<0.005, MSE=3.3] (see Table 4).
Table 4: Average score for DRQs 2-5

Patterned
Non-patterned

Different
Objects

Practice
Same
Objects

5.8
8.2

7.9
6.1

Same
Objects
with Space
8.9
5.6

Simple effects tests revealed that practice had an
effect where the test item was patterned [FA@b1(2,30)=
4.793, p<0.05]. Pattern was found to have an effect on
device representation where different objects were

drawn at practice [FB@a1(1,30)=5.340, p<0.05] and
where objects drawn at practice were the same with
space between them [FB@a3(1,30)=8.005, p<0.01].
The questionnaire measured understanding of two
concepts central to the use of MIC. Firstly, that
multiple objects with space between them can be
selected at the same time by using a fence, and secondly
that multiple objects can be manipulated simultaneously
once selected. For each of these concepts there were
five questions. The trial upon which participants
reached a good understanding of these concepts was
taken to be when they answered four or all five of these
questions correctly.
An ANOVA revealed an
interaction between practice and pattern for the trial
upon which participants reached a good understanding
of both fencing [F(2,30)=3.451, p<0.05, MSE=1.8] and
manipulating objects [F(2,30)=6.843, p<0.005,
MSE=1.1]. Simple effects tests found the same pattern
of significant results for manipulating objects as were
found on the overall DRQ results (Table 4). Further
analyses found that a good understanding of fencing
was reached significantly earlier on than a good
understanding of manipulating objects [t(35)=7.402,
p<0.001].

Discussion
As expected, practice resulted in the more efficient
performance of the task. Those in groups where
practice involved the selection and manipulation of
more than one item performed the task more efficiently
overall, generated more efficient strategies, and did so
earlier on in the experiment. Although all groups used
fence, copy and paste, the manner in which they were
experienced influenced strategy generation. Most
importantly, repeated use of the component parts of the
less superior strategy proved useful for the generation
of the new strategy (MIC). In addition, the more
participants understood about the device, the better the
strategy that was used at test.
For the copy paste task described, the results imply
that people acquired information about the device
through the repeated practice of a known method.
Initially a good understanding of the fence operator was
gained, and then an elaborated model of manipulating
multiple objects. Participants learned more than was
required to merely reduce the performance time of the
method, as the knowledge acquired correlated with the
efficiency of the strategy generated. This finding has
implications for models of practice that assume people
merely re-code previously stored information. Neither
Anderson’s compilation (1982), nor Rosenbloom and
Newell's (1986) chunking model predict the results
reported here. Both models explain how an existing
strategy becomes more efficient, and thus effect a
speed-up, rather than how information, acquired
through practice, supports strategy change. Logan's
(1988) instance-based model also fails to predict the

results reported here, as an increase in the number of
instances of a strategy in memory can only support shift
from algorithm to memory-based processing, not the
kind of strategy change reported here. The results also
have implications for models of strategy change. In
Shrager and Siegler’s (1998) model the role of new
information acquired through repeated practice is not
considered as a precursor to strategy change.
Also in contrast to Anzai and Simon (1979),
providing the perceptual groupings that must be made
in order to use the efficient strategy had no effect on
strategy generation. However, groupings did have an
effect on strategy generation depending upon the
practice experienced.
An explanation for this
interaction may be that those in the different objects
group, where efficient strategies were not readily
available, had a relatively high workload. Constructing
the pattern may have added to the high workload of the
group, and so the perceptual noticing mechanism could
not make use of the pattern, and in turn the use of the
efficient strategy was not prompted. Alternatively, the
pattern may only be useful for generating MIC if
concepts central to DAC are known, without this the
pattern may serve as a distraction. Similar explanations
could be offered for the interaction between pattern and
practice for the amount learned about the device.
In summary, the evidence reported here suggests that
repeated practice of a known method can facilitate the
generation of new strategies. A possible reason for this
is that practice results in the elaboration of the user’s
device representation, which in turn supports strategy
generation. These results challenge models of learning
through practice that merely increase the efficiency of
existing methods, and models of strategy change that
fail to account for the role of practice.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Hans Neth and Gareth Miles for their
useful comments on an earlier draft.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1995). Learning and memory: An
integrated approach. New York: Wiley & sons.
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill.
Psychological Review, 89, 396-406.
Anzai, Y., & Simon, H. A. (1979). The theory of
learning by doing. Psychological Review, 86, 124140.
Bhavnani, S. K., & John, B. E. (1997). From sufficient
to efficient usage: An analysis of strategic
knowledge. Proceedings of CHI '97, 91-98.
Bhavnani, S. K., John, B. E., & Flemming, U. (1999).
The strategic use of CAD: An empirically inspired,
theory based course. Proceedings of CHI '99, 183190.

Bhavnani, S. K. (in press). Strategic approach to
computer literacy. Proceedings of CHI 2000.
Carroll, J. M., & Rosson, M. B. (1987). The paradox of
the active user. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Interfacing
thought: Cognitive aspects of human-computer
interaction. Cambridge, M.A.: The MIT Press.
Compton, B. J., & Logan, G. D. (1991). The transition
from algorithm to retrieval in memory based theories
of automaticity. Memory and Cognition, 19, 151-158.
Crowley, K., Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1997).
Strategy discovery as a competitive negotiation
between metacognitive and associative mechanisms.
Developmental Review, 17, 462-489.
Delaney, P. F., Reder, L. M., Staszewski, J. J., & Ritter,
F. E. (1998). The strategy-specific nature of
improvement: The power law applies by strategy
within task. Psychological Science, 9, 1-7.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Towards an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492-527.
Luchins, A. S. (1942). Mechanization in problem
solving. Psychological Monographs, 54, 248.
Newell, A., & Rosenbloom, P. S. (1981). Mechanisms
of skill acquisition and the power law of practice. In
J. R. Anderson (Ed.), Cognitive skills and their
acquisition. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.
Nilsen, E., Jong, H., Olson, J. S., & Polson, P. G.
(1992). Method engineering: From data to practice.
Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI'93 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 313-320.
Nilsen, E., Jong, H., Olson, J. S., Biolsi, K., Rueter, H.,
& Mutter, S. (1993). The growth of software skill: A
longitudinal look at learning and performance.
Proceedings of ACM CHI'92 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 149-156.
Olson, J. R., & Olson, G. M. (1990). The growth of
cognitive modelling in human-computer interaction
since GOMS. Human Computer Interaction, 5, 221265.
Rickard, T. C. (1997). Bending the power law: A
CMPL theory of strategy shifts and the
automatization of cognitive skills. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 126(3), 288-311.
Rosenbloom, P. S., & Newell, A. (1986). The chunking
of goal hierarchies: A generalized model of practice.
In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & J. M. Mitchell
(Eds.), Machine learning 2: An artificial intelligence
approach . Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1998). SCADS: A model
of children's strategy choices and strategy
discoveries. Psychological Science, 9(5), 405-410.
Young, R. M., & MacLean, A. (1988). Choosing
between methods: analyzing the user's decision space
in terms of schemas and linear models. Proceedings
of CHI ‘88, 139-143.

