UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Theory-Based Reasoning in Clinical Psychologists

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1r63h366

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Kim, Nancy S.
Ahn, Woo-kyoung

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Theory-Based Reasoning in Clinical Psychologists
Nancy S. Kim (nancy.s.kim@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University; 2 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Woo-kyoung Ahn (woo-kyoung.ahn@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University; 534 Wilson Hall
Nashville, TN 37240 USA

Abstract
Progress in science is marked by the formation of
theories that explain a body of observations. Contrary to
this guiding philosophy, clinical psychologists have
prescribed to an atheoretical system of diagnostic
reasoning since 1980. We report two studies
demonstrating that clinicians have not internalized
atheoretical reasoning despite the system’s widespread
acceptance. The results show that clinicians’ own
theories about disorders significantly affect their
diagnoses of hypothetical patients and memory for
symptoms. Clinicians are cognitively driven to form and
apply theories to observations despite decades of
deliberate training, practice, and pressure to reason
atheoretically.

Introduction
Philosophers of science have argued for decades that
scientific progress is delineated not merely by the
amassing of observations, but rather by the formation of
broad principles that organize and explain these
observations in a cohesive manner (Hempel, 1965).
Evolutionary theory, for example, is regarded as a
revolutionary advance in organismic biology in large
part because it provides a deeper structure for a
scientific taxonomy of living things, moving away from
classification based on superficial features. Data are
measured and considered within the larger structure of
this overarching theory. Similarly, the human mind
constantly seeks out underlying rules and principles that
make sense of incoming data concerning the
surrounding world. Adults (Murphy & Medin, 1985),
children (Gelman, 2000; Keil, 1989), and even infants
(Marcus, Vijayan, Rao, & Vishton, 1999)
spontaneously extract and apply underlying organizing
principles and abstract rules that go beyond surface
features. In this way, the human mind forms categories
and concepts based on its theories about the
surrounding world (Carey, 1985).

Atheoretical versus theory-based reasoning
In contrast, the current Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (APA, 1994), prescribes

an atheoretical approach to diagnosing mental disorders
(Follette & Houts, 1996). Most mental disorders lack a
single universally acknowledged pathogenesis, which in
the past led to unreliability between clinicians in
diagnosis. The DSM-IV's (APA, 1994) widely
acclaimed solution is to eliminate theory use altogether
when making a diagnosis, incorporating instead
checklists of symptoms compiled by a panel of experts.
In doing so, it represents each disorder as a list of
unrelated symptoms, ignoring the causal relations
between symptoms that are a fundamental aspect of
theory representations (Carey, 1985). For most
disorders, the DSM-IV (APA, 1994) states that a subset
of the list is sufficient for a diagnosis regardless of
which combination of symptoms appears, thereby
assuming that all symptoms in the list are equally
central to the disorder. For example, any 2 of the
following 5 symptoms warrant a diagnosis of
schizophrenia, according to the DSM-IV: hallucinations,
delusions, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or
catatonic behavior, and negative symptoms. Since
eliminating any overt mention of an underlying theory
for the taxonomy two decades ago (APA, 1980), the
DSM system has become widely accepted in the U.S.,
forming the core of research, clinical assessment,
diagnosis, and treatment in psychopathology. Research
funding, journal titles, and health care reimbursements
are all organized by, and dependent on, use of the
categories defined by the DSM-IV (APA, 1994).
Has the DSM system succeeded in internalizing
atheoretical reasoning in clinicians? An atheoretical
approach would suggest that experienced clinicians,
after years of emphasizing use of the DSM system, will
come to embody its prescription of atheoretical
reasoning (APA, 1994). In contrast, the theory-based
approach would suggest that clinicians, despite such
emphasis on the elimination of theory, are still
influenced by their own idiosyncratic theories about
disorders when reasoning about them (Medin, 1989).
The two approaches were differentiated by testing for
the presence or absence of the causal status effect, a
specific mechanism by which theory-based reasoning
occurs (Ahn, 1998; Ahn, Kim, Lassaline, & Dennis,

2000). The causal status effect is said to occur when
category features causally central to an individual’s
theory of that category are treated as more important in
categorization than less causally central features. For
instance, if symptom A causes symptom B in a
clinician’s theory, then A is more causally central than
B, and A is thereby predicted to have greater diagnostic
importance than B. To derive the causal centralities of
individual symptoms imbedded in a complex theory,
the following formula1 can be used:
ci,t+1 =

j

dij cj,t

(1)

where dij is a positive number that represents how
strongly symptom j depends on symptom i, and cj,t is
the conceptual centrality of feature j, at time t (Sloman,
Love, & Ahn, 1998). This model states that the
centrality of feature i is determined at each time step by
summing across the centrality of every other feature
multiplied by that feature's degree of dependence upon
feature i. Thus, in the current studies we operationalized
the theory-based view as a systematic effect of
relational structures on conceptual representation and
use.2
A theory-based view would further predict that any
features relationally connected to other features would
be treated as more important than isolated features in
reasoning (Gentner, 1983). That is, if symptom A
causes symptom B, but symptom C is isolated (it does
not and is not caused by any other symptoms in a
clinician’s theory), C would be the least central
symptom of the three.

Study 1
We measured expert and trainee clinical
psychologists’ causal theories in the first session. Then
we examined whether the causal centralities of
symptoms in their theories predict how important these
symptoms are in diagnosis (in the first and second
sessions), and how well they are remembered (in the
second session).

1

Although other formulas are also consistent with the causal
status effect, this formula showed the best fit in analyses of
lay people’s conceptual representations of common objects
(e.g., apples and guitars; Sloman et al., 1998). Moreover, all
of the analyses on causal centrality reported below are based
on rank orders of causal centrality derived from this formula,
and different formulas do not produce radically different rank
orders.
2
We do not intend to claim here that theory-based
categorization is limited to the effect of relational structures.
Categorization may also be affected by the content of
relations, an issue that was not the focus of the current
studies.

Participants
Participants
were
11
experienced
clinical
psychologists, and 10 clinical psychology graduate
students. The experienced clinical psychologists had
been in practice for a minimum of 15 years (ranging
from 15 - 52 years with a median of 28 years). Ten
were licensed psychologists with Ph.D.’s, and 1 was a
board-certified psychiatrist with an M.D.

Session 1: Measurement of causal theories and
conceptual centrality
We measured participants’ individual causal theories
for each of 5 disorders that were judged to be highly
familiar by undergraduate students. The 5 disorders
were Anorexia Nervosa, Antisocial Personality
Disorder, Major Depressive Episode, Specific Phobia,
and Schizophrenia.
In an initial disorder defining task, participants
viewed a list of symptoms for each disorder. Symptoms
included both the DSM-IV (APA, 1994) diagnostic
criteria and the non-criterial, characteristic symptoms
from the manual’s disorder description. Participants
were asked to define each disorder for themselves by
adding new symptoms, crossing out symptoms,
combining two or more symptoms, and / or dividing a
single symptom into two or more symptoms.3 All
subsequent tasks in both sessions incorporated these
individually tailored lists.
Participants' causal theories were then measured for
each disorder. Participants received slips of paper, each
bearing the name of a symptom. They were first asked
to arrange the symptoms around the corresponding
disorder name. Next, participants drew arrows between
symptoms to indicate causal relations as they thought
was appropriate. Finally, they rated the strength of each
causal relation on a scale of 1-5 (1=very weak; 5=very
strong). From these causal drawings, we determined the
causal centrality of each symptom using Equation (1).
Isolated features were always assigned the lowest
causal centrality.
During this session, we also measured the conceptual
centrality of each symptom to the disorder. Clinicians
were asked, “how easily can you imagine a person with
[disorder X] who does not have the symptom of [Y]?”
for each symptom on a scale of 0-100 (0=very difficult
to imagine; 100=very easy to imagine). The order of the
two tasks, conceptual centrality and causal theory
measurement,
was
counterbalanced
between
participants. The results demonstrated that conceptual

3

For instance, a participant might choose to divide the single
symptom "disturbed experience of body shape or denial of the
problem" into separate symptoms ("disturbed experience of
body shape;" "denial of the problem").

80

Psychologists
Grad students

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Causally
central

Causally
peripheral

Isolated

Patient type
Figure 1. Clinical psychologists' and clinical graduate
students' likelihood ratings of mental disorder category
membership for hypothetical patients in Study 1. Error
bars indicate standard errors.
centrality was positively correlated with causal
centrality (as determined by Equation [1]) for 18 out of
20 participants,4 such that the more causal a symptom
was within each participant’s theories, the more central
the symptom was to that participant’s concept of the
disorder. The median overall correlation coefficients for
clinical psychologists and graduate students were .41
(range: -.12 to .50) and .27 (range: .11 to .62),
respectively.

thought to cause more symptoms more strongly than
other symptoms did). Participants were told that these
patients did not exhibit any other symptoms. The
number of DSM-IV (APA, 1994) diagnostic criteria was
equated over the types of patients. Therefore, according
to strict DSM-IV (APA, 1994) criteria, each of the three
different types of hypothetical patients should be
equally likely to have the disorder in question.
We asked participants to rate the likelihood that each
of these hypothetical patients actually had the
associated disorder. Specifically, for each hypothetical
patient, participants answered the question, “what is the
likelihood, in your opinion, that a patient with the
following characteristics has [disorder X]?” on a scale
of 0-100 (0=very unlikely; 100=very likely).
Although the number of criterial symptoms according
to the DSM-IV (APA, 1994) was equated across the
three types of patients, participants judged patients with
causally central symptoms (mean of 61.0) as nearly
20% more likely to have the disorder than patients with
causally peripheral symptoms (mean of 42.0; t = 4.5, p
< .001). Patients with isolated symptoms were judged
as least likely to have the disorder (mean of 34.5; t =
3.3, p = .003). Figure 1 shows the results broken down
by expert and trainee participant groups. There was
neither a significant main effect of expertise nor any
significant interaction involving expertise.
Approximately one hour after they completed the
hypothetical patient diagnosis task, participants were
asked to recall the symptoms of those hypothetical
patients. Participants recalled significantly more
causally central (67%) than causally peripheral (51%; t
= 2.9, p = .009) or isolated (44%; t = 2.7, p < .02)
symptoms.

Session 2: Hypothetical patient diagnosis and
free recall of symptoms
Participants were brought back to the lab about 10 14 days after the first session. For the second session,
we created a unique set of hypothetical patients for each
participant based on that participant’s own theories as
reported in the causal centrality task. Two to three
hypothetical patients were constructed for each of the 5
mental disorder categories. Each patient was composed
of three symptoms that were either causally central or
causally peripheral as determined by Equation (1), or
isolated5. For example, causally central patients
consisted of three symptoms causally central to the
participant’s theory of the disorder (i.e., they were
4

The data of one graduate student participant could not be
included in this particular analysis because there was no
variance among that participant's conceptual centrality
responses within each disorder.
5
Some participants left no symptoms isolated in their theory
of a disorder. In these cases, a patient description composed
of isolated symptoms could not be created.

Study 2
Study 2 expanded the generality of these findings
using modified procedures. There were two principal
changes. First, the causal centrality task was modified
to measure participants' theories about all kinds of
symptom-symptom relations, not restricting the
measure to causal relations only. Second, another
aspect of memory for symptoms was examined by
using a recognition task instead of the recall task. These
changes will be described in detail in the following
sections.

Participants
Participants were another group of 14 experienced
clinicians and 6 clinical psychology interns. The expert
clinicians had been in practice for a minimum of 15
years (ranging from 17-43 years with a median of 26
years). All 14 expert clinicians were licensed
psychologists; 13 had Ph.D.’s and 1 had an Ed.D.

Stimulus materials
The same 5 disorders in Study 1 were also utilized in
this study. Unlike in Study 1, however, participants
were provided with a list of “standard” symptoms.
These symptoms were defined by the participants in
Study 1. Namely, a symptom was dropped from the list
of symptoms for Study 2 if it was dropped by over 50%
of the experts and over 50% of the trainee participants
in Study 1. Using these standard lists of symptoms
allowed us to make direct comparisons between
participants' theories, especially between those of
experts and trainees.

Session 1: Measurement of relational theories
and conceptual centrality
We measured participants’ individual theories for
each disorder using the same procedure as before,
except that this time we asked participants to draw any
kind of relations between symptoms they saw fit, not
limiting the measure to causal relations. Participants
rated the strength of each relation on a scale of 1-3 (1=
weak; 2=moderate; 3=strong). They were asked to
consider using, but not to limit themselves to, the
following relations: “is a subset of,” “is an example of,”
“precedes,” “co-occurs with,” “is a precondition for,”
“causes,” “jointly cause,” “affects,” “determines the
extent of,” “increases,” “decreases,” “is a catalyst for,”
“is used as a defense against,” “is a cure for.” The
relational centrality of each symptom was then
determined using Equation (1). For instance, in
applying the formula, “A is a precondition for B” and
“A precedes B” are treated as “B depends on A.” We

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Psychologists
Interns

Relationally Relationally
central
peripheral

Isolated

Patient type
Figure 2. Clinical psychologists' and clinical
psychology interns' typicality ratings for hypothetical
patients in Study 2. Error bars indicate standard errors.

used these relational centralities to further investigate
clinicians' and clinical trainees' use of theories in
reasoning with three modified measures of diagnostic
importance and memory. During the first session, we
also measured the diagnostic importance of each
symptom to the disorder. Participants were asked, “how
important is the symptom of [Y] in diagnosing a person
with [disorder X]?” on a scale of 0-100 (0=very
unimportant; 100=very important). As in Study 1, the
order of the two tasks was counterbalanced between
participants. The results demonstrated that diagnostic
importance was positively correlated with relational
centrality (as measured by Equation [1]) for 18 out of
20 participants (average r = .77, clinical psychologists;
r = .66, interns). That is, the more symptoms depended
on a symptom, the more central that symptom was to
participants’ concepts of the disorder. The median
overall correlation coefficients for psychologists and
graduate students were .25 (range: .02 to .61) and .44
(range: -.94 to .68), respectively.

Session 2: Hypothetical patient typicality and
recognition of symptoms
As in Study 1, we constructed 2 to 3 hypothetical
patients for each of 5 mental disorder categories. Each
patient consisted of a set of three symptoms that were
either relationally central, relationally peripheral, or
isolated, for each disorder and each participant. As in
Study 1, a patient composed of isolated features was not
included if a participant did not leave any symptoms
isolated in their theory. Again, the number of criterial
symptoms was equated between patients so that
diagnoses based strictly on the DSM-IV (APA, 1994)
would not differentiate them. Participants were asked to
assess how typical hypothetical patients were of the
disorder (following Cantor, Smith, French, & Mezzich,
1980). Specifically, participants answered the standard
typicality rating question, “how well, in your opinion,
does a patient with the following characteristics fit in
the diagnostic category of [X]?” on a scale of 0-100
(0=very poorly; 100=very well) for each patient.
Patients with relationally central symptoms (mean of
72.3) were judged as more typical of the disorder than
patients with relationally peripheral symptoms (mean of
57.8; t = 4.3, p < .001), which in turn were judged as
more typical than patients with isolated symptoms
(mean of 47.9; t = 2.7, p < .02). Figure 2 shows the
results broken down by experts and trainees. Neither a
significant main effect of expertise nor an interaction
effect involving expertise was found.
Following an approximately one-hour delay,
participants received a standard recognition task
(following Roediger & McDermott, 1995), in which
they were asked to classify symptoms on a list as “old”
or new” based on whether they had seen them earlier in
the hypothetical patients task. The list included 30

relationally central and 30 relationally peripheral
symptoms. Half of the symptoms in each group were
old and half new. Consistent with previous findings
showing an effect of schema on false recognition
(Bower, Black, & Turner, 1979), participants were
much more likely to falsely recognize new, relationally
central symptoms as symptoms that they had seen
before (23.3%) than new, relationally peripheral
symptoms (13.2%; t = 3.0, p = .008). Participants
showed greater sensitivity to relationally peripheral
symptoms (d' = 2.62) than to relationally central
symptoms (d' = 2.04; F[1, 18] = 2.43; p = .01). Thus,
participants were less able to distinguish between
presented and non-presented relationally central
symptoms. False memory has generally been thought to
be an issue for patients with psychological disorders or
Inflexible
thinking

Need
for
control

1.0
Disturbed
body image /
denial

1.0
1.1

1.3

1.6

1.4

1.3

Excess
dieting,
exercise

Industrial
society
1.1

Focus
on
food

1.2
1.4

Won't
maintain
weight

Obsessivecompulsive
symptoms

1.1

Physical
effects (i.e.,
medical
problems
such as
hypothermia)

1.1

1.3

No
period
for 3+
mo.
1.1
1.3

1.2
Fears
being
fat

1.1

Binges
&
purges

Figure 3. Participants' average relational theory of
Anorexia Nervosa in Study 2. (Note: An arrow from A
to B indicates that B depends on A [or A affects B].
The symptom descriptions in the figure were truncated
and sometimes combined to keep the figure readable.
Only dependency relations that received mean strength
ratings greater than 1 on a 3-point scale are shown in
the figure. Symptoms in white circles with boldface
borders are DSM-IV (APA, 1994) diagnostic criteria.
The DSM-IV implies that these are not weighted
differently.)

problems (Loftus & Ketcham, 1994). Interestingly, we
found that therapists are biased to falsely remember
having seen symptoms in their patients that are central
to their personal theories about the disorder.

Consensus on theories
Unlike in Study 1, all participants received the same set
of symptoms, allowing a direct comparison of their
theories. Participants’ theories, as measured by
relational centrality rank orders, were highly consistent
with each other (Kendall’s coefficients of concordance
ranging from .34 to .59 across the 5 disorders, all p’s <
.0005). Because of this, we were able to construct an
average dependency structure for each disorder, such as
the one shown in Figure 3 for Anorexia Nervosa.
These average theories of experts generally agreed
with those of lay people. For instance, the mean rank
orders of diagnostic criteria symptoms for major
depression obtained in an earlier study from
undergraduate students (Kim & Ahn, 2001) were highly
correlated with those obtained from clinicians and
clinical trainees in Study 2 (r = .93, p < .001). We also
developed hypothetical patient descriptions based on
clinicians’ and clinical trainees’ averaged theories of
the 5 disorders and gave them to 23 undergraduates.
Relationally central patients (mean of 75.3) were
judged to be more typical of a disorder than relationally
peripheral patients (mean of 29.3; t = 12.44, p < .001).

Discussion
In sum, we found that symptoms playing a central
role in clinicians’ theories were considered to be more
important in diagnosis, were more likely to be recalled
later, and were more likely to be falsely recognized as
having been present in patient descriptions. Despite the
fact that the modern DSM system, which has become
engrained into the conscious practice of clinical
psychology, avoids the use of theory, clinicians prefer
to base their reasoning on their own organizing
theories. This was shown at a much more specific level
of analysis than previous work documenting top-down
effects of theory on reasoning (i.e., Chapman &
Chapman, 1967; Wisniewski & Medin, 1994). Furthermore, in all six measures, there were no differences
between levels of expertise, suggesting that years of
training and long-term use of the modern DSM system
do not diminish the effect of theory on reasoning.

Implications
When making formal DSM diagnoses using
checklists, it is possible that clinicians may not be as
strongly affected by their theories. However, the effect
of theory-based conceptual representations found in the
current studies may still pervade critical aspects of
clinical work. As shown in our study, clinicians are

better at recalling symptoms central to their theories,
and may be biased to falsely remember theory-central
symptoms of patients they have already seen. These
tendencies may influence clinicians’ informal initial
diagnoses, which may in turn markedly affect how
clinicians subsequently perceive and interact with their
patients. For instance, symptoms of mental disorders
are often ambiguous, and clinicians may focus their
attention on detecting symptoms central to their
theories.
We also note that theory-based reasoning in itself is
not a reasoning fallacy, provided that clinicians’
theories are valid (Dawes, Faust, & Meehl, 1989).
However, in the case of less well-known disorders such
as personality disorders, experts may have more
idiosyncratic theories. This, if true, may account in part
for the notoriously low reliability between clinicians in
diagnosing the personality disorders. We are currently
conducting a study to examine this issue. In cases such
as these, reliance on invalid theories may perhaps
constitute a fallacy in clinical judgment.
In general, however, categorization based on valid
theories conforms to the higher levels of taxonomy that
scientists should strive for (Hempel, 1965). Indeed,
symptoms that explain and cause other symptoms may
be the most important ones to attend to and remember,
because they may be the more useful predictors for
prognosis and treatment. In the current study, we found
clinicians’ theories to be in general agreement with
each other’s and with lay people’s theories, at least in
disorders that are also familiar to lay people. This
suggests that experts’ theories of these socio-culturally
familiar disorders are not highly idiosyncratic, but
rather seem to be based on commonsense notions, and
may therefore be worthy of careful consideration in
revising the DSM.

Acknowledgments
We thank Marvin Chun, Frank Keil, Donna Lutz,
Laura Novick, Peter Salovey, and Andrew Tomarken
for helpful comments, and Jessecae Marsh and Judy
Choi for help in running participants. This research was
supported in part by a National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship to Nancy S. Kim and a
National Institute of Mental Health Grant (RO1
MH57737) to Woo-kyoung Ahn.

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for
natural kinds and artifacts? Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of feature
centrality. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 361-416.
American Psychiatric Association (1980). Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd

Edition. Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
Edition. Washington, DC: Author.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts
in memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177220.
Cantor, N., Smith, E. E., French, R., & Mezzich, J.
(1980). Psychiatric diagnosis as prototype
categorization. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89,
181-193.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: Plenum.
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1967). Genesis of
popular but erroneous psychodiagnostic observations.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 72, 193-204.
Dawes, R. M., Faust, D., & Meehl, P. E. (1989).
Clinical versus actuarial judgment. Science, 243,
1668-1674.
Follette, W. C., & Houts, A. C. (1996). Models of
scientific progress and the role of theory in taxonomy
development: A case study of the DSM. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 1120-1132.
Gelman, S. A. (2000). In H. W. Reese (Ed.), Advances
in child development and behavior. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155170.
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation.
New York: Free Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W. (in press). The influence of
naive causal theories on lay concepts of mental
illness. American Journal of Psychology.
Loftus, E., & Ketcham, K. (1994). The Myth of
Repressed Memory. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton,
P. M. (1999). Rule learning by 7-month-old infants.
Science, 283, 77-80.
Medin, D. L. (1989). Concepts and conceptual
structure. American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1481.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of
theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological
Review, 92, 289-316.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive
Science, 22, 189-228.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating
false memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Medin, D. L. (1994). On the
interaction of theory and data in concept learning.
Cognitive Science, 18, 221-281.

