UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ties That Bind: Reconciling Discrepancies Between Categorization and Naminf
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9hx831hn
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)
Authors
Livingston, Kenneth R.
Andrews, Janet K.
Dwyer, Patrick
Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

      Ties That Bind: Reconciling Discrepancies Between Categorization and
                                                       Naming
                                  Kenneth R. Livingston (livingst@vassar.edu)
                             Department of Psychology and Program in Cognitive Science
                                     Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 479
                                             Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
                                     Janet K. Andrews (andrewsj@vassar.edu)
                             Department of Psychology and Program in Cognitive Science
                                     Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 146
                                             Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
                                       Patrick Dwyer (padwyer@vassar.edu)
                                                Department of Psychology
                                    Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 3532
                                             Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
                          Abstract                            1994b) This expansion or acquired distinctiveness
                                                              effect seems to involve a stretching of the psychological
   We present the results of a study designed to show
   that dissociations between lexical and similarity-         similarity space in the region of the category boundary,
   based boundary partitions for a set of items can be        with the result that smaller changes along the category
   produced in the laboratory. This is achieved by an         relevant dimensions are sufficient to produce a just
   incremental process of learning to assign a category       noticeable difference (JND).
   label to items increasingly far removed (in similarity        Category clusters might also be formed by a process
   space) from the center of that category and                of compression in the region of similarity space that
   approaching a different category. This process occurs      contains a set of items, with the result that a larger
   in parallel with a compression effect in psychological     change is required to produce a JND. A number of
   similarity space such that increasingly distant items      researchers have found evidence for this process as well
   labeled as members of category A nonetheless come
   to be viewed as more similar to category B (the
                                                              (Kurtz, 1996; Livingston, Andrews, and Harnad, 1998).
   category to which they are in fact closer in pre-          Either of these processes, expansion or compression of
   category learning similarity space) than they are by       the similarity space, is sufficient to produce a
   people who have not learned the category distinction.      categorical distinction between sets of items, and thus
                                                              looks promising as a general mechanism for concept
                       Introduction                           learning. On such an account, a concept is formed
                                                              when regions of psychological similarity space are
Although patterns of similarity are related in a more         warped so as to create a relatively more compact
complex way to categorization and concept learning            representational structure that can be more readily
than was once thought, the evidence is mounting that          manipulated as a unit.
such relationships are crucial to the partitioning of a set      This description of a general mechanism for category
of items into categories (Medin, 1989; Medin,                 learning is called into question, however, by recent
Goldstone, and Gentner, 1993; Goldstone, 1994a;               findings concerning the relationship of language labels
1994b). Among the most interesting recent findings is         to category similarity structures.        Malt, Sloman,
the discovery that the psychological similarity space         Gennari, Shi, and Wang (1999) asked native speakers of
usually assumed in the effort to measure relationships        English, Spanish, and Chinese to name each member of
among category members is not static, but may actually        a set of sixty containers. They then asked these same
undergo a change in its metric properties during the          people to sort these sixty items into groups based on
process of category learning. Thus, for example,              their overall similarity. Perhaps not surprisingly,
Goldstone and his colleagues have found repeatedly that       language communities differ in their lexical partitioning
people who have learned to categorize a set of items          of the set of items. Chinese speakers partition the set
make more reliable discriminations between pairs of           using five words, English speakers use 7, and Spanish
items that cross the category boundary than people who        speakers use 15. The variation in grain is not the result
have not learned to categorize them (Goldstone, 1994a;        of simply forming a greater number of subcategories in,

say, Spanish, of the same larger category boundaries                              Method
found in Chinese; there is substantial non-shared
variance in these lexical groupings.                       Participants
   The real surprise comes when one examines the           Participants were seventy-eight Vassar College
clustering of items that occurs during the sorting task.   undergraduates who were given course credit in an
Malt, et al., found that the sorts were very similar       introductory psychology course. Twenty people
across language communities, in spite of the disparity     participated in preliminary research to select an
in lexical boundaries for the set. There seems to be a     appropriate stimulus set. The remaining fifty-eight
dissociation of lexical boundaries from category           people participated in the experiment reported here,
boundaries based on similarity, and this creates           twenty-two of them in a control group, and eighteen in
something of a theoretical problem for the account of      each of two experimental groups.
category learning given above. Indeed, it constitutes a
puzzle for any theory of conceptual structure that         Stimuli
suggests that there is a central tendency in the
                                                           Ten members of the Nemipteridae family of fish
representation of the members of a category. The
                                                           (threadfin breams) and ten members of the Labridae
widely held belief that terms derive their meanings
                                                           family (wrasses) were selected for preliminary analysis
from their links to coherent concepts seems inconsistent
                                                           from Burgess, Axelrod, and Hunziker (1997). Each
with this result.
                                                           stimulus was color photocopied, glued onto a blank
   Unfortunately, we have no information about the
                                                           card (5.1 by 10.8 cm), laminated, and then randomly
kinds of judgments that people might have made of
                                                           assigned a number from 1 to 20, which was printed on
Malt, et al.’s set of containers prior to learning to name
                                                           the back of the card. Following examination of the
and categorize them. We therefore have no way of
                                                           two-dimensional solution to a multidimensional
knowing how this odd state of affairs came to pass, nor
                                                           scaling analysis (MDS) of the similarity judgments of
whether it really constitutes a disconfirmation of the
                                                           twenty people on all 190 possible pairs (see Procedure
claim that psychological similarity space warps in a
                                                           below), the set was culled to remove outlying cases.
coherent fashion during category learning.
                                                           These were then replaced with items that occupied the
   How might an item come to have a name other than
                                                           central region of the 2D space, which appeared to be
that of its nearest neighbors with whom it shares a
                                                           defined by the dimensions of degree of body striping,
region in similarity space? One possibility discussed
                                                           and the ratio of body width to length.            These
by Malt, et al. (1999) is that a series of intermediate
                                                           replacement items were selected without regard to
cases could be introduced, one at a time, each inheriting
                                                           membership in the two original categories.
the name of its nearest neighbor, and each more remote
from the category to which the name was initially
attached. If the chain of items spans the boundary         Procedure
between two categories, one could wind up with             Participants were assigned either to a control condition
instances that are labeled as members of category A, the   (N=22) or to one of two learning conditions (N=18
point of origin for the chain, even while having more in   each group). Participants in the control condition were
common perceptually with the members of category B.        asked to judge the degree of similarity between all
The dissociation of lexical and similarity groupings       possible pairs of the twenty stimuli (190 pairs). The
occurs because the former is based on nearest exemplar     participant was seated at a table upon which the stimuli
pairings introduced incrementally, while the latter is     had been placed face up, and was allowed to inspect the
based on the warping of similarity space described         entire stimulus set for one minute. The stimuli were
above.                                                     then turned over, revealing the numbers on the back,
   In order to test this hypothesis, we constructed a set  and the experimenter began naming pairs in a
of stimuli whose distribution in similarity space          previously determined random order. The participant
allowed for partitioning into two categories while         was instructed to turn over each corresponding pair,
leaving a set of items in the space between these          look at the two items, and verbally rate the similarity
groupings to allow the building of a naming chain from     of the stimuli on a 9-point scale from 1 (most similar)
one to the other. Success at building such a chain         to 9 (most different). Ratings were provided to one
would constitute an existence proof for this process,      decimal place.
and comparison of data from people who learned to             For control group participants, the similarity
categorize the set with data from people without           judgment task was the only task required. All control
category or name-learning experience would allow us to     group participants were run through the procedure in a
determine whether this process alters the character of     block before work began with the experimental group.
any warping of the similarity space.                       This allowed us to complete an MDS analysis of the
                                                           data from this group to confirm the pattern of similarity
                                                           relationships in the set and the choice of stimuli for
                                                           building the chain between categories. As expected, the
                                                           MDS analysis of the control group data revealed that

stimuli clustered in two core groups consisting of eight                           Results
and seven items, respectively. The five remaining
                                                           Six people in the learning group did not meet the
stimuli were intermediate cases, four of which formed a
                                                           criterion for successful learning by the conclusion of
chain between the two larger groups. One intermediate
                                                           training. All six of these people were in the G-root
stimulus that was not part of the chain was treated as a
                                                           group. Data for those who failed to reach criterion were
neutral stimulus, and did not appear in the training
                                                           excluded from all analyses. Mean similarity ratings
task. It served as the means to a test for demand effects
                                                           were calculated separately for the control and learning
in the data set (see Results, below).
                                                           groups, and, within group, mean similarities were
   This analysis of the pre-categorization similarity
                                                           calculated for aurora-aurora (A-A) pairs, for aurora-
space allowed us to design the stimulus sets for the
                                                           gracilia (A-G) pairs, and for gracilia-gracilia (G-G)
learning group. Learning participants were first taught
                                                           pairs. Separate analyses were then performed for the
to categorize the core set of fifteen stimuli. Stimuli
                                                           two different chaining groups, using the same control
were presented individually, in blocks of fifteen that
                                                           group data for comparison in both cases.
included all members of both categories.              The
                                                              In order to determine whether category learning
participant was asked to label each picture as either
                                                           produced compression and/or expansion effects in the
gracilia or aurora. The experimenter gave immediate
                                                           A-root group, we performed a 2 (group: control vs.
feedback, recorded the response, and then presented the
                                                           learning) by 3 (pair type: A-A, A-G, G-G) analysis of
next picture. Order of presentation within each trial
                                                           variance (ANOVA) on mean similarity ratings with
block was random. Training continued until the
                                                           repeated measures on the second variable. The analysis
participant met the criterion of two consecutive errorless
                                                           revealed a significant main effect of pair type, F(2,76) =
trial blocks (30 stimuli), or a total of 20 trial blocks
                                                           149.506, MSE = 63.152, p < .0001; and a significant
had passed, whichever came first.
                                                           interaction effect, F(2,76) = 9.952, MSE = 4.202, p <
   Once category training on the core stimuli was
                                                           .001. (See Figure 1). For the G-root group, the same 2
complete, the first stimulus in the chain was introduced
                                                           (group: control vs. learning) by 3 (pair type: A-A, A-
into the subsequent trial block. Which stimulus this
                                                           G, G-G) ANOVA with repeated measures on the second
was depended on the direction in which the chain was
                                                           variable revealed significant main effects of group, F
being built. For half of the study participants, the
                                                           (1,32) = 9.488, MSE = 22.437, p < .005, and pair
chain was built from gracilia to aurora (the G-root
                                                           type, F(2,64) = 57.551, MSE = 20.376, p < .0001.
group) and for half it was built in the opposite direction
                                                           The interaction effect was not significant. (See Figure
(the A-root group). Assignment to these subgroups
was random. The first chaining stimulus introduced         2.)
was the one closest to the root category in the MDS
space derived from the control group data.
   Once this new stimulus was introduced into the set,
training continued as before, except that trial blocks
now contained one additional stimulus. Order of
presentation was still random, except that the new              8
chaining stimulus was always presented immediately
                                                                7
after its nearest neighbor in the root category. Training
using this newly expanded set continued until the               6
participant met the criterion of two consecutive trial          5
blocks in which all chaining stimuli presented up to                                                           A-root
that point had been correctly categorized, or a total of 5      4
                                                                                                               CTRL
trial blocks (after introduction of the new item),              3
whichever came first. Once the participant met criterion
for one chaining stimulus, the next stimulus in the             2
chain was introduced into the subsequent trial block.           1
The new chaining stimulus always followed the
                                                                0
previously learned one, which appeared randomly in the                   A/A        A/G        G/G
trial block along with the 15 core stimuli and any other
chaining stimuli. Training was halted when the                                     Pair Type
participant met the training criterion after the           Figure 1. Comparison of the mean similarity ratings of
introduction of the fourth and final item in the chain.    the control group and the group who learned a chain of
          Once training was completed, the participant     items rooted in the aurora category. Interaction of
took a short break before completing the similarity        group with pair-type is shown.
judgment task. Procedures for this task were exactly as
for the people in the control group, and are described
above.

      7                                                   MDS Analysis
                                                          In order to better understand the nature of the changes
      6
                                                          taking place in psychological similarity space we
      5                                                   performed a multi-dimensional scaling analysis of the
                                                          mean similarity ratings of all three groups (control, A-
      4                                            G-root root, and G-root). The full matrix of mean similarities
                                                   CTRL   from each of the three groups was entered into an
      3
                                                          INDSCAL analysis. The two-dimensional solution
      2                                                   provides a relatively good fit to the data (R-squared =
                                                          .872), and is plotted in Figure 3. The locations of all
      1                                                   twenty stimuli for each of the three groups (control, A-
      0                                                   root, and G-root) are depicted, and the pattern of
              A/A         A/G        G/G                  changes in similarity is shown by arrows connecting
                          Pair Type                       three points. The point at the tail end of the arrow
                                                          represents the location in the space of the stimuli as
Figure 2. Comparison of the mean similarity ratings of    judged by the control group. The middle point shows
the control group and the group who learned a chain of    the locations of the twenty stimuli as judged by the G-
items rooted in the gracilia category. Interaction of     root group, while the points at the tips of the arrow
group with pair-type is shown.                            heads show the locations of the twenty stimuli as
                                                          judged by the A-root group. The graph gives a sense of
                                                          the compression that occurs in the similarity space as
Thus, compression occurred in both learning groups,       categories are learned. Note that the greater relative
i.e., item pairs were judged to be more similar relative  proximity of items following compression of the
to control group ratings, particularly for the within-    similarity space has the effect of making them a more
category (A-A and G-G) pairs. No expansion occurred,      easily identified grouping, even though there is no
i.e., between-category pairs (A-G) were not judged to be  statistically significant increase in mean inter-item
less similar by the learning groups than by the control   differences across the category boundary.           Most
group.                                                    importantly, the graph shows how the chained items
                                                          move toward the central tendency of their nearest
Neutral Stimulus Analysis                                 neighbor cluster, even when the label training ties them
                                                          to the more remote cluster.
Goldstone, Lippa, and Shiffrin (2001) have devised an
ingenious technique for detecting the presence of
demand effects in data of this kind. The analysis works
by comparing the pattern of changes in similarity
relationships among items in a learning set relative to a
neutral item not included in training. If the similarity
judgments of pairs including the neutral item change in
ways that are predictable from the compression or
expansion effects that occur for categorized items, this
must be due to actual changes in the underlying
similarity space and not demand effects, since the
neutral item was never categorized.
   For our data set, the absolute difference for each
participant between all possible within-group and
between-group pairs of pairs involving the neutral
stimulus was calculated, averaging separately across
each group. Separate 2 (group: learning vs. control) by
2 (pair of pair type: within vs. between) ANOVAs with
repeated measures on the second variable were
conducted for both the A-root and the G-root groups.
The pattern of results was the same as that reported
above. There was thus no evidence that the observed
compression was due to a demand effect for either         Figure 3. Shows the two-dimensional MDS analysis
group.                                                    (INDSCAL) of similarity relationships among the
                                                          twenty stimulus items for all three groups. The arrow
                                                          labeled R is for the neutral item (see text). The four
                                                          arrows linked by a shaded line are the chaining items.

The remaining points on the right side of the graph are    items in the chain leading deeply into aurora territory
the core items in the aurora category, while those on      as gracilia, the region of space that they occupy is
the left are the core items in the gracilia category. The  being compressed still further around the central
space of similarities for the control group is represented tendency of the aurora category. It is therefore not
by closed circles found at the tails of the arrows. The    surprising that one sees evidence of what counts as
circles at the tips of the arrow heads represent the space between-category compression for this group, because
of similarities for the experimental group that learned a  those last two items in the chain are considered gracilia
chain that begins in the aurora category and extends       for purposes of this analysis.
toward the gracilia category. The filled circles found        Looked at from this lexical perspective, the result
roughly in the middle regions of the arrows represent      seems straightforward enough, but the effect is far more
the space of similarities for the group that learned a     interesting for what it tells us about how category
chain that begins in the gracilia category and extends     learning warps similarity space. Notice that the lexical
toward the aurora category.                                chaining effect seems to have relatively little effect on
                                                           the direction in which similarity space is compressed
                        Discussion                         during learning. The overall magnitude of the effect is
                                                           different in the two cases, an effect that is likely the
The domain of words must map in some predictable
                                                           result of the fact that the task is more difficult and so
way to the domain of concepts if there is to be anything
                                                           produces slower and less robust learning in the G-root
to the story that says words have meaning in virtue of
                                                           group, but the space warps in the same way in both
the concepts to which they are linked. This is why
                                                           cases. This warping, based on the pattern of structure
Malt, et al.’s (1999) finding of an apparent dissociation
                                                           and variation in the whole set of items, overrides local
between lexical boundaries and category boundaries in
                                                           tendencies associated with rogue items chained in from
similarity space is so provocative. The experiment
                                                           elsewhere. As can be seen in Figure 3, the result is that
reported here demonstrates one process by which names
                                                           the chained items move in the direction of the nearest
might become attached to items that are remote in
                                                           region of compression, even while they are being
similarity space from the core of the concept to which
                                                           labeled as members of the more remote cluster. The
the name typically refers. Note that although we did
                                                           similarity-based warping of the representational space
not measure typicality in this study, one further
                                                           occurs independently of labeling. Thus are lexical and
prediction would be that chained items should be seen
                                                           similarity-based category dissociations produced.
as atypical of the category they name.
                                                              If this account is correct, several further predictions
  More important than the demonstration of a
                                                           follow. We have already mentioned the predictions for
procedure for producing this dissociation are the data
                                                           typicality. Over long periods of time, we would also
showing how this effect is related to the warping of
                                                           expect chains that stretch far from their roots would
similarity space previously shown to occur during
                                                           become unstable and break, with items at the ends of
category learning. This effect was clear in comparisons
                                                           those chains receiving new labels more in keeping with
of the A-root group (people who learned a chain that
                                                           those of their similarity-space neighbors. Linguistic
begins with an item well within the region of the
                                                           analysis of patterns of lexical evolution should reveal
aurora group) with the control group. Analysis of
                                                           such phenomena in the history of any language. We
variance revealed the same pattern of within-category
                                                           would also expect this pattern to be most common for
compression found in previous research (e.g., see Kurtz,
                                                           artifact categories, where genuinely new instances are
1996; Livingston, et al., 1998). The effect is less clear
                                                           introduced with some frequency, and the perceptual and
in the G-root group. Compression occurs in this case,
                                                           functional feature landscape is quite fluid. We are
but it occurs for between category pairs as well as for
                                                           currently conducting a replication and extension of the
within-category pairs. Obviously, the direction in
                                                           study reported here using artifact categories and
which we tried to build chains made a difference, an
                                                           additional control groups. Finally, these results have
observation further confirmed by the fact that all of the
                                                           deeper implications for the nature of the relationship
study participants who failed to reach our learning
                                                           between systems for representing lexicons, at least and
criterion were in the G-root chaining group.           The
                                                           systems for representing category information. These
nature of the difference between our two experimental
                                                           two systems must remain in register to some extent,
groups, and its consequences for similarity judgments,
                                                           but it is clear that each is sufficiently modular with
can be seen in Figure 3.
                                                           respect to the other to permit some rather remarkable
  First, notice that the chains differ in how deeply
                                                           dissociations to develop in very short order.
rooted they are in their originating categories. The
aurora-based chain begins with an item well inside the
region of similarity space that encompasses the                             Acknowledgments
category, and it does not extend very deeply into the      Our thanks to the Undergraduate Research Summer
region occupied by the gracilia category. Exactly the      Institute at Vassar College, and to Maria Jalbrzikowski
opposite is true for the G-root chaining group. Thus,      and Paul Francaviglia for their assistance in the conduct
even when people are learning to label the last two        of this experiment.

                     References
Burgess, W.E., Axelrod, H.R., & Hunziker, R. (1997).
  Dr. Burgess’s Mini-Atlas of Marine Aquarium Fishes
  Mini-Edition. Neptune City, NJ: TFH Publications,
  Inc.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994-a). Influences of categorization
  on perceptual discrimination. Journal of
  Experimental Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994-b). The role of similarity in
  categorization: Providing a groundwork. Cognition,
  52, 125-157.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. (2001).
  Altering object representations through category
  learning. Cognition, 78, 27-43.
Kurtz, K. J. (1996). Category-based similarity. In G.
  W. Cottrell (Ed.) Proceedings of the Eighteenth
  Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
  290.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S.
  (1998). Categorical perception effects induced by
  category learning. Journal of Experimental
  Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24,
  732-753.
Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., &
  Wang, Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming:
  Similarity and the linguistic categorization of
  artifacts. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
  230-262.
Medin, D.L. (1989). Concepts and conceptual structure.
  American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1482.
Medin, D.L., Goldstone, R.L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
  Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100,
  254-279.

