UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toward a Model of Learning Data Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2qb8m54p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Baker, Ryan Shaun
Corebett, Albert T.
Koedinger, Kenneth R.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toward a Model of Learning Data Representations
Ryan Shaun Baker (rsbaker@cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Albert T. Corbett (corbett+@cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Kenneth R. Koedinger (koedinger@cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
The use of graphs to represent and reason about data is of
growing importance in pre-high school mathematics curricula.
This study examines middle school students’ skills in
reasoning about three graphical representations: histograms,
scatterplots and stem-and-leaf plots. Students were asked to
interpret graphs, select an appropriate graph type to represent
a relationship and to generate graphs. Accuracy levels varied
substantially across the three tasks and three graph types. The
overall pattern of results is largely explained by the varying
ease of transfer of student knowledge from a simpler graph
type, based on surface similarity.

Introduction
External graphical representations are of considerable
importance in problem solving. Considerable research has
taken place over the last two decades on the different
mechanisms through which graphical representations assist
their users in drawing inferences (Larkin & Simon, 1987;
Stenning, Cox, and Oberlander 1989).
In this paper we take up the use of representations at a
very early point – at the point when a student is just learning
to generate and interpret a representation – and ask what
some of the major challenges are in learning these skills.
There has been growing interest in attempting to teach these
skills to students as young as those in the third through
eighth grades1 (NCTM 2000), but there is considerable
evidence as well that these skills have not yet been
developed by many undergraduates (Tabachneck, Leonardo,
and Simon 1994).
We take up this subject in the context of developing a
cognitive model of how novices generate and interpret some
of the simpler representations used in data analysis. This
model is designed with production-rule logic, in ACT-R
(Anderson 1993). In this process, we hope to follow in the
footsteps of some of the successful cognitive models of
novices developed in other domains such as algebra
problem solving (Koedinger & MacLaren 1997).
One area which might considerably influence students’
performance on these tasks is transfer of the knowledge
students already have of generating and interpreting other
1

Between the ages of 7 and 13.

representations. Since students are taught different sets of
representations at different grade levels (NCTM 2000), it is
quite plausible that an important model for learning new
representations will be the representations encountered
earlier. Previous research into when transfer occurs shows
that transfer can happen between exercises taking place in
different representations, through mechanisms such as
analogy, and that transfer can occur between similar
processes (Novick 1988, Novick and Holyoak 1991, Singley
and Anderson 1989). Hence, we seek to find out if and how
these processes extend to the very first stages of learning
how to use and generate a representation.
We are interested both in positive transfer, and in
overgeneralization, where knowledge is transferred
inappropriately. Scanlon’s (1993) research in the use of
representations for physics problem-solving provides some
excellent examples of overgeneralization in the
interpretation of different graphical representations.
Additionally, other research has shown that misconceptions
in physics, arising from overgeneralization of previously
learned knowledge, causes long-term difficulties in correctly
learning new material. How best to deal with such
misconceptions is an active question in the research
literature, with some arguing for a curricular strategy which
acknowledges the appropriate contexts for certain
conceptions and helps students see when they are
inappropriate (NRC 1999).
In this paper, we present results and analysis of a
empirical study we conducted in this domain, investigating
novice performance (with an eye towards transfer effects)
on interpreting, generating, and selecting representations
important to early data analysis.

Domain
Representations
This study focuses on three graphical representations of
data: histograms, scatterplots, and stem-and-leaf plots.
A histogram depicts a frequency distribution, as displayed
in Figure 1. A set of interval categories (as in Figure 1) are
represented in the X axis, and the frequency of each
category is represented by the height of the corresponding
vertical bar. A stem-and-leaf plot, shown in Figure 2, also

Teacher Predictions
In this study, students are asked to (a) interpret graphical
representations, (b) select the appropriate representation for
different types of data display, and (c) generate different
representations. We asked the two teachers in our sample
classes to predict how their students would perform. The
teachers predicted that students would perform about
equally well on interpretation and generation, and poorly on
selection. They predicted that students would be most

successful with histograms, next most successful with
scatterplots (because scatterplots are more conceptually
challenging) and would perform worst on stem-and-leaf
plots (because they are the least familiar to students).

STEM-AND-LEAF
Ones
column

Tens
column
4
2
5
1

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

5 8
1 3 4 6 7 7 9
0 0 1 2 2 5
7

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0

3

2

181210

211240

241270

Brand

271300

Sodium level (mg)

Figure 4: A Bar graph
Figure 1: The histogram used in the interpretation exercises

Grub
Club
GnuMade

151180

Delish

0

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Davis

1

0-30 31-60 61-90 91-120 121150

100

Figure 3: The scatterplot used in the interpretation exercises

Price
Per
Serv
(cents)

Number of
brands

50
Quality Rating

5

4

12, 14, 16, 16, and 19
are values in this set

7
4 6 6 9
6 7 9
4 6

Figure 2: The drawing of a stem-and-leaf plot we used in
our refresher sheet

Price per serving (cents)

displays frequency distribution data – the frequency of
occurrence in this case for values between 0 and 99. In
Figure 2, a distribution of 30 values, ranging from 4 to 97, is
displayed. The higher order “tens” digit of the values form
10 categories down the left side of the graph. The lower
order “ones” digit of each observed value is displayed in an
ordered row to the right of the associated tens digit. Finally,
a scatterplot employs a Cartesian plane to represent the
relationship between two quantitative variables, as
displayed in Figure 3. Each axis represents one of the
variables, and the points represent paired values of the
variables.
These three representations were selected because they
are featured in most middle school math curricula and to
systematically vary graph characteristics. Note that
histograms and stem-and-leaf plots each portray univariate
frequency distributions, although their surface features are
dissimilar. The stem-and-leaf plot looks more like a table,
frequency is depicted horizontally rather than vertically, and
the frequency count is not directly depicted. In contrast,
histograms and scatterplots share some superficial
similarities – each has two numerically labeled axes – but
they represent very different types of information.
A fourth type of graph, which was not included in the
experimental tests, will be relevant in interpreting student
performance. This is a bar graph, as depicted in Figure 4. A
bar graph displays the values of a categorical variable along
its X axis, and of a related quantitative variable along its Y
axis.

The participants were 52 8th and 9th grade students from
three mainstream pre-algebra classes in two Pittsburgh
suburbs, half male and half female. The study was
conducted prior to the year’s data analysis unit; students had
some exposure to histograms, scatterplots and stem-and-leaf
plots in the last two years, and considerably greater
exposure to bar graphs before that point.

or not there is a relationship between price and quality?”),
and four choices.
The students were also given a sheet with a picture of the
four types of representations directly addressed in the
exercises (histograms, scatterplots, stem-and-leaf plots, and
box plots – bar graphs were not included in this sheet, nor
mentioned in the study). An example from this sheet is
shown in Figure 2. We did this in order to prevent the
forgetting of terms from having an effect on the students’
performance.

Design

Scoring

In the study, each of the participants completed 3-4
exercises in which they were asked to generate (“draw”) a
histogram, scatterplot, or stem-and-leaf plot, to answer a set
of interpretation questions for one of those representations,
or to select the most appropriate representation for a
particular question. Four different forms were used, with
questions on each form chosen such that neither the same
category of task nor the same representation were assigned
twice in one form. Within each form, the order of the
exercises was rotated for different students to prevent order
effects. These forms also included exercises involving box
plots and tables, but we neither expected nor found the kind
of effects we found for the representations discussed here.
The generation exercises gave the student a data set, in
the form of a table, and asked them to draw the given
representation of that data. The exercise statement read
as follows:

For generation exercises, we developed rubrics for
completely correct solutions (no features incorrect), and
solutions that had the correct surface features (with the same
general appearance as a correct solution – axes and bars or
dots). For interpretation and representation choice exercises,
we scored answers either completely right or wrong.

Methods
Participants

Please draw a [scatterplot, histogram, stem-and-leaf plot],
showing all of the data in this table. Show all work. Feel
free to use graph paper, if necessary.
The interpretation exercises gave the student a drawing of
that representation and a set of questions to answer using
that representation (see Figure 1and Figure 3).
The interpretation exercises had three types of questions,
both multiple-choice and open-ended. The first type were
straightforward questions typically asked for the target
representation. These required no understanding of the
representation’s global properties (for the histogram, “How
many brands of creamy peanut butter have between 0 and
30 mg of sodium?”). The second were also typical, but
required understanding of the representation’s global
properties -- properties which require the student to make
inferences (Stenning, Cox and Oberlander 1995, Leinhardt,
Zaslovsky, and Stein 1990). “Is there a relationship between
quality and price? Answer yes or no.” is one such question
for scatterplots. Finally, the third type were questions that
are not typically asked for the target representation, but
could be answered through productions more appropriate for
another representation (for the scatterplot, “What is the price
of the brand with a quality rating of 3?”).
The representation selection questions gave the students a
data set, in the form of a table, a question to answer (such as
“What type of graph would be best for determining whether

Results and Discussion
Performance accuracy in the graph interpretation, generation
and interpretation tasks is displayed in Table 1. Students
performed moderately well overall on graph interpretation,
averaging 56% correct. However, there was large difference
between performance on different representations – the 15
students interpreting histograms performed considerably
better (average of 96% correct) than the 12 students
interpreting scatterplots (average of 56% correct on the
open-ended questions) (t(25)=4.925,p<0.0001). Both groups
performed considerably better than the 13 students
interpreting stem-and-leaf plots (average of 17% correct)
(for scatterplots versus stem-and-leaf plots, t(23)=4.109,
p<0.001 ; for histograms versus stem-and-leaf plots,
t(26)=12.191, p<0.0001). In contrast, student performance
on graph selection and graph generation was quite poor.
Students were not better than chance accuracy (1 out of 4,
25%) in graph selection. Furthermore, they were completely
unsuccessful at generating histograms and scatterplots.
Performance by the 15 students who attempted to generate
stem-and-leaf plots was relatively poor at 20% completely
correct, but was marginally significantly better than the
performance of the 12 students attempting to generate
histograms (0% completely correct) and the 12 students
attempting to generate scatterplots (0% completely correct),
using a test of the significance of independent proportions.
(z=1.64, p<.11).
The teachers accurately predicted that students would
struggle with graph selection problems. Their predictions
that histograms would be easiest and stem-and-leaf plots
hardest corresponded with the data, but only for graph
interpretation. Their expectation that students would have
comparable success with generation and interpretation
proved dramatically incorrect. Nathan and Koedinger
(2000) report a similar result, that experienced teachers
sometimes exhibit an “expert blindspot” and, in some cases,

Table 1: Average student performance in graph generation
and interpretation. Percent which students would be
expected to get right through guessing is placed in
parentheses where appropriate.
Histogram

Scatterplot

Generation

0%

0%

Stem-and
-leaf plot
20%

Interpretation
(open-ended
questions)
Selection

95%

56%

17%

15%
(25%)

20%
(25%)

8%
(25%)

consistently make inaccurate predictions about which
problems will be most challenging for students.
This unanticipated decoupling between performance on
graph interpretation and graph generation is striking. In
addition to the large difference in overall accuracy, the
relative difficulty of different representations is essentially
reversed in the two tasks. Students had the most trouble in
interpreting stem-and-leaf plots, but that was the only graph
type they had any success in generating. A similar
dissociation of interpretation and generation has been
observed in other domains such as programming (Anderson,
Conrad & Corbett, 1989), although not always (Pennington
& Nicolich, 1991).

Figure 5: An example of a student-drawn "histogram". Note
the axes are a categorical variable versus a quantitative
variable – appropriate for a bar graph.

Histogram & Scatterplot = Bar Graph
When we examined the student graph generation solutions
which were correct at least so far as having the proper
surface features, we noted a characteristic error in 100% of
the histograms and 28% of the scatterplots that provides
strong evidence about the students’ problem solving
strategy. Figure 5 displays a typical histogram solution and
Figure 6 displays a typical scatterplot solution. In each case
the students have constructed axes that are appropriate for a
bar graph. In both graphs, the x-axis represents individual
values of a categorical variable (individual brands of peanut
butter) and the y-axis represents values of a quantitative
variable (sodium level). Each of these graphs is the
informational equivalent of a bar graph. This suggests that,
in this stage of learning, students are transferring existing
knowledge about bar graphs, instead of using knowledge
specific to the target representation. That students would
already have knowledge of bar graphs is consistent with bar
graphs being a simpler representation than histograms (no
aggregation of data in the x-axis) and scatterplots (only one
continuous variable). This hypothesis not only explains the
graph generation results, but also appears to account for the
overall pattern of graph interpretation and graph selection
results as we discuss below.

Graph Interpretation
Figure 7 displays a set of production rules for common bar
graph interpretation problems – given one of the categorical

Figure 6: An example of a student-drawn "scatterplot". Note
the axes are once again more appropriate for a Bar graph.
instances on the x-axis, find the associated quantitative
value on the y-axis. For example, if a bar graph displays the
price of several brands of peanut butter (see Figure 4) and a
student is asked “What is the price of GnuMade peanut
butter?”, the student finds “GnuMade” on the x-axis, finds
the top of the associated bar, then reads horizontally across
to find GnuMade’s price on the y-axis. These productions
were directly applicable to all of our histogram
interpretation exercises. On those exercises, the 15 students
had an average accuracy rate of 95%. These productions
were also applicable to several of the scatterplot questions
(e.g., “What is the price of the brand with a quality rating of
3?”). Students had an average accuracy rate of 50% on these
questions.
Student performance on the scatterplot questions is quite
striking, when we consider the fact that these questions are
not standard for scatterplots. At the same time, the students

Table 2: Average student performance in graph
interpretation, for different kinds of problems. Percent
which students would be expected to get right through
guessing is placed in parentheses where appropriate.

Interpret:
“Bar graph
Productions”/
Analogous
Interpretation:
Emergent
Properties
Interpretation:
Overall

Histogram

Scatterplot

95%

50%

N/A

95%

If we are trying to find a value on a graph
And we are looking for the value
corresponding to a value V
Then
Set a subgoal of looking for V written on the x axis

Stem-and
-leaf plot
21%

If we are looking for V on the x axis
And value V is written at location x* on the x axis
Then
Set a subgoal of looking at location x*

67%
(50%)

N/A

If we are looking at location x* on the x axis
And point P is the topmost drawn in graphic
above location x* on the x axis
Then
Set a subgoal of looking across from P

57%

17%

had considerable difficulty with other scatterplot exercises.
In fact, on the exercises where students had to interpret a
scatterplot’s global properties, generally considered that
representation’s main function, the students did not perform
significantly better than chance (p>.10, N=12, using a sign
test).
By contrast, the bar graph interpretation productions in
Figure 7 do not transfer to stem-and-leaf plots, because the
student can neither look up the given value on either axis,
nor read the answer off the other axis. This is borne out by
the fact that on the 4 questions which were almost word-forword identical to the histogram interpretation questions, the
13 students performed much more poorly, averaging 21%
correct. This is significantly lower than the performance on
the
corresponding
questions
for
histograms
(t(26)=9.908,p<.0001).
Hence student interpretation performance levels are more
similar between histograms and scatterplots that share
surface features with bar graphs, than between histograms
and stem-and-leaf plots that have similar content but
different surface features (cf. Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser
1981).

Graph Selection
If students are reasoning about all three representations with
reference to a single familiar bar graph, they have no basis
for discriminating which of the three is appropriate for
representing different types of relationships and we would
expect chance performance levels. This is in fact what we
found, with students getting 15% on the graph selection
exercises, even below the 25% accuracy choosing 1 out of 4
would predict. In the absence of understanding which
representation is appropriate, an apparent bias in favor of
the representation the student had drawn in another
question, which by our study design was necessarily wrong,
may have led to the observed below chance performance.

If we are looking across from P
And y* is the value on the y axis horizontally
over from P
Then
Return y* as the value we were looking for

Figure 7: English-language productions for bar graph
interpretation, also suitable for some histogram and
scatterplot interpretation.
If we are trying to generate a graph G
And G’s axes have not been selected
Then
Set a subgoal for selecting G’s axes
If we are attempting to select axes for graph G
And the X axis is not selected
And there is a variable V in our data set
And V is a categorical variable
Then
Select V as our X axis

Figure 8: An English-language production for choosing the
X axis variable during generation, overgeneralized to apply
inappropriately during scatterplot and histogram generation.

Conclusion and Future Work
Novice students’ performance on interpretation, generation,
and selection of the data representations in this study can be
explained as depending upon transfer of their prior
knowledge of bar graphs. Where transfer and generalization
are afforded by surface similarity, they occur, whether
appropriate or not. This hypothesis exposes a more
integrated pattern of interpretation and generation
performance than is apparent in the overall results.
Given these findings, we are working toward developing
a more complete ACT-R cognitive model of learning data
representations
A major subtask in developing our model will be refining
our understanding of the factors which scaffold the novices
in transferring their knowledge, both appropriately and
inappropriately. We do not yet know which common
features between representations are essential to this process
– certainly it seems that surface features are more important
than deeper features, a finding compatible with those in
analogical transfer (cf., Novick 1988; Novick and Holyoak
1991) – but which surface features are most salient is an
important question in itself. For example, stem-and-leaf
plots have three large differences from histograms: flipped
axes, the need to remove the tens digit, and the need to
count up values. Determining which of them is most

important will have large impacts on our understanding of
the generality of the productions students use.
Eventually, we hope to use the cognitive model we
develop to build a Cognitive Tutor (Corbett, Koedinger, &
Hadley, in press) for this domain. Already, our research has
given us extensive information about some of the important
difficulties novices have in learning how to generate and
interpret these basic representations, including the confusion
between histograms and bar graphs. Additionally, our
curriculum will be strongly shaped by further research
determining whether these overgeneralizations are truly
misconceptions which need to be broken down, or whether
they are preconceptions which can still be built upon in
some way (cf., NRC 1999).
A final future direction is one that may have surprising
power – rather than trying to repair misconceptions, we may
get even better long-term results from addressing the
possibility that we can create a curriculum where bar graphs
are taught differently, and the overgeneralization never
develops in the first place – where the interpretation
productions still transfer, but the generation productions do
not become inappropriately broad. Through research in
these areas, we hope to transform students’ knowledge in
this domain.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jay Raspat and Katy Getman for
assisting us in the administration of the study discussed
here. We would also like to thank Bethany Rittle-Johnson
and Jack Zaientz for helpful discussions.

References
Anderson, J.R. (1993) Rules of the Mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Novick, L.R. (1988) Analogical Transfer, Problem
Similarity, and Expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 14 (3),
510-520.
Scanlon, E. (1998) How Beginning Students Use Graphs of
Motion. In M.W. van Someren, P. Reimann, H.P.A.
Boshuizen, T. de Jong (Eds.) Learning With Multiple
Representations. Kidlington, OX UK: Elsevier Science.
Anderson, J.R., Conrad, F. and Corbett, A.T. (1989) Skill
acquisition and the LISP Tutor. Cognitive Science, 13,
467-505.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems
by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Hadley, W. H. (in
press). Cognitive Tutors: From the research classroom to
all classrooms. In Goodman, P. S. (Ed.) Technology
Enhanced Learning: Opportunities for Change. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koedinger, K.R. and MacLaren, B.A. (1997) Implicit
strategies and errors in an improved model of early
algebra problem solving. In Shafto, M.G. & Langley, P.

(Eds.) Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.382-387.
Larkin, J.H. and Simon, H.A. (1987) Why a Diagram is
(Sometimes) Worth Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive
Science,11, 65-99.
Leinhardt, G, Zaslavsky, O. and Stein, M.K. (1990)
Functions, Graphs, and Graphing: Tasks, Learning, and
Teaching. Review of Educational Research. 60 (1), 1-64.
Nathan, M.J. & Koedinger, K.R. (2000) An investigation of
teachers' beliefs of students' algebra development.
Cognition and Instruction. 18 (2), 207-235.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000)
Principles and Standards for School Mathematics.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.
National Research Council. (1999) How People Learn:
Brain, Mind, Experience, and School. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Novick, L.R. and Holyoak, K.J. (1991) Mathematical
Problem Solving by Analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 17 (3),
398-415.
Pennington, N. and Nicolich, R. (1991) Transfer of Training
Between Programming Subtasks: Is Knowledge Really
Use Specific? Empirical Studies of Programmers: Fourth
Workshop. 156-176.
Singley, M.K. and Anderson, J.R. (1989) The Transfer of
Cognitive Skill. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Stenning, K., Cox, R., and Oberlander, J. (1995) Contrasting
the cognitive effects of graphical and sentential logic
teaching: Reasoning, representation, and individual
differences. Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 333354.
Tabachneck, H.J.M., Leonardo, A.M., Simon, H.A. (1994)
How Does an Expert Use a Graph? a Model of Visual and
Verbal Inferencing in Economics. Proceedings of the 16th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

