UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Training for Insight: The Case of the Nine-Dot Problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9g3432x1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Kershaw, Trina C.
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Training for Insight: The Case of the Nine-Dot Problem
Trina C. Kershaw (tkersh1@uic.edu) and Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Illinois at Chicago
1007 W. Harrison St., Chicago, IL 60607
Abstract
Three sources of difficulty for the nine-dot
problem were hypothesized: 1) turning on a nondot point, i.e., ending one line and beginning a new
line in a space between dots; 2) crossing lines, i.e.,
drawing lines that intersect and cross; and 3)
picking up interior dots, i.e., drawing lines that
cross dots that are in the interior of the nine-dot
and its variants. Training was designed to either
facilitate or hinder participants in overcoming these
difficulties. Participants were then tested on
variants of the nine-dot problem. Results showed
that participants in the facilitating training
condition performed significantly better than the
hindering or control group.

among college undergraduates who are given a few
minutes to think about it is less than 5% (Lung &
Dominowski, 1985; MacGregor, Ormerod, &
Chronicle, 2001). The problem is surely of an
unfamiliar type – when in everyday life do we ever
draw lines to connect dots under certain constraints? –
but what, exactly, are the sources of difficulty?
Interestingly, seventy years of research (Maier, 1930)
have not sufficed to answer this question.

Constraints and Insights
Prior knowledge is the main resource that a problem
solver can bring to bear on a problem. Prior knowledge
produces unconscious biases that might influence
perception and/or encoding of a problem. In general,
prior knowledge can be helpful and productive when
reasoning or solving a problem. However, when a
problem solver faces a very unfamiliar or novel type of
problem, there is no guarantee that prior knowledge
will be relevant or helpful. The defining characteristic
of so-called insight problems is that they activate
seemingly relevant prior knowledge which is not, in
fact, relevant or helpful (Ohlsson, 1984b, 1992; Wiley,
1998). To succeed, the problem solver must de-activate
or relax the constraints imposed by the more or less
automatically activated but unhelpful knowledge. To
understand human performance on an insight problem,
we should therefore try to identify the particular prior
concepts, principles, skills or dispositions that constrain
performance on that problem. Knoblich, Ohlsson,
Haider, and Rhenius (1999) and Knoblich, Ohlsson, and
Raney (1999) applied this perspective with considerable
success to a class of match stick problems. In this
paper, we apply it to the nine-dot problem and other
connect-the-dots (CD) problems.
The nine-dot problem (Maier, 1930) requires that
nine dots arranged in a square be connected by four
straight lines drawn without lifting the pen from the
paper and without retracing any lines (Figure 1). This
task is ridiculously simple in the formal sense that there
are only a few possible solutions to try, but ridiculously
difficult in the psychological sense that the solution rate

Figure 1: The nine-dot problem and its solution
The Gestalt psychologists introduced insight
problems into cognitive psychology and explained their
difficulty in terms of Gestalts, schemas that supposedly
organize perceptual information (Ohlsson, 1984a).
Consequently, they hypothesized that the nine-dot
problem is difficult because people are so dominated by
the perception of a square that the do not 'see' the
possibility of extending lines outside the square formed
by the dots (Scheerer, 1963). This hypothesis predicts
that telling participants that they can draw lines outside
the figure should facilitate the solution. Burnham and
Davis (1969) and Weisberg and Alba (1981) tested this
hypothesis, and found that the instruction only worked
if combined with other hints that gave away part of the
solution, e.g., telling the participants at which point to
start or giving them the first line of the solution. A
second prediction from the Gestalt hypothesis is that
altering the shape of the problem and thus breaking up
the square should also help. Both Burnham and Davis
(1969) and Weisberg and Alba (1981) found facilitating
effects of this manipulation. A third prediction from the
Gestalt hypothesis is that giving people experience in
extending lines outside the figure should help.
Weisberg and Alba (1981) and Lung and Dominowski
(1985) indeed found facilitating effects of such training.
Recently, MacGregor et al. (2001) and Chronicle,
Ormerod, and MacGregor (in press) have proposed a

theory that attempts to predict quantitative differences
in solution rates for different CD problems. Their
explanation is based on four principles: (a) People
always draw their next line so as to go through as many
dots as possible. (b) People judge the value of a line as
a function of how many dots it picks up in relation to
how many dots are left and how many lines they have
left to draw. (c) People look ahead 1, 2, 3 or at most 4
steps when deciding which line to draw next. (d) When
lookahead indicates that every possible line from the
current dot will end in a situation where the next line
does not provide sufficient progress, they consider, with
some probability, lines that go outside the figure
formed by the dots.
This theory successfully predicts the differences
in solution rates between different several different CD
problems. It provides a more detailed description of
why people get stuck than any previous theory – their
lookahead is not deep enough to reveal that the solution
path they are trying will dead end eventually – but the
basic explanation for the difficulty is similar to that of
previous theories: people consider lines within the
shape formed by the dots before they consider lines that
go outside the figure.
However, if this is true of variants of the nine-dot
problems that do not form squares or any other 'good
figure', then the Gestalt explanation for why people do
not go outside the figure no longer holds. So what is the
difficulty?
By analyzing pilot data and inspecting MacGregor et
al.’s (2001) solution rates for the different nine-dot
variants, we hypothesize that "hesitating to go outside
the figure formed by the dots" is the wrong formulation
of the constraint operating in this type of problem.
Instead, we propose that people are disposed to turn on
a dot, as opposed to turn on a point on the paper where
there is no dot (a non-dot point). This constraint
overlaps in meaning with the stay-within-the-figure
constraint, so it explains the success of the training
provided by Lung and Dominowski (1985). At the same
time, this formulation is different enough to explain
why telling people that they can go outside the figure
does not help; they do not hesitate to extend lines
outside the figure, but they do not want to turn on a
non-dot point. As a secondary constraint, we
hypothesize that people hesitate to cross lines, having a
strong disposition towards thinking of the four lines
they are supposed to draw as forming a closed outline.
As a consequence, they do not see how to pick up the
dots in the interior of the figure, an operation that
requires crossing lines in many CD problems.
In the present study, we tested this hypothesis by
both comparing problems that did and did not require
turns on non-dot points and by attempting to facilitate

the solution via training. As a novel methodological
feature, we also tried to hinder the solution with
training intended to strengthen the inappropriate
constraints.

Method
Participants
Participants were 90 undergraduates (30 in each
training group: facilitating, hindering, and no training)
from UIC’s Participant Pool. No demographic data
were collected about the participants.

Materials
The training exercises were designed by the first author.
Facilitating Training The facilitating training was
designed to eliminate the difficulties that participants
were thought to face when solving the nine-dot
problem. Twelve training exercises were designed,
each with similar instructions to the nine-dot problem
(Connect all of these dots using ___ straight lines
without lifting your pen from the page and without
retracing any lines). Each exercise required a different
number of lines to connect the dots.
Six of the training exercises required participants to
cross lines and pick up interior dots (Figure 2), and the
other six could only be solved by turning on a non-dot
point (Figure 3). Each training exercise was presented
on its own page. The dots were filled circles that were
.5 cm in diameter, and the centers of each dot were
approximately 3.75 cm apart.

Figure 2: Facilitating Training Exercise and its
Solution: Crossing Lines and Picking up Interior Dots
Hindering Training The hindering training consisted
of 12 exercises that were solved by drawing lines that
always turned on a dot and never crossed another line
(Figure 4). As in the facilitating training, participants
were instructed with similar directions to the nine-dot
problem (Connect all of these dots using ___ straight
lines without lifting your pen from the page and without
retracing any lines). Again, each exercise required a
different number of lines to connect the dots. The

hindering training was constructed just as the
facilitating training, with the dots, or filled circles,
being .5 cm in diameter and the centers of each dot
being approximately 3.75 cm apart.

each group. The purpose of giving participants a set
starting point was to make sure that there was a single
solution for each training exercise.
Participants had one minute to work on each training
exercise. Time was kept by the experimenter.
Participants in the no training (control) group did not
complete the training exercises and instead began with
the problems.

Figure 3: Facilitating Training Exercise and its
Solution: Turning on a Non-Dot Point
Nine-Dot Variants The three insight and three noninsight versions of the nine-dot problem that were used
had been designed by MacGregor et al. (2001). The
insight problems required participants to turn on a nondot point (Figure 5), while the non-insight problems
were the insight problems with an added dot, which
excused participants from having to turn on a non-dot
point (Figure 6). Each problem was presented on its
own page. The dots were filled circles that were 1 cm
in diameter. The center of each dot was approximately
3.75 cm apart.

Figure 5: Nine-Dot Variant: Insight Version

Figure 6: Nine-Dot Variant – Non-Insight Version
Figure 4: Hindering Training Exercise and its Solution

Procedure
Participants were seen in groups of 2-10. Each session
lasted from 40 minutes to an hour. All test materials
were contained in a booklet.
Training Phase Participants in both the facilitating
and hindering training conditions were given the same
directions for the training exercises. The instructions
explained that they would be connecting dots using the
number of lines specified on each page without lifting
their pens from the page or retracing any lines. They
were also told to start at the dot marked with a star for

Problem-Solving Phase.
After completing the
training, participants began the problem-solving section
of the booklet. Participants were instructed that they
would have four minutes to connect all the dots in the
figure using four straight lines without lifting their pens
from the page and without retracing any lines. For each
problem, there was a practice sheet followed by a
second identical sheet with the problem on it.
Participants were instructed to try the problem as many
times as they wanted to on the practice sheet. When
they thought they had come up with a solution, they
were to record the time out of the four minutes that had
passed, using a large clock at the front of the room.

The participants then were to turn the page and redraw
their final solutions on the clean page.
The order of problems was the same for all
participants. The first problem was an insight problem,
the second was a non-insight problem, the third was an
insight problem, and so on. Each insight problem was
followed by its non-insight version. The first insight
problem was of principal interest in comparing the
effect of the training manipulations. The other
problems were included to obtain baseline solving rates
for various problem types, and to compare solving rates
in the UIC participant population to the solving rates
obtained by MacGregor et al. (2001).

Results
The results focus on the first insight problem (see
Figure 5).

Group Analysis
A 3 x 2 chi-square analysis was conducted for the first
insight problem. The independent variable was the type
of training: facilitating, hindering, or no training. The
dependent variable was whether or not a participant had
solved the first insight problem. Nineteen participants
(63%) in the facilitating group solved the first insight
problem, eight (27%) in the hindering group solved,
and 11 (37%) in the no training group solved. The chisquare was significant, χ2(2, N = 90) = 8.836, p < .05.
Post-hoc comparisons showed significant differences
between the facilitating group and the hindering group,
χ2(1, N = 60) = 8.148, p < .05, and between the
facilitating group and the no training group, χ2(1, N =
60) = 4.267, p < .05, but not between the hindering
group and the no training group, χ2(1, N = 60) = .693, p
> .05.
A between-groups analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was conducted for the average amount of time it took
participants in each group to solve the first insight
problem. Participants in the facilitating group averaged
116 seconds to solve the first insight problem, the
hindering group averaged 188 seconds, and the no
training group averaged 185 seconds to solve. The
ANOVA was significant, F(2,87) = 5.873, p < .05.
Post-hoc Tukey tests revealed significant differences
between the facilitating group and the hindering group
(p < .05) and the facilitating group and the no training
group (p < .05), but not between the hindering group
and the no-training group (p > .05).

Individual Differences Analysis
Although the facilitating group did better on the first
insight problem than the other two groups, there was a
large amount of variation in solving rate within the
facilitating training group. Specifically, not all

participants in the facilitating training group completed
the training correctly. Participants in the facilitating
group were split into two sub-groups based on whether
or not they had completed the training correctly. In
order to be classified as having completed the training
correctly, a participant had to correctly complete over
half (six) of the training exercises. If a participant did
not correctly complete at least six of the training
exercises, then he or she was put into the “did not
complete training” group. In the “completed training”
group, no participant got more than four training
exercises incorrect. In the “did not complete training”
group, one participant got six exercises wrong, and the
others got seven or more exercises wrong.
There were a total of 19 participants in the
“completed training” group, 17 (89%) of which solved
the first insight problem, and 11 participants in the “did
not complete training” group, two (18%) of which
solved the first insight problem. A chi-square analysis
comparing the performance of the two sub-groups on
the first insight problem was significant, χ2(1, N = 30)
= 15.248, p < .05.
Within each group, there were large differences in
the amount of time needed to solve the first insight
problem. Participants in the facilitating group who
solved the first insight problem needed between 8 and
180 seconds to solve, with the majority of solvers
requiring between eight and 109 seconds. The amount
of time needed to solve ranged between 15 and 235
seconds in the hindering group, and between 20 and
195 seconds in the no training group.

Discussion
The results show that the problems that did not require
turns on non-dot points were easier than those that did,
and that the facilitating training improved performance
on our CD problems, supporting the idea that the
difficulties of the nine-dot problem and of CD problems
generally might be some combination of a disposition
towards turning on a dot and a disposition to think of
the four lines they are supposed to draw as forming an
outline and hence not crossing each other.
Contrary to expectation, the hindering training did
not suppress the solution rate below that of a control
group. There are several possible explanations. First,
the solution rate was low enough so that attempting to
suppress it further encountered a floor effect. Second, it
is possible that the constraining dispositions were
entrenched enough already so that attempting to
entrench them yet further with a brief intervention did
not succeed.
An interesting finding was that for the facilitating
group, the degree to which participants completed the
training determined their success in solving the first

insight problem. It is likely that only the participants in
the facilitating group who fully completed the training
were able to successfully transfer what they had learned
during training to solving the insight problems. This
finding shows that despite common difficulties for
participants in solving CD problems, there exists
individual variation in the degree to which participants
can be guided to overcome these difficulties.
Where would people acquire the two central
dispositions to want to turn on a dot and to draw
outlines? The first disposition might stem from yet
another Gestalt concept, the difference between figure
and ground. The dots on the paper is the figure and the
paper is the background and hence not part of what they
are working on. The disposition to draw outlines might
be grounded in how people draw when they try to make
representational drawings; they trace the outline of the
object they are trying to represent. Even if plausible
sources can be identified for these two constraints, it
remains to prove that they are operating in the nine-dot
problem itself as well as in the altered versions we used
in this study.
Another reason that people find the nine-dot and
related CD problems difficult is that their prior
experience in solving CD problems is based in
children’s connect-the-dot puzzles. This experience is
irrelevant to the knowledge that is needed to solve the
nine-dot problem.
Prior knowledge creates
unconscious biases that are not always helpful (cf.
Ohlsson, 1984b, 1992; Wiley, 1998). The presentation
of a problem can interact with prior knowledge, thus
resulting in an incorrect and unhelpful encoding of the
problem.
What is of most interest in studies on CD problems is
to comprehend how people can get stuck on such trivial
problems. To understand how the human mind works,
we must understand unhelpful interactions between
problems and prior knowledge, the impasses that result,
and how people overcome those impasses by relaxing
the inappropriate constraints. Insight problems are tools
with which to study these processes.

References
Burnham, C.A., & Davis, K.G. (1969). The nine-dot
problem: Beyond perceptual organization.
Psychonomic Science, 17(6), 321-323.
Chronicle, E.P., Ormerod, T.C., & MacGregor, J.N. (in
press). When insight just won’t come: The failure of
visual cues in the nine-dot problem. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology.

Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk
decomposition in insight problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 1534-1555.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. (1999).
Resolving impasses in problem solving: An eye
movement study. In M. Hahn and S. Stoness (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 276-281).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lung, C.T., & Dominowski, R.L. (1985). Effects of
strategy instructions and practice on nine-dot
problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
11(4), 804-811.
MacGregor, J.N., Ormerod, T.C., & Chronicle, E.P.
(2001). Information-processing and insight: A
process model of performance on the nine-dot and
related problems. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:
Learning,
Memory,
and
Cognition,27(1), 176-201.
Maier, N.R.F. (1930). Reasoning in humans: I. On
direction. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 10,
115-143.
Ohlsson, S. (1984a). Restructuring revisited I:
Summary and critique of the Gestalt theory of
problem solving. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology, 25, 65-78.
Ohlsson, S. (1984b). Restructuring revisited II: An
information processing theory of restructuring and
insight. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25,
117-129.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing
explanations of insight and related phenomena. In M.
Keane and K. Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the
Psychology of Thinking (Vol.1, pp. 1-44). London:
Harvester-Wheatsheaf.
Scheerer, M. (1963) Problem solving. Scientific
American, 208(4), 118-128.
Weisberg, R.W., & Alba, J.W. (1981). An examination
of the alleged role of “fixation” in the solution of
several “insight” problems. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 110(2), 169-192.
Wiley, J. (1998). Expertise as mental set: The effects of
domain knowledge on creative problem solving.
Memory & Cognition, 26(4), 16-730.

