UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Cognitive Models to Guide Instructional Design: The Case of Fraction Division

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6dk5t75h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Rittle-Johnson, Bethany
Koedinger, Kenneth R.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

U sing cognitive m odels to guide instructionaldesign:
The case offraction division
Bethany R ittle-Johnson (br2e@ andrew .cm u.edu)
K enneth R .K oedinger (koedinger@ cm u.edu)
H um an-Com puterInteraction Institute,Carnegie M ellon U niversity
Pittsburgh,Pa 15213 U SA
A bstract
Cognitive m odeling can be used to com pare alternative
instructionalstrategies and to guide the design of curriculum
m aterials. W e m odeled tw o alternative strategies for fraction
division,and the m odels led to specific em piricalpredictions
of the benefits and draw backs of each strategy. These
insights provided concrete suggestions fordeveloping lessons
on fraction division, including a new potential strategy that
com bines the benefits of the tw o strategies. This on-going
w ork illustrates the potential of cognitive m odeling for
inform ing the design ofbetterm athem atics curricula.

Background
A lthough U .S.students are fairly proficientatperform ing
routine calculations,they lack a conceptualunderstanding of
m athem atics and have difficulty solving non-routine
problem s (Lindquist,1989;Jakwerth,1999).These findings
have spurred m any educators to callfor an increasing focus
on building understanding and problem solving skill in
m athem atics instruction.The N ationalCouncilfor Teachers
of M athem atics (N CTM ) standards state the overarching
learning goal as: “Students m ust learn m athem atics with
understanding, actively building new knowledge from
experience and prior knowledge,” (p. 16, N CTM , 2000).
The standards proposed by N CTM , and curriculum and
evaluations based on them , have m et with opposition from
advocates of “back-to-basics” approach (M athem atically
Correct, 2000). M athem aticians, politicians, teachers and
parents have raised concerns that students are not learning
their arithm etic facts and basic com putationalskills and are
lobbying to abandon these reform efforts. Further, m any
teachers have been resistant to changing their teaching
practices and doubtthe benefits ofreform -based curricula.
A lthough there is agreem ent on the need to im prove the
m athem atics curriculum in the U .S., there is considerable
disagreem ent on how the curriculum should be changed.
Controversy over how to teach fraction division helps to
illustrate this fundam ental conflict over whether the
curriculum
should focus on gaining conceptual
understanding or on proficiency in retrieving facts and
executing com putational procedures. To solve fraction
division problem s, students are traditionally taught the
com putational procedure of inverting the divisor and
changing the operation to m ultiplication (invert-andm ultiply strategy). A s an alternative, the N CTM 2000
standards proposed a picture division strategy where
students draw a picture of the starting am ount, repeatedly
“cut off” groups of the size specified by the divisor and

countthe resulting num berofgroups. Forexam ple,to solve
six divided by 3/4,students could draw a line six units long,
divide each unitinto fourths,and then startatsix and m ark
off groups of three fourths to find how m any 3/4 are in six.
A ccording to the standards: “Lacking an understanding of
the underlying rationale [for invert and m ultiply], m any
students are therefore unable to repair their errors and clear
up their confusions about division of fractions… Carefully
sequenced experiences with [picture division] problem s
such as these can help students build an understanding of
division offractions.” (p.218 N CTM ,2000).
In principle,an idealapproach to inform ing the debate on
how best to teach a particular m athem atical topic is to
conduct a m ulti-year, m ulti-site experim ental study
com paring a reform -based approach with a back-to-basics
approach. In addition to the practical lim itations of this
approach, an em pirical evaluation does not explain the
reasons for the results or offer insights into how to apply
these results to othertopics.
W e have begun to explore the role ofcognitive m odels in
helping to inform this debate. D eveloping cognitive m odels
offers four key advantages. First, developing cognitive
m odels requires precise and unam biguous specification of
problem representations and action sequences and allows for
detailed com parisons of problem solving strategies.Second,
the specificity of the m odels leads to generation of specific
hypotheses that can be tested through sm aller, focused,
em pirical studies. Third, cognitive m odels can be used to
understand and explain em pirical results, allowing
researchers to understand the m echanism s underlying the
differences and to extrapolate the findings to otherdom ains.
Finally, inspection and evaluation of these m odels yield
concrete suggestions for better content and m ethods of
teaching a particulartopic.
To illustrate the potential of cognitive m odeling for
inform ing the currentdebate in m athem atics instruction,we
describe our use of cognitive m odeling to guide the design
of lessons on fraction division (as part of a m iddle-school
m ath curriculum we are developing). Rational num ber
concepts and procedures are a cornerstone ofm iddle-school
m athem atics,butU .S.students perform poorly on a range of
rational num ber problem s, including fraction division
problem s. (e.g. Lindquist, 1989; Lesh & Landau, 1983).
Fraction division is a representative topic in m athem atics for
which the standards-based and back-to-basic m ovem ents
have proposed alternative strategies.
In the currentpaper,we presentcognitive m odels of both
fraction division strategies, outline predictions for learning

and transfer that are revealed by the m odels, and offer
prelim inary im plications of the m odels for instructional
design, including a new strategy for fraction division that
was suggested by this work

C ognitive M odels
O ur cognitive m odels are based on A CT-R theory, which
breaks knowledge into two m ain categories -- a declarative
knowledge base offacts and a proceduralknowledge base of
production rules (A nderson,1993). D eclarative knowledge
includes both priordom ain knowledge and representation of
the currentproblem situation. A production rule is a sim ple
IF-TH EN
statem ent that m anipulates declarative
knowledge, and a series of production rules m odel actions
forsolving a problem .

M odelofPicture D ivision Strategy
W e collected inform al verbal protocols from five sixthgrade students while they solved basic fraction division
problem s such as 15 ÷ 1 1/2.The students had received no
form al instruction on fraction division. O ne student
spontaneously used a picture division strategy,and the other
students were provided with a picture and encouraged to try
using the strategy.
The com bination of the task analysis and students’ think
alouds revealed 4 m ain sub-goals for im plem enting this
strategy: 1) identify the values in the problem s and draw
the appropriate picture, 2) m ark the picture into the
Table 1: Cognitive m odelofpicture division strategy
Productions
1.Identify-starting-am ount
2. D raw-whole-startingam ount
OR
3. D raw-m ixed-startingam ount
4. Identify-size-of-groups
5. Identify-value-ofdivisions
6. D raw-divisions
7.Identify-step-size
8.M ark-first-group
9.M ark-next-group
10. Finished-m arkinggroups
11. Count-whole-groups
12. Identify-rem ainingdivisions
13.Step-size-asdenom inator-of-rem ainder

StudentExam ple
H ere’s her8 footlong
board
[draws line with 8 sections]

A nd she wants each one
[shelf]to be a half,
So,I’d spliteach one in
half
[m arks each whole in half]
[group size = 1;skip to 9]

A nd then that’s how m any
shelves.[counts]16.
NA
NA

N ote: Extra productions w ould be needed to solve problem s
w here the denom inators ofthe dividend and divisorare different
and one is nota m ultiple ofthe other(e.g.3/5 ÷ 1/3).

Table 2:Exam ple declarative knowledge chunk:
Representation of2/3
Q U A N TITY 2/3>
isa num ber
whole
0
top-num ber 2
bottom -num ber3
parts-per-whole 3 ;;Picture D ivision strategy only
needed-parts 2 ;;Picture D ivision strategy only
appropriate size groups,3) countthe num ber ofgroups,and
4) convert the rem ainder (if there is one) to a fractional
value. These four sub-goals translate into 13 key steps or
actions that the problem solver m ust take (see Table 1; a
dotted line designates the beginning of a new sub-goal).
These actions were instantiated as productions in an
intelligent tutoring system that is based on A CT-R theory
(A nderson,Corbett,K oedinger& Pelletier,1995).
The productions in the picture division m odel rely on
m eaningful representation of problem inform ation in
declarative m em ory. First,selection of this strategy com es
from representing the m eaning of division as finding the
num ber of groups of a given size in the starting am ount.
Second, the productions rely on a quantity-based
representation of fractions. Students need to represent
fractions as parts of a whole (e.g. 2/3 is two out of three
equalsize parts) rather than only as a visualarrangem entof
num bers (e.g. 2 is the top num ber and 3 is the bottom
num ber). Table 2 provides a sam ple declarative chunk used
in representing the problem .

M odelofInvert-and-M ultiply-Strategy
The invert-and-m ultiply strategy can be broken into 4 m ain
sub-goals: 1) identify the dividend and the divisor, 2) if
needed, convert whole num bers and m ixed num bers to
fractions, 3) invert the divisor and m ultiply the two
fractions, and 4) if needed, sim plify the answer by
Table 3:Cognitive m odelforinvert-and-m ultiply strategy
Productions
1. Identify-dividend
2. Identify-divisor
3. W hole-dividend-tofraction
4. Identify-m ixed-dividend
5. Identify-m ixed-divisor
6. M ixed-to-fraction
7. Invert-divisor
8.M ultiply-top-& -btm -#s
9.Im proper-to-m ixed
10.ID -whole-#-answer
11. ID -if-quotient-isreducible
12. Reduce Fraction

StudentExam ple
12
1 1/2
12/1
NA
1 1/2 is 3/2
So,m ake it12/1 * 2/3
Equals 24/3
Thatis 8
[D one]
NA
NA

converting an im proper fraction to a m ixed num ber and/or
by putting the fraction in sim plest term s. These four subgoals translate into 11 key steps or actions thatthe problem
solver m ust take (see Table 3; dotted lines designate the
beginning ofa new sub-goal).
The declarative knowledge used by the invert-andm ultiply strategy differs from that used by the picture
division strategy. In the invert and m ultiply strategy,
division is represented as perform ing actions on num bers.
Fractions are represented as a visual arrangem ent of digits,
and quantity-based knowledge is notused (see Table 2).

Em piricalSupportfor O ur M odels
W e designed a brief intervention to validate and refine our
cognitive m odels. The students had already been taughtthe
invert-and-m ultiply strategy, and we gave them a brief
lesson on the picture division strategy. Thirty-two ninthgrade students from two m ath classes for below-average
m ath students participated in the study.
O n the first day of our study, students received a 10m inute lesson on fraction division from their classroom
teacher. The teacher discussed how to solve two types of
fraction division problem s using each strategy. Instruction
on the picture division strategy focused on form ing a
quantity-based representation of the problem without
detailed instruction on the actions (productions) for
im plem enting the strategy. The teacher then reviewed the
steps for using the invert-and-m ultiply. A fter this brief
lesson, students were random ly assigned to use one of the
two strategies to solve a set of problem s. Students solved
two problem s using the assigned strategy and received
feedback and help in finding the correct answer if needed.
Students then solved a setof 10 problem s withoutfeedback
or help – 4 instructed problem s (problem s with whole
num bers and/or unit fractions), 5 transfer problem s
(problem s with non-unitfractions and with m ixed num bers),
and a fraction m ultiplication problem . Students had
approxim ately 20 m inutes to solve the problem s, and their
com pliance with the strategy instructions was high. In the
invert-and-m ultiply group, there was no trace of students
using a pictorialstrategy,and in the picture division group,
a picture was drawn on 83% of attem pted problem s. Four
days later,students were asked to solve a parallelsetof 10
problem s using any strategy they wanted.
Students had difficulty learning the picture division
strategy from our brief lesson. O n D ay 1,they solved 60%
ofthe instructed problem types correctly,butonly 9% ofthe
transfer problem s correctly. M any students got stuck and
did not finish the assessm ent; students only attem pted 57%
of the problem s (com pared to students attem pting 96% of
problem s in the invert-and-m ultiply group).
N ot surprisingly, students who were assigned to use the
fam iliar invert-and-m ultiply strategy solved m ore problem s
correctly on D ay 1,com pared to the Picture D ivision group
(49% vs. 28% correct; F (1,30) = 16.96, p < .01). They
solved 89% of the instructed problem types correctly, but
only 31% of the transfer problem s correctly (although they

had previously received instruction on these problem types
as well.) Student had particular difficulty when the
problem s involved m ixed num bers. O nly half of the
students solved atleastone problem ofthis type correctly.
W hen students were free to choose any strategy on D ay 2,
students used the m ore fam iliar and well practiced invertand –m ultiply strategy on a m ajority ofproblem s (M = 62%
of trials with a m ean accuracy of 60% ). The picture
division strategy was used on 10% ofproblem s,and only by
students who were assigned this strategy on D ay 1.
To help explain the difficulties of each strategy,students’
incorrect solutions were classified using the productions in
the relevant cognitive m odel. W e distinguished between
failing to initiate a production and im plem enting a
production incorrectly (an error). The ease of coding
student solutions is an additional benefit of developing
cognitive m odels. W e reportsolution data from D ay 1,but
a sim ilarpattern arises on D ay 2.
Tables 4 and 5 show the distribution offailures and errors
over the productions for each strategy. O n the picture
division strategy, students often did not know how to start
the problem . W hen students attem pted the problem , they
often did not succeed on the first sub-goal – identifying
values and setting up the picture. There were a surprising
num ber of errors in identifying the dividend and in drawing
the divisions correctly (e.g.students added 3 extra divisions
perwhole for1/3,thus m aking fourths). Students’errors on
identify-parts-per-whole varied by problem type,suggesting
that an additional production was needed in our m odel.
W hen the dividend was a fraction, students som etim es
divided the fractional am ount, rather than the whole, into
the specified num ber of parts (e.g.for 1/2 ÷ 1/10,dividing
the halfinto 10 sections). Students need an extra production
for m apping the parts-per-whole to the parts-per-fraction
(e.g. if 10 division in one whole,half as m any (5) in 1/2).
W e have very little data on the difficulty ofproductions that
occur later in the sequence because students often
abandoned this strategy.
Students using the invert-and-m ultiply strategy were
m uch m ore likely to attem pt to solve a problem , and the
m ajority of m istakes arose from failing to or incorrectly
converting m ixed num bers to fractions. H owever,this error
did not cause students to abandon the strategy. Rather,
students m ade illegitim ate adaptations to the strategy,such
as inverting the fractional portion of the divisor and then
m ultiplying the whole num ber portions and the fraction
portions separately (e.g.8 2/3 ÷ 2 1/3 = 8 2/3 * 2 3/1 = 16
6/3).Further,students’ errors on the fraction m ultiplication
problem suggested that the conditions for firing the invertdivisor production were overly general for m any students.
H alf of the students in the invert and m ultiply group
inverted the second fraction before m ultiplying.

Table 4:Classification ofstudents’incorrectsolutions
using the picture division strategy on day 1
A ction/Production
<StartProblem >
ID /D raw-whole-starting-am t
ID /D raw-m ixed-starting-am t
Identify-size-of-groups
Identify-value-of-divisions
D raw-divisions
Identify-step-size
M ark-first-group
M ark-next-group
Finished-m arking-groups
Count-whole-groups
Identify-rem aining-divisions
Step-size-as-denom inator-ofrem ainder

N o.of
Errors
NA
6
7
6
10
7
1
2
NA
NA

N o.of
Failures
64
1
11
1
1
NA
NA

Table 5:Classification ofstudents’incorrectsolutions
using the invertand m ultiply strategy on day 1
A ction/Production
<Startproblem >
ID D ividend
ID D ivisor
W hole-to-fraction
ID -m ixed-dividend & M ixed-tofraction
ID -m ixed-divisor& M ixed-tofraction
Invert-divisor
M ultiply-top-& -btm -#s
Im proper-to-m ixed
ID -if-com m on-factor
Reduce Fraction

N o.of
Errors
NA
13

N o.of
Failures
8
15

4

9

2
4
3
NA
NA

9
8
9
NA
NA

Im plications ofthe results for the cognitive m odels
The em piricalresults revealed a necessary refinem entto the
picture division m odel and validated the other productions
in the two m odels. Students’ errors when using the picture
division strategy indicated thatan additionalproduction was
needed when the dividend was a fraction. O therwise, the
m odels captured students’behaviors quite well.
The em pirical results also provide inform ation on
com m on buggy rules and on the frequency of correct
productions “failing to fire”. Students’ buggy rules willbe
m odeled as production rules, allowing us to identify the
source of the differences in the correct and incorrect
productions. This inform ation can be used to target
instruction ataddressing orpreventing these errors.
These results also highlight the im portance of the
declarative knowledge structures. The ninth-grade students
in this study did not seem to form quantity-based
representations of fractions or to represent division as

finding the num berofgroups ofa certain size in the starting
am ount. W ithout these declarative knowledge structures,
students had great difficulty im plem enting the initial
productions forthe picture division strategy. In contrast,the
invert-and-m ultiply strategy only relies on a superficial
representation ofdivision and ofthe position ofthe digits in
fractions, although a quantity-based representation of the
values could be used to recognize errors in its execution
(e.g. that m ultiplying the whole num bers will lead to too
large of an answer). A fter m ore than 5 years of instruction
on the division operator and on fractions,these students did
notseem to be form ing m eaningfulrepresentations ofeither.

Predictions from the m odels
Cognitive m odels of the picture division and invert-andm ultiply strategies can lead to com parative predictions for
1) difficulty of learning each strategy,2) efficiency ofusing
each strategy once learned,3) generality of each strategy to
the range of fraction division problem s,4) retention of the
strategies,and 5)transfer.
First, the ease of learning the two strategies depends on
students’ prior knowledge. In particular,learning difficulty
should be predicted by two factors --how students represent
fractions and division and how well they know sym bol
m anipulation rules for working with fractions. If students
form quantity-based representations of fractions and attach
m eaning to the division operation, learning the picture
division strategy should be relatively straightforward since a
m ajority of the productions are based on fam iliar and well
practiced knowledge (e.g. m arking sections and counting).
H owever, if students only represent fractions as visual
arrangem ents of digits and division as m anipulating
sym bols, this representation is not com patible with the
strategy, so the strategy will be difficult to learn. The
invert-and-m ultiply is not dependent on a quantity-based
representation of fractions. In contrast,the ease of learning
this strategy depends on how well students already know
productions for converting whole and m ixed num bers to
fractions and for converting im proper fractions to m ixed
num bers.
Second, our m odels support the predictions that the two
strategies will not be equally efficient once they are
m astered. A lthough the totalnum berofproductions to learn
is sim ilar in the two strategies (13 vs. 12), the num ber of
production firings is often higher for the picture division
strategy because som e productions m ust fire m any tim es.
Forexam ple,to solve 6 ÷ 3/4,the draw-divisions production
fires 18 tim es and the m ark-next-group production fires 6
tim es. Thus, to solve this problem , the picture division
strategy has 32 production firings whereas the invert-andm ultiply strategy has 6 production firings. O n a m ajority of
problem s, the invert-and-m ultiply strategy is m ore efficient
than the picture division strategy once the strategy is
m astered.
Third, the ease of applying the two strategies to the full
range offraction division problem s is notequivalent. O nce
the full set of productions is m astered for the invert-and-

m ultiply strategy,it can be applied to any fraction division
problem . In contrast,the picture division strategy becom es
very cum bersom e if the dividend is large,the denom inator
ofthe divisoris large,orifthe denom inators ofthe dividend
and divisor are not“friendly” (i.e.one denom inator is nota
factor of the other, such as 3 and 5). The first two
constraints require an unm anageable num ber of firings of
the draw-divisions and m ark-next-group productions. The
third constraintrequires a new setofproductions forfinding
equivalent fractions with a com m on denom inator, thus
necessitating extra productions thatare notwellgrounded in
the situation. O verall, the picture division and invert-andm ultiply strategy can both be used to solve a m ajority of
fraction division problem s, but the invert-and-m ultiply
strategy has the advantage of m ore uniform difficulty on all
types ofproblem s.
The fourth prediction concerns the retention of the two
strategies and confers an advantage to the picture division
strategy. In A CT-R,recallis based on spreading activation,
so knowledge that is connected to a richer network of
knowledge chunks is easierto recall(A nderson,1993). The
picture division strategy utilizes rich knowledge
representations of quantities and operations,so this network
of relations should facilitate recall. In contrast,the invertand-m ultiply strategy utilizes sparse, visual-based
representations that are not connected to a rich knowledge
base,so this strategy should be harderto recallaftera delay.
O ur results indicate that students have difficulty correctly
retrieving all of the relevant productions for invert-andm ultiply. In addition, both level-of-processing and dualcode theories of m em ory (Craik & Lockhart,1972; Paivio,
1971) suggest that the richer problem representations
utilized by the picture division strategy should lead to better
recall of this strategy, com pared to the invert-and-m ultiply
strategy. Thus,we predictthatrecallofthe picture division
strategy willbe m ore robust.
Fifth, the m odels lead to very different transfer
predictions. Inspection of the m odels indicates no overlap
in the productions thatare used by each strategy,so learning
one strategy will not aid learning of the other. The two
strategies also transfer differently to other topics. W hen
knowledge chunks are activated, their m em ory trace is
strengthened (A nderson, 1993), so quantity-based
representations of fractions and a m eaning-based
representation of division are strengthened (and possibly
refined) when students use the picture division strategy.
Thus,learning the picture division strategy should facilitate
perform ance on tasks utilizing these representations.
Representing fractions as part-whole quantities provides a
powerful declarative knowledge structure for choosing and
im plem enting a variety of strategies for tasks such as
com paring m agnitudes, estim ating, or adding and
subtracting fractions. The picture division strategy should
also transfer to decim al division since it strengthens a
m eaningful representation of division and m any of the
productions can be used to solve division problem s with
decim als. In contrast, the invert-and-m ultiply strategy

should facilitate perform ance on problem s involving other
fraction operations oralgebraic sim plification. This strategy
strengthens productions that are also used for adding,
subtracting and m ultiplying fractions, such as converting
im proper fractions to m ixed num bers, reducing fractions,
and m ultiplying fractions (although students m ay overgeneralize the strategy and also invert the second fraction
when m ultiplying fractions). Productions from this strategy
can also be applied to sim plifying algebraic expressions.
O verall,the two strategies should aid perform ance on very
differenttypes oftransferproblem s.
D eveloping cognitive m odels of the two strategies leads
to precise predictions of the benefits and drawbacks to each
strategy. The picture division strategy should be easy to
learn if students have quantity-based representations of
fractions, should be recalled after a delay, and should
transfer to tasks such as com paring fractions and dividing
by a decim al. In contrast, the invert-and-m ultiply strategy
should be easy to learn ifstudents already know productions
for m anipulating fractions, should be efficient and broadly
applicable once m astered, and should transfer to other
fraction operations and to algebra.

Im plications for InstructionalD esign
Com paring the benefits and drawbacks of each strategy
allows for an inform ed decision on whether and how to
teach each strategy. N either of the strategies was strong
along all five dim ensions that we considered (difficulty of
learning, efficiency, generality, retention and transfer).
Instead,there were trade-offs forlearning each strategy.
H ow the fraction division problem s are represented in
declarative m em ory helps to explain the benefits and
drawbacks to each strategy. The picture division strategy
supports a quantity-based representation of fractions as a
specified num ber of parts of a whole. Q uantity-based
representations provide a unified representation thatcan be
used when solving a large variety of rational num ber
problem s, such as m odeling, estim ating, com paring, and
doing arithm etic with fractions. Thus, retention of the
strategy should be high. In contrast,the invert-and-m ultiply
strategy relies on a visual, position-based representation,
and this representation requires different, special-purpose
productions to solve a sim ilar variety of rational num ber
problem s, and retention of the productions would be
relatively low. H owever,these specialized productions lead
to m ore efficientperform ance.
Ideally, instruction could bridge from the m ore
m eaningfuland grounded strategy of picture division to the
m ore abstract and efficient strategy of invert and m ultiply,
while m aintaining high retention. U nfortunately,there is no
overlap in the problem representations or the productions
used by these two strategies, m aking it difficult to build
from one to the next. Because of this lim itation, we
developed a third strategy,labeled the com m on denom inator
strategy, which builds off the picture division strategy and
leads to an efficient and general m ethod for dividing
fractions. Because this strategy builds on the picture

division strategy, we first discuss suggestions for teaching
the picture division strategy and then outline a m odelofthis
new strategy.
The cognitive m odel suggests a careful sequence of
lessons for teaching the picture division strategy. Students
should first learn to represent fractions as part-whole
quantities. N ext, students should be taught to use the
picture division strategy on problem s thatrely on the fewest
num ber of productions - dividing a whole num ber by a unit
fraction. A fter students have learned this m inim um set of
five productions, they will need help identifying the group
size of non-unit fractions and m ixed num bers, identifying
the num ber of sm aller divisions in bigger divisions if both
num bers contain fractions, and converting rem ainders to
fractionalvalues when needed.
A fter students have experience with the picture division
strategy, the com m on denom inator strategy can be
introduced as a m ore general and efficient strategy.
Initially, the com m on denom inator strategy can be tightly
grounded by the picture division strategy,and then itcan be
abstracted to a m ore efficientalgorithm . Both the grounded
and abstract versions of the com m on denom inator strategy
are illustrated in Table 6. The strategy has five m ain subgoals: 1) identify the initialvalues,2)find the totalnum ber
of divisions in the starting am ount (which m ay involve
finding a com m on denom inator for the dividend and
divisor), 3) identify the size of each group (with this
com m on denom inator), 4) divide the total num ber of
division by the group size, 5) sim plify the answer. A fter
identifying the initial values, students m ust figure out the
total num ber of divisions in the starting am ount, which is
analogous to m arking the divisions and counting the total
num ber of divisions. To identify the group size, students
m ust m ake sure the divisor is a fraction that has the sam e
num ber of parts-per-whole (denom inator) as the dividend.
N ext, the num ber of groups is found by dividing the total
num ber of divisions by the group size (i.e.dividing the two
num erators), which is analogous to m arking the groups on
the picture and counting the num ber of groups. This leads
to an answer in appropriate fractional form , although the
answer m ay need to be converted from an im properfraction
Table 6: Exam ple ofcom m on denom inatorstrategy for
solving 1 1/2 ÷ 3/4
G rounded approach:
Because 1/2 = 2/4,and 1 whole = 4 fourths,1 1/2 = 6/4.
now have:6/4 ÷ 3/4
In 6/4,there are 2 groups of3/4,so the answeris 2.
A bstractapproach:
Equivalentfractions:1/2 = 2/4
M ixed to fraction:have 1 2/4:1 * 4 = 4;4 + 2 = 6,so 6/4
N ow have 6/4 ÷ 3/4
6 ÷ 3 = 2;4 ÷ 4 = 1
A nswer is 2/1,and because any num ber divided by 1 is that
num ber,the answeris 2.

to a m ixed num bers. A fter linking this strategy to the
picture division strategy, a m ore form al, sym bol-based
strategy can be abstracted,which relies on converting whole
and m ixed num bers to fractions and finding fractions with a
com m on denom inator and then dividing the num erators and
denom inators. This strategy retains the quantity-based
representations of the picture division strategy while being
m ore efficientand generalthan this strategy. W e have used
these analyses to design a setoflessons on fraction division
that integrate all three strategies,and we are piloting these
lessons with sixth grade students who have no prior
experience with fraction division.
In sum m ary, cognitive m odeling is a prom ising tool for
evaluating alternative strategies and techniques that can be
leveraged in the developm ent of better curriculum m aterial
and instructionalapproaches.

A cknow ledgm ents
This work was supported by N IM H /N RSA training grant5
T32 M H 19983-02 and by a grant from Carnegie Learning.
W e would like to thank Jay Raspatand his students atN orth
H ills Junior H igh for participating in the em pirical study
and Juan Casares, A aron Powers and W illie W heeler for
their help with the cognitive m odel for the picture division
strategy.

R eferences
A nderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the m ind. H illsdale, N .J.:
Erlbaum .
A nderson,J.R.,Corbett,A .,K oedinger,K .R.,& Pelletier,
R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned. Journal of
the Learning Sciences,4,167-207.
Craik, F.I.M ., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of
processing. A fram ework for m em ory research. Journal
ofVerbalLearning and VerbalBehavior,11,671-684.
Jakwerth, P. (1999) TIM SS Perform ance A ssessm ent
Results:U nited States.Studies in EducationalEvaluation,
25,277-281.
Lesh, R. & Landau, M . (Eds.) (1983). Acquisition of
m athem atical concepts and processes. N ew Y ork:
A cadem ic Press.
Lindquist, M .M . (1989). Results from the Fourth
M athem atics Assessm ent of the National Assessm ent of
EducationalProgress.Reston,V A :N CTM .
N ational Council of Teachers of M athem atics. (2000).
Principles and standards for school m athem atics.
Reston,V a:N CTM .
Paivio,A .(1971). Im agery and verbalprocess. N ew Y ork:
H olt,Rinehart& W inston.

