UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using a Triad Judgment Task to Exam ine the Effect of Experience on Problem
Representation in Statistics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jp2n3z9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Rabinowitz, Mitchell
Hogan, Tracy M.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

U sing a Triad Judgm entTask to Exam ine the EffectofExperience on Problem
R epresentation in Statistics
M itchellR abinow itz (m rabinow itz@ fordham .edu)
G raduate SchoolofEducation,Fordham U niversity
N ew Y ork,N Y 10023 U SA

Tracy M .H ogan (tehogan@ fordham .edu)
G raduate SchoolofEducation,Fordham U niversity
N ew Y ork,N Y 10023 U SA

A bstract
This research investigated w hether the differences found
betw een novices and experts in using surface and deep
structures to categorize problem s applied to the dom ain
ofstatistics.A lso explored w as w hetherthe m ethodology
of a triad judgm ent task w as reliable in discrim inating
how beginning and advanced students representstatistics
problem s. The task w as designed in w hich source
problem s shared either structural features (t-test,
correlation, or chi-square) or surface sim ilarity (story
narrative) w ith the targetproblem .G raduate students (N
= 101) w ith varying levels of experience in the dom ain
of statistics w ere asked to chose w hich source problem
“goes best” w ith the target problem for each triad.
Students w ith advanced experience in statistics tended to
represent the problem s on the basis of deep, structural
features w hile beginning students tended to rely on
surface features. D iscussion on the effectiveness of the
m ethodology em ployed and potential uses in other
dom ains is presented.

Introduction
Students learning statistics are required to learn a setof
interacting skills. First, they need to becom e fam iliar
w ith statistical procedures and how to use them
(com puting form ulas).Second,they need to be able to
recognize w hen to use those statisticalprocedures.The
firstsetof skills is proceduralin nature,i.e.,they need
to learn form ulas and know how to execute the
com putation (orthe statisticalpackages).The lattertype
of skillis representational,i.e.,they need to be able to
perceive and represent features w ithin contexts that
suggestw hich procedures should be used.
Previous research (A delson, 1981; Chi, Feltovich &
G laser, 1981; Chase & Sim on, 1973; H ardim an,
D urfresne & M estre, 1989; Schoenfeld & H errm ann,
1982) has show n that experts and novices w ithin a
dom ain represent problem s w ithin that dom ain on the
basis of a differentsetof features.Bransford,Brow n &
Cocking (1999) report that this difference,in part,lies
in know ledge organization. Expert know ledge centers
on core concepts and big ideas found w ithin the dom ain
w hile novices rely on isolated facts and do notconnect

these facts in a w ay that allow s them to generate
inferences. For exam ple, Chi and colleagues (1981)
found that participants w ith advanced experience in
physics sorted problem s in their discipline on the basis
of structuralfeatures,including the law s and principles
of physics. W hen asked to sort the sam e problem s,
novices represented, and subsequently sorted the
problem s on the basis of surface features, such as the
objectbeing m anipulated in the problem .
Q uilici and M ayer (1996) argue that w hile surface
features are generally m ore salient than structural
features for novices, successful analogical transfer is
dependentupon the recognition ofstructuralsim ilarities
am ong problem s. Consequently, they investigated the
role of exam ples in how students learn to categorize
statistic w ord problem s. Their findings suggest that
exposure to exam ples influences inexperienced
students’ structural schem a construction, particularly
w hen the exam ple problem s em phasize structural
characteristics versus surface characteristics. Q uilici
and M ayer contend that their study m erits further
research concerning the conditions under w hich
students rely on surface features or structure features in
categorizing problem s. In that Q uilici and M ayer’s
participants w ere lim ited to those w ith little or no
know ledge about statistics,further research concerning
the effect of experience on problem representation is
w arranted.
This study w as designed to replicate the
expert/novice
difference
in
perception
and
representational skill in the context of statistics
problem s.The purpose ofthis study w as tw o-fold.First,
the study investigated w hether the differences found
betw een novices and those w ith advanced experience in
statistics use surface and/or deep structures to
categorize problem s applied to the dom ain of statistics.
Second, this research explored w hether the
m ethodology of a triad judgm ent task w as reliable in
discrim inating how beginning and advanced students
represent statistics problem s. Consequently, this study
extended Q uilici and M ayer's research (1996) by
determ ining if those w ith advanced training in statistics

do indeed cue in on the structural features of a
statisticalw ord problem .
To com plete this extension,a triad judgm enttask w as
designed and adm inistered to individuals w ith varying
levels of statisticalexperience.A ccording to H ardim an,
D ufresne & M estre (1989), the triad judgm ent task
offers several advantages over the traditional sorting
task used in previous research (Chiet.al,1981;Q uilici
& M ayer, 1996). First, participants are able to
concentrate on individual problem sets rather than
being presented w ith a stack of cards to sort
sim ultaneously.Second,the task allow s for large-group
adm inistration and ease in scoring. The design of the
triad task in this study w as sim ilar in nature to that
em ployed by H ardim an and colleagues’ research
(1989). H ow ever, it differed in that this research
exam ined problem representation in the dom ain of
statistics w hile theirs w as grounded in the field of
m echanics.
The judgm ent task required participants to identify
w hich of tw o given source problem s “goes best” w ith a
targetproblem (Figure 1).The source problem s shared

students w ith varying levels of experience in the
dom ain ofstatistics.W e hypothesized thatstudents w ith
m ore advanced statistical experience w ould
predom inantly represent problem s based on structural
features w hile students w ith less statistical experience
w ould tend to represent the problem s based on surface
features.
M ethod

Participants
The participants w ere 101 graduate students w ith a
varied am ountofexperience in statistics.Those w ith no
prior statistics courses totaled 27 participants, 33
participants com pleted one course, 13 finished tw o
courses, 10 had com pleted three courses, six
participants com pleted four courses, eight participants
finished five courses, three participants had com pleted
six courses and one participantcom pleted eightcourses.
A ll individuals w ho volunteered to participate in this
study earned course extra-credit.

Problem Task
TargetProblem

Source Problem 1

Source Problem 2

Figure 1
Structure ofTriad Problem s
eithersim ilarsurface features orstructuralfeatures w ith
the targetproblem .Surface features w ere sim ilarin that
the story narrative shared com m on characteristics w hile
sim ilar structural features involved the requirem ent of
the sam e statistical test (t-test, correlation and chisquare). Surface features included sim ilar story
characters (personnel expert, m eteorologist, college
dean
and
psychologist)
and
sim ilar
dependent/independent variables (w ords typed per
m inute/experience of typists, annual rainfall/average
yearly tem perature, grade point average/reading score,
num ber of errors on a test/am ount of sleep). The
structural features included the nature of the
independent variable (one group or tw o independent
groups) and the nature of the dependent variable
(continuous orcategorical).
U sing the statistics w ord problem s from Q uilici and
M ayer’s study (1996), 18 triads w ere designed to
investigate w hether this judgm ent task w ould
discrim inate betw een those representing the problem s
using deep, structural features w ith those relying on
surface features.To do this,w e adm inistered the task to

A triad judgm ent task w as used to investigate the
features that people use to represent com m on statistics
problem s. The task involved the presentation of three
statistical problem statem ents- one target problem and
tw o source problem s. Participants w ere asked to read
each set and judge w hich of the tw o source problem s
“goes best” w ith the targetproblem .Com parisons w ere
based upon tw o features:surface and structure.Surface
features w ere defined by the narrative characteristics
(i.e., “A fter com paring w eather data for the last 50
years,a m eteorologistclaim s...”) and structuralfeatures
w ere defined by requisite statistical tests (t-test,
correlation,chi-square).
There w ere three sets of com parison types that
participants w ere asked to evaluate (A ppendix). In the
first com parison, one source problem shared only
sim ilar surface features to the targetproblem w hile the
other source problem shared only sim ilar structural
features. Thus, Com parison O ne w as considered
Sim ilar N arrative / D issim ilar Structure - Sim ilar
Structure /D issim ilarN arrative (SN /D S-SS/D N ).In the
second com parison, one source problem shared no
sim ilarities in either surface or structure w hile the other
shared only sim ilar structure to the target problem .
Thus,Com parison Tw o w as considered
D issim ilar N arrative / D issim ilar Structure - Sim ilar
Structure/D issim ilar N arrative (D N /D S-SS/D N ). In the
third com parison, one source problem shared only
sim ilar surface features to the targetproblem w hile the
other shared neither surface nor structural sim ilarities.
Thus, Com parison Three w as considered Sim ilar
N arrative /D issim ilar Structure - D issim ilar Structure /

D issim ilar N arrative (SN /D S-D S/D N ).Each participant
w as presented six triads percom parison fora totalof18
triads.

Procedure
Participants w ere given a packet that contained the 18
triad problem s and a cover sheet. O n the cover sheet,
the participants recorded background inform ation
including prior statistics courses, education level, and
gender. Participants w ere tested during class and w ere
given as m uch tim e as needed to com plete the task.

Scoring
A m axim um score of 18 points, at six points per
com parison type w as possible.Participants scored one
pointper triad under Com parison O ne (SN /D S-SS/D N )
and Com parison Tw o (D N /D S-SS/D N ) if they selected
on the basis of structural features. For Com parison
Three (SN /D S-D S/D N ),participants scored one pointif
they selected sim ilar surface features in that neither
com parison problem s shared structuralfeatures w ith the
targetproblem .Thus,a higher score im plies a tendency
tow ards choosing the structural dim ension or the
surface dim ension w here appropriate.
R esults
A correlation analysis w as conducted to exam ine in
greater depth the relationships betw een the level of
experience (as m easured by the num ber of statistics
courses an individual com pleted) and the three
com parison types. Findings suggest a significant
relationship betw een num berofcourses and totalscore,
r = .39,p < .01.This suggests thatthe m ore experience
an individual has in statistics,the m ore likely they are
to m ake m ore structural com parisons betw een tw o
statisticalpassages.
W hile there w as a significantcorrelation betw een the
num ber of courses com pleted and total score on the
triad judgm ent task, there w ere differences found
am ong the three com parison types. Specifically, only
Com parison O ne (SN /D S-SS/D N ) and Com parison
Tw o (D N /D S-SS/D N ) w ere significantly correlated
w ith the num berofcourses (r= .35,p < 01,r= .39,p <
.01,respectively).These results,taken together,suggest
thatthe m ore experience one has in statistics,the m ore
likely he/she is to group statistical passages according
to sim ilar m ethodologies. A s expected, there w as no
significant correlation betw een experience level and
Com parison Three (SN /D S-D S/D N ). If neither of the
tw o source problem s shared structuralfeatures w ith the
target problem , individuals, regardless of experience,
choose upon the basis ofsurface features.
In addition, to investigate w hether individuals w ith
m ore experience in statistics perform ed differently on
the three com parison types as did novices, a repeated

m easures A N O V A w as conducted. Individuals w ere
grouped into three levels ofexperience in the dom ain of
statistics. Level O ne included participants w ho had
taken either zero or one course (n=60), Level Tw o
reflected participants that had com pleted either tw o or
three courses (n=23) and Level Three included
participants that had com pleted four or m ore statistics
courses (n=18). M eans and standard deviations for
scores on the three com parison types for each
experience levelare presented in Table 1.The
Table 1: M eans and Standard D eviations for
Com parison Type by Experience Level.
Level

n

O ne
Tw o
Three

60
23
18

Type I
M
SD
1.73 1.68
2.13 1.94
3.44 1.61

Type II
M
SD
3.87 1.24
4.04 .88
4.94 1.06

Type III
M
SD
4.87 1.32
4.52 1.20
4.16 1.50

significant interaction betw een experience level and
com parison type suggests a relationship betw een the
level of experience and the w ay the individual
represents the particularstatisticalproblem , F (2,98)=
4.94,p < .01.Tukey’s H SD testindicated thatthose in
level three perform ed significantly different than those
in levels one and tw o. The significant m ain effect of
experience level indicates that individuals w ith m ore
training in statistics represent statistical passages in
w ays that are m ore expert,F (2, 98) = 6.67,p < .01.
The significantm ain effectofcom parison type suggests
that individuals, regardless of level of experience, do
not respond in the sam e w ay to the different problem s
found in the triad judgm enttask,F (2,98)= 44.89,p <
.01.
D iscussion
In this study, tw o questions w ere tackled. The first
question w as,H ow do beginning and advanced students
in statistics com pare in the w ay they representstatistical
w ord problem s? The analyses revealed several
contrasts. It w as show n that those w ith advanced
experience tended to look for sim ilar deep structures in
the w ord problem s presented w ithin the triads.
Conversely, the findings suggest that novices relied
m ore heavily on the surface features to m atch a source
problem w ith a target problem . H ow ever, w hen
presented w ith com parisons types w here neither of the
source problem s shared deep structural features w ith
the target problem , all students, regardless of
experience, selected on the basis of sim ilar surface
features.
The second question w as,Can a triad judgm ent task
be used to reliably discrim inate how beginning and
advanced students representstatistics w ord problem s on

either the basis of structural features or surface
features? O n the basis of earlier research (Chi,
Feltovich & G laser, 1981; H ardim an, D urfresne &
M estre, 1989), w e reasoned that those w ith advanced
training in statistics w ould m ake selections based on
structural features w hile those w ith less training w ould
select on the basis of surface features in a triad
judgm ent task. Findings w ere consistent w ith our
prediction. This suggests that the triad judgm ent task
m ay indeed be a prom ising m ethodology to em ploy in
studies w here sorting tasks are traditionally used.
This study yields im plications for educators of
statistics. First, instruction in statistics should address
the nature of problem s and their structuralcom ponents
(e.g.,type of data presented and the driving question of
the problem ).Second,learners should be provided w ith
explicit instruction in recognizing sim ilarities of
problem s based on core concepts, a skill requisite of
experts (Bransford,Brow n and Cocking,1999).
This study certainly contributes to the relatively
narrow research base ofexperts-novices in statistics,yet
further studies are needed. Specifically, m ore studies
are needed to explore the circum stances that prom ote
the transition from using surface characteristics to deep
structuralfeatures in representing problem s.
R eferences
A delson, B. (1981). Problem solving and the
developm ent of abstract categories in program m ing
languages.M em ory & Cognition,9,422-433.
Bransford,J.D .,Brow n,A .L.,& Cocking,R.R.(Eds.).
(1999).H ow people learn: Brain, m ind, experience,
and school. W ashington D C: N ational A cadem y
Press.
Chase, W .G ., & Sim on, H .A . (1973). Perception in
chess.Cognitive Psychology,4,55-81.
Chi, M .T.H ., Feltovich, P.J., & G laser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics
problem s by experts and novices.Cognitive Science,
5,121-152.
H ardim an, P.T., D ufresne, R., & M estre, J.P. (1989).
The relation betw een problem categorization and
problem solving am ong experts and novices.M em ory
and Cognition,17,627-638.
Q uilici,J.L.,& M ayer,R.E.(1996).Role of exam ples
in how students learn to categorize statistics w ord
problem s. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88,
144-161.
Rabinow itz, M ., & G laser, R. (1985). Cognitive
structure and process in highly com petent
perform ance. In F.D . H orow itz and M . O ’Brien
(Eds.), The gifted and talented: A developm ental
perspective.
W ashington
D C:
A m erican
PsychologicalA ssociation.
Shoenfeld, A .H ., & H errm ann, D .J. (1982). Problem
perception and know ledge structure in expert and
novice m athem atical problem solvers. Journal of

Experim ental Psychology: Learning, M em ory, &
Cognition,8,484-494.
A ppendix
Com parison O ne: Sim ilar N arrative/D issim ilar
Structure - Sim ilar Structure/D issim ilar N arrative
(SN /D S-SS/D N )
Target: A fter exam ining w eather data for the last 50
years, a m eteorologist claim s that the annual
precipitation is m ore likely to be above average in years
w hen the tem perature is above average than w hen
tem perature is below average.For each of the 50 years,
she notes w hether the annualrainfallis above or below
average and w hether the tem perature is above or below
average.
Source 1:A fter exam ining w eather data for the last50
years, a m eteorologist claim s that the annual
precipitation varies w ith the average tem perature.For
each of 50 years, she notes the annual rainfall and
average tem perature.
Source 2: A college dean claim s that a group of good
readers contains m ore honors students than a group of
poor readers. For each of 100 first year college
students, a reading com prehension test w as used to
determ ine w hether the student w as a good or poor
reader and grade point average (G PA ) w as used to
determ ine w hether or not the student w as an honors
student.
Com parison Tw o: D issim ilar N arrative/D issim ilar
Structure – Sim ilar Structure/D issim ilar N arrative
(D N /D S-SS/D N )
Target: A college dean claim s that good readers earn
better grades than poor readers. The grade point
averages (G PA ) are recorded for 50 first-year students
w ho scored high on a reading com prehension test and
for 50 first-year students w ho scored low on a reading
com prehension test.
Source 1: A psychologist tests the hypothesis that
people w ho are fatigued also lack m entalalertness.A n
attention test is prepared w hich requires subjects to sit
in front of a blank TV screen and press a response
button each tim e a dotappears on the screen.A totalof
110 dots are presented during a 90-m inute period,and
the psychologist records the num ber of errors for each
subject. Tw enty subjects are selected; half are tested
after being keptaw ake for 24 hours and half are tested
in the m orning after a full night's sleep. Based on the
num ber of errors on their test, each subject is also
labeled as high orlow in m entalalertness.
Source 2: A personnel expert w ishes to determ ine
whether experienced typists are able to type faster than
inexperienced typists.Tw enty experienced typists (i.e.,
w ith 5 or m ore years of experience) and 20

inexperienced typists (i.e., w ith less than 5 years of
experience)are given a typing test.Each typists average
num berofw ords typed perm inute is recorded.
Com parison Three: Sim ilar N arrative/D issim ilar
Structure - D issim ilar Structure/D issim ilar N arrative
(SN /D S-D S/D N )
Target: A fter exam ining w eather data for the last 50
years, a m eteorologist claim s that the annual
precipitation varies w ith the average tem perature. For
each of 50 years, she notes the annual rainfall and
average tem perature.
Source 1:A fter exam ining w eather data for the last50
years, a m eteorologist claim s that the annual
precipitation is greater in years w ith below average
tem perature than in years w ith above average
tem perature.She notes the annualrainfallforeach of25
years thathad above average tem peratures as w ellas 25
years thathad below average tem peratures.
Source 2: A psychologist tests the hypothesis that
people w ho are fatigued also lack m entalalertness.A n
attention test is prepared w hich requires subjects to sit
in front of a blank TV screen and press a response
button each tim e a dotappears on the screen.A totalof
110 dots are presented during a 90-m inute period,and
the psychologist records the num ber of errors for each
subject. Tw enty subjects are selected; half are tested
after being keptaw ake for 24 hours and half are tested
in the m orning after a full night's sleep. Based on the
num ber of errors on their test, each subject is also
labeled as high orlow in m entalalertness.

