UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When knowledge is unconscious because of conscious knowledge and vice versa

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gz4t1s4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Dienes, Zoltan
Perner, Josef

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When knowledge is unconscious because of conscious knowledge and vice
versa
Zoltan Dienes (dienes@biols.susx.ac.uk)
Experimental Psychology, Sussex University
Brighton BN1 9QG England

Josef Perner (Josef.Perner@sbg.ac.at)
Institut fuer Psychologie, Universitaet Salzburg
A-5020 Salzburg Austria

Abstract
This paper will offer a framework and a methodology for
determining whether subjects have conscious or
unconscious knowledge. The implicit-explicit distinction
will be related to consciousness using the framework of
Dienes & Perner (1999; 2001a,b,c) and the higher-order
thought theory of Rosenthal (1986, 2000). Whether a
mental state is conscious or not depends on whether
certain inferences are unconscious or not, in a way we
will specify; this is the interaction between implicit and
explicit knowledge we will consider. The arguments will
be illustrated with the artificial grammar learning
paradigm from the implicit learning literature.

Introduction
In this paper we will argue that there is an intimate
and generally unappreciated interaction between
implicit and explicit knowledge that occurs all the time.
Consideration of this interaction is important in
determining whether a subject possesses conscious or
unconscious states of knowledge. To make the
argument, in the first section below we will overview
the framework of Dienes and Perner (1999, 2001a,b,c)
for understanding the implicit-explicit distinction in
terms of the properties of representations. We will take
an everyday use of the implicit-explicit distinction and
apply it in a particular way to what it is to represent
something. Given a representational theory of
knowledge, this produces a hierarchy of ways in which
knowledge can be implicit or explicit. We will then use
the higher-order thought theory of Rosenthal (1986,
2000) to show full explicitness is almost the
requirement for mental states of knowing to be
conscious. There is one further stipulation above and
beyond full-explicitness needed for consciousness and
it is this that shows the importance of an interaction
between implicit and explicit knowledge in producing
conscious or unconscious states. We will discuss this
relationship and illustrate how subjects’ knowledge of
an artificial grammar could be shown to be conscious or
unconscious (in fact we will argue that the evidence

shows that subjects can acquire fully unconscious
knowledge).

Implicitly vs Explicitly Representing
Dienes and Perner’s (1999, 2001a,b,c) framework could
be structured as semi-independent modules: a notion of
representation, a notion of the implicit-explicit
distinction, the hierarchy of implicitness, and a theory
of consciousness. To a degree, one can reject one of the
modules and still accept the others to build an
understanding
of
implicit
knowledge
and
consciousness. We begin first with the notion of
representation: In order to be clear how one might
explicitly or implicitly represent something we need to
be clear about what it is to represent something. In this
we follow the functional theories of representation. For
example, according to Millikan (1984, 1993), there
must be a producer of the representation that has as its
function that it brings about a mapping from the
representation to a state of affairs. For example, in a bee
dance, the bee can produce a dance such that the angle
of the dance maps onto the location of the nectar.
Further there will be consumers of the representation
that perform various functions as they react to it. But
they can only perform their functions under normal
conditions if the representation does indeed map onto a
certain state of affairs: This state of affairs is the
content of the representation. This is what we mean by
a representation. On this account, representations do not
need to have further properties (e.g. compositional
semantics) to be representations. The weights of a
connectionist network are representations: They must
map onto statistical regularities in the world in a certain
way for the consumers of these weights to perform their
functions, so the weights represent statistical
regularities. What is it for a representation to represent
something implicitly or explicitly, and what makes
some representations conscious (those that have the
contents that are the contents of our consciousness)
while other representations are unconscious?

A bee dance represents the location of nectar. We say
it represents location explicitly, because variations in
the representational medium (angle of dance) map onto
variations in location. However, it does not explicitly
represent that it is about nectar: There is nothing in the
medium that varies with whether it is nectar that it is
about or something else. We say it represents the fact
that it is about nectar only implicitly. Just so, in
everyday terms when one answers the question "what is
this?" to a succession of animals, and responds with the
statement "cat" (or "dog" etc), the statement explicitly
represents the property of being a cat, because
variations in the representational medium (words) map
precisely into variations in this content. The statement
implies that it is this that is a cat, but it does not say so
explicitly: There is not a part of the medium that varies
directly with this rather than that being a cat.
Now consider what it is to have knowledge. In
general knowledge consists of a proposition ("this word
has the meaning butter") towards which you have an
attitude of knowing. One can know without making all
of these components of knowledge explicit. One can
represent the proposition explicitly but not the fact that
it is knowledge. It can in fact be knowledge (because it
is taken as true and acted upon) without there being a
representation that goes into one state for it being
knowledge and another state if it is not knowledge.
Minimally one could just make explicit the property
without making explicit the individual that has this
property (compare the bee dance). In subliminal
perception we argue that it is indeed just a property of a
presented word that is represented explicitly e.g. having
the meaning "butter". There is no representation with
the content "I see that the word in front of me has the
meaning butter" so this cannot be the content of any
experience of the subject; but the representation of
merely "butter" can allow the subject to e.g. say
"butter" as the first dairy product that comes to mind.
At the next stage, the full proposition is made explicit
("The word in front of me has the meaning butter").
This stage involves the binding of features to
individuals. At the next stage the factuality or otherwise
of the proposition is made explicit ("it is a fact that the
word in front of me has the meaning butter"). This is
precisely the developmental milestone that occurs in a
child’s representational capacity at about 18 months
(Perner, 1991), and is needed for appreciating
hypotheticals, changing temporal states of affairs (and
hence is necessary for explicit memory), and counterfactual reasoning. At the final stage the propositional
attitude by which one holds the proposition is made
explicit ("I see that the word in front of me has the
meaning butter"). This is full self and attitude
explicitness. We argue that this is necessary for
knowledge to be conscious knowledge. This link from

full explicitness to consciousness is made via the higher
order thought theory of consciousness (Rosenthal,
1986, 2000; Carruthers, 1992, 2000).

The Higher-Order Thought Theory
Rosenthal (1986, 2000) develops an account of when
a mental state is a conscious mental state. He argues
that when one is in a conscious mental state one is
conscious of that mental state. It would be
inconceivable to claim that one is in a conscious state
of, for example, seeing the word butter, while at the
same time denying being conscious of seeing the word
butter. So the question is, how does one become
conscious of mental states? The relevant way,
Rosenthal argues, is to think about them. We become
conscious of our seeing the word butter when we think
that we are seeing the word butter. That is, when we are
consciously seeing the word butter, we have a thought
like "I see that the word is butter". Because this thought
(this mental state) is about another mental state
(seeing), it is called a higher order thought. Note that
this higher order thought is just our requirement for
knowledge to be fully explicit: There is a natural
relationship between explicitness and consciousness.

A Method For Determining Unconscious
States
These considerations show that knowledge states being
conscious or not is essentially a metacognitive issue
(Dienes & Perner, 2001b). Roughly, simply knowing
something and hence being able to respond
discriminatively does not make the knowing a
conscious mental state; for the latter, one must know
that one knows. Metacognition has both a monitoring
and a control aspect, and both of these aspects can be
used to form methodologies for determining the
conscious status of knowledge via an analysis of the
relationship of different types of control and monitoring
to the hierarchy of implicitness (Dienes & Perner,
2001b). Here we will focus exclusively on monitoring;
the criterion for a state being conscious or unconscious
is essentially that of the subjective threshold in the
subliminal perception literature (Cheesman & Merikle,
1984).
Consider a subject in an artificial grammar learning
experiment (Reber, 1967, 1989). The subject is exposed
to strings of letters generated by a finite state grammar
and asked to memorize them. After some minutes
exposure, the subject is told actually there was a set of
complex rules that determined the order of letters
within the strings, and could they now classify a new
set of strings as obeying the rules or not. Reber found
that subjects could do so above chance but they found it
difficult to say what the rules were. How could we

determine whether their knowledge is actually
unconscious?
When subjects classify a test string they bring to bear
their knowledge of the grammar to produce a new piece
of knowledge: Whether this string is grammatical or
not. We must distinguish these different knowledge
contents: knowledge of the grammar, and knowledge of
a particular string being grammatical (the
grammaticality judgement).
When subjects make grammaticality judgements to
the same strings several times they respond with
different degrees of consistency to different strings
(Reber, 1989; Dienes, Kurz, Bernhaupt, & Perner,
1997). For some strings the subject responds highly
consistently, for others the subject may give a
"grammatical" or "non-grammatical" response with
50% probability. Our interpretation of this fact is that
subjects are in different knowledge states about the
different test strings. Regardless of whether they have
induced the same grammar as the experimenter or not
(in fact, their grammar is correlated with the
experimenter’s grammar), the subjects themselves are
treating themselves as being in different knowledge
states about different strings. But have they
conceptualized themselves as being in those different
knowledge states? That is, have they formed attitudeexplicit representations - higher-order thoughts - about
those states? (Note that it was important to establish
that there were different knowledge states before this
question could be asked.)
When confidence ratings are taken after each
classification decision, subjects can classify at above
chance rates even when they claim they are literally
guessing (for a review see Dienes & Berry, 1997).
Further, under some conditions, there will be no withinsubject relationship between confidence and accuracy:
Subject do not know about the different knowledge
states they are in fact in (Dienes & Berry, 1997; see
Dienes & Perner, 2001c for this finding with a contextfree grammar). Their knowledge is attitude-implicit,
and hence unconscious.

The Crucial Interaction Between Conscious
and Unconscious Knowledge
Consider now two objections one may have to assessing
unconscious knowledge with confidence ratings. First,
Allwood, Granhag, Johansson (in press) found the
normal evidence for attitude-implicit knowledge in an
artificial grammar learning experiment when the typical
amount of learning and testing was used. In a second
experiment that involved greater exposure to strings at
learning and test subjects’ confidence and accuracy was
well-calibrated and so the knowledge seemed entirely
atittude-explicit, despite the authors’ feeling that the

fundamental nature of subjects’ knowledge had not
changed. Allwood et al suggest that confidence ratings
can come to be based on implicit knowledge as much as
explicit knowledge, and this possibility undermines the
usefulness of a dissociation between confidence and
accuracy as a measure of implicit knowledge. Second,
there is the standard objection to subjective measures of
consciousness: Are they not dependent on the
vicissitudes of subjects’ idiosyncratic theories of
consciousness, knowledge, etc (e.g. Shanks & St John,
1994)? This second objection is taken up in Dienes &
Perner (2001a) and especially Twyman and Dienes
(2001); we will develop a different, complementary
response in this paper. To address these objections we
need to return to a subtlety of the higher-order thought
theory that we glossed over.
Rosenthal argues that to make a mental state
conscious, the higher order thought must assert that one
is in the state and it must not arise from any inferences
of which we are conscious. That final stipulation is
crucial. If I am driving along and swerve, and wonder
why I swerved, I might think "I must have swerved
because I saw that truck". That thought is a higher order
thought about one being in a mental state of seeing.
But it does not make the original seeing conscious; it
does not make it conscious precisely because it arose
from an inference of which one was conscious.
A mental state is conscious if we are non-inferentially
conscious of it; the mental state would be unconscious
if we were conscious of the mental state only by virtue
of inferences of which we are conscious. This is just
why blindsight patients’ seeing is still unconscious even
though they may consciously infer they must be seeing
"because the experimenter tells me I am consistently
correct." They have a higher-order thought that they are
seeing, but our intuitions are that the seeing remains
unconscious; and it remains unconscious precisely
because the higher-order thought (the attitude explicit
representation) arose from an inference of which the
patient is conscious.
How do these considerations apply to determining
whether a subject in an experiment has acquired
conscious or unconscious knowledge? One has to be
careful when the mental state is knowing, because
knowing need not refer to an occurrent mental state at
all. Knowing is often used in a dispositional sense: if
you are asked if you know your times tables, that does
not mean to say you are actively thinking about them
now; the question is just whether you could do so
accurately if asked. We will see how this can lead to a
paradox.
Imagine a person is asked a general knowledge
question and they believe they know the answer. The
person is asked "Why do you conclude that you know

that?" When a person consciously knows something
they might be able to provide conscious inferences by
means of which they conclude that they know. They
might justify their knowledge as knowledge because
e.g. " I can describe the reasoning by which I drew the
conclusion"; "I remember the event in which a trusted
authority told me the knowledge"; or, more generally, "I
can consciously link the knowing to some conscious
perception."
These conscious inferences do not make the
knowledge unconscious. (Further, they are not essential
for the knowledge being conscious either: I might not
know why I know something, I just insist that I know
it.) This seems to go against the conclusion that mental
states are only conscious if one knows about them by
inferences of which one is unconscious.
The problem arises because knowing is not an
occurrent mental state. An occurrent mental state
associated with knowing is "thinking with conviction"
or "thinking with a certain degree of conviction". Even
if a person is aware of the inferences by which they
know something, they just directly know that "I am
thinking with conviction" if the thinking is a conscious
state. In answer to the question "How do you know you
are thinking with conviction?" one does not need to list
the inferences that justify the knowledge as knowledge;
they are not inferences leading to the conclusion that
one is thinking with conviction. One just directly knows
that one is thinking with conviction if the thinkingwith-conviction is a conscious mental state. It is a
conscious state because the inferences, if any, by which
one ascertained that one was in the state were
unconscious.
In answer to the question "Why do you conclude that
you know that?" a person might provide conscious
inferences by means of which they conclude they know
something by observing their behaviour: "I respond
consistently, quickly or effectively". For example, a
person may select the correct capital of a country, let’s
presume, due to being in an unconscious state of
thinking-with-conviction. This state makes the person
respond consistently and quickly; the state of thinkingwithout-conviction (let’s presume) makes the person
respond inconsistently and slowly. The person does not
know he is in a state of thinking with conviction at first;
but he consciously infers from the speed with which
the answer came to him that he must have been in an
occurrent state of knowing. Because he is conscious of
this inference, the state is unconscious. If the same
inference had been drawn for the same reason but
unconsciously, his thinking-with-conviction would be a
conscious mental state. In this sense, explicit
knowledge of ones mental state depends on that explicit
knowledge being produced only implicitly; for

example, only with inferences that are themselves
implicitly represented. This is the crucial interaction
between implicit and explicit knowledge we wish to
dwell on.
Applying these notions to artificial grammar learning,
consider a subject who sees a test string, applies
knowledge-of-the-grammar, classifies the test string as
grammatical or not (knowledge-of-the-test-string), and
then gives a confidence rating.
Subjects’ different degrees of consistency to different
test strings show that subjects, when classifying
different strings, are in states of thinking with different
degrees of conviction. If subjects confidence ratings are
unrelated to their consistency then their higher order
thoughts (confidence ratings) are not sensitive to their
actual mental states of thinking with more or less
conviction ("knowledge states", for short). We have
taken this to be evidence of the knowledge states being
unconscious. In fact, however, in some cases they will
be in a state of thinking-with-a-lot-of-conviction and
give a high confidence rating; in these cases, they do
have a higher-order thought (attitude-explicit
knowledge) to the effect that they are in a state that they
are in; so if the confidence rating came to them in a way
that appeared unmediated, the state would be a
conscious state. If confidence ratings appear
unmediated to the subject, the lack of relationship
between confidence and consistency implies some
knowledge is unconscious, even though it allows some
knowledge to be conscious. This is one refinement we
must add to our previous interpretation of a lack of
relationship between confidence and accuracy.
Now consider Allwood et al’s results. Demonstrating
a relationship between confidence and accuracy is not
sufficient for demonstrating that the knowledge is
conscious; one also needs to determine what the subject
believes the confidence ratings are based on. Strictly
speaking, if subjects base the ratings on inferences (e.g.
perceived reaction times, perceived fluency) of which
they are conscious, the knowledge states are still
unconscious. Although we are in progress with an
experiment that includes asking subjects to report on
the bases of their confidence ratings, we regard this
more as a means for us as psychologists to generate
ideas, rather than as a test of the conscious status of
their knowledge; the latter needs to be methodologically
simpler. A lack of relationship between confidence and
accuracy does imply that at least some of the
knowledge states are unconscious, and so this remains a
valuable criterion.
If subjects’ ratings are based on explicit inferences,
including the products of implicit knowledge (e.g.
fluency), the knowledge states are unconscious; if
confidence ratings come to be based on implicit

knowledge in a way that appears unmediated to the
subject, and hence confidence is calibrated with
accuracy, then the states of knowledge are conscious.
The knowledge states referred to here are knowledge
about the grammatical status of test strings. Even if
these knowledge states were all conscious, it would
leave open the possibility that knowledge of the
grammar was unconscious.
Thus, Allwood et al’s intuitions that subjects in their
experiment two still had, in some sense, implicit
knowledge could be due to (a) despite the subjects’ well
calibrated confidence ratings, this calibration was based
on conscious inferences regarding the mental state the
subjects must have been in (states of knowing the
grammatical status of strings), and so those mental
states were still in fact unconscious; or (b) the mental
states of knowing the grammatical status of the strings
were in fact conscious (the confidence ratings were not
based on conscious inferences), but the mental states of
knowing the grammatical rules were not conscious;
subjects did not have non-inferential higher order
thoughts about being in those latter states.
If subjects’ become conscious of their mental states
responsible for grammaticality judgements, methods of
using confidence ratings for grammatcaility judgements
can no longer be used to show knowledge of
grammatcal rules is unconscious. Dienes and Perner
(2001b) discuss how to measure implicit knowledge
under these conditions.
Rosenthal (2000) discusses how higher order
thoughts need not be produced by a 100% reliable
means; however they are produced, so long as they
appear unmediated, they produce conscious awareness
of being in a certain mental state. The first order mental
state about which one has a second order thought need
not even exist for the subject to consciously experience
being in a certain state. Subjects’ higher-order thoughts
partly constitute their theories about their mental states;
such theories are not therefore a nuisance that get in our
way as experimenters; they are part of the very thing to
be investigated and explained.

Conclusion
We have argued for a second-order representational
account of consciousness. Consciousness can never be
produced just by, for example, a sustained pattern of
activation in a connectionist network per se (e.g.
O’Brien & Opie, 1999); the properties of the
representation must in certain respects be like those of
people to count as mental states and the system must be
able to refer to those states in further representations
(Perner & Dienes, 1999; see Dienes & Perner, 2001c
for discussion). Such considerations lead directly to
metacognitive measures of the consciousness of mental
states. Conscious states cannot be measured just by

discriminative responding, but only by evidence that the
subject is conscious of the mental state.
To summarize the argument of this paper, we have
taken two points made by Rosenthal regarding his
higher order thought theory; namely that (a) higher
order thoughts are occurrent states rather than
dispositional states (like knowing might be); and (b) the
higher order thoughts must not result from inferences of
which the person is conscious. These two points turn
out to have important implications for the measurement
of implicit or explicit knowledge in (for example) the
implicit learning literature. The contribution of this
paper is to show in detail the relevance of Rosenthal’s
theory to psychologists interested in determining the
conscious or unconscious status of mental states in (for
example) implicit learning studies.
We are conscious of mental states when our explicit
knowledge of them is based purely on implicit
knowledge, when the knowledge of being in the state
does not arise out of any inference of which we are
conscious. Note there is a symmetry here with volition;
we have voluntary control over an act only when the
intention produces the act by mechanisms of which we
are unconscious (Dienes & Perner, 2001b).
The importance of considering the conscious status of
the inferences leading to a judgement has also been
highlighted by Koriat (e.g. 1998). We hope we have
elucidated further implications of the interaction
between implicit and explicit inferences and implicit
and explicit knowledge states.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to David Rosenthal for valuable discussion
before this paper was written.

References
Allwood, C. M., Granhag, P. A., Johansson, H. (in
press). Realism in confidence judgements of
performance based on implicit learning. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology.
Carruthers, P. (1992). Consciousness and concepts.
Proceedings
of
the
Aristotelian
Society,
Supplementary Vol. LXVI, 42-59.
Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal consciousness
naturally. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheesman J. & Merikle, P. M. (1984). Priming with
and
without
awareness.
Perception
&
Psychophysics, 36, 387-395.
Dienes, Z., & Berry, D. (1997). Implicit learning: below
the subjective threshold. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 4, 3-23.
Dienes, Z., Kurz, A., Bernhaupt, R., & Perner, J.
(1997).
Application of implicit knowledge:
deterministic or probabilistic?
Psychologica
Belgica, 37, 89-112.

Dienes, Z., & Perner, J. (1999) A theory of implicit
and explicit knowledge. Behavioural and Brain
Sciences, 22, 735-755.
Dienes, Z., & Perner, J. (2001a) A theory of the implicit
nature of implicit learning. In Cleeremans, A., &
French, R. (Eds), Implicit learning. Psychology Press.
Dienes, Z., & Perner, J. (2001b). The metacognitive
implications of the implicit-explicit distinction. In
Chambres, P., Marescaux, P.-J., Izaute, M. (Eds),
Metacognition: Process, function, and use. Kluwer.
Dienes, Z., & Perner, J. (2001c). Unifying
consciousness with explicit knowledge. In
Cleeremans, A. (Ed.) The unity of consciousness:
binding, integration, and dissociation. Oxford
University Press.
Koriat, A. (1998). Metamemory: the feeling of knowing
and its vagaries. In M. Sabourin, F. Craik, & M.
Roberts (Eds), Advances in psychological science
(Vol. 2). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Millikan, R. G. (1984). Language, thought, and other
biological categories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Millikan, R. G. (1993). White queen psychology and
other essays for Alice. Cambridge, MA: Bradford
Books/MIT-Press.
O’Brien, G., & Opie, J. (1999). A connectionist theory
of phenomenal experience. Behavioural and Brain
Sciences, 22, 127-196.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational
mind.. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. A Bradford
Book.
Perner, J., and Dienes, Z. (1999) Higher order thinking.
Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 22, 164-165.
Reber, A.S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial
grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behaviour, 6, 855-863.
Reber, A.S. (1989). Implicit learning and tactic
knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 118, 219-235.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1986). Two concepts of
consciousness. Philosophical Studies, 49, 329-359.
Rosenthal, D.M. (2000).Consciousness, Content, and
Metacognitive Judgments, Consciousness and
Cognition, 9, 203-214.
Shanks, D. R. & St. John, M. F. (1994). Characteristics
of dissociable human learning systems. Behavioural
and Brain Sciences, 17, 367-448.
Twyman, M., & Dienes, Z. (2001). Metacognitive
Measures of Implicit Knowledge. 2001 Convention
of The Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence
and the Simulation of Behaviour (AISB), York
March 21st-24th.

