UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Behavioral and Computational Integration of Phonological, Short-Term Memory, and
Vocabulary Acquisition Processes in Nonword Repetition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6s38c8mr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Abbs, Brandon
Gupta, Prahlad
Tomblin, J. Bruce
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Behavioral and Computational Integration of Phonological, Short-Term Memory,
and Vocabulary Acquisition Processes in Nonword Repetition
Brandon Abbs (brandon-abbs@uiowa.edu)
Prahlad Gupta (prahlad-gupta@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

J. Bruce Tomblin (j-tomblin@uiowa.edu)
Department of Speech Pathology & Audiology, Wendell Johnson Speech & Hearing Center
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

John Lipinski (john-lipinski@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
One potential benefit to lexical growth suggested by
these perspectives is through a benefit to parsing abilities
as a result of enhanced stimulus acuity. The rapid rate of
speech transmission and the context-dependent nature of
speech perception makes one's perceptual ability in the
early stages of language acquisition, before lexical cues
can aid processing, an important part in parsing and
analyzing the audio-perceptual stream (Jusczyk, 2000, p.
204; Bates & MacWhinney, 1987). Having precise
representations of the auditory environment may
contribute to the development of an efficient recognition
system and aid in the formation of reliable mappings
between sound and meaning.
However, acuity may also hinder processing as the
lexicon grows by preventing generalization based on the
similarity between new words and known words during
the process of vocabulary acquisition. Developmental
data, such as that presented by Stager and Werker (1997)
show changes in phonetic sensitivity in a word-learning
task as a function of age (and thus, they argue, experience
with learning new words). Certain phonological contrasts
were not maintained in word-learning tasks and may
become less important as the lexicon grows and known
words aid the processing of unknown words. Thus, the
system may be jointly influenced by perceptual and
memory processes and must ultimately balance forces of
acuity and generalization.
The statistical learning literature (e.g., Saffran, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996) provides additional information on the
function of memory processes by focusing on the
acquisition of knowledge about the stimulus environment.
Here the focus is not on acuity, but on the ability to learn
the statistical structure of an environment.
This
knowledge contributes to vocabulary acquisition by
helping to parse the stream into the appropriate units for
learning about a particular aspect of language. Thus, it is
the function of a domain-general learning mechanism
that contributes to vocabulary growth and the impact of
individual differences in phonological processing is felt
somewhat indirectly through the effects on memory.

Abstract
Theories of language acquisition propose an early and
important role for perceptual processes, but often present
these processes as separate from the short-term sequencing
processes and long-term linguistic knowledge that also
contribute to the development of language. Using nonword
repetition as a measure that reflects the interaction of these
processes, we present a computational model that integrates
all three of these processes into a single system and
examine the similarity between the relationship of these
three processes found in the model and the relationship
found in adolescent humans.
Keywords: language acquisition; short-term memory;
phoneme discrimination; vocabulary; nonword repetition

Processes of Vocabulary Acquisition
While there is an acknowledged role for perceptual
processes in language acquisition by models of language
acquisition, the precise relationship between these
processes and higher-level lexical processes tends to be
left unspecified. Specifically, it has been argued that
phonological learning involves the organization of sound
whereas lexical learning involves the organization of
meaning and this shared organizational principle could
theoretically be supported by stimulus-general processes
(Jusczyk, 2000, p. 1-3). Other theories support the idea
that accomplishing the former helps to accomplish the
later.
For example, the Competition Model (Bates &
MacWhinney, 1987) claims that perceptual units must be
isolated from irrelevant and variable contextual factors.
Once these perceptual units are isolated and can be
reliably recognized, then the mapping between these
perceptual units and their function in the language can
begin. This process is similar to the discovery of
variability and stability in mapping word forms to lexical
function, but statistical relationships between these
processes are rarely discussed and the bulk of the
empirical work related to this model has focused on the
ability to map between lexical and syntactic knowledge.

59

such, measures were taken at different time points, but
were completed by the same experimenters in the same
testing locations.
Data from 57 adolescents were included in the analysis
based on the availability of data on the tasks of interest.
These participants were between 15 and 17 years old at
the latest testing session. No attention was paid to the
participants language status as the interest in the group
lies in the inclusion of participants with a wide range of
language abilities, rather than the inclusion of participants
from a specific population.

Theoretically, it is clear that both perceptual and
memory processes contribute to vocabulary acquisition,
but empirically the nature of this relationship remains
unclear. Perceptual and memory processes appear to be
studied independently though they make joint
contributions to vocabulary acquisition and may also
interact with one another. A good starting point for
bringing together these investigations is to ask how
changes in the representation of auditory information,
which would be determined largely by the function of
perceptual processes, might impact the memory processes
responsible for vocabulary acquisition in humans and in a
model of vocabulary acquisition.
A recent connectionist model (Gupta & Tisdale,
submitted) provides a framework for examining the
potential impact of phonological representations on
vocabulary acquisition processes. Here it has been
demonstrated that short-term memory for phonological
information (also known as PSTM) can be conceptualized
as a causal factor in determining one's vocabulary and that
both PSTM and vocabulary causally determine the
generalization and sequencing ability demonstrated by
participants in a nonword repetition (NWR) task, a task
that has long been thought to measure the functioning of
the memory processes responsible for vocabulary
acquisition (Gupta & Tisdale, submitted).
Further, this model demonstrates these relationships
within a single processing system: a recurrent network.
Within this system, PSTM is operationalized as the
recurrence in the model and vocabulary knowledge lies in
the weights between layers of the network. The goal of
the current work is to incorporate the concept of
perceptual processing into this model based on the
theoretical relationship presented above and the empirical
observations presented below.
This new model characterizes NWR as a product of
both vocabulary and PSTM. NWR measures how the
processing of novel linguistic information is impacted by
PSTM processes and vocabulary. Thus, we see NWR as a
measure that captures the interaction between the
processes responsible for vocabulary. For this reason, we
focus on NWR as our dependent measure instead of a
measure of vocabulary acquisition. The question we
attempt to answer is whether or not perceptual processing
(measured by phoneme discrimination) predicts the
efficacy of these processes based on their shared reliance
on both acuity and generalization.

Perceptual Processing
Perceptual processing was assessed during the latest
testing session using a phoneme discrimination task that
had participants discriminate between tokens of English
words whose initial consonant had a varying voice onset
time (VOT) resulting in a b/p continuum. On the "b" end
of this continuum, was a /bol/ token ("bowl") recorded by
a human speaker with a VOT of 0 ms. This initial token
was spliced to create a range of additional stimuli with
VOTs of 10 – 50 ms in 10 ms increments. Stimuli were
presented through headphones with experimental
parameters that limited the memory components of the
task. The participants' task was to discriminate between
tokens; reporting whether the tokens were the "same" or
"different" (stimulus creation and experimental methods
can be found in Coady, Kluender, & Evans, 2005).
The relevant measure for this task is proportion correct
on "different" trials involving two within-category tokens
(i.e., VOT 0 vs. VOT 20 and VOT 30 vs. VOT 50) and
two between-category tokens (i.e., VOT 10 vs. VOT 30
and VOT 20 vs. VOT 40). Limitations of the data set
prevented the calculation of a useful d' as will be done in
the modeling data.

Short-Term Memory Processing
For assessing STM ability using novel linguistic stimuli, a
NWR task was given. For assessing ability using known
linguistic stimuli, a digit span (DS) task was given. These
tasks were completed in the same testing session, one year
prior to the discrimination task.
Nonword Repetition In the NWR task, participants were
presented with blocks of 20 nonwords from an established
corpus of novel linguistic stimuli (Gupta et al., 2004).
Within each block, participants were presented stimuli of
a single syllable length, beginning with 2-syllable
nonwords and ending with 7-syllable nonwords. Each
syllable had a consonant-vowel (CV) structure, except for
the final syllable, which had a CVC structure. Stimuli
were presented through headphones and the participants'
task was to simply repeat each word immediately upon
hearing it. The measure for this task was percentage of
whole words correctly repeated at each syllable length.
Digit Span In the DS task, participants were presented
with lists of digits in blocks of 8 lists. Each list in a block
was presented through headphones at a rate of 1 digit per

Behavioral Integration
In order to have a better understanding of the relationship
between perceptual processes, PSTM, and vocabulary, we
performed a multiple regression analysis on a set of
previously collected data. These data are part of a larger
longitudinal study of children with Specific Language
Impairment (SLI; a disorder of language in children with
no neurological cause) and their developmental cohorts
(Tomblin, Zhang, Buckwalter, & O'Brien, 2003). As
60

second. Lists were initially 2 items in length and grew by
1 item with each subsequent block.
Participants
continued to a new block if they accurately recalled more
than 50% of the lists in a given block. The measure for
this task is the longest list length at which the 50%
performance criterion was exceeded.

In the case of 4-syllable nonwords, only measures of
between category discrimination are a significant
predictor of NWR in addition to DS. The coefficients for
these two measures have opposite signs, suggesting
individual differences in the category boundaries of our
participants.
For some participants, categorical
discrimination occurs in the 10 v. 30 contrasts occur, but
not the 20 v. 40 and vice versa. For some other
participants, categorical discrimination may occur in both.
Future analysis will be needed to entangle the nature of
this relationship, however it is clear that such a
relationship exists.
Success on between-category discrimination indicates a
generalization of stimulus properties that leads to strong
VOT categories.
This generalization affects NWR
positively as it can help the system process novel stimuli
that align with the phonological structure of its
vocabulary. Failure on between-category discrimination
indicates a representation of specific acoustic detail rather
than general categories, however these data suggest that
one can still succeed at NWR under these conditions.
Though the locus of these effects are not evident in these
data, it is most likely the sequencing processes associated
with both NWR and DS (the later of which is also a
positive contributor to NWR) that are supporting NWR.

Vocabulary
Participants completed the expressive subtest of the
Comprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary
Test (CREVT; Wallace & Hammill, 1994) as a measure
of expressive vocabulary. Participants completed the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III (PPVT-III; Dunn &
Dunn, 1997) as a measure of receptive vocabulary. Scores
on these two components were then used to create a
composite z-score for vocabulary. These assessments
were completed during the same session as NWR and DS.

Results
The independent predictors of the regression model
consisted of the two measures of within category
discrimination, the two measures of between category
discrimination, the DS measure, and the vocabulary
measure. These predictors were applied to the NWR
scores of the group at each syllable length, for a total of
six analyses. Correcting for these multiple comparisons,
the regression model was significant (p < .008) for
accuracy on 3-, 4,-, 5-, & 6-syllable nonwords. The
variance explained by these models ranged from 29.8 37.5%. For the purpose of in-depth analysis, we chose to
focus on the strongest model, which was for 4-syllable
nonwords (see Table 1). Incidentally, this length was the
mode digit span score for the group, so it represents
performance on stimuli that are near the boundary
between capacity and supra-capacity for these
participants.
c
Table 1: Standardized regression model coefficients for
accuracy on 4-syllable nonwords. Significant
predictors are in bold.

Computational Integration
The interpretation of the behavioral data just presented
assumes an integrated system of vocabulary acquisition
that incorporates phonological processing, STM, and
vocabulary knowledge. Such a system has previously
integrated STM and vocabulary knowledge (Gupta and
Tisdale, submitted), but can it integrate phonological
processing and show the same effects of specification and
generalization observed in the behavioral data?

Model Architecture
The model is a modified version of a connectionist model
developed by Botvinick and Plaut (2006) to model
immediate serial recall within a recurrent network (for
details on the psychological and technical motivations for
architectural details see Botvinick & Plaut; Gupta &
Tisdale, submitted). The model consists of an input layer
that represents the individual syllables of a word. This
layer has 21 units that can represent the constituent
phonemes of a syllable within a CCVCC phoneme frame.
5 units are dedicated to representing the phonemes that
may legally occupy the initial C slot of the frame
(according to the phonological constraints of English), 3
units are dedicated to the second C slot, 5 units are
dedicated to the V slot, 3 are dedicated to the penultimate
C slot, and 5 are dedicated to the ultimate C slot (see
Figure 1). The input layer also has 1 control unit that
cues the network to recall a sequence.
The input layer is fully connected to a 200-unit hidden
layer that is fully recurrent. That is, the hidden layer
connects to itself through a set of modifiable weights that

Statistical Values
Variable
Intercept
Discrimination - Within
00 vs. 20
30 vs. 50
Discrimination – Between
10 vs. 30
20 vs. 40
Other Cognitive Measures
Digit Span
Vocabulary

Std. β
-.256

p
.251

-.087
.039

.481
.768

.283
-.320

.029
.011

.574
.160

<.001
.172

61

can transform the current activation of the hidden layer
and affect processing at this layer for sequences of
information. The hidden layer is also fully-connected, in
an interactive fashion, to the output layer, which has the
same representational scheme as the input. The only
difference in the output layer is that the single control unit
is replaced with a single unit that lets the network indicate
the end of its recall of a sequence.

C

C

V

C

C

Stop

Hidden Layer (200)

Training

C (5)

The model was trained by having it shadow and recall a
set of 4,386 English words that were between 2 and 4
syllables in length. These words were selected from a
larger set of 130,000 phonologically distinct words that
accompany the Festival speech synthesis software (Black
& Taylor, 1997).
In each training epoch, the model was presented with
each of these 4,386 words in a random order. For each
word, the model was presented with one syllable at a time
at the input layer and the target of the output was the
syllable that was being presented. Following the last
syllable of each word the "Recall" unit of the input layer
was activated. This cued the network to enter the recall
phase of training in which the model had to repeat each of
the syllables that had just been presented, in the same
order that they had been presented. No input was
provided at the input layer and the target in this phase was
the relevant syllable that was to be recalled. For the final
syllable, the model was trained to activate the "Stop" unit
of the output layer in addition to the phonological
representation of the final output. Weight changes were
made at the end of each word (including the recall phase)
using recurrent back-propagation through time
(Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986). The context
layer was reset between each word. The model was
trained for a total of 100 epochs with a learning rate of
0.005 and no momentum term.

C (3)

V (5)

C (3)

C (5) Recall (1)

Figure 1: Architecture of the model, including the
syllable structure that is represented at input and
output. For the input and hidden layers, the
number of units is given in parentheses.
correct. No weight changes were made during this, or any
other, testing procedure.
NWR was measured in the model by presenting 2-, 3-,
and 4-syllable nonwords (2 at each length) to shadow and
recall. These nonwords were selected from the same
corpus as those that were presented to the humans.
Accuracy was measured in the same way as when
assessing vocabulary.
Reported values for both
vocabulary and NWR are proportion correct.

Discrimination
A key insight provided by Botvinick and Plaut (2006) was
that this type of network can eventually configure its
weights so that upon recall, an entire list (remember, their
task was list recall) is represented by the activation vector
at the hidden layer when the recall cue is presented. This
situation arises because this vector is the only information
the model has to carry out its recall of the sequence it has
just heard.
For recall, the model systematically
transforms this initial vector using the weight matrix that
supports recurrence to produce each of the individual
elements of the list.
Gupta and Tisdale (submitted), have subsequently
shown that the same representation arises with whole
words when the task is word recall. The whole word is
initially represented at the hidden layer and is transformed
to produce each of the individual syllables within the
word. In this way, the activation of the hidden layer
represents the similarity between different words and this
information can theoretically be used to discriminate one
word from another.
In the current model, we tested this idea by presenting
the phonological representations of seven different
categorical consonant contrasts and their intermediate
representations. For example, in the implementation of
the b/p continuum, the model was presented with "bowl"
(/bol/) and "pole" (/pol/) as well as gradient
representations of intermediate consonants. Specifically,
the representation of "b" or VOT 0 was [0 0 1 0 0], the
representation of "p" or VOT 50 was [0 0 0 0 1] and the

Vocabulary and Short-Term Memory
Gupta and Tisdale (submitted) showed that a network
trained as described above could learn a substantial
vocabulary and engage in NWR (i.e., repeat back words it
had never processed before). Further, they (along with
Botvinick and Plaut's [2006] initial demonstration in the
domain of list recall) showed that STM can be thought of
as the recurrence in this system and vocabulary
knowledge can be thought of as the weights in the system.
In this way, the model encodes not just the specific words
it has seen, but information about the phonological
structure of the language it is learning.
Vocabulary was measured in the current model by
presenting each of the 4,386 words from training and
measuring the accuracy of the output for each syllable
during recall. If the mean squared error for the output
vector of a particular syllable was less than .1, then that
syllable was marked as correct. If all of the syllables in
the word were correct, then that word was marked as
62

models (i.e., different initial random weights) were
trained and tested.
Averaging across each of the 5 simulations for a given
gain value and then treating each gain value as an
individual 'participant' allows us to perform a regression
model using the models' overall vocabulary and d' to
predict performance on NWR.

intermediate representations reflected a shift between
these two tokens by capturing the negative relationship
between the two units that encode these consonants. VOT
10 was represented by [0 0 .8 0 0 .2], VOT 20 by [0 0 .6 0
0 .4], and so on. For each categorical contrast, we
constructed the same number of intermediate
representations by varying the value of the negatively
related inputs. Each of these representations were then
presented to the model during test and the activation
vector at the hidden layer was recorded. The other six
categories that were use were t/d, k/g, p/g, p/d, and r/l.
The first five were consonants were presented along with
/ol/ and r/l was presented along with / k/. While these
are representations of English words, they were not words
that were a part of the training corpus.
The measure of discrimination was derived from the
normalized dot product (or similarity) of vectors
associated with the representations of the contrasts
between tokens that the humans made. From these dot
products, we averaged across within- and betweencategory token discriminations to get a single measure of
within- and between-category discrimination. We then
calculated an overall d' for the model to capture how well
it was distinguishing within- and between-category
contrasts across each of the seven consonant contrasts.

Results
NWR, vocabulary, and d' all vary as a function of gain
(see Figure 3). The model performed best on these three
measures when gain values were set between .5 and 1.25.
Below .5, performance on all three measures dropped in a
relatively linear fashion.
Above these values,
performance also dropped in a relatively linear way.
However, at values above 2.35 vocabulary acquisition and
NWR performance was exceptionally poor, while
discrimination ability began to improve. We believe this
pattern is likely due to the limits of representational
flexibility as a function of the number of hidden layer
units, and the number of connection weights with
extremely high gain values. At higher gain values, the
model may be forced into an unstable weight space that
causes a form of catastrophic interference and prevents
the acquisition of a large vocabulary, which also affects
NWR. We are currently investigating this hypothesis
with models that have 400 hidden layer units.
The regression model explains 93.7% of the variance in
NWR performance. This is a significant amount, F(2,60)
= 458.53, p < .05, and each of the predictors are also
significant. The strongest predictor is vocabulary with a
standardized β of .932, p < .05, followed by the intercept,
β = -.142, p < .05, and d', β = .097, p < .05. Thus, for
both the human participants and the model, a measure of
discrimination shows a significant relationship with NWR
that is independent of a measure of vocabulary.

Gain
In order to model individual variation in phonological
representation and implement the differences in acuity
and generalization that we believe to be evident in the
human data, we manipulated the gain variable of the
logistic function used to calculate activation values in the
model. It is important to point out that this parameter is
not one that has been developed specifically for the
current application. Rather, it is an intrinsic and taskgeneral parameter used in the implementation of many
connectionist models. Further, we are making no claims
that a neural gain equivalent leads to the individual
differences in human perception in which we are
interested. Gain is simply a way of changing the acuity of
the representation, though other implementations could be
used to the same effect.
Using gain instead of temperature in a traditional
logistic activation function (cf. Rumelhart & McClelland,
1988, p. 71) results in the equation:

activation =

QuickTime™ and a
TIFF (Uncompressed) decompressor
are needed to see this picture.

1
1+ e

−net i *gain

where neti is the net activation received by a given unit.
As gain increases in this equation, the resulting activation
that arises from the same net activation sharpens (see
Figure 2).
In the current framework, the effect of gain is to make
words easier to discriminate at the hidden layer of the
model. We trained and tested 310 different models using
the method described above. For each gain value
(ranging from .05 to 3.15 in .05 increments) 5 different

Figure 2: The effect of changes in gain on the logistic
activation function given in equation 1. Here gain
changes from .1 to 1.5 and the activation function gets
progressively steeper.
63

the stimuli used in the phoneme discrimination task. We
would also like to thank members of the Modeling
Discussion Group at the University of Iowa and three
anonymous reviewers for helpful discussion of this paper.
This research was supported in part by grant NIH NIDCD
R01 DC006499 to Prahlad Gupta.

NWR, Vocabulary, and Phoneme Discrimination as a Function of Gain
1.4

NWR
Phoneme Discr.
Vocabulary

1.2

1

0.8

References

0.6

Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition,
variation and language learning. In B. MacWhinney
(Ed.), Mechanisms of Language Acquisition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Black, A. W., & Taylor, P. A. (1997). The Festival
Speech Synthesis System: System documentation (Tech.
Rep.
HCRC/TR-83). Scotland,
UK: Human
Communication Research Centre, University of
Edinburgh.
Botvinick, M. M., & Plaut, D. C. (2006). Short-term
memory for serial order: A recurrent neural network
model. Psychological Review, 113, 201-233.
Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test III. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Gupta, P., Lipinski, J., Abbs, B., Lin, P.-H., Aktunc, E.
M., & Ludden, D., et al. (2004). Space aliens and
nonwords: Stimuli for investigating the learning of
novel word-meaning pairs. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 36, 699-703.
Gupta, P., & MacWhinney, B. (1997). Vocabulary
acquisition
and
verbal
short-term
memory:
Computational and neural bases. Brain and Language,
59, 267-333.
Gupta, P., & Tisdale, J. (submitted). Does phonological
short-term memory causally determine vocabulary
growth? Toward a computational resolution of the
debate. Unpublished manuscript.
Jusczyk, P. W. (2000). The discovery of spoken language.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Rumelhart, D., Hinton, G., & Williams, R. (1986).
Learning internal representations by error propagation.
In D. Rumelhart, & J. McClelland (Eds.), Parallel
distributed processing, Vol. 1: Foundations.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical Learning by 8-Month-Old Infants. Science,
274, 1926-1928.
Stager, C.L., & Werker, J.F. (1997). Infants listen for
more phonetic detail in speech perception than in wordlearning tasks. Nature, 388, 381-382.
Tomblin, B., Zhang, X., Buckwalter, P., & O'Brien, M.
(2003). The stability of primary language disorder: Four
years after kindergarten diagnosis. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 46, 1283-1296.
Wallace, G., & Hammill, D. (1994). Comprehensive
Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test. Austin, TX:
Pro-Ed.

0.4

0.2

2.
9

3.
05

2.
6

2.
75

2.
3

2.
45

2

2.
15

1.
7

1.
85

1.
4

1.
55

1.
1

1.
25

0.
8

0.
95

0.
5

0.
65

0.
2

0.
35

0.
05

0

Gain

Figure 3: Three measures of performance in the model as a
function of the gain parameter. NWR & vocabulary is
given as proportion correct, whereas phoneme
discrimination is d'.

Discussion
In both the human data and the computational model,
the exact relationship between phoneme discrimination,
NWR, and vocabulary is far from clear, but it has been
demonstrated that a relationship exists and that it is a
useful field of inquiry for the purposes of further
explicating models of language acquisition. In the
humans, only between-group categorization was
predictive of NWR and the nature of this relationship
varied depending on the exact stimulus tokens that were
being used. In the model, manipulations of gain, or the
sharpness of the activation function, had an effect on
vocabulary, NWR, and phoneme discrimination. Further,
a regression analysis on the modeling results showed a
predictive relationship of phoneme discrimination and
vocabulary on NWR. While the modeling and human
measures are not equivocal, they are analogous and the
existence of a relationship in both is a theoretically
important contribution that deserves a more precise
comparison and further investigation.
Overall, phonological processing, STM, and vocabulary
acquisition can be thought of as a single integrated system
whose overall functioning is reflected in the measure of
NWR, but their exact relationship will take further
untangling. The model presented here provides a specific
computational framework for integrating the three
processes discussed in this paper into a single account and
investigating the relationship that they have with one
another.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Matt Botvinick and Dave Plaut in
their assistance with adapting their model, Marlea
O'Brien, Connie Ferguson, Juanita Limas, Amy
Schminke, and Marcia St. Clair for their assistance in
collecting the human data, and Jeff Coady for providing
64

