gravitational force

as follows: The activation function of each unit is the identity
for x ≥ 0 and zero for x < 0 and the connectivity between the
units is given by the weight matrix W which is defined as


1 −ε . . . −ε
−ε 1 . . . −ε


W = .
(1)
..
.. 
.
.
.
 .
.
.
. 
−ε −ε

Figure 1: RFs imposed on a table. Absolute / relative RFs
(solid black axes) lead to a different partitioning of space than
the intrinsic RF (dashed gray axes).
Often these three RF coincide, but in certain situations RFs
may partition space differently. Consider, for instance, the
scene in Figure 1. Here the object, a table, is not upright, but
rotated 90° clockwise. Therefore, the intrinsic RF of the table
partitions space differently than the absolute and—assuming
an upright viewer—relative RF. “The fly is above the table”
could then mean either that the fly is above with respect to
the absolute / relative RF (black region in Figure 1) or with
respect to the intrinsic RF (gray region in Figure 1). It is such
possible disagreement between different types of RF which
necessitates selecting one.
To gain a deeper understanding of the mechanisms involved in RF selection we developed a computational model
of the selection. The main model components were motivated by three empirical effects reported in the literature:
inability of simultaneous activation of several types of RF
(Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin, 1994, experiment 3), soft selection (Carlson-Radvansky & Logan, 1997), and negative
priming (Carlson-Radvansky & Jiang, 1998). In the following sections we will describe these effects in more detail and
present both the model components based on these effects and
model predictions arising from the chosen components.

Simultaneous Activation
In experiment 3 of Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin (1994) participants were informed of the three types of RF and were
asked to be prepared to use any type of RF in the experimental task. Interestingly, requiring participants to be equally prepared for any RF did not improve but worsen the participants’
performance. It seems that the participants were not able to
prepare for the use of the different types of RF. This inability
of preparing for (i.e., activating) several different RF speaks
for a direct competition between disagreeing types of RF.
We propose that such direct competition is realized in the
form of lateral inhibition. More precisely, our model comprises a number of units which (a) represent the competing
entities from which to select, (b) are activated by the information available at the time of spatial term use, (c) feed
back positively to themselves, (d) have an activation which is
above or equal to zero, and (e) mutually inhibit each other.
Assuming n units, this architecture can formally be described
1468

...

1

with ε set appropriately (see below).
Given this activation function and the weight matrix W
consider now a situation in which all of the units are activated to the same degree a. When representing the activation of the units by a vector v of length n this means that
vi = a, ∀i : 1 ≤ i ≤ n and, importantly, one iteration W ∗v leads
to the new activation vector ṽ with


a − ε ∗ (n − 1) ∗ a


..
ṽ = 
(2)
.
.
a − ε ∗ (n − 1) ∗ a
Thus, (a) all activations decrease and (b) the units’ activations
are still pairwise identical. In other words, trying to activate
each of the competing units to the same degree will result in
none of the units being activated which corresponds to the
effect observed by Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin (1994).
In addition to accounting for the preparedness effect, the
proposed structure implies three properties of RF selection.
One property is related to RF representation the other two are
related to the model’s dynamics.
Reference Frame Representation The above presented
model structure implies that—contrary to common assumption (e.g., Burigo & Coventry, 2005; Carlson-Radvansky &
Logan, 1997)—it is not the different types of RF which are
activated and selected. If units would represent different types
of RF, this would mean that whenever there is evidence for
one of the RF types (i.e., an object has intrinsic sides, gravity
is present, etc.) the corresponding unit would be activated.
In particular, even if all RF were aligned they would activate
different units which would lead to competition.
Since competition between aligned RF seems highly implausible, we propose that it is not RFs, but their parametrization which is activated, competing, and selected. Thus, in our
model the units competing with each other represent parameter values. This approach allows basing the observed competition on more plausible grounds; only if the different types of
RF have disagreeing parameter values, competition will arise.
Furthermore, assuming a competition of parameter values
instead of RFs yields a cognitively more efficient account of
the processes involved in spatial term apprehension. If only
the parameters values compete there is no need to activate
multiple RF, impose multiple RF on a scene, activate multiple
spatial templates, and align all the latter with the former; only
the activation and selection of parameter values is necessary.
After a set of parameters has been selected only one RF and

one spatial template needs to be imposed on the scene. Thus,
a cognitive system realizing competition via parameter values
utilizes fewer complex representations (just one RF and one
template) and less processing steps (just imposing and align
one RF and one template) than a system realizing competition via RF. In presuming that the human cognitive system
has evolved to employ its restricted resources as efficiently as
possible, a cognitive model implementing parameter competition seems to be cognitively more plausible.
Besides being more plausible this account of the selection
process implied by the proposed structure is supported by recent findings of Carlson and van Deman (in press). Consequently, in our model the competing units represent certain
parameter values. More precisely, since for “above” only orientation and direction are important, the model contains four
competing units representing the orientations and directions
as given by the vectors (0, 1)t , (1, 0)t , (0, −1)t , (−1, 0)t in a
standard Cartesian coordinate system.
Model Dynamics The implications regarding the model’s
dynamics concern how initial unit activation is related to
model behavior / output.
First, the unit receiving the highest initial activation will
win the competition. Due to the nature of the lateral inhibition
(see Equation 1) the amount of activation of a unit after one
iteration of the model is directly proportional to its activation
before that iteration. As a result, the unit with the highest
activation will remain the unit with the highest activation until
the end of the competition and, thus, win the competition.
Second, the number of iterations necessary to determine
the winner depends on the differences between the initial activations of the units: The smaller the initial differences the
more iterations are necessary for the competition. If environmental (absolute RF), object (intrinsic RF), and person (relative RF) information all indicate the same direction, only one
of the units will be activated and, thus, competition will need
zero iterations. If, on the other hand, different sources of information indicate different directions, different units will be
activated leading to competition. The precise number of iterations for this competition will depend on the relative magnitude of the different units’ initial activations.
Assuming that the number of iterations in the model is proportional to the time it takes participants to select one particular direction, the model makes the following predictions: (i)
spatial term use is fastest if all information sources indicate
the same direction; (ii) the weaker the initial evidence for the
finally winning direction compared to the evidence for competing directions the longer the reaction times. Regarding the
latter, for instance, reaction times should be longer for selecting the absolute direction when it is not the same as the intrinsic direction than for selecting the absolute direction when it
is the same as the intrinsic direction.

the competition. In the extreme case one could argue (e.g.,
Carlson, 1999) that competition is not finished before there
is unequivocal evidence for only one of the competing parameter settings. Alternatively, competition could stop when
the indication for one set of parameters is sufficiently high
compared to the other possible parameter settings without requiring that there is strict evidence for only one set of the
competing parameters.
Empirical evidence regarding these two possibilities is
ambiguous. Some experiments speak for a strict selection
whereas others suggest a non-strict selection. In particular, the experiments by Carlson-Radvansky and Logan (1997)
show that there seem to be strong interindividual differences
regarding how strict parameter selection is. Taken together
these results indicate that (a) non-strict selection happens to
occur and (b) the strictness of the selection varies across situations and individuals.
Accordingly, the model presented here has been equipped
with a non-strict selection mechanism the strictness of
which is assumed to be one of the main parameters of the
model. More precisely, the selection mechanism is realized by a single unit, the gating unit, which receives input from all four competing units and feeds forward to
four output units. This gating unit is activated only if
activationi /(∑ j6=i activation j ) > t holds for one of the competing units i, where t is the selection threshold of the model.
Once this criterion is reached the activation of the competing units is fed to the output units unchanged. Activation
of the output units indicates that a parameter setting has
been selected. The selected parameter setting is computed
as the weighted sum of the vectors represented by the four
competing units, where the activation of the output units
are taken as the weights for the corresponding vectors. If,
for example, the threshold t were set to 5 and after competition the output units would be activated with the values
5, 0.5, 0, 0 the resulting parameter setting would be given as
5∗(0, 1)t +0.5∗(1, 0)t +0∗(0, −1)t +0∗(−1, 0)t = (0.5, 5)t .
An interesting prediction arising from this selection mechanism is the covariation of reaction time and the extent to
which the selected parameter setting is a combination of the
competing parameter values. If the gating criterion is set to
a high value this will—all else being equal— result in more
iterations, that is, in longer reaction times. At the same time
a high criterion value will enforce large differences in the activations of the output units and, thus, enforce a parameter
setting which is influenced strongly by only one of the directions. Accordingly, in a production task such as the one
employed in experiment 3 of Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin
(1993) reaction times should be comparatively fast in cases
where participants put the to be located object into a position
indicating a combination of intrinsic and absolute directions.

Negative Priming

Soft Selection
One important aspect of controlling parameter selection is
when to terminate the selection process, that is, when to end
1469

The last effect to be considered stems from the study by
Carlson-Radvansky and Jiang (1998). In their experiments
they used a negative priming paradigm to further elucidate

the control dynamics involved in RF selection. The major result of these experiments was that some aspect of the control
mechanisms underlying parameter selection hampers activating and selecting parameter settings which previously have
not been selected.
This implies that there needs to be some form of memory accounting for the—at least recent—history of the control system. We propose that this memory is realized by four
extra units. Each of these units is a shunting model as developed by Grossberg (1982). Basically, a shunting unit is
a time delayed store of the difference of the excitatory and
inhibitory inputs it is receiving. In our model each shunting
unit receives excitatory input from one of the competing units
and inhibitory input from all other competing units and feeds
back only to the competing unit from which it receives excitatory input. Due to this setup the net competition signal (i.e.,
the difference between excitatory self-facilitation and inhibition by the rivaling units) will be fed back to each competing
unit indirectly via the corresponding shunting unit and in particular, the shunting unit will accumulate the net competition
signal. After competition ends the competition signal stored
in the shunting units, will decay to zero over time, but will
partly still be available in subsequent situations. Since the
net competition signal of loosing units will be negative subsequent activation and selection of these units will be more
effortful resulting in the negative priming effect observed by
Carlson-Radvansky and Jiang (1998).
As the other two model design decisions—and partly in
combination with them—implementing negative priming by
shunting models leads to specific predictions. First, competing parameter values imply that negative priming will be observed when the not selected orientation and direction in the
first situation is the same as in the second situation. In particular, negative priming should also occur if the negatively
primed direction was activated by object information in the
first situation but is activated by person information in the second situation. RF competition, on the contrary, would predict
no priming effect in such a setting. Second, the net competition signal of the winning unit will be positive. As a result, subsequently activating and selecting the same direction
should be easier than activating and selecting this direction
for the first time. Put differently, positive priming of the previously selected direction should also be observable in human
behavior.
The overall architecture resulting from the above considerations is depicted in Figure 2.

Overall Model
Assume that some input arrives at the control model (indicated by the sketched input connections in Figure 2) and initially activates the competing units (labeled “competition”
in Figure 2). If the input arises from a situation with disagreeing parameter values, the gating unit (labeled “gating”
in Figure 2) will not be activated and, thus, competition takes
place. In each iteration of the competition the competing
units feed their activation both back to themselves and to
1470

input

competition

shunting

gating

output

Figure 2: The overall model. See text for details.
all shunting units (labeled “shunting” in Figure 2) and the
shunting units feed the resulting net competition net c back
to the corresponding competing units. Thus, after one iteration the new activation acti (k + 1) of a competing unit
i is given as acti (k + 1) = acti (k) + netic . Since netic approximately amounts to acti (k) − ε ∗ ∑ j6=i act j (k), acti (k + 1)
can be written as 2 ∗ acti (k) − ε ∗ ∑ j6=i act j (k). Accordingly,
ε ∈ [1/3, 2/3] must hold, because if ε were below 1/3, convergence of the competition would not be guaranteed, and if
ε were above 2/3, the process might converge with selecting none of the competing parameter values. The model presented here uses ε = 0.4. By such choosing ε it is guaranteed that after a finite number of iterations the gating unit will
fed the current activation of the competing units to the output
units (labeled “output” in Figure 2).

Evaluation
As detailed above the developed model not only accounts for
a number of empirical effects observed in a range of studies, but also generates several new predictions. Unfortunately,
there are no experiments or published data which allow testing the model in its entirety. In particular, the predictions
arising from the gating and shunting mechanisms cannot be
tested with currently available data. However, pertinent data
is available regarding the predictions stemming from the lateral inhibition structure. Of these available data we chose
to model the experiment 2 of Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin
(1994), since this experiment is one of the few studies available where—in some conditions—all three types of information sources are in disagreement.
In their experiment Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin (1994)
had their participants work on a sentence-picture verification
task; after reading a description indicating that a fly is above
an object a picture was shown and the participants had to indicate as quickly as possible whether the description was correct with respect to the picture. This verification task was repeated under several conditions which were essentially generated by three manipulations. The first manipulation concerned the orientation of the object. The object could be either upright (canonical) or rotated by 90° clockwise (non-

canonical). The second manipulation concerned the orientation of the participants. Some participants conducted the
experiment upright (no tilt group), some reclining with their
head to the right (aligned with top group), and some reclining with their head to the left (aligned with bottom group).
The last manipulation concerned the location of the fly which
could be either above the object with respect to one type of
RF or not above with respect to all types of RF.
For succinctly expressing the condition and the corresponding subject response we will use the following general
notation format: XX-XXXyes, no , where the ’X’ are variables
to be replaced by A (absolute), R (relative), I (intrinsic), C
(canonical), and NC (non-canonical). The first two capital
letters indicate whether the object was rotated or not. The
second three letters signify both which RF are disagreeing
and where the located object is. The subscript shows whether
the participants responded with “yes” or “no”. For example,
C-ARIyes signifies that the object was not rotated, all three RF
were agreeing, the fly was above according to these RF, and
the participants responded “yes”. Two special cases are Cno
and NCno . The former means that the fly was not above with
respect to all types of RF and subjects responded “no”. The
latter means that the fly was located below the object according to the intrinsic RF and the participants responded “no”.
Model Application Since the determination of the input activations is currently not part of the model, the input in the
different conditions had to be approximated. Assuming that
the proportions with which the participants used the different
RF are directly related to the activation which is input to the
competing units, we employed the proportions reported by
Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin (1994) to derive the input activations. Based on the acquired proportions we set the amount
of activation stemming from absolute, relative, and intrinsic
sources to be 7.2, 0.7, 2.1, respectively. Thus, for instance, in
the condition NC-ARyes , the initial activation of the competing units was set to 7.9, 2.1, 0, 0.
Given the thus determined input values the only free parameter of the model, that is, the gating criterion was estimated from the empirical data and found to be 27.6. Using this criterion the model was run for each condition investigated in experiment 2 of Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin
(1994). The results of the simulation are shown in Table1.
For each condition (column 1) the table shows the reaction
times as observed in the experiment (column 2), the model
iterations (column 4), and the reaction times predicted by the
model based on a linear regression of the human data on the
model iterations (column 3).
Several things seem noteworthy with respect to the results. First of all, as exhibited by the correlation of r = 0.71
the model generally accounts well for the empirical data—
especially if considering that only one parameter was fit for
the 20 data points. Furthermore, the effects predicted by
the lateral inhibition structure are present in the data. For
example, the condition where all information sources agree
on the direction (C-ARIyes ) has the smallest reaction time.
1471

Table 1: Empirical and model results with respect to experiment 2 of Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin (1994).
Condition

C-ARIyes
Cno
NC-ARyes
NCno
NC-Ino
NC-Iyes
C-AIyes
Cno
C-Rno
NCno
NC-Ayes
NC-RIno
NC-RIyes
C-AIyes
C-Rno
NC-Ayes
Cno
NC-Rno
NC-Ino
NC-Iyes

Study Results Model Results
ms
ms
iterations
no tilt group
642
760
0
781
760
0
815
886
60
834
932
82
893
886
60
1019
1108 166
aligned with top group
704
804
21
839
846
41
846
804
21
854
969
100
857
943
87
919
943
87
1035
1041 134
aligned with bottom group
725
804
21
898
804
21
917
894
64
992
825
31
1040
928
80
1094
913
73
1209
1063 144

In addition, comparing the reaction times of C-ARIyes , NCARyes , and NC-Ayes shows that—as predicted by the model—
reaction times increase the more competing sources of information rival the selection of the winning direction.
There are also some effects in the data posing problems
to the model as it currently is. For example, no-responses
seem to take longer than yes-responses regardless of the selection situation (compare, e.g., C-ARIyes with Cno ). Yet,
no-responses have commonly and across various tasks been
found to take longer than yes-responses in psychological
studies. This suggests an effect which is not specific to reference frame selection and, thus, by definition not in the scope
of the presented model. A second main effect the model has
difficulties with is the fact that reaction times across all conditions are higher in the bottom group than in the top group
than in the no tilt group. It is not clear what the reason for
this increase of reaction times across groups is. It could be,
however, that reclining increased the perceived difficulty of
the experimental task. If this was the case, and a higher perceived difficulty led to a more conservative selection criterion (i.e., a higher gating threshold), the model would predict
exactly such a reaction time difference between the groups.
Nevertheless, we refrained from modeling the data including
this assumption, since this seemed too ad-hoc and, moreover,
would have resulted in three free parameters.

Summing up, although the model realizes a single step of
the processes hypothesized to be involved in spatial term use,
it captures the general trend in pertinent experimental data
quite well. In addition, human reaction time differences between separate conditions in the modeled experiment were as
predicted by the model. Finally, due to its design the model
can also account for additional empirical effects not investigated in the modeled empirical data such as negative priming (Carlson-Radvansky & Jiang, 1998) and the fact that spatial templates can be aligned to a direction which is intermediate to the directions competing with each other (CarlsonRadvansky & Logan, 1997).

Conclusion
In this contribution we presented a computational model of
the control mechanisms underlying RF selection in spatial
term use. The model was validated by showing its ability
to reasonably fit pertinent experimental data. Consequently,
the model constitutes a refinement of the framework initially
proposed by (Logan & Sadler, 1996). In particular, the model
does not just add a new isolated part to this framework, but
connects rather naturally to existing models (e.g., Regier &
Carlson, 2001) developed in this framework. The model by
Regier and Carlson (2001) does explain how humans arrive
at a judgment of the appropriateness of the location of an object with respect to a spatial term. Put differently, this model
elucidates from which mechanisms the observed spatial templates do arise. As one crucial prerequisite to produce the ratings, the model by Regier and Carlson (2001) needs a reference direction. Such a reference direction is exactly what the
model presented in this contribution has as its result. Combining this observation with the above considerations of RF
representation yields a new sequence of steps for the overall
framework: steps (c) – (e) (see above) should be replaced by
(c) selecting parameter settings, and (d) computing the spatial
template as demanded by the current task based on the model
by Regier and Carlson (2001). As an additional contribution,
our model generates a number of new predictions which can
be easily tested empirically.
Although the model was developed concentrating on the
term “above”, it can be assumed to be valid beyond this domain. Previous research indicates considerable similarities
between the apprehension of “above” and other terms (cf.
Carlson, 1999; Logan & Sadler, 1996). Thus, there is good
reason to believe that the proposed control mechanisms are
suitable for all spatial terms. Moreover, the proposed control
model might also be accurate for other spatial cognition tasks
where the use of RF has been assumed (see Schultheis, in
review; Allen, 1999). Yet, to which extent the control mechanisms proposed in this contribution transfer to other spatial
cognition task is an issue for future work.

Acknowledgments
This paper presents work done in the project R1-[ImageSpace] (SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition). Funding by the Ger1472

man Research Foundation (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.
We also thank the reviewers for their helpful comments.

References
Allen, G. L. (1999). Children’s control of reference systems
in spatial tasks: Foundations of spatial cognitive skill? Spatial Cognition and Computation, 1(4), 413 - 429.
Burigo, M., & Coventry, K. (2005). Reference frame conflict
in assigning direction to space. In C. Freksa, M. Knauff,
B. Krieg-Brückner, B. Nebel, & T. Barkowsky (Eds.), Spatial cognition IV: Reasoning, Action, Interaction. Berlin:
Springer.
Carlson, L. A. (1999). Selecting a reference frame. Spatial
Cognition and Computation, 1(4), 365 - 379.
Carlson, L. A., & van Deman, R. (in press). Inhibition within
a reference frame during the interpretation of spatial language. Cognition.
Carlson, L. A., & Logan, G. D. (2001). Using spatial terms
to select an object. Memory & Cognition, 29(6), 883 - 892.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Irwin, D. E. (1993). Frames of
reference in vision and language: Where is above? Cognition, 46, 223-244.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Irwin, D. E. (1994). Reference
frame activation during spatial term assignment. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33, 646 - 671.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Inhibition
accompanies reference-frame selection. Psychological Science, 9(5), 386 - 391.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Logan, G. D. (1997). The influence of reference frame selection on spatial template construction. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 411 - 437.
Coventry, K. R., Cangelosi, A., Rajapakse, R., Bacon, A.,
Newstead, S., Joyce, D., et al. (2005). Spatial prepositions and vague quantifiers: Implementing the functional
geometric framework. In C. Freksa, M. Knauff, B. KriegBrückner, B. Nebel, & T. Barkowsky (Eds.), Spatial cognition IV: Reasoning, Action, Interaction. Berlin: Springer.
Grossberg, S. (1982). Studies of mind and brain. Boston:
Reidel Publishing.
Levinson, S. (1996). Frames of reference and molyneux’s
question: cross-linguistic evidence. In P. Bloom, M. Peterson, M. Garrett, & L. Nadel (Eds.), Language and space.
MA: M.I.T Press.
Logan, G. D., & Sadler, D. D. (1996). A computational analysis of the apprehension of spatial relations. In P. Bloom,
M. Peterson, M. Garrett, & L. Nadel (Eds.), Language and
space. MA: M.I.T Press.
Regier, T., & Carlson, L. A. (2001). Grounding spatial language in perception: An empirical and computational investigation. Journal of experimental psychology:General,
130(2), 273 - 298.
Schultheis, H. (in review). A control perspective on imaginal
perspective taking. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling.

