UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Dynamic and Stochastic Theory of Choice, Response Time, and Confidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wm9g74s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Pleskac, Timothy J.
Busemeyer, Jerome

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Dynamic and Stochastic Theory of Choice, Response Time, and Confidence
Timothy J. Pleskac (tim.pleskac@gmail.com)
Indiana University, 1101 E. Tenth St.
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Jerome Busemeyer (jbusemey@indiana.edu)
Indiana University, 1101 E. Tenth St.
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

(where the respondent determines when to stop and decide),
there is an inverse relationship between the time taken and
the degree of confidence expressed in the choice
(e.g.,Baranski & Petrusic, 1998; Henmon, 1911). On the
other hand, during externally controlled stopping tasks
(where the experimenter determines when to stop and
decide) the longer people are given to make a decision the
more confident they become (e.g., Irwin, Smith, &
Mayfield, 1956).
The purpose of this paper is to present a diffusion model
that is capable of explaining all three response variables and
their interrelationships using a common underlying
processing mechanism. Next we give an intuitive
description of how the model works using a prototypical
sensory identification task. Then we formalize the model
and illustrate how it simultaneously predicts the relationship
between decision time and confidence for both the optional
stopping and externally controlled stopping tasks.
Accounting for both phenomena with a single process is an
important hurdle for any model of confidence as most
models of confidence can typically only account for one of
these effects, but not both (Vickers, 1979). Finally, we will
conclude by outlining the theoretical implications of this
model. We will also offer some preliminary comparisons
between the diffusion model of confidence and the Poisson
race model.

The three most basic performance measures used in cognitive
research are choice, response time, and confidence. We
present a diffusion model that accounts for all three using a
common underlying process. The model uses a standard drift
diffusion process to account for choice and decision time. To
make a confidence judgment, we assume that evidence
continues to accumulate after the choice. Judges then interrupt
the process to categorize the accumulated evidence into a
confidence rating. The fully specified model is shown to
account qualitatively for the most important interrelationships
between all three response variables found in past research.
Keywords: diffusion; random walk; confidence; cognitive
model; judgment.

Introduction
The three most important measures of cognitive
performance are choice, decision time, and confidence.
Signal detection theory (Green & Swets, 1966) was
originally designed to explain choices and is able to also
account for confidence ratings. A great limitation of this
model, however, is its inability to explain decision time.
Random walk/diffusion theory was introduced for this
purpose (Link & Heath, 1975; Ratcliff, 1978). This theory
provides an elegant explanation for both choices and
response time. A great limitation of random walk/diffusion
theory, up till now, is its inability to account for confidence
ratings. To date only the Poisson race model has
successfully accounted for all three variables (Van Zandt,
2000; Vickers, 1979; Vickers & Packer, 1982; Vickers,
Smith, Burt, & Brown, 1985b).1 The purpose of this paper is
to develop a generalization of the random walk/diffusion
theory to offer an alternative account of choice, decision
time, and confidence.
Our challenge is to explain with our diffusion model of
confidence the massive amount of data that has accumulated
about the complex relationships among these three
measures. Here are a few. First, there is a speed/accuracy
trade-off where faster choices produce higher error rates
(Luce, 1986). Second, accuracy generally increases with
confidence (Vickers, 1979), but judges are often
overconfident (McClelland & Bolger, 1994). Finally, there
is a twofold relationship between confidence and decision
time. On the one hand, during optional stopping tasks
1

A diffusion model of confidence judgments
To begin, consider a standard identification task. On each
trial an observer listens through headphones to either white
noise or white noise plus a faint tone (signal). The observer
has no way of knowing which event has occurred and must
decide whether the tone is present (Yes) or if there is only
white noise (No). After deciding, the observer rates her
confidence in her choice by selecting one of four categories:
‘1’ for doubtful, ‘2’ for little confidence, ‘3’ for fairly
confident, and ‘4’ for perfectly confident. With a faint
enough signal mistakes are expected and confidence
responses should be distributed over the scale.
The diffusion model makes four fundamental assumptions
to model observers’ Yes/No choices: (a) Evidence favoring
each alternative is integrated over time during the trial; (b)
The sampled evidence at each time step is subject to random
fluctuations; (c) Evidence in support of one alternative

Vickers and colleagues call this the accumulator model.

563

Figure 1. One realization of the diffusion model of confidence for a signal trial where an accurate choice is made. After a
fixed time interval passes (τ) more evidence is collected and confidence rating of ‘2’ is selected. The upper distribution is the
predicted distribution of the spread of evidence at Time 2. The predicted confidence distribution for errors is also shown had
the drift process incorrectly reached -θ.
are none if observers stop accumulating evidence once a
(signal) is evidence against the other (noise); and (d) When
threshold is reached.
a threshold level of evidence favoring one alternative over
Instead, as Figure 1 shows, we remove this feature and
the other has accumulated, the observer stops collecting
instead assume judges, after making a choice, continue to
evidence and makes a decision accordingly. A standard
accumulate evidence to estimate their confidence. In our
diffusion model also allows evidence to be continuous in
model, judges then interrupt the diffusion process to
nature and its accrual is continuous over time. See the left
categorize the accumulated evidence into a confidence
side of Figure 1 for the typical diffusion process during one
response category.
trial of the identification task. Cognitive models assuming
Next we specify in more detail the two stages of our
these four assumptions have been shown to account for
diffusion model beginning with the decision stage.
response time and accuracy data in several different areas
Decision stage
(e.g., Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993; Ratcliff, 1978;
Ratcliff & Smith, 2004; Roe, Busemeyer, & Townsend,
The decision stage takes the standard form as other
2001; Usher & McClelland, 2004).
diffusion models. At time 0 the state of evidence, L(0), is at
Despite the ability of the diffusion model to so elegantly
its starting point, L(0) = z, where L(t) denotes the state of
explain choice and decision time, the model has typically
evidence at time t. The parameter z accounts for any
been dismissed as a plausible model of confidence
response bias observers may have toward one response or
judgments (e.g., Vickers, 1979). Here is why. If the
the other. If z = 0 observers are unbiased, if z < 0 then
accumulated evidence in the diffusion model is interpreted
observers are biased to respond No, and if z > 0 then they
as the likelihood ratio of the observed data given the two
are biased to respond Yes. As Figure 1 shows, at the onset
response alternatives then the choice process can be
of the trial observers begin accumulating evidence to make a
understood as an optimal Bayesian inference model
decision. If the accumulated evidence reaches the upper
(Edwards, 1965). With this interpretation the choice
threshold at θ, then judges choose the Yes response. If it
thresholds are a fixed level of posterior odds that are just
reaches - θ then they would choose the No response. The
small or just large enough for observers to act on. Thus, the
time it takes for the evidence to reach either threshold is the
model predicts that across all trials – having reached the
predicted decision time, t1.
same level of posterior belief in their choices – judges must
To formalize the decision stage we will temporarily
have an equal level of confidence in all of their choices.
assume that the accumulation process occurs at discrete and
This is clearly false.
arbitrarily small fixed blocks of time, h. With each passing
To surmount this obstacle we use the actual task the
block of time each sampled piece of evidence, x(t + h),
observers are confronted with to relax one assumption of the
updates the state of evidence so that at time t + h the state of
diffusion model. Recall that during the identification task,
the evidence would be,
judges are first asked to make a choice and then make a
L(t+h) = L(t) + x(t + h).
(1)
confidence judgment. Across 100 years of psychological
The time that has passed after n samples is given by t = nh.
experiments this procedure is the rule rather than the
As Figure 1 illustrates at each time step the sampled
exception (Baranski & Petrusic, 1998). What are the
evidence is not constant, but subject to variability. We
consequences of this procedure on diffusion models? There
assume the sampled evidence at each time step is normally
distributed with a mean of δh and variance of σ2h when the

564

signal is present and with a mean of - δh and variance of σ2h
when noise is present. Holding everything else constant the
larger the magnitude of δ the faster people will reach a
response and the fewer errors people will make.
This model is now equipped to account for speedaccuracy tradeoffs. Namely increasing the magnitude of |θ |
will increase the amount evidence needed to reach a choice.
This reduces the impact random fluctuations in evidence
will have on choice and as a result increase choice accuracy.
However, a larger |θ | means more time will be needed
before sufficient evidence is collected. In comparison,
decreasing |θ | leads to faster responses, but also more
errors.
A standard Wiener diffusion model – where evidence
accrues continuously over time – is derived when the time
step h approaches zero so that the above discrete process
converges to a continuous time process (Cox & Miller,
1965). Ratcliff (1978) provides the expressions for the
predicted choice probabilities of the four different types of
responses (hits, false alarms, correct rejections, and misses)
and the probability density functions for decision times (see
also Cox & Miller, 1965).

As Figure 1 depicts, analogous to signal detection theory,
judges scale the accumulated evidence L(t2) onto the
possible response categories. In the case of our hypothetical
identification task there are four response categories
conditioned on the Yes/No choice, Rj|Choice where j = 0, 1,
2, 3 so each judge needs three response criteria for each
option, ck, yes where k = 1, 2, 3, to select among the
responses. The response criteria, just like the choice
thresholds, are set relative to values of evidence. The
location of the criteria depend, as in signal detection theory,
on the biases of judges and may also be sensitive to the
same experimental manipulations that change the location of
the drift starting point, z. We also assume symmetry in the
criteria for a yes or no response (e.g, c1, no = -c3, yes). If
judges choose the Yes option and the cumulated evidence is
less then c1, yes (L(t2) < c1, yes) then judges select confidence
level 1, if it rests between the first and second criteria, c1, yes
<L(t2) < c2, yes, then they chooses confidence level 2, and so
on.
The distributions over the confidence ratings are a
function of the distribution of evidence in the diffusion
process. However, the properties of the distributions reflect
the fact that we know what state the evidence was in at the
time of decision, either θ or -θ. So our uncertainty about its
location at t2 is only a function of τ. Consequently, during a
signal trial for a given δ the distribution of evidence at time
t2, f [x(t2)], is normally distributed with a mean of τδ + θ if
Yes was chosen and τδ - θ if No was chosen. The means
for noise trials can be found by replacing the δ’s with - δ.
The variance in all cases is σ2τ. The distribution over the
different confidence ratings for hits trials is then
Pr(Rj | Hit) = P(cj,Yes < L(t2) < cj+1,Yes|δ, σ2, τ)
(3)
where c0, yes is equal to -∞ and cj+1, yes is equal to ∞. Similar
expressions can be formulated for the other choices. The
precise values can be found using the standard normal
cumulative distribution function.
We leave the model as specified and now turn to some
basic properties of the model and how it accounts for the
known relationships between confidence, choice accuracy,
and decision time.

Confidence stage
After making a decision we assume judges continue
accumulating evidence to make a confidence rating. Our
model captures this idea by allowing the diffusion process,
after reaching either choice threshold, to continue for a fixed
period of time, τ. The parameter τ is empirically observable.
Baranski and Petrusic (1998) report over a number of
perceptual experiments that with accuracy-stressed
conditions and after an initial block of trials the amount of
time between making a decision and selecting a confidence
level (τ) is between 500 to 650 ms and constant across
confidence ratings. For speeded conditions τ was slightly
higher (~700 to 900 ms) and tended to vary across
confidence ratings.2 In a memory study where accuracy was
emphasized Pleskac, Dougherty, Rivedenera, and Wallsten
(2007) found that τ was between 700 to 750 ms and also
constant across confidence levels. As a result we fix the
interval between the decision time (t1) and confidence time
(t2) at τ = 700 milliseconds to identify the basic properties of
the model. Future work will investigate if τ is sensitive to
item difficulty or the speed/accuracy tradeoff.
At the time of the confidence judgment, the accumulated
evidence reflects the newly collected evidence plus the
evidence collected before making a decision,
L(t2) = L(t1) + x(t1 + τ).
(2)

Qualitative Predictions
Notice that our diffusion model has the same strengths as
signal detection theory in accounting for confidence ratings.
Namely it can capture the basic relationship between
confidence and accuracy where larger δ’s lead to greater
discrimination and also, ceteris peribus, higher levels of
confidence. Like signal detection theory it can also account
for situations when the observer is overconfident. For
example, Erev, Wallsetn, and Budescu (1994) provide a
detailed account of how signal detection can account for
overconfidence assuming improper criteria placement and
random error (see also Ferrell & McGoey, 1980).
The model goes beyond signal detection theory though in
that it predicts that confidence is sensitive to the speedaccuracy tradeoff. Larger magnitudes of |θ | will not only

2

The systematic change in τ across confidence ratings may be
indicative of τ being a function of other parameters of the diffusion
process such as the drift rate or its sensitivity to other experimental
factors. However, since all of Baranski and Petrusic’s (1998) used
the same verbal terms for confidence it is difficult to know if the
change in τ is indicative of post-decision computation or the
respondent learning how to scale different levels of confidence.

565

shows the diffusion model naturally predicts this
relationship. It shows the average path of the drift process
with δ > 0 and the predicted distributions over the
confidence scale at different points in time. Because the
expected state of evidence at any point in time is δt,
observers’ confidence will naturally increase holding the
response criteria constant.
The direct relationship between confidence and decision
time, has posed a problem for early models of confidence.
That is because they assumed that confidence was an
inverse function of response time (Audley, 1960; Ratcliff,
1978). But, can our model predict the inverse relationship
between confidence and decision time? As we show next,
for a complete account we need to incorporate trial-by-trial
variability in δ.

Figure 2. The predicted direct relationship between decision
time and confidence.

Confidence and decision time inversely related

lead to slower decision times and more accurate choices, but
also higher levels of confidence. This is because the mean of
the confidence distributions are a function of the choice
thresholds, θ and -θ. The opposite is true for speeded trials
where the model predicts lower levels of confidence.
Vickers and Packer (1982) report experimental results that
support this prediction.
Next we show how the diffusion model can account for
the twofold relationship between confidence and decision
time. Though historically the inverse relationship between
the two variables was shown to exist first, for simplicity’s
sake, we begin with the later finding that there is a direct
relationship between confidence and decision time.

A common result is that confidence and decision time are
inversely related (e.g., Baranski & Petrusic, 1998; Henmon,
1911). These studies employ a discrimination task with an
optional stopping procedure where observers control their
own sampling by choosing when they are ready to make a
choice. The results in these tasks show that across stimuli
the average decision time monotonically decreases as the
confidence level increases.
The model naturally accounts for the inverse relationship
between confidence and decision time when the objective
difference between stimuli varies from trial to trial. The
diffusion model handles this by assigning more difficult
stimuli lower levels of δ. For these stimuli, low δ’s result in
slower predicted decision times, and lower confidence
levels - the inverse relationship.
The difficulty for the diffusion model comes in that
Henmon (1911) and Baranski and Petrusic (1998) (see
Experiment 1) showed that this inverse relationship holds
even when the objective difference between stimuli is held
constant in the same block of trials. The model in its present
form does not predict this relationship. In fact it predicts
that during an optional stopping task for a given δ any
observed decision time will have an identical distribution
over confidence. This is because the distribution over
decision time g(t1 | δ, z, θ) is conditionally independent from
the distribution of evidence at the confidence time point, fδ [
x(t2) | δ, θ,τ, Choice]. In other words, the time in which the
diffusion process reaches θ does not directly depend on the
accumulated evidence at time t2, and visa versa. Instead the
relationship, as we have previously shown, is mediated by
the values of δ and θ.
To account for this inverse relationship for a fixed level of
difficulty we introduce a slight modification to the model.
Due to factors like fluctuations in attention or motivation,
we allow δ for a given stimulus to vary randomly between
trials. The modification is not new. Ratcliff and colleagues
(Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff & Smith, 2004) used the same
modification to account for the often-observed phenomenon

Confidence and decision time directly related
The result that in some cases there is a direct relationship
between confidence and decision time has been investigated
primarily with what Irwin, Smith, and Mayfield (1956) call
the expanded judgment task. The task essentially
externalizes the sequential sampling process asking people
to physically sample observations from a distribution and
then make a choice. For example Vickers et al. (1985)
allowed observers to sample horizontal lines on a computer
monitor. Their location on the horizontal axis of the screen
was determined by a normal distribution with either a
positive or a negative mean. The participant had to
determine the sign of the mean based on the location of the
sampled lines. Generalizing results from expanded judgment
tasks to situations when sampling is internal, like our
hypothetical identification task, is justified as results from
both tasks mimic each other (Vickers et al., 1985a; Vickers
et al., 1985b).
The direct relationship between decision time and
confidence was uncovered when an external stopping rule
was used during the expanded judgment task. With this
stopping rule, the experimenter interrupts observers at
different sample sizes and asks them for a confidence
judgment. For example, whether the mean is above or below
0. In this case, confidence increases with larger samples
(Irwin et al., 1956; Vickers et al., 1985b). As Figure 2

566

Smith, 2004), that decision times for errors will on average
be slower than decision times for correct choices. This is
because the tail for the errors extends beyond the tail for
correct choices. The top panel of Figure 3 also shows the
predicted inverse relationship for hits. Taking slices of the
joint density function at different values of x(t2) along the yaxis we see that the peak of the density function travels
south, southeasterly across plot. That together with the
increasing tail of the decision times as we move down x(t2)
will draw the average decision time out for lower levels of
evidence. Because confidence is directly scaled from the
accumulated evidence this in turn implies an inverse
relationship. The plot shows a hypothetical set of criteria
and confidence scales for such a mapping. The bottom panel
shows the same inverse relationship for incorrect choices.

Conclusion
Vickers (2001) commented that “despite its practical
importance and pervasiveness, the variable of confidence
seems to have played a Cinderella role in cognitive
psychology - relied on for its usefulness, but overlooked as
an interesting variable in its own right.” (p. 148). Our
diffusion model helps confidence relinquish this role and
reveals that a single stochastic cognitive process can give
rise to the three most important response variables in
cognitive psychology: choice, decision time, and
confidence.
The model uses a standard drift diffusion process to
account for choice and decision time. To make a confidence
rating, we assume that evidence continues to accumulate
after a choice. Judges then interrupt the process to
categorize the accumulated evidence into a confidence
rating. The formally specified model qualitatively accounts
for the known interrelationships between choice, decision
time, and confidence.
An advantage of this model is that it is a generalization of
signal detection theory. Therefore, it is immediately
applicable to the same basic and applied tasks that signal
detection has been used for such as lie detection (see BenShakhar, Lieblich, & Bar-Hillel, 1982); jury decision
making (Mowen & Darwyn, 1986); and HIV screening
(Meyer & Pauker, 1987).
The model can also be adapted to account for other
confidence procedures. For example, often judges are asked
to directly evaluate their confidence that the current
stimulus is a signal without explicitly making a choice. An
intriguing possibility that deserves investigation is that even
in these situations respondents implicitly make a choice
(signal or noise) then scale their confidence. Indeed,
applications of the Poisson race model often make this
assumption when modeling these types of confidence
ratings (e.g., Van Zandt, 2000).
The Poisson race model is a viable competitor for the
diffusion model in that it also accounts for choice, response
time, and confidence. Our diffusion model holds two
advantages over the Poisson race model. First, the diffusion
model accurately predicts skewed response time

Figure 3. Contour plots of the marginal density of decision
time and evidence at the time of confidence for hits and
false alarms. Parameters from Ratcliff (1978) were used.
that decision times for errors are slower than times for
correct choices (for another modeling strategy see Lee,
Fuss, & Navarro, 2006).
To model trial-by-trial variability in the drift rate we –
like Ratcliff – will assume that δ is normally distributed
with a mean v and variance η2. Now with trial-by-trial
variability the model does predict the inverse relationship
for the same reason as when objective difficulty varied
between stimuli. To see the predicted inverse relationship,
Figure 3 shows a contour plot of the marginal joint density
function of t1 and x(t2) for both hits and false alarms. The
distributions were found by calculating the joint distribution
of δ, t1, and x(t2), and integrating over δ,

u[ x ( t 2 ), t1] =

# g(t " ) f (" hit ) f ( ) [ x(t ) " ]d" .
1

"

x t2

2

(4)

Notice that the distribution over δ reflects our knowledge of
the type of choice at t1 (hit, miss, false alarm, or correct
rejection),
Pr (choice " ) f" (" )
.
(5)
f" (" choice) =
Pr (choice " ) f" (" ) d"

!

#

!

The parameters of the model were approximated from
Ratcliff’s (1978) diffusion model parameters.
The top panel plots the joint distribution for hits and the
bottom for false alarms. Comparing the two density
functions reveals, consistent with past work (e.g., Ratcliff &

567

distributions where the Poisson model tends to predict more
symmetrical distributions (Ratcliff & Smith, 2004). A
second advantage is that the diffusion model explicitly
models the response mapping function, whereas the Poisson
model typically contains no such component. Future tests of
these two models can only improve our understanding of the
cognitive underpinnings of choice, decision time, and
confidence.

Luce, R. D. (1986). Response Times: Their Role in Inferring
Elementary Mental Organization. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
McClelland, A. G. R., & Bolger, F. (1994). The calibration
of subjective probabilities: Theories and models
1980-94. In G. Wright & P. Ayton (Eds.),
Subjective Probability (pp. 453-482). Chichester:
John Wiley & Sons.
Meyer, K. B., Pauker, S. G. (1987). Sounding Board:
Screening for HIV: Can we afford the false
positive rate? The New England Journal of
Medicine. 238-241.
Mowen, J. C., & Darwyn, E. L. (1986). Discretionary
aspects of jury decision making. In Arkes, H. R. &
Hammond, K. R. eds. Judgment and Decision
Making.
Pleskac, T. J., Dougherty, M. P., Rivedenera, W., &
Wallsten, T. S. (2007). Effects of divided versus
full attention on confidence. Submitted manuscript.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). Theory of Memory Retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.
Ratcliff, R., & Smith, P. (2004). A comparison of sequential
sampling models for two-choice reaction time.
Psychological review, 111, 333.
Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (2001).
Multialternative decision field theory: A dynamic
connectionst model of decision making.
Psychological Review, 108, 370-392.
Usher, M. M., & McClelland, J. L. J. L. (2004). Loss
aversion and inhibition in dynamical models of
multialternative choice. Psychological review, 111,
757-769.
Van Zandt, T. (2000). ROC curves and confidence
judgments in recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 26, 582-600.
Vickers, D. (1979). Decision processes in visual perception.
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Vickers, D. (2001). Where does the balance of evidence lie
with respect to confidence? In E. Sommerfeld, R.
Kompass & T. Lachmann (Eds.), Proceedings of
the seventeenth annual meeting of the international
society for psychophysics (pp. 148-153).
Lengerich: Pabst.
Vickers, D., Burt, J., Smith, P., & Brown, M. (1985a).
Experimental Paradigms Emphasizing State or
Process Limitations .1. Effects on Speed Accuracy
Tradeoffs. Acta Psychologica, 59, 129-161.
Vickers, D., & Packer, J. (1982). Effects of Alternating Set
for Speed or Accuracy on Response-Time,
Accuracy and Confidence in a Unidimensional
Discrimination Task. Acta Psychologica, 50, 179197.
Vickers, D., Smith, P., Burt, J., & Brown, M. (1985b).
Experimental Paradigms Emphasizing State or
Process Limitations .2. Effects on Confidence. Acta
Psychologica, 59, 163-193.

References
Audley, R. J. (1960). A stochastic model for individual
choice behavior. Psychological Review, 67, 1-15.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1998). Probing the locus
of confidence judgments: Experiments on the time
to determine confidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
24, 929-945.
Ben-Shakhar, G., Lieblich, I., & Bar-Hillel, M. (1982). An
evaluation of polygraphers' judgments: a review
from a decision theoretic perspective. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 67, 701-713.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field
theory: A dynamic-cognitive approach to decision
making in an uncertain environment. Psychological
Review, 100, 432-459.
Cox, D. R., & Miller, H. D. (1965). The Theory of
Stochastic Processes. New York, NY: Chapman
and Hall.
Edwards, W. (1965). Optimal Strategies for Seeking
Information - Models for Statistics, Choice
Reaction-Times,
and
Human
InformationProcessing. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
2, 312-329.
Erev, I., Wallsten, T. S., & Budescu, D. V. (1994).
Simultaneous over- and underconfidence: The role
of error in judgment processes. Psychological
Review, 101, 519-527.
Ferrell, W. R., & McGoey, P. J. (1980). A model of
calibration for subjective probabilities.
Organizational Behavior & Human Decision
Processes, 26, 32-53.
Henmon, V. A. C. (1911). The relation of the time of a
judgment to its accuracy. Psychological Review,
18, 186-201.
Irwin, F. W., Smith, W. A. S., & Mayfield, J. F. (1956).
Tests of two theories of decision in an "expanded
judgment" situation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 51, 261-268.
Link, S. W., & Heath, R. A. (1975). Sequential Theory of
Psychological Discrimination. Psychometrika, 40,
77-105.
Lee, M.D., Fuss, I.G, & Navarro, D.J. (2006). A Bayesian
approach to diffusion models of decision-making
and response time. In B. Schölkopf, J.C. Platt, & T.
Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 19. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

568

