UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Matter of Trust: When Landmarks and Geometry Are Used During Reorientation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zg7099x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Ratliff, Kristin R.
Newcombe, Nora S.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Matter of Trust: When Landmarks and Geometry Are Used During Reorientation
Kristin R. Ratliff (k.ratliff@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Nora S. Newcombe (newcombe@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

spaces (Cheng, 1986; Gallistel, 1990; Hermer & Spelke,
1994, 1996; Wang & Spelke, 2002; see Cheng & Newcombe,
2005 for an overview).
As an alternative to modularity, evidence within a variety
of domains suggests that spatial information sources are
frequently combined to determine judgments and behavior
using weighting mechanisms. Within the spatial domain,
methods using weighting mechanisms include Huttenlocher,
Hedges and Duncan’s (1991) hierarchical combination model
and Hartley, Trinkler and Burgess’ (2004) boundary
proximity model (see Cheng et al., in press; Newcombe &
Ratliff, 2007, for overviews). Such approaches can be
classified as examples of the adaptive combination view,
which focuses on the certainty and variability of encoding of
spatial cues to determine the weight placed on that
information (Newcombe & Huttenlocher, 2006). Organisms
are more likely to use information that is more salient, certain
and less variable, as well as information that is more familiar
to the organism from prior experience. During reorientation,
an adaptive combination view suggests that geometric and
featural information are utilized in varying degrees at varying
points in development, depending on the certainty and
variance with which the two kinds of information are
encoded, along with the salience of the cues, their perceived
usefulness, and the organism’s prior experience using the
cues (Newcombe & Ratliff, 2007).

Abstract
The size of the experimental enclosure used in a reorientation
paradigm appears to have a profound effect on very young
children (Learmonth, Newcombe, & Huttenlocher, 2001;
Learmonth, Nadel, & Newcombe, 2002) and non-human
species (Sovrano, Bisazza, & Vallortigara, 2005; Sovrano, &
Vallortigara, 2006; Vallortigara, Feruglio, & Sovrano, 2005).
Greater preference has been found for geometric information
when reorienting in smaller environments than in larger spaces
once geometric and featural cues are placed in conflict
(Chiandetti, Regolin, Sovrano & Vallortigara, in press;
Sovrano, Bisazza, & Vallortigara, 2007; Sovrano &
Vallortigara, 2006). We present two studies suggesting that: (a)
when a landmark is placed in conflict with the geometry of an
experimental space, adults favor geometric information only in
a small room and favor featural information in a larger room,
and (b) training in a large room increases use of features in a
small room. These results provide evidence that the supposed
dominance of geometric information in guiding reorientation is
limited to small, fully-enclosed spaces. Flexible reorientation,
encompassing all available spatial cues, is characteristic in
larger spaces or when learning history and experience have
established the usefulness of features.
Key Words: navigation; reorientation; adaptive combination.

Introduction
Determining one’s specific location after being disoriented is
a basic adaptive challenge for all mobile organisms. The
development and production of such navigational abilities
often relies on an allocentric process where direction and
distance are measured using various types of spatial cues such
as geometric and featural information (Gallistel, 1990;
Newcombe, 2002). However, there has been much debate as
to how these various sources of spatial information are
utilized during reorientation.
Research on human and nonhuman spatial reorientation has
revealed that all varieties of species tested thus far navigate
using the geometric shape of an environment following
disorientation, while use of features (such as distinctive wall
colors or panels) has only been found in certain
circumstances, such as larger environments, when landmarks
are distal, or when the feature directly marks the site of the
hidden target (see Cheng & Newcombe, 2005 for a full
review). Some have argued that these results suggest a
modular view of reorientation, in that a mental representation
of the space is formed within an encapsulated geometric
module that only incorporates information about the shape of

When and How Features Are Used
In contrast to evidence supporting a geometric module
account of reorientation, many non-human species use
features in addition to geometric information during
reorientation in a wide array of circumstances. Vallortigara,
Zanforlin and Pasti (1990) found that chickens used both
geometry and features to reorient within a rectangular
enclosure; however, this use was limited to featural cues that
directly marked the target or rotationally opposite corner.
Kelly, Spetch and Heth (1998) found more flexible feature
use among pigeons, reorienting by both direct and indirect
features in conjunction with geometry to guide searches for
food. Additionally, when features were placed in conflict with
the learned geometry of the space (distinct panels placed in
the corners rotated to adjacent corners) the history of the
pigeon’s exposure to the featural cues affected their reliance
on them. Pigeons trained in the presence of the feature panels
primarily used this information, even in the conflicting

581

powerful (Gouteux & Spelke, 2001; Poucet, Lenck-Santini, &
Save, 2003).
The previously reviewed studies with children and
nonhuman species demonstrate the profound effect of room
size on determining whether features will be used during
reorientation. The further away a feature is located from an
organism the greater they will rely on this cue as compared to
the location of a proximal feature because movement around
a local area creates only small variations in the location of the
distal feature but very large variations in the location of a
local feature according to an adaptive combination model
(Newcombe & Ratliff, 2007).
An organism’s prior experience and learning history would
also be predicted to greatly affect the weight given to featural
information according to an adaptive combination model.
Striking evidence for this idea was recently reported when
wild-caught mountain chickadees, having spent little to no
time in enclosed rectangular environments, showed a
dominant use of features overshadowing geometry during
reorientation (Gray, Bloomfield, Ferrey, Spetch & Sturdy,
2005). The chickadees also used geometry to a reduced
degree when it is the only information available as compared
to other studied organisms. Similarly, fish that have been
raised in circular tanks reorient more by featural information
than geometry as compared to fish raised in rectangular tanks
(Brown, Spetch, & Hurd, in press).
These findings, in addition to those previously reviewed,
support the adaptive combination view that cue validity,
strength of encoding, and prior experiences, such as rearing
environments and training history, play an important role in
affecting the utilization of features and geometry during
reorientation. Geometry is not dominant over featural
information as a rule, but rather, the use of such spatial cues
depends on the weights associated with them. By placing
geometric information in conflict with features in Experiment
1, we examine to what degree geometric and featural
information guides adult human reorientation in two different
sized environments. We expect that the adults will rely on the
geometric information to a greater degree in the smaller
environment, with increased use of features in the larger
enclosure, due their history with the usefulness of distal
versus proximal landmarks.
Learning history and prior experience appear to affect the
use of features. If featural information is indeed utilized to a
lesser degree in the small room than in the larger room of
Experiment 1, would manipulating learning experience affect
this difference as predicted by the adaptive combination
model? Specifically, we wanted to know whether training in
the large room would increase use of features during testing
in the small room. We consider these possibilities in
Experiment 2 by again placing geometric information in
conflict with features in both a large and small environment
after training in the opposite sized room.

geometric locations, whereas the pigeons trained initially with
only geometry showed a mixed use of features and geometry.
Rhesus monkeys also demonstrate flexible reorientation
using both room geometry (rectangular shape) and a large
feature (colored wall) to locate a reward (Gouteux, ThinusBlanc, & Vauclair, 2001). However, the monkeys only used
large features to distinguish the room shape while ignoring
small cues. This may be explained by cue validity, in that
small objects are more likely to move and thus provide less
stable landmarks than large objects. Since size often relates to
weight, larger objects in the environment are viewed as heavy
and harder to move, providing a more stable distant
landmark. There is even some neurobiological evidence to
support the importance of proximity when utilizing features,
in that the head-direction cells of rats seem to depend on
information from distal rather than proximal cues (Zugaro et
al., 2004).
Fish have been trained to locate an exit within a small
rectangular fish tank by using either featured panels in each
corner or a colored wall along one side of the tank in addition
to the available geometry (Sovrano, Bisazza, & Vallortigara,
2002). Interestingly, when trained in a small tank and later
tested in a larger tank, fish make relatively more geometric
errors, whereas fish trained in a large space then tested in a
small tank rely greatly on features to reorient (Sovrano,
Bisazza, & Vallortigara, 2005). Size of the enclosure also
changes reorientation strategies when a feature, such as a
colored wall, is shifted during testing from the learned
location. When the learned geometry and feature locations are
placed in conflict, fish (Sovrano, Bisazza, & Vallortigara,
2007) as well as chicks (Chiandetti, Regolin, Sovrano &
Vallortigara, in press; Sovrano & Vallortigara, 2006) reorient
by the geometry of a small enclosure but incorporate features
to a greater extent in the larger space.
The effect of room size is seen among human children as
well. Disoriented children 17 to 24 months (Learmonth,
Newcombe, & Huttenlocher, 2001) and 3 to 5 years
(Learmonth, Nadel, & Newcombe, 2002) used a variety of
featural landmarks, including a bookcase or a colored wall, to
reorient in a room larger than the original Hermer and Spelke
(1994, 1996) studies. Although the larger room is four times
the area of the original small room, the ratio of long to short
walls remains the same as the original Hermer and Spelke
room. All children in this larger room successfully used the
features to reorient above chance and performance improved
with increasing age. However, all children demonstrated
geometric encapsulation in the small room until the age of six
years.

Explaining the Room Size Effect
All of the previously reviewed studies include fully enclosed
rectangular environments in which geometric information is
easily encoded with great certainty and low variability.
Geometric information could therefore be expected to
predominate in these studies. However, when geometric
information is more ambiguous, as found with a partially
enclosed environment, its use in guiding reorientation is less

Experiment 1
In this study, we placed geometric and featural information in
conflict with each other within a learned environment.

582

Participants were trained with a location memory task in
either a small, fully enclosed rectangular space or a larger
rectangular room, four times the area of the small one.
However, the ratio of long to short walls remained constant
across room sizes, providing equivalent geometric
information in both environments. Each room had a stable
featural landmark on the wall during training that was moved,
out of sight of the participants, to the adjacent wall prior to
testing. We expected adults to reorient in a more
geometrically driven manner in the small room, while
showing greater dependence on feature location in the larger
room. Increased feature driven searches in the large room
would cast doubt on the modular viewpoint that geometric
information dominates spatial reorientation as a rule.

was counterbalanced and matched across conditions, so that
an equal number of participants received direct or indirect
trials for each room size.
The experimenter instructed the participants to spin slowly
in place (at least 10 full rotations) and change directions upon
cue. The experimenter walked around the participant at
varying speeds as to not provide a landmark cue as well. The
participant then stopped spinning and faced the
predetermined direction. The target was hidden in the same
corner for each of the training trials within subjects. The
facing position of the participants and the hiding corner for
each participant was counterbalanced in each condition and
matched across conditions, so that an equal number of trials
ended with subjects facing each wall and the object being
hidden in each corner between subjects. After disorientation,
the experimenter asked the participant, “Where did I hide the
keys?” noting any pauses longer than 5s and telling them to
“point” if they hesitated.
After the four training trials, the participants were
instructed that the test trials would consist of the same task
and they must remember, “the keys will be in the same place
as they were during training, but you will not see me hide
them this time.” All participants were led outside the room
and asked to draw a sketch of the enclosure to establish
encoding of the geometry and features. While the participant
waited outside the room, the experimenter moved the feature
from its trained position to the next adjacent clockwise corner
(direct) or middle panel (indirect). After the short break, the
experimenter blindfolded the participant and led them back
into the middle of the room. The participant then performed
the same disorientation procedure previously described. Once
the participant stopped spinning and took off the blindfold,
they pointed to a corner, indicating where they thought the
target object was located. No feedback was given on whether
they were correct or incorrect. The experimenter then asked
which corner they would pick for their second choice. The
experimenter recorded the first and second choices as the
landmark corner (L), a geometrically appropriate corner (G),
or the error corner (E) as shown in Figure 1. Another test trial
of the same procedure was then performed with the feature
location in the same shifted position as test trial 1.
Following the test trials, participants were de-briefed about
the purpose of the experiment and asked about what strategy,
if any, they used to reorient. We calculated for each
participant a proportion of search trials at landmark (L) and
combined geometric (G+G) corners for each trial. We used
single sample t tests (all two-tailed unless specified
otherwise) to examine crucial contrasts in landmark and
geometric search performance between the two room sizes.

Method
Participants. Thirty-two college undergraduates at Temple
University were recruited from introductory psychology
classes and given course credit. Six males and 10 females
were randomly assigned to the small room, and seven males
and nine females were randomly assigned to the larger room.
Apparatus and materials. Participants were tested in either
a small rectangular enclosure (four ft. by six ft.) or a larger
enclosure (eight ft. by 12 ft.). Thus the area of the larger room
is four times that of the small room, but the ratio of long to
short walls remains the same. The smaller “room” consisted
of a frame with white fabric covering the four walls and the
ceiling, and four 25-W lights attached at the top of each
corner to illuminate the room and avoid any directional light
cues. The larger “room” consisted of white fabric affixed to
the ceiling of the experiment room and two symmetric
overhead lights illuminating the room without giving any
directional light cues. In both “rooms” one of the short walls
served as a door and was sealed with Velcro when closed to
retain the symmetry of the room. The featural landmark used
for both rooms was a moveable piece of brightly colored,
patterned fabric, which stands out from the all-white
background but is flush with the wall. Identical plastic
containers in each corner served as potential hiding places for
the target object. Participants listened to white noise through
headphones to prevent any sound cues during the task. A key
chain with four keys attached served as the target search
object.
Design and Procedures. Participants were randomly
assigned to either the small or larger room. Participants then
received four training trials with the stable landmark feature
to familiarize them with the spatial layout of the room. The
training trials consisted of the experimenter showing the
participant the target item (keys) while standing in the middle
of the room. The experimenter then hid the keys in one corner
that was either directly marked by the feature (the feature was
located at the hiding corner) or indirectly marked by the
feature (the feature was located in the middle of the wall,
adjacent to the hiding corner) (see Figure 1). Feature location

Results
Figures 1a and 1b present the mean proportion of landmark
and geometric first searches during trial 1.

583

TRAINING

TEST
E

G

0

.06

(0)

(.06)

.25

.69

(.11)

(.12)

(a)

G

L
E

G

0
(0)

(b)
G

.44
(.13)

.31

.25

(.12)

(.11)

L

Figure 1. Adults received four trials with a stable target and were tested in either (a) a large or (b) a small rectangular room.
Mean proportions (with standard errors) of first searches after the landmark shift are presented on the right (G=geometric corner,
L=landmark corner, E=error corner). Feature location was counterbalanced across all participants in both room sizes, but for
space concerns we present two examples here by either marking the target directly (bottom) or indirectly (top).
There was no effect of gender, F(1,24) = 0.43, p = .52, or
feature location, F(1,24) = 2.08, p = .16, on either landmark
or geometric searches. However, room size had a significant
effect on whether participants chose landmark or
geometrically appropriate corners, F(1,24) = 6.19, p = .02.
Participants in the small room first searched at the geometric
corners where the target was located during the training
session significantly more often than did those in the larger
room, t(30) = 2.67, p < .01 (one-tailed). The opposite
response strategy was found for the participants in the larger
room, who first searched the corner relative to where the
landmark was now located, significantly more often than did
the participants in the small room, t(30) = 2.67, p < .01 (onetailed).
Room size had a profound effect on participants’ initial
search strategies. Participants searched the geometrically
appropriate corners from the training layout significantly
more often in the small enclosure than in the larger space.
However, participants used the location of the featural
landmark to reorient, despite its shifted location from the
trained layout, in the larger room as compared to the small
room. The feature was not serving as a direct beacon in this
case either, as there were no differences in search behavior
for participants using the feature that directly marked the
target or those who used the feature in an indirect manner.

reorienting adults would support an adaptive combination
view of explaining human reorientation based on cue
weighting rather than the existence of a geometric module.

Method
Participants. Thirty-two Temple undergraduates were
recruited as previously described and randomly assigned to
two groups, with six males and 10 females in each group.
Apparatus, Design and Procedures. Participants were
randomly assigned to the large or small room for the training
session and followed the same reorientation procedure in
Experiment 1. Following training, participants were then
given the test trials in the opposite size room. As such, half of
the participants learned the spatial layout of the small space
and experienced the landmark shift in the larger room,
whereas the other half received training in the larger room
and were tested in the small room (see Figure 2). The
experimenter recorded the participants’ searches and analyzed
the data as described in Experiment 1.

Results
Figures 2a and 2b present the mean proportion of landmark
and geometric first searches during trial 1.
There were no effects of feature location, gender, or room
size on either landmark or geometric searches (all F’s < .13,
p’s > .72). All participants used the same search strategy with
no differences between the larger and small rooms, F(1,28) =
.35, p = .56. That is, participants initially searched based on
the location of the feature significantly more than the
geometry, even after the landmark location shifted from the
trained layout with respect to the geometry of the room,

Experiment 2
In order to examine the effects of learning history on adult
spatial reorientation, we replicated Experiment 1 but switched
room size between training and testing. Hence, half the
participants were trained in the larger room and tested using
the shifted landmark in the small room and vice versa for the
other half of participants. Finding that learning history can
increase the use of features in the small room among

584

TRAINING

TEST
E

0

G

0

(0)

(a)
G
E

(0)

.06

.94

(.06)

(.06)

0

L

G

.12

(0)

(.09)

0

.88

(0)

(.09)

(b)
G
L
Figure 2. Adults were either (a) trained in a large room and tested in a small room, or (b) trained in a small room and tested in a
large room. Mean proportions (with standard errors) of first searches after the landmark shift are presented on the right. Feature
location was again counterbalanced across all participants in both room sizes using the two examples shown here by either
marking the target directly (top) or indirectly (bottom).

Discussion

for both the small, t(15) = 4.39, p < .01, and larger testing
enclosures, t(15) = 7.00, p < .01. Interestingly, the
participants who were trained in the larger space and
subsequently tested in the small room searched at the featural
corner significantly more often than the participants tested in
the small room in Experiment 1, t(30) = 4.44, p < .01.
Again, use of features during reorientation was greatly
increased by exposure to the larger room, whether during a
brief training session or during the two test trials alone.
Reorientation was dominated by the location of the feature in
both small and larger rooms in this shifted landmark task.
Participants initially searched for the keys according to the
location of the featural landmark, ignoring the geometric
information. The brief training session in the larger space is
enough to shift response strategies from geometry based to
feature driven in the small enclosure following landmark
displacement. Perhaps even more striking is that training in
the small room resulted in featural driven reorientation when
testing occurred in the larger space.
One may argue these findings do not provide evidence
against modularity because the geometric module may be
deactivated when switching room sizes from training to
testing, which leaves only the featural information to guide
searches. However, this explanation is unlikely due to the fact
that the ratio of long to short walls remains constant in the
two testing environments, despite the size change, resulting in
the same relative geometric information in both rooms.
Additionally, we know that training in the small room
encourages encoding of, and subsequent reorientation by,
geometry over features. Therefore, finding that features guide
reorientation in the larger space suggests a change in strategy
relative to the change in room size, not an inactivated
geometric module.

In the present experiments we found that adults use both
geometric and featural properties of environments in order to
reorient and find a hidden object. By shifting a landmark’s
position during a reorientation task in a small versus larger
space, we placed the geometric information of the learned
spatial layout in conflict with the learned location of a feature
within that space. In Experiment 1, we found that in pitting
features against geometry, adults choose to reorient by the
geometric room shape in a very small enclosure, but the
feature is used to guide navigation in a larger space.
We also examined in Experiment 2 whether learning
history affects the use of features in instances of competing
information by training the adults in either the larger or small
space and then performing the shifted landmark task in the
opposite sized room. Adults reoriented strictly by the location
of the feature, regardless of room size. It appears that
exposure to the larger room, either during four training
sessions or two test trials, drastically increases the use of
features during reorientation.
Taken together, these results provide evidence against an
encapsulated geometric module guiding reorientation and
suggest a more flexible approach to explaining spatial
navigation and development. We have shown that geometric
information does not necessarily dominate over features
during human reorientation. In fact, reorientation guided by
featural cues is highly malleable given sufficient prior
experience using the feature and the opportunity to encode the
feature with low variability and high certainty, as in the case
of a more distal landmark in the larger space. The present
findings also correspond to the adaptive combination model
predictions that feature use will increase in larger spaces due
to such factors as cue validity and strength of encoding
(Experiment 1) and prior experience using features as spatial

585

Learmonth, A., Nadel, L., & Newcombe, N.S. (2002).
Children’s use of landmarks: Implications for modularity
theory. Psychological Science, 13, 337–341.
Learmonth, A., Newcombe, N., & Huttenlocher, J. (2001).
Toddler’s use of metric information and landmarks to
reorient. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 80,
225-244.
Newcombe, N.S. (2002). Spatial cognition. In D. Medin
(Ed.), Cognition volume, Stevens’ handbook of
experimental psychology, (3rd ed.). New York, NY: John
Wiley.
Newcombe, N.S., & Huttenlocher, J. (2006). Development
of spatial cognition. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Series
Eds.) and D. Kuhn & R. Seigler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception and
language (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Newcombe, N.S., & Ratilff, K.R. (2007). Explaining the
development of spatial reorientation: Modularity-pluslanguage versus the emergence of adaptive combination. In
J. Plumert & J. Spencer (Eds.), The emerging spatial mind.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Poucet, B., Lenck-Santini, P.P., & Save, E. (2003). Drawing
parallels between the behavioral and neural properties of
navigation. In K. J. Jeffery (Ed.), The neurobiology of
spatialbehaviour. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sovrano, V., Bisazza, A., & Vallortigara, G. (2002).
Modularity and spatial reorientation in a simple mind:
encoding of geometric and nongeometric properties of a
spatial environment by fish. Cognition, 85, B51-B59.
Sovrano, V., Bisazza, A., & Vallortigara, G. (2005). Animals’
use of landmarks and metric information to reorient:
Effects of the size of the experimental space. Cognition, 97,
122-133.
Sovrano, V., Bisazza, A., & Vallortigara, G. (2007). How fish
do geometry in large and in small spaces. Animal
Cognition, 10, 47-54.
Sovrano, V.A., & Vallortigara, G. (2006). Dissecting the
geometric module: A sense-linkage for metric and
landmark information in animals’ spatial reorientation.
Psychological Science, 17, 616-621.
Vallortigara, G., Feruglio, M., & Sovrano, V.A. (2005).
Reorientation by geometric and landmark information in
environments of different size. Developmental Science, 8,
393-401.
Vallortigara, G., Zanforlin, M., & Pasti, G. (1990). Geometric
modules in animal spatial representations: a test with chicks
(Gallus gallus). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 104,
248-254.
Wang, R. & Spelke, E. (2002). Human spatial
representation: Insights from animals. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 376-382.
Zugaro, M.B., Arleo, A., Dejean, C., Burguiere, E.,
Khamassi, M., & Weiner, S.I. (2004). Rat anterodorsal
thalamic head direction neurons depend upon dynamic
visual signals to select anchoring landmark cues. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 530-536.

cue to increase their perceived usefulness (Experiment 2).
The adaptive combination approach provides an appropriate
fit to the behavioral data and accounts for why some sources
of information are weighted more heavily than others in
determining orientation, without proposing a modular
architecture.
Acknowledgements: Funding was provided by the National
Science Foundation (BCS0414302).

References
Brown, A,A., Spetch, M.L., & Hurd, P.L. (in press). Growing
in circles: Rearing environment mediates spatial navigation
in fish. Psychological Science.
Cheng, K. (1986). A purely geometric model in rat’s spatial
representation. Cognition, 23, 149-178.
Cheng, K., & Newcombe, N. (2005). Is there a geometric
module for spatial orientation? Squaring theory and
evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 1–23.
Cheng, K., Shettleworth, S.J., Huttenlocher, J., & Rieser, J.J.
(in press). Bayesian integration of spatial information.
Psychological Bulletin.
Chiandetti, C., Regolin, L., Sovrano, V.A. & Vallortigara, G.
(in press). Spatial reorientation: The effects of space size on
the encoding of landmark and geometry information.
Animal Cognition.
Gallistel, C. (1990). The organization of learning.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gouteux, S., & Spelke, E.S. (2001). Children’s use of
geometry and landmarks to reorient in an open space.
Cognition, 81, 119–148.
Gouteux, S., Thinus-Blanc, C., & Vauclair, J. (2001). Rhesus
monkeys use geometric and nongeometric information
during a reorientation task. Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 505-519.
Gray, E.R., Bloomfield, L.L., Ferrey, A., Spetch, M.L., &
Sturdy, C.B. (2005). Spatial encoding in mountain
chickadees: Features overshadow geometry. Biology
Letters, 1, 314-317.
Hartley, T., Trinkler, I., & Burgess, N. (2004). Geometric
determinants of human spatial memory. Cognition, 94, 39–
75.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1994). A geometric process for
spatial reorientation in young children. Nature, 370, 57-59.
Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. (1996). Modularity and
development: the case of spatial reorientation. Cognition,
61, 195-232.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L.V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98, 352-376.
Kelly, D.M., Spetch, M.L. & Heth, C.D. (1998). Pigeons'
encoding of geometric and featural properties of a spatial
environment. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 112,
259-269.

586

