UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analyzing Human Tutorial Dialogues for Cohesion and Coherence During Hypermedia
Learning of a Complex Science Topic

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fn838jr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Jeon, Moongee
Azevedo, Roger

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analyzing Human Tutorial Dialogues for Cohesion and Coherence During
Hypermedia Learning of a Complex Science Topic
Moongee Jeon (MJEON1@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology | Institute for Intelligent Systems | University of Memphis,
3693 Norriswood Avenue
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Roger Azevedo (RAZEVEDO@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology | Institute for Intelligent Systems | University of Memphis,
3693 Norriswood Avenue
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract
We analyzed cohesion and coherence of 79 think-aloud
transcription logs from a human tutorial dialogue study
investigating the effect of tutoring on college students’
learning about the circulatory system with hypermedia. The
study involves randomly assigning 82 non-science majors to
either the self-regulated learning (SRL, control condition) or
the externally-regulated learning (ERL, experimental
condition with a human tutor). The corpus we examined
contained a total of 1,445 pages. We used Coh-Metrix, an
automated web-based tool developed to evaluate text and
discourse, in order to assess cohesion and coherence of the
tutorial dialogues produced between a human tutor and lowdomain knowledge college students during 79 tutoring
sessions. Our findings showed that there were significant
differences in the tutorial dialogues of the ERL tutoring
condition versus those of the SRL control condition in the coreferential cohesion, the semantic/conceptual overlap, the
causal ratio, the standard readability formulas, the incidence
scores of connectives, the number of words, the number of
sentences, the number of turns, the average sentences per turn,
and the average words per sentence. Our findings have
implications for the design of intelligent tutorial dialogue in
hypermedia systems developed to improve learners’ deep
conceptual understanding of complex and challenging science
topics.
Keywords: Cohesion; Coherence; Human Tutorial Dialogue;
Learning; Hypermedia; Human Tutoring

Cohesion and Coherence in Tutorial Dialogues
Cohesion and coherence of text and discourse are critical
components affecting text processing and comprehension.
According to Graesser et al. (2004), coherence indicates
characteristics of mental models that readers establish
during comprehension, whereas cohesion refers to features
of text-based information such as argument overlap,
discourse markers, anaphora, and connectives. Coherence,
according to Graesser et al. (2003), is the final
psychological construct that readers build in their mind.
Readers normally construct a coherent representation in
terms of various cohesion and coherence relations during
comprehension. For example, they attain coherence of a
text by identifying various coherence relations (Sanders,
Spooren, & Noordman, 1992) or rhetorical structures (Mann
& Thompson, 1988) in the text, linking text-based segments,
and combining the text-based information with their prior

1127

background knowledge (Kintsch, 1988, 1998; McNamara et
al., 1996). Similarly, students can construct coherent mental
models for subject matters while learning with the help of a
human tutor in a classroom or while interacting with a
computer-based learning environment such as a hypermedia
environment (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2004, 2005, in press).
Recent empirical studies have shown that cohesion and
coherence are cardinal to examine whether readers generate
inferences to link text units during on-line comprehension
(Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994; Graesser & Bertus,
1998; Millis & Graesser, 1994), to combine the text-based
information with the readers’ prior knowledge in their longterm memory (McNamara et al, 1996), and to construct
mental models successfully in their mind (Gernsbacher,
1997; Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994; Kintsch, 1988,
1998; Zwaan, Langston, & Graesser, 1995). The mental
models established by the readers promote deeper
processing and understanding of the text. Thus, the
coherent mental representation constructed based on the
text-based information together with the readers’ prior
knowledge is essential to understand the text successfully at
a deep level. While these indices have been adopted mainly
by cognitive psychologists in text comprehension studies,
they are now being used by members of the Cognitive
Science community to examine the quality and linguistic
features found in tutoring dialogues. The aim is to
understand the nature of the student-tutor dialogues in order
to better design automated conversational dialogue in
learning technology-based systems aimed at fostering
conceptual understanding of complex and challenging
science topics (e.g., see Azevedo, 2005; Graesser,
McNamara, & VanLehn, 2005).
With these theoretical frameworks and recent advance in
computational linguistics and natural language technologies,
our research group has developed Coh-Metrix, an automated
web-based tool to analyze cohesion and coherence of
various types of text, discourse, and tutorial dialogue in
terms of over 400 measures (Graesser, McNamara,
Louwerse, & Cai, 2004). The Coh-Metrix tool has been
widely used by our research group. For example, the CohMetrix tool was recently used by Jeon and Graesser (2006)
to examine cohesion, coherence, and readability of the
tutorial dialogues of high-knowledge students who had

taken college physics versus the tutorial dialogues of lowknowledge students with no college physics background
while interacting with AutoTutor, an animated pedagogical
agent which scaffolds college students to learn about
conceptual physics by holding conversations in natural
language (Graesser, Person, Lu, Jeon, & McDaniel, 2005).
Their results showed that the tutorial dialogues of the highknowledge students were connected more coherently than of
the low-knowledge students.
Coh-Metrix has been used, in this human tutoring study,
to examine cohesion, coherence, and readability of the
tutorial dialogues of the ERL (externally-regulated learning)
tutoring condition versus the tutorial dialogues of the SRL
(self-regulated learning) control condition.

Coh-Metrix
Coh-Metrix
(http://cohmetrix.memphis.edu/)
is
an
automated web-based tool designed to examine text and
discourse on cohesion, coherence, and readability based on
over 400 measures (Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse, & Cai,
2004). For example, the Coh-Metrix tool provides coreferential cohesion (argument overlap and stem overlap),
LSA cosines (latent semantic analysis: semantic/conceptual
overlap), causal ratio, incidence scores of connectives and
logical operators, and other measures.
Coh-Metrix
examines texts using various types of cohesion and
language characteristics unlike standard readability formulas
(e.g., Flesch Reading Ease and Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level)
which mainly focus on word length and sentence length.
Coh-Metrix consists of lexicons, part-of-speech classifiers,
syntactic parsers, semantic templates, latent semantic
analysis, and other components that have been extensively
used in computational linguistics.

ERL group. In terms of self-regulatory processes,
participants in the SRL condition engaged in more use of
less effective learning strategies (e.g., free searching), while
those in the ERL participants engaged in more planning and
activation of prior knowledge, deployment of key
monitoring activities (e.g., monitoring their progress toward
goals), and effective strategies (e.g., hypothesizing).
The goal of this paper is to report the analyses that were
conducted on the 79 1 think-aloud protocols (41 from the
SRL control condition and 38 from the ERL tutoring
condition) by focusing on the cohesion and coherence
measures extracted from the 1,445 pages of think-aloud
protocols.
The participants were non-science majors from a large
mid-Atlantic public university who were given extra credit
to participate in the study. Their mean age was 21 with an
average GPA (mean = 3.3) and comprised mostly of female
students (81% of the sample).

Tutoring Sessions

Method: An Overview of the Study

Briefly, the methodology of the original study which has
been extensively used by Azevedo and colleagues (see
Azevedo, Cromley, Winters, Moos, & Greene, 2005;
Azevedo, Moos, Greene, Winters, & Cromley, in press;
Greene, Moos, Azevedo, & Winters, 2006; Moos &
Azevedo, 2006) was also used in this study to evaluate
students’ self-regulated learning about science with
hypermedia: (1) obtain informed consent; (2) administer
participant questionnaire; (3) administer pretest (20
minutes); (4) provide instructions for the learning task; (5)
tour of the hypermedia environment including its features
and content; (6) give participants think-aloud practice task;
(7) inform participants of the overall learning goal (“Make
sure you learn about the different parts and their purpose,
how they work both individually and together, and how they
support the human body”) as part of their instructions for
learning about the circulatory system. During the 40-minute
hypermedia learning task, the participants had access to the
think-aloud instructions and the overall learning goal.
Participants were free to create drawings or take notes while
learning with hypermedia, although not all chose to do so.
All participants were required to navigate the hypermedia
environment for 40 minutes to learn about the circulatory
system. Differences between the two conditions (ERL
versus SRL) were given next. Only the participants in ERL
had access to a human tutor with extensive training (B.Sc. in
biology and six years of teaching biology in the schools)
who would scaffold them to learn about the circulatory
system by furnishing external regulation and by prompting
them throughout the session to activate their prior
knowledge, to establish learning goals, to monitor several
aspects of their learning and task conditions, to deploy key
learning
strategies
(e.g.,
summarize,
coordinate
informational sources), and to handle task difficulties and
demands (e.g., engage in help-seeking behavior).

The overall study conducted by Azevedo and colleagues (in
press) examined the effectiveness of self-regulated learning
(SRL) and externally regulated learning (ERL) on college
students’ learning about a science topic with hypermedia
during a 40-minute session. A total of 82 college students
with little knowledge of the topic were randomly assigned
either to the SRL or ERL condition. Students in the SRL
condition regulated their own learning, while students in the
ERL condition had access to a human tutor who facilitated
their self-regulated learning. We converged product (pretestposttest declarative knowledge and qualitative shifts in
participants’ mental models) with process (think-aloud) data
to examine the effectiveness of SRL versus ERL. Analysis
of the declarative knowledge measures showed that the ERL
condition group mean was statistically significantly higher
than the group mean for the SRL condition on the labeling
and flow diagram tasks. There were no statistically
significant differences between groups on the matching task,
but both groups showed statistically significant increases in
performance. Further analyses showed that the odds of
being in a higher mental model posttest group were
decreased by 65% for the SRL group as compared to the

1128

1

We dropped 3 participants because of poor audio quality.

turns, the average words per sentence, and the average
sentences per turn because the main goal of this paper was
to compare cohesion, coherence, and readability of the
tutorial dialogues from the ERL (externally-regulated
learning) condition with those from the SRL (self-regulated
learning) control condition while learning with hypermedia.
The results presented in this section are from several oneway ANOVAs performed between the means of several
Coh-Metrix measures of the ERL and the SRL conditions.

Materials and Procedures for Analyzing Tutorial
Dialogue Data
We collected 38 ERL transcription logs and 41 SRL
transcription logs from the 79 college students who
participated in this human tutoring study all of which were
the Microsoft Office Word files. Here are examples of the
ERL and SRL transcriptions:
ERL Transcription (Subject #3030)
Tutor: Scroll down till you find the red blood cell section,
just read the first sentence. You’ll find out.
Student: Carry oxygen from the lungs.
READS: Red blood cells make up almost 45
percent of the blood volume…
Tutor: Yeah. They have a very special molecule called
hemoglobin and it carries oxygen. They are the, they are
the key to the oxygen.
Student: lungs, lungs…

Co-Referential Cohesion Scores

SRL Transcription (Subject #3063)
Student: yeah …
…
READS: This inner layer is surrounded by
connective tissue and smooth muscle. Blood
vessels expand during exercise...
… this picture here... constituents of blood, an average
healthy person approximately 45% of blood volume in the
cells... clear yellow layer called plasma so plasma’s
yellow. hmm... so... I guess the red part would just be the
red blood cells... ummm... 95% of plasma’s water and
glucose, proteins, amino acids... hmm… [unintelligible]…

Co-reference cohesion occurs when a noun, pronoun, or
noun phrase refers to another constituent in discourse. For
this paper, the Coh-Metrix tool computed two types of coreference cohesion scores including the adjacent argument
overlap and the stem overlap scores. The adjacent argument
overlap score, in this paper, is defined as the proportion of
adjacent sentence pairs in a tutorial dialogue that share one
or more arguments and the adjacent stem overlap indicates
the proportion of adjacent sentences that share one or more
stems (e.g., swim, swimmer, swimming).

To analyze cohesion and coherence in the human tutorial
dialogues with the Coh-Metrix tool, we extracted only the
tutor and student turns from the 79 think-aloud transcription
logs, excluding AUDIO VIDEO and READS parts of the
transcriptions. We then eliminated all the titles such as
‘Student’ and ‘Tutor’ and the bracketed transcriptions (e.g.,
[unintelligible]) in the tutorial dialogues. Next, we divided
the whole tutorial dialogues including both the tutor and
student turns into two types of dialogue group (tutor versus
student dialogue group) because the primary research
question of this paper is to investigate cohesion, coherence,
and readability of the tutorial dialogues of the ERL tutoring
condition versus the SRL control condition using CohMetrix. We used Coh-Metrix (version 1.4) entering the
three types of tutorial dialogue: the whole tutorial dialogue,
the tutor dialogue, and the student dialogue. However, we
analyzed only the students’ dialogues for this paper.

Results
For this paper, we investigated a few specific measures of
the Coh-Metrix tool. More specifically, we selected the
measures such as the co-referential cohesion scores, the
latent semantic analysis, the standard readability formulas,
the causal ratio, the incidence score of connectives, the
number of words, the number of sentences, the number of

1129

Table 1: Means (SDs) for the measures of Coh-Metrix by
Tutoring Condition
Measures of Coh-Metrix
ERL
SRL
Condition Condition
(n=38)
(n=41)
Adjacent Argument Overlap
.15(.09)
.36(.14)
Adjacent Stem Overlap
.12(.08)
.33(.13)
LSA Cosine of Adjacent
.18(.05)
.24(.07)
Sentence to Sentence
LSA Cosine of Turn to Turn
.15(.1)
.41(.2)
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level
3.1(1.3)
7.5(2.7)
(0-12)
Flesch Reading Ease Score
83(6.8)
66(11.4)
(0-100)
Causal Ratio
3.4(1.7)
2.1(1.4)
Incidence Score of Total
89(18.8)
74(21.8)
Connectives
Incidence Score of Positive
30.9(9) 22.9(10.6)
Causal Connective
Incidence Score of Negative
5.8(3.1)
2.8(2.6)
Additive Connective
Number of Words
1323(457) 1083(594)
Number of sentences
241(84)
92(62)
Number of Turns
177(54)
13(9)
Average Sentences per Turn
1.4(.2)
10.1(7.8)
Average Words per Sentence
5.8(2.2)
13.4(6.2)
Two separate ANOVAs were performed on each of the
adjacent argument overlap and the adjacent stem overlap
scores of tutorial dialogues as a function of condition (ERL
verses SRL; see Table 1). Our findings showed that there
was a significant difference between the ERL tutoring
condition and the SRL control condition for the adjacent
argument overlap, F (1, 77) = 64.7, MSE = .013, p < .001;
the argument overlap score of the SRL condition (M = .36)

was higher than the ERL condition (M = .15). Similarly, the
stem overlap score of the SRL tutorial dialogues (M = .33)
was also significantly higher than that of the ERL (M = .12)
[F (1, 77) = 71.8, MSE = .012, p < .001] (see Table 1).
These results show that the tutorial dialogues of the SRL
control condition are more co-referential than the ERL
tutoring condition indicating that the adjacent sentences of
the SRL condition dialogues have more common arguments
(e.g., noun, pronoun, noun-phrase) and stems than of the
ERL tutoring condition.

condition (Subject #3063) to show how the LSA cosine of
turn to turn was calculated.
Turn1: The heart... superior, okay so there’s the vena cava,
superior and inferior, they go into the right atrium,
tricuspid valve, right ventricle. uhh pulmonary...
Turn2: ... I was using them actually right. so umm...
proteins, protein molecules, lymphocytes... the immune
system, fraction of the blood composition, gamma, ...
Turn3: ... umm blood, vital fluid, river of life, that’s not
really useful. Role of blood, lungs, digestive system, …

LSA Cosine of Adjacent Sentence to Sentence
The mean of LSA cosines of turn to turn was calculated
as follows:

Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) is a mathematical and
statistical method which computes semantic similarities of
sentences and paragraphs of text and discourse (Landauer,
Foltz, & Laham, 1998). An LSA cosine of adjacent
sentence to sentence, in this paper, indicates semantic
relatedness of adjacent sentences in tutorial dialogues. In
general, high LSA cosines of adjacent sentence to sentence
represent that the sentences are connected more
semantically. Here is an example of a student’s tutorial
dialogue taken from the SRL tutoring condition (Subject
#3063) to show how the LSA cosines of adjacent sentences
were computed.

LSA cosine of turn to turn = MEAN [LSA (Turn 1, Turn
2), LSA (Turn 1, Turn 3), LSA (Turn 2, Turn 3)]

Turn: Four chambers, left right ventricle, left right atrium
(Sentence1). The muscle is the myocardium
(Sentence2)…
Turn: … lets see we have the three types of blood vessels,
arteries, veins, capillaries (Sentence 3). Arteries away
veins toward I remember that much (Sentence 4) …

We performed an ANOVA on the LSA cosines of turn to
turn as a function of condition (see Table 1). Our results
showed that the LSA cosines of turn to turn in the SRL
condition (M = .41) were significantly higher than those in
the ERL tutoring condition (M = .15), F (1, 77) = 58.3, MSE
= .022, p < .001. This result indicates that the turns of the
tutorial dialogue of SRL control condition are connected
more coherently than of the ERL tutoring condition in the
global level (means global coherence).

Standard Readability Formulas

The mean of LSA cosines for adjacent sentence to
sentence was computed as follows:

The Coh-Metrix tool provides two types of standard
readability formulas, the Flesch Reading Ease score and the
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level. The Flesch Reading Ease
score is expressed by a number ranging from 0 to 100; a
higher score represents easier reading. The Flesch Reading
Ease score is computed as follows:

LSA cosine of adjacent sentence to sentence = MEAN
[LSA (Sentence 1, Sentence 2), LSA (Sentence 2,
Sentence 3), LSA (Sentence 3, Sentence 4)]
An ANOVA was performed on the LSA cosines of
adjacent sentence to sentence as a function of condition
(ERL versus SRL; see Table 1). There was a significant
difference between the ERL tutoring condition and the SRL
control condition, F (1, 77) = 39.8, MSE = .005, p < .001.
The LSA cosine of adjacent sentence to sentence of the SRL
tutorial dialogues (M = .24) was higher than of the ERL
tutoring condition (M = .18) indicating that the coherence of
the adjacent sentences of the SRL tutorial dialogues is
higher than of the ERL in the local level (means local
coherence).

Flesch Reading Ease Score = 206.835 - (1.015 * ASL) (84.6 * ASW)
ASL (Average Sentence Length) = the number of words
divided by the number of sentences.
ASW (Average number of Syllables per Word) = the
number of syllables divided by the number of words.
The Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level defined as a number
ranging 0 to 12 converts the Flesch Reading Ease Score to a
U.S. grade-school level; a higher score indicates more
difficult reading. The Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level is
computed as follows:
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level = (.39 * ASL) + (11.8 *
ASW) - 15.59

LSA Cosine of Turn to Turn
LSA cosines of turn to turn indicate semantic relatedness of
turns in tutorial dialogues. For example, high LSA cosines
of turn to turn indicate that the turns in the tutorial dialogues
are linked more semantically. Here is an example of
students’ tutorial dialogues taken from the SRL tutoring

1130

We performed two separate ANOVAs on the two
standard readability formulas as a function of condition
(ERL versus SRL). The results showed that there was a
significant difference between the ERL tutoring condition

and the SRL control condition for the Flesch Reading Ease
score, F (1, 77) = 68.1, MSE = 89.8, p < .001. The Flesch
Reading Ease score of the ERL condition (M = 83) was
higher than the SRL condition (M = 66). There was also a
significant difference between the two conditions for the
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level, F (1, 77) = 81.8, MSE = 4.5, p
< .001. The Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level of the SRL
condition (M = 7.5) was higher than of the ERL condition
(M = 3.1). These results suggest that the sentences and
turns of the tutorial dialogues of the SRL condition exhibit
more complicated syntactic structures than of the ERL
condition indicating more difficult reading (see Table 1).

Causal Ratio
Causal cohesion indicates the causal relatedness of
sentences in terms of causal cohesion relations (Graesser et
al., 2004). The Coh-Metrix tool calculates causal cohesion
relations by causal ratios. A causal ratio is defined as a
proportion of causal particles (P) to causal verbs (V).
Simply put, the causal ratio is computed as follows:
Causal Ratio = P / (V+1)
The denominator was the number of causal verbs plus one
in order to consider the rare case in which a text has no
causal verbs. An ANOVA was performed on the causal
ratios of the tutorial dialogues as a function of condition.
The result showed that the causal ratio of the ERL condition
(M = 3.4) was significantly higher than the SRL control
condition (M = 2.1), F (1, 77) = 13.9, MSE = 2.4, p < .001,
reflecting that the sentences and turns of the tutorial
dialogues of the ERL tutoring condition are connected more
causally based on the causal relations signaled by the causal
particles (e.g., since, so that, and consequently) and verbs
(e.g., cause, enable, and make) than of the SRL control
condition (see Table 1).

negative additive connectives in order to gain a deep
conceptual understanding (based on mental model shifts of
the circulatory system from pretest to posttest) while
interacting with the human tutor (see Table 1).

Basic Count
The Coh-Metrix tool computed the number of words, the
number of sentences, the number of turns, the average
sentences per turn, and the average words per sentence in
the tutorial dialogues. ANOVAs were performed on each of
them as a function of condition. Our results showed that (1)
the number of words in the tutorial dialogues of the ERL
condition (M = 1,323) was significantly higher than those in
the SRL condition (M = 1083), F (1, 77) = 4.02, MSE =
283171.4, p < .05; (2) the number of sentences in the ERL
transcriptions (M = 241) was significantly higher than those
in the SRL condition (M = 92), F (1, 77) = 81.3, MSE =
5368.9, p < .001; and (3) the number of turns in the ERL
condition (M = 177) was significantly higher than those in
the SRL condition (M = 13), F (1, 77) = 372, MSE = 1426.8,
p < .001. By contrast, the average sentences per turn of
those in the SRL condition (M = 10.1) was significantly
higher than those in the ERL condition (M = 1.4), F (1, 77)
= 48, MSE = 31.8, p < .001, and the average words per
sentences in the SRL condition (M = 13.4) was significantly
higher than those in the ERL condition (M = 5.8), F (1, 77)
= 52.2, MSE = 21.1, p < .001. These results indicate that the
students in the ERL tutoring condition interacted more with
a tutor than in the SRL control condition; which is normal
given that the students in the SRL condition did not have
access to a human tutor while learning about the circulatory
system with hypermedia. By contrast, the SRL students
created longer sentences, but with fewer turns than the ERL
students. The longer sentences for SRL students might be
compensating for the fewer number of turns during the
learning session, but these linguistic features were not
reflected in learning.

Incidence Score of Connectives
Summary of Results

The Coh-Metrix tool computes incidence scores of several
types of connectives in discourse such as temporal, additive,
and causal connectives. An incidence score is expressed by
a number of occurrences of a particular category per 1,000
words. ANOVAs were performed on the incidence scores
of connectives in the tutorial dialogues as a function of
condition. Our results showed that the incidence score of
the total connectives of the ERL condition (M = 89) was
significantly higher than the SRL control condition (M = 74),
F (1, 77) = 11.2, MSE = 416.7, p = .001. More specifically,
students in the ERL tutoring condition (M = 30.9) used
more positive causal connectives (e.g., therefore and thus)
than in the SRL control condition (M = 22.9), F (1, 77) =
13.2, MSE = 96.5, p < .001. The students in the ERL
tutoring condition (M = 5.8) also used more negative
additive connectives (e.g., however and but) than in the SRL
control condition (M = 2.8), F (1, 77) = 21.3, MSE = 8.2, p
< .001. These results indicate that the students in the ERL
tutoring condition tended to use more positive causal and

1131

In sum, we analyzed cohesion and coherence from 79 thinkaloud transcription logs (1,445 pages) from a human
tutoring study investigating the effect of tutoring on college
students’ learning about the challenging and complex
science topic with hypermedia. We used Coh-Metrix to
examine cohesion and coherence of the tutorial dialogues
produced between a human tutor and low-domain
knowledge college students during 79 tutoring sessions.
Our findings showed that there were significant differences
in the tutorial dialogues of the ERL (externally-regulated
learning) tutoring condition versus the SRL (self-regulated
learning) control condition in the co-referential cohesion,
the semantic/conceptual overlap, the causal ratio, the
standard readability formulas, the incidence scores of
connectives, the number of words, the number of sentences,
the number of turns, the average sentences per turn, and the
average words per sentence. Considering the novelty of
these methods within the Cognitive Science community, we

argue that our findings have implications for the design of
intelligent tutorial dialogue in hypermedia systems
developed to promote learners’ deep conceptual
understanding of complex and challenging science topics.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the National
Science Foundation (REC#0133346 and REESE#0633918)
awarded to the second author. The authors would like thank
Jeffrey Greene, Daniel Moos, Dr. Cromley, Fielding
Winters, and Neil Hofman for assistance with data
collection and transcribing the audio data. We also
acknowledge Dr. Graesser’s Institute for Education Sciences
(R3056020018-02) and National Science Foundation (REC
0106965 and ITR 0325428) grants supporting the
development of Coh-Metrix.
We also thank Amy
Witherspoon for comments and feedbacks on a previous
draft.

References
Azevedo, R. (2005). Using hypermedia as a metacognitive
tool for enhancing student learning? The role of selfregulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 40, 199209.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (2004). Does
adaptive scaffolding facilitate students’ ability to
regulate their learning with hypermedia? Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 29, 344-370.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., Winters, F.I., Moos, D.C., &
Greene, J.A. (2005). Adaptive human scaffolding
facilitates adolescents' self-regulated learning with
hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33, 381-412.
Azevedo, R., Moos, D.C., Greene, J.A., Winters, F.I., &
Cromley, J.C. (in press). Why is externally-regulated
learning more effective than self-regulated learning with
hypermedia? Educational Technology Research and
Development.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1997). Two Decades of Structure
Building. Discourse Processes, 23, 265-304.
Graesser, A.C., & Bertus, E.L. (1998). The construction of
causal inferences while reading expository texts on
science and technology. Scientific Studies of Reading, 2,
247-269.
Graesser, A.C., Louwerse, M.M., McNamara, D., Olney, A.,
Cai, Z., & Mitchell, H. (in press). Inference generation
and cohesion in the construction of situation models:
Some connections with computational linguistics. In F.
Schmalhofer and C. Perfetti (Eds.), Higher level language
processes in the brain: Inferences and comprehension
processes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., & Louwerse, M.M.
(2003). What do readers need to learn in order to process
coherence relations in narrative and expository text. In
A.P. Sweet & C.E. Snow (Eds.), Rethinking reading
comprehension (pp. 82-98). NY: Guilford.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M., & Cai,
Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and

language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments,
and Computers, 36, 193-202.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D., & VanLehn, K. (2005).
Scaffolding Deep Comprehension Strategies through
Point&Query, AutoTutor and iSTART. Educational
Psychologist, 40, 225-234.
Graesser, A.C., Person, N., Lu, Z., Jeon, M., & McDaniel,
B. (2005). Learning while holding a conversation with a
computer. In L. PytlikZillig, M. Bodvarsson, & R.
Bruning (Eds.), Technology-based education: Bringing
researchers and practitioners together (pp. 143-167).
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Graesser, A.C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-95.
Greene, J.A., Moos, D.C., Azevedo, R., & Winters, F.I.
(2006). Exploring differences between gifted and gradelevel students’ use of self-regulatory learning processes
with hypermedia. Computers & Education.
Jeon, M., & Graesser, A. C. (November, 2006). Using CohMetrix to Assess the Role of Background Knowledge on
Cohesion in Tutorial Dialogue. Symposium presentation
at the 36th Annual Meeting of the Society for Computers
in Psychology. Houston, TX.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The Role of Knowledge in Discourse
Comprehension: A Construction-Integration Model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998).
Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25, 259-284.
Mann, W.C., & Thompson, S.A. (1988). Rhetorical
structure theory: towards a functional theory of text
organization. Text, 8, 243-281.
McNamara, D.S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N.B., & Kintsch, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Text coherence,
background knowledge, and levels of understanding in
learning from text. Cognition and Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Millis, K. & Graesser, A.C. (1994). The time-course of
constructing knowledge-based inferences for scientific
texts. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 583-599.
Moos, D.C., & Azevedo, R. (2006). The role of goal
structure in undergraduates' use of self-regulatory
variables in two hypermedia learning tasks. Journal of
Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 15(1), 49-86.
Sanders, T.J.M., Spooren, W., & Noordman, L.G.M. (1992).
Toward a taxonomy of coherence relations. Discourse
Processes, 15, 1, 1-35.
Zwaan, R.A., Langston, M.C., & Graesser, A.C. (1995). The
construction of situation models in narrative
comprehension: an event-indexing model. Psychological
Science, 6, 292-297.
Zwaan, R.A., & Radvansky, G.A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123, 162-185.

1132

