UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Anger in a Just World? The Impact of Cultural Concepts on Cognition and Emotion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61x2q5nw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Bender, Andrea
Spada, Hans
Swoboda, Hannah
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Anger in a Just World? The Impact of Cultural Concepts on Cognition and Emotion
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Hans Spada (spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Hannah Swoboda (swoboda@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Simone Traber (traber@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Karsten Rauss (karsten.rauss@medecine.unige.ch)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
The cognitive appraisal of an event is crucial for the elicitation
and differentiation of emotions. Similar appraisals will result
in similar emotions, but the appraisal of one and the same
event may depend on culturally defined concepts. Appraising
an event as unjust, for instance, and its agent as responsible are
cognitive determinants for anger. Justice, however, is defined
through cultural values, and responsibility ascription may follow culture-specific tendencies. Our interdisciplinary study
scrutinizes the impact of cultural concepts on the cognitive determinants for anger in Germany and Tonga. The experimental
data support our hypothesis that culturally defined self-concepts and beliefs in a just world affect the way in which unjust
situations are appraised. Consequently, emotional responses
differ between cultures.
Key words: Cognition, Emotion, Culture, Appraisal Theory,
Attribution, Self-Concept, Belief in a Just World.

Introduction
Imagine that your supervisor has promised to promote you to
the next available higher position as you are doing a good
job. But then a colleague with less qualifications is given priority. Most likely you will consider this decision an unfair
act, for at least two reasons: because you are neglected
despite your higher qualifications, and because your supervisor has broken his promise.
Appraising an event as negative—here due to the unfair
decision—is one of the basic cognitive determinants for the
elicitation of anger. The other determinant is that another
person has caused this event to happen and that this person is
held responsible for what he or she did (e.g., Ellsworth &
Smith, 1988; Lazarus, 1991; Roseman, Antoniou & Jose,
1996). Whereas these determinants should invariably lead to
anger, people may differ with regard to the degree to which
they appraise a certain situation as negative or the agent as
responsible. For instance, the belief in a just world (Lerner,
1980) could affect the assessment of a given situation as
unjust, and both this belief and the self-concept (e.g., Markus
& Kitayama, 1991) could affect attribution tendencies that
influence the ascription of responsibility.
Such differences appear not only on the individual but also
on the cultural level. Systematic cultural variation in selfconcepts and their impact on attribution tendencies has been
widely documented (e.g., Markus & Kitayama, 1991; Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002); research on cultural
variation in the just world belief is less extensive, but still
convincing (Dalbert & Yamauchi, 1994; Loo, 2002). As

attribution styles and the assessment of valence are directly
relevant for the elicitation of specific emotions, cultures
should also differ in their emotional responses if they differ
in these appraisal components.
Finding such a correspondence would not only provide
support for appraisal theoretical assumptions, but also corroborate a cognitive explanation for cultural differences in a
more differentiated manner than usual. Our studies try to
find evidence for such an explanation. They are based on the
assumption that the cognitive processes preceding emotions
are universal, but the conceptual content on which these processes operate is culture-specific. In order to scrutinize how
culturally defined concepts affect the cognitive determinants
and thereby eventually alter emotional responses to given situations, we compared Germany with the Polynesian culture
of Tonga. Previous studies, based on anthropological
research and psychological experiments (Beller, Bender &
Song, subm.; Bender et al., 2006, 2007), suggested that people in Tonga hold a more interdependent self-concept than
people in Germany and suggest that they also hold a stronger
just world belief.
In this study, the assumed cultural influence on the cognitive determinants for certain emotions were experimentally
tested, with the focus on anger, on its cognitive determinants
valence and causation/responsibility, and on the culture-specific self-concept and just world belief. Before presenting
this experiment and its results, we will outline the relevant
theoretical assumptions and highlight essential aspects of
Tongan culture.

Cognitive Determinants for Emotions
Emotions are elicited and differentiated by the cognitive
appraisal of an event (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Ortony, Clore &
Collins, 1988; Roseman et al., 1996; Scherer, Schorr &
Johnstone, 2001). Although each event is appraised in a specific—and often complex and unique—way, a limited set of
abstract cognitive determinants suffices to define the emotional response: For instance, an event classified as positive
and as caused by oneself should, at least to a certain degree,
elicit pride. In turn, each of the major emotions is characterized by a combination of such determinants.

Cognitive Determinants for Anger
Current appraisal theories agree that the determinants eliciting anger encompass a negative valence, causation by

101

another person, and high responsibility of this person (e.g.,
Ellsworth & Smith, 1988; Lazarus, 1991; Nerb & Spada,
2001; Roseman et al., 1996; Weiner, 1995). Most theorists
assume that these determinants are both necessary and sufficient for the elicitation of the respective emotions. Yet, there
is some empirical evidence for the weaker interpretation that
the relation between appraisal components and emotions is
only a contingent association (Kuppens et al., 2003). For the
purpose of our study, we focused on the degree to which
people attribute causation and ascribe responsibility to various sources, which are crucial factors in differentiating anger
from its conceptual “neighbors” shame/guilt and sadness
(e.g., Lazarus, 1991).
In principle, events can be caused by oneself, another person, or circumstances, and responsibility can be considered
as rather high or low. Although such a strict distinction is
pervasive in theory, the two dimensions are often conflated in
practice, as low personal responsibility typically goes
together with circumstantial causation (for a more detailed
discussion on this point see Bender et al., 2006). For our scenarios, we therefore decided to keep causation constant (by
another person) and to ask for the relative responsibility
ascribed to self, other, and circumstances. Each of these corresponds to a specific emotional response, namely to
shame/guilt, anger, and sadness in negative events, and to
pride, gratitude, and joy in positive events (see Figure 1).

Cultural Modulators:
Self-Concept and Just World Belief
One basic assumption of appraisal theories is that appraising
situations in similar ways should lead to similar emotions,
whereas appraising them differently should lead to different
emotions—irrespective of culture. What should be prone to
cultural influences is the way in which a certain event or situation will be appraised. If, for instance, a person regards
another person as highly responsible for the negative outcome of an event, a likely response will be anger. But
whether he or she regards this person as highly responsible
will depend on a whole range of factors, among them culture-specific concepts, values, and norms. If such factors
affect the ascription of responsibility, they should also lead
to different emotional responses, at least in terms of intensity
(e.g., Mesquita & Frijda, 1992; Scherer, 1997).
Self-Concept. One of the most extensively investigated and
documented modulators of responsibility ascription is the
self-concept. The self-concept is defined by two dimensions:
independence and interdependence. Although not entirely
mutually exclusive, they focus on diverging aspects: A more
independent self-concept is typically emphasized in “individualistic” cultures in which self-esteem and personal
accomplishments are focused on, and in which rights are valued over duties. In more “collectivistic” cultures, on the
other hand, the interdependent aspects of the self are emphasized. People are seen as parts of larger social groups that
bind and mutually obligate them; duties are valued over
rights, and social harmony is of prime concern (Markus &
Kitayama, 1991; Oyserman at al., 2002).
These differences in self-concept also imply a divergence
in attribution styles: Members of individualistic Western cul-

positive events

GRATITUDE

PRIDE
negative events

SHAME /
GUILT

ANGER

Agency
self

JOY
other

high

SADNESS

Responsibility
low

(circumstances)

Figure 1: Emotional responses to negative and positive
events varying in the source of agency and responsibility.
tures are, for instance, more prone to the fundamental attribution error than members of collectivistic cultures such as
the Chinese: The former typically tend to overestimate dispositional factors and therefore ascribe higher personal
responsibility to the actor (i.e., “other”) than collectivistically oriented people, who more readily take situational
influences (“circumstances”) into account (e.g., Choi & Nisbett, 1998; Morris, Menon & Ames, 2001). Consequently,
similar situations should elicit less anger but more sadness in
cultures with a prevalence of interdependent self-concepts
(Beller et al., subm.; Bender et al., 2006, 2007).
Just World Belief. Since appraising an event as unjust is an
important determinant in eliciting anger (e.g., Scherer,
1997), the just world belief (Lerner, 1980) should also have
an influence on anger elicitation. This belief is seen as an
indicator for a basic cognitive schema according to which
the world is a just place where people generally get what
they deserve and deserve what they get. Experiencing injustice creates discomfort, which people try to reduce. They
have three options to do so: giving up one’s just world belief,
alleviating the injustice by helping the victim, or modifying
one’s cognitions by re-appraising the situation as less unjust.
Compared to the first two, the third option is the easiest and
consequently the one chosen most likely. It can be achieved
by (at least partly) blaming the victim for what happened to
him or her (e.g., Dalbert, 2002; Hafer & Correy, 1999).
Considering the appraisal pattern leading to anger, a strong
just world belief has two implications: It should reduce the
degree to which the event is negatively appraised (e.g., as
unjust), thus also decreasing the intensity of the resulting
emotion; and it should increase the tendency to blame the
victim (the “self”), whereas external factors like other people
or circumstances should be discounted. When rating the
emotion of the affected person, such a tendency to blame the
victim should correspond to the assumption that this person
will feel guilt. If, on the other hand, people are less willing to
believe in a just world, their appraisal should encompass a
higher assessment of negative valence and a stronger focus
on the agent (“other”) as responsible. This should result in a
prevalence and higher intensity of anger.

102

So far, cultural differences in the extent of the just world
belief have been documented, revealing a comparably low
value of M = 2.40 (on a scale from 1 to 6) for German participants as compared to Hawaiian (M = 3.63) or Canadian
ones (M = 3.83) (Dalbert & Yamauchi, 1994; Loo, 2002). In
addition, empirical tests have established an impact of the
just world belief on anger, mediated by attribution styles
(Dalbert, 2002; Hafer & Correy, 1999). However, its integration into a larger cultural and appraisal-theoretic framework
is still in its beginning.

Self-Concept, Just World Belief, and Emotions
in Tongan Culture
The core value in Tongan culture is 'ofa, glossed as “love,
concern, or generosity”. It characterizes the ideal emotional
relationship between people and requires cooperation and
sharing with others (e.g. Bender et al., 2007; Morton, 1996).
Despite this emphasis on social harmony, Tongan society is
hierarchically structured, with higher rank ascribed to older
people, female siblings, and noble families. Linked with
these differences in rank are social rules of respect and obedience. As a consequence, people are to a large degree determined in their options and activities by other members of
their social net, notably their extended families. Whereas
such an experience may be regarded as negative by Western
(i.e., individualistic) standards, the strong social support that
comes with it is highly valued by most Tongans.
Accordingly, a strong interdependent self-concept can be
assumed to prevail in Tonga. Previous studies (Beller et al.,
subm.; Bender et al., 2006) supported this assumption,
revealing a significantly stronger interdependent self-concept for Tongans than Germans (and even Chinese), whereas
the independent aspects of the self were rated rather similarly. These studies also suggest that situational factors are
taken into account more readily in Tonga than in Germany
when ascribing responsibility, and that these culturally
affected appraisals alter emotional responses.
With regard to the just world belief, no quantitative data
was available so far. However, anthropological research on
the role of religious concepts supports the assumption that it
may be higher in Tonga than in Germany, nurtured by both
traditional Polynesian (Bender & Beller, 2003; Shore, 1989)
and modern Christian concepts (Bender, 2001). According to
the Polynesian world view, the supernatural power mana is
brought about by and induces prestige, influence, and good
luck. In other words: People who are successful possess
mana, and people possessing mana will be successful. This
is at least as compatible with the theory of a world that is
good to good people as are introduced Christian notions of
justice.
As Germany and Tonga differ on all relevant dimensions,
we regard them as appropriate instances for an analysis of
how culture and cognition interact in shaping emotions.

Experiment
The experiment is motivated by three hypotheses: (1) The
assumed cultural differences in the just world belief should
have an impact on the appraisal of negative valence and of

responsibility (with a prime impact on blaming the victim);
(2) differences in self-concept should have an impact on the
appraisal of responsibility (with a prime impact on considering circumstances); and (3) emotional responses should vary
in correspondence to these appraisal differences.
More precisely, we expected that, in general, Tongans hold
a stronger just world belief and a more interdependent selfconcept than Germans. Consequently, our Tongan participants should ascribe more responsibility to self and circumstances and less to others than the German participants.
Therefore, they should indicate more guilt and sadness, but
less anger than the German participants.

Method
In order to ensure a valid choice of terminology and scenarios, the construction of the experimental material was
assisted by anthropological fieldwork in Tonga, which consisted of participant observation, informal talks, interviews,
pile sorting tasks, and linguistic analyses (not reported here;
for more details see Bender et al., 2007).
Materials. The materials consisted of two parts. The first
part included several context stories (vignettes), each followed by a set of questions, and the second part included different scales. All materials were presented in the
participants’ native language and used customary names for
the persons involved. Only those parts of the material and
results relevant to our current question are reported here.
Part 1: Two context stories explicitly dealt with cases of
injustice, one with a situation in which an unfair decision is
made [uD] and one in which a person breaks a promise [bP]:
[uD] During a ball game, John is very committed. When attempting to score a decisive point, John is fouled by a
player of the opposing team. The referee lets them continue their game. John’s team loses the match.
[bP] Tina has an agreement with her mom that she is allowed to go to a performance at the weekend if she gets
a good mark on her math exam. Tina gets a good mark,
but her mother doesn’t allow her to go.
In a previous study (Bender et al., 2007), typicality of these
scenarios was checked. Both were rated equally typical in
Germany and Tonga: the [uD] scenario with 2.68 in Germany and 2.74 in Tonga, the [bP] scenario with 2.13 in Germany, and 2.20 in Tonga (on a scale ranging from 0 to 4).
With regard to the cognitive determinants (i.e., valence and
causation/responsibility), the two scenarios were supposed
to be similar. After testing differences between the two scenarios (and due to only marginal effects), we aggregated the
ratings of all participants over the two scenarios.
Each story was followed by several questions. The first
asked for ratings of emotional responses in the situation. A
multiple-choice format was used with 11 emotions, among
them anger (German: Ärger, Tongan: 'ita), guilt (Schuld,
loto-tautea), and sadness (Traurigkeit, loto-mamahi).
Although not all terms are entirely congruent across languages, congruence is high for the relevant notions (for more
details, see Bender et al., 2007). For each emotion, participants had to indicate its intensity on a five-point scale ranging from 0 (“not at all”) to 4 (“very strong”).

103

Subsequent questions asked for an assessment of how
severe the incident is (i.e., degree of negative valence) and
how responsible other, self, or circumstances are. Again, participants had to indicate their ratings on a five-point scale
ranging from 0 (“not at all”) to 4 (“completely”).
Part 2: In addition to the questionnaire, we asked for
aspects of the self-concept and the just world belief. We used
the Self-Construal Scale of Singelis (1994) in a slightly
shortened version (inconsistent items were eliminated in
order to enhance reliability) and the Personal Belief in a Just
World Scale of Dalbert (2002). People were instructed to rate
the degree to which each statement applied to them on a fivepoint scale ranging from 0 (“not at all”) to 4 (“completely”).
Design. The context stories were presented within-subjects
and in randomized order. Each story started on a new page;
the questions were presented in the same order as described
above.
Participants. Samples consisted of students from higher
classes of secondary schools, one in Siegen, Germany, the
other in Pangai, Tonga. The German sample consisted of
134 students, 61 of whom were male and 72 female (1 did
not indicate gender), with mean age M = 15.0 years (range:
13-19 years). The Tongan sample consisted of 67 students,
30 of whom were male and 36 female (1 did not indicate
gender), with mean age M = 15.8 years (range: 13-18 years).
Due to missing values, some participants had to be excluded,
but in order to retain as many participants as possible, we did
this separately for each calculation.
Procedure. The data collection took place in the classrooms.
Each participant received a booklet with general instructions,
the questionnaire, and the scales. Participants were
instructed to answer all questions in the given order, and
were granted as much time as they needed.

Germany
4

***

Tonga

***

3.08
3

2.70

2.50 2.51
2.27

2.19

2

1

indep.
interdep.
Self concept

Belief in a
just world

Figure 2: Cultural differences in ratings of self-concept and
just world belief.
mean interdependence value was 2.27 in Germany
(SD = .56) and 3.08 in Tonga (SD = .62); F(1, 163) = 73.54,
p < .001, partial η2 = .310. As expected, the answers of the
Tongan students revealed a more interdependent self-concept
than those of the German students. In addition, they also
showed a stronger just world belief: Here, the mean value
was 2.19 in Germany (SD = .77) and 2.70 in Tonga
(SD = .69); F(1, 177) = 18.79, p < .001, partial η2 = .118
(Figure 2).
Appraisal of Valence and Responsibility: The scenarios
explicitly described cases of injustice caused by another person. We therefore expected relatively high ratings of negative
valence (degree of damage) and a general tendency to
ascribe more responsibility to others than to self or circumstances in both cultures. However, we also expected cultural
differences in the relative intensities of responsibility ascription to the three sources. The results supported our hypotheses (see Table 1).
The degree of negative valence and other-responsibility is
indeed rated significantly higher in Germany than in Tonga,
whereas Tongans also ascribed responsibility to self and circumstances (in correspondence with just world belief and
self-concept, respectively), and did so significantly more
than Germans (Figure 3).

Results and Discussion
Data was analyzed with ANOVAs, with the between-subjects
factor country.
Self-Concept and Just World Belief: In line with previous
studies, we expected the Tongan students to be more interdependent than the German students (whereas independence
never produced significant differences). We found no differences between the two samples on the independence scale,
but did find differences on the interdependence scale. The

Table 1: Mean ratings M of valence, of responsibility to other, self, or circumstances, and of emotional
responses, aggregated over the two scenarios, compared across cultures (G = Germany, T = Tonga).
Appraisal dimensions and emotions

MG

MT

SDG

SDT

df

Valence (degree of damage)

3.45 2.90

.90

1.28

Ascription of
responsibility to

3.43 2.40

.94

.59 1.37

.75

1.21 2.12

• other
• self
• circumstances

Emotional responses • anger
• guilt
• sadness

partial η2

F

p

1, 144

8.67

.004

.06

1.23

1, 144

30.96

< .001

.18

1.02

1, 144

26.92

< .001

.16

1.00

1.11

1, 144

24.27

< .001

.14

3.56 3.20

.75

1.07

1, 173

6.31

.013

.04

.55 1.96

.87

1.46

1, 173

63.80

< .001

.27

2.60 3.19

.85

1.03

1, 173

16.30

< .001

.09

104

Germany

**

4

Tonga

Germany

***

4

3.43

3.45
3

3.56

***

3.20
2.90

***

2.40

3.19

3

***

***

2.12
2

1

1.21
1

.59

damage
Valence

other

self
circumstances
Responsibility

Figure 3: Cultural differences in ratings of damage and
ascription of responsibility to other, self, or circumstances.
Figure 4 illustrates the relative portions of responsibility
ascribed to other, self, and circumstances, that is, the pattern
of diverging attribution tendencies: Whereas Germans
ascribe most responsibility to the other, Tongans put much
more emphasis on circumstances and on the self.
circumstances
20.9 %
35.4 %

9.3 %
69.8 %

Germany

40.7 %

2.60

1.96

2

1.37

Tonga

*

self
other

23.9 %

Tonga

Figure 4: Cultural differences in responsibility ascription
(given in relative proportions of the three sources).
Emotional Responses: From the emotions asked for in the
scenarios, only those three theoretically relevant for our
question are reported here: anger, guilt, and sadness (Table
1). As expected from appraisal theories, anger should prevail
as the emotional response to negative events for which
another person is accountable, and particularly so in cases of
injustice. The other two emotions should also be elicited by
unjust events, but in addition, guilt should depend on the
ascription of responsibility to self, whereas sadness is typically assumed to result from causation by circumstances.
When sadness co-occurs with anger, the two responses differ
in focus: anger on the elicitor, sadness on the outcome
(Ortony et al., 1988). As expected, the pattern of emotional
responses generally followed the pattern of responsibility
ascription: German ratings were significantly higher than
Tongan for anger, but lower for guilt and sadness (Figure 5).
In conclusion, we found corresponding cultural differences for the cognitive determinants of emotions, their cultural modulators self-concept and just world belief, and the
emotional responses themselves. Both the differences and
their correspondence support our hypotheses about the cultural impact on the way in which emotional responses are
cognitively elicited.

.55

Anger

Guilt

Sadness

Figure 5: Cultural differences in ratings of emotions.

General Discussion
Our results indicate that Tongans have a more interdependent
self-concept and a stronger belief in a just world than Germans. As predicted, they also appraise less damage and
ascribe less responsibility to others, and accordingly respond
with anger less intensely than Germans. Instead, Tongans
ascribe more responsibility to self and circumstances, which
also results in higher ratings for sadness and guilt.
The results on self-concept and its impact on cognitive
determinants of emotions are consistent with findings from
research on attribution styles (e.g., Choi & Nisbett, 1998;
Morris et al., 2001), whereas the obtained correspondence
between cognitive determinants and emotional responses
reflects general appraisal theoretic findings (e.g., Ellsworth
& Smith, 1988; Roseman et al., 1996; Scherer, 1997). In
addition, the results of our study replicate previous findings
from Tonga using the same design (Bender et al., 2006,
2007), and they resonate with studies on similar topics
(Beller et al., subm.) as well as with anthropological research
on cultural values and social structure (e.g., Bender et al.,
2007; Morton, 1996).
With regard to the just world belief, the correspondence
between a stronger belief, lower ratings of damage, and
higher ratings of self-responsibility are, again, consistent
with research in this field (e.g., Dalbert & Yamauchi, 1994;
Hafer & Correy, 1999; Loo, 2002), except that just world
belief ratings are higher for our German sample of high
school students than for Dalbert and Yamauchi’s (1994)
sample of university students; but given the differences in
age and education this may not be surprising.
Our results go beyond previous findings for Tonga and
supplement our interpretation of attribution tendencies. In
particular, by considering the just world belief we provide an
explanation for the lower assessment of damage (based on
the coping strategy of re-appraising the situation as less
unjust) and for the high ascription of responsibility to the
self (i.e., to the victim of the event).
This tendency to ascribe responsibility to the self, however, might also result from an interdependent self-concept.
If people are regarded as interconnected parts of their group,

105

all group members should have their share of responsibility
for the behavior of single members. Although strong interdependent self-concepts and just world beliefs do not necessarily co-occur in general, they seem to do so in Tonga.
Therefore, the cultures in our comparison do not allow to
separate the relative impact of these two cultural factors on
the ascription of self-responsibility.
Our analysis is based on co-variations that cannot prove
causal links. However, it converges with findings from
anthropological research on the same cultures and with psychological studies on the same theoretical concepts. This
supports us in our conclusion that cultural differences in
ascribing responsibility and corresponding emotions are, to
an important degree, due to cultural differences in self-concept and just world belief. In other words, culture shapes the
way in which cognition triggers emotions. A thorough
understanding of cultural differences in emotions therefore
requires knowledge about their cognitive constituents as well
as the underlying cultural concepts that may modulate their
effects.

Acknowledgments
The project was funded by a grant from the DFG to Hans
Spada and Stefan Seitz (Sp 251/18-x). We thank the Government of Tonga for granting us permission to conduct our
research. We are indebted to Moana and Sione Faka'osi,
Teisa Fakatene, Naule'o Fifita, Pauline Fili, Fonongava'inga
and Paul Kidd, Katalina Lutui, and Langilangi Vi, for assistance and discussions in Tonga. In Germany, we wish to
thank Lena Hofmann, Annelie Rothe, Teresa Schmidt, Manuela Sibold, and Nina Tödter for their assistance and enthusiasm, and we are grateful to Sieghard Beller, Sarah Mannion,
and Stefan Seitz for discussion and valuable comments.

References
Beller, S., Bender, A. & Song, J. (subm.). Conditional promises and threats in a cultural comparison. [Under review]
Bender, A. (2001). “God will send us the fish” – Perception
and evaluation of an environmental risk in Ha'apai, Tonga.
Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, 9, 165-190.
Bender, A. & Beller, S. (2003). Polynesian tapu in the ‘deontic square’: A cognitive concept, its linguistic expression
and cultural context. In R. Alterman, & D. Kirsh (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Bender, A., Spada, H., Seitz, S., Swoboda, H. & Traber, S.
(2007). Anger and rank in Tonga and Germany: Cognition,
emotion, and context. Ethos, 35 (2), 196-234.
Bender, A., Spada, H., Swoboda, H. & Traber, S. (2006).
Responsibility for bad deeds—and for good? The impact of
cultural attribution tendencies on cognition and emotion. In
R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Choi, I. & R.E. Nisbett (1998). Situational salience and cultural differences in the correspondence bias and actorobserver bias. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
24, 949-960.

Dalbert, C. (2002). Beliefs in a just world as a buffer against
anger. Social Justice Research, 15 (1), 123-145.
Dalbert, C. & Yamauchi, L. (1994). Belief in a just world and
attitudes toward immigrants and foreign workers: A cultural comparison between Hawaii and Germany. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 24, 1612-1626.
Ellsworth, P.C. & Smith, C.A. (1988). From appraisal to emotion: Differences among unpleasant feelings. Motivation
and Emotion, 12, 271-302.
Hafer, C.L. & Correy, B.L. (1999). Mediators of the relation
between beliefs in a just world and emotional responses to
negative outcomes. Social Justice Research, 12, 189-204.
Kuppens, P., Mechelen, I.V., Smits, D.J.M. & de Boeck, P.
(2003). The appraisal basis of anger: Specificity, necessity,
and sufficiency of components. Emotion, 3 (3), 254-269.
Lazarus, R.S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Lerner, M.J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental
delusion. New York: Plenum.
Loo, R. (2002). A psychometric and cross-national examination of a belief in a just world scale. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 32 (7), 1396-1405.
Markus, H.R. & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self:
Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Mesquita, B. & Frijda, N.H. (1992). Cultural variations in
emotion. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 179-204.
Morris, M. W., Menon, T., & Ames, D. R. (2001). Culturally
conferred conceptions of agency: A key to social perception of persons, groups, and other actors. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 5, 169-182.
Morton, H. (1996). Becoming Tongan: An ethnography of
childhood. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
Nerb, J. & Spada, H. (2001). Evaluation of environmental
problems: A coherence model of cognition and emotion.
Cognition and Emotion, 15, 521-551.
Ortony, A., Clore, G.L., & Collins, A. (1988). The cognitive
structure of emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H.M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002).
Rethinking individualism and collectivism: Evaluation of
theoretical assumptions and meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 128, 3-72.
Roseman, I.J., Antoniou, A.A. & Jose, P.E. (1996). Appraisal
determinants of emotions: Constructing a more accurate
and comprehensive theory. Cognition and Emotion, 10,
241-277.
Scherer, K.R. (1997). The role of culture in emotion-antecedent appraisal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 902-922.
Scherer, K.R., Schorr, A. & Johnstone, T. (Eds.) (2001).
Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods,
research. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shore, B. (1989). Mana and tapu. In A. Howard & R. Borofsky (Eds.), Developments in Polynesian ethnology. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
Singelis, T.M. (1994). The measurement of independent and
interdependent self-construals. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 580-591.
Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of responsibility: A foundation
for a theory of social conduct. New York: Guilford Press.

106

