UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Control as Alternation of Activation and Suppression in a Stroop Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6950q24k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Juvina, Ion
Taatgen, Niels A.
Dickison, Daniel

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Control as Alternation
of Activation and Suppression in the Stroop Task
Ion Juvina (ijuvina@andrew.cmu.edu)
Niels A. Taatgen (taatgen@cmu.edu)
Daniel Dickison (danieldickison@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

distraction and/or interruption; it results in consistent
behavior. The sub-symbolic dimension intervenes by
activating or suppressing various contents or processes
depending on their relevance to the task at hand; this
dimension ensures that the system is able to react timely and
flexibly to changes in environment.

Execution of tasks in which information rapidly changes its
relevance employs both excitatory and inhibitory top-down
control. This assertion is derived from empirical data and
computational cognitive modeling of a screen-based Stroop
task. Empirical data showing both within-trial (interference
and facilitation) and between-trial (negative priming) effects
are presented. A computational cognitive model developed
within the ACT-R architecture is proposed. This model uses a
spreading activation mechanism that activates information
pertaining to the current trial and suppresses information
pertaining to the preceding trial. A good fit of this model to
human data is reported and the neuro-cognitive plausibility of
top-down suppression is discussed.

Background
The Stroop task is one of the most investigated tasks in
Cognitive Psychology (MacLeod, 1991). Since it is so well
documented we used it as a reference task in conjunction
with other tasks in an individual differences study aiming to
understand the role of cognitive control in multitasking.

Keywords: Cognitive control; Cognitive modeling; Stroop.

The Stroop Task

Introduction

The standard Stroop task, which will be discussed here
(Stroop, 1935), consists of a serial presentation of various
words written with various ink colors. Words can be color
names such as “red” or neutral such as “bag”. Participants
have to name the ink color of the presented words. One of
the most known findings is that it takes longer to name the
color of incongruent color words (e.g. the word “red” in
green ink) than to name the color of neutral words. This
effect is known as Stroop interference and it is usually
computed as the difference between the median reaction
time on incongruent and neutral trials. It also takes shorter
to name the color of congruent color words (e.g. the word
“red” in red ink) than to name the color of neutral words.
This effect is known as Stroop facilitation and it is usually
computed as the difference between the median reaction
time on congruent and neutral trials. Stroop interference and
facilitation are referred to here as within-trial effects since
they are computed in a way that ignores any dependencies
between trials.
Performance on a particular Stroop trial seems to be
related not only to features of the current stimulus but also
to features of the preceding stimulus. For example, when the
to-be-ignored word on the previous trial turns out to be the
to-be-named color on the current trial (e.g., the word
“green” in red ink precedes the word “blue” in green ink)
reaction time increases. The phenomenon, called “negative
priming”, is very robust and fairly general (MacLeod,
1991). Theoretical accounts of negative priming (NP) refer
to either processes of selective inhibition or episodic
memory retrieval (Egner & Hirsch, 2005).

Cognitive control has been conceptualized in several ways.
In the ACT-R theory cognitive control is localized in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) (Anderson, 2005) and is
viewed as sequencing of steps needed to accomplish a task,
resistance to distraction via abstract control states, and
allocation of cognitive resources in a parsimonious way
(Taatgen, 2007). In the parallel distributed processing (PDP)
framework cognitive control is conceived of as top-down
excitatory biasing (TEB) from the prefrontal cortex (PFC) to
other brain structures involved in performing a task (Miller
& Cohen, 2001). The PFC holds task representations that
provide biasing input to the processing areas in the posterior
cortex, thus selectively activating task relevant information.
Task irrelevant information is not exposed to TEB thus
losing the competition in favor of task relevant information
(Herd, Banich, & O'Reilly, 2006).
Two distinct dimensions of cognitive control seem to be
employed in tasks where information rapidly changes its
relevance. A symbolic dimension of cognitive control
ensures the proper sequencing of steps necessary to perform
the task. A sub-symbolic dimension of control ensures that
relevant information is activated and irrelevant information
is suppressed. This paper seeks to demonstrate that the subsymbolic dimension of control is achieved not only through
a TEB mechanism but also with the aid of a top-down
inhibitory biasing (TIB) mechanism.
The two dimensions of control seem to have
complementary functional roles. The symbolic dimension
enforces and maintains a course of action in face of

1133

The selective inhibition account (Houghton, Tipper,
Weaver, & Shore, 1996) posits an initial activation of both
features (word and color) followed by an active inhibition of
the to-be-ignored feature (word) of the current stimulus. If
the inhibited feature returns as the to-be-named feature of
the next stimulus its inhibition has to be overridden by reactivation. This account predicts longer reaction times when
the previous word feature re-occurs as the current color
feature. Since only the to-be-ignored feature is inhibited
(i.e., inhibition is selective), this account predicts that
reaction time will not increase when the previous color reoccurs as the current color. In fact, reaction times should
decrease, since the to-be-named feature (color) has just been
activated in the previous trial.
The episodic retrieval account (Neill, 1997) holds that the
to-be-named feature of the current stimulus triggers a
retrieval of the most recent episode in which the concept
corresponding to that feature has been used and the
associated reaction. For example, assuming the word “red”
re-occurred as the color red, it would trigger the retrieval of
an episode composed of the concept “red” and the reaction
“no-response”. Since the reaction derived from the retrieved
episode is not adequate for the current stimulus, an
additional retrieval or a strategy change is required to
generate the proper reaction, which explains the time delay.
Similar to the selective inhibition account, this account
predicts longer reaction times when the previous word
feature re-occurs as the current color feature. In the case of
the previous color feature re-occurring as the current color
feature, this account would also predict no increase in
reaction times; the most recent episode involving the current
color contains exactly the reaction needed for the current
stimulus.
Both the selective inhibition and episodic retrieval
accounts explain between-trial effects based on the
processes (activation and suppression, or retrieval of
previous solutions) responsible for the within-trial effects;
in other words, between-trial effects are by-products of
within-trial effects.

employed to model the Stroop interference and facilitation
effects. Although it does not address between-trial effects, it
could account for negative priming cases where the previous
word re-occurs as the current color.
Herd, Banich, and O’Reilly (2006) argue that a TIB
mechanism is not necessary to account for interference and
facilitation. Using the Leabra modeling environment and
only a TEB approach, they were able to not only account for
interference and facilitation but also explain fMRI data
showing increased activity in brain regions processing tobe-ignored information. A general concept of color, which
subsumes linguistic and perceptual features, is represented
in the PFC and spreads activation toward processing areas
for both word and color. This is how the to-be-ignored word
feature gets activated as shown by fMRI data (Herd, Banich,
& O'Reilly, 2006). However, the color feature gets extraactivation from another PFC representation responsible for
maintaining the task set, that is, the requirement to respond
to the color feature. This model demonstrates that there is no
need for active top-down inhibition of the word feature
because the color feature gets more top-down activation and
wins the competition. Moreover, the authors argue that topdown inhibition would be biologically implausible, as
inhibitory projections in the human brain are strictly local. It
is not clear though how this model would account for
between-trial effects using only a TEB mechanism.

Empirical Study
Participants, Method, and Procedure
A screen-based Stroop task was administrated to 53
participants. Age ranged from 18 to 59 with an average of
24. There were 16 women and 37 men. Participants received
a fixed amount of monetary compensation for their
participation.
The standard Stroop task was adapted for screen-based
administration. Stimuli were color words (red, blue, yellow
and green) and neutral words colored with one of the four
colors denoted by the mentioned color words. They were
presented one at a time and remained on the screen until the
participant responded. Two response options were also
displayed flanking the stimulus on its left and right sides.
Response options were non-colored (i.e., colored with black
ink) color words. One response option would contain the
right answer and the other one a wrong answer. Every
subject received 150 trials, 50 trials for each condition –
conflicting, congruent and neutral. The location of stimuli
on the screen was kept constant. All the other factors were
randomized.
Participants were instructed to select the response option
that matched the color of the stimulus and started with a
short computer-guided tutorial that emphasized the correct
response. During the actual task no feedback was provided.

Computational Cognitive Models of Stroop Effects
In an ACT-R model of the Stroop task developed by Lovett
(2005), a representation of the current stimulus is part of the
goal representation and spreads activation toward colorassociation representations in declarative memory.
Representations are positively linked when they represent
matching colors and negatively linked when they represent
mismatching colors. When the word and color features of
the stimulus are congruent, the association representation
receives positive activation from both features causing the
facilitation effect; when the word and color are incongruent
the to-be-retrieved representation receives positive
activation form the color feature and negative activation
from the word feature causing the interference effect. This
model seems to support the selective inhibition account:
activation and suppression (i.e., activation spreading
through negatively weighted links) mechanisms are

Results of the Empirical Study
The data of one participant were excluded from analyses
due to failure to follow task instructions. Accuracy and

1134

reaction time (RT) were recorded for each trial. Accuracy
data are consistent with previous studies, showing less than
1% errors for the congruent and neutral conditions and less
than 10% errors for the incongruent condition. For the
following analyses only RT from correct trials was
considered. Significant interference and facilitation effects
were found. Since within-trial effects were very consistent
with those found in previous studies they will not be treated
in more detail here. However, the actual mean values can be
seen in the next section where model simulations will be
compared to the empirical data.
Two significant between-trial effects were found (see
Table 1). They will be referred here to as Word-Color (WC) and Color-Color (C-C) effects, respectively. The W-C
effect is observed when the word feature of the preceding
stimulus re-occurs as the color feature of the current
stimulus. The average RT for the W-C prime trials is
significantly higher than for no-prime trials (t(51)=6.4,
p<0.001).
The C-C effect is observed when the color feature of the
preceding stimulus re-occurs as the color feature of the
current stimulus. The average RT for the C-C prime trials is
significantly higher than for no-prime trials (t(51)=2.86,
p<0.01).

Table 2 shows the frequency of occurrence of various trial
types. These data are reported because the magnitude and
direction of between-trial effects may be related to the low
frequency of prime trials relative to the frequency of noprime trials.

Discussion of the Empirical Findings

Table 1: Mean RT (ms) and t-tests showing between-trial
effects (* significant at alpha = 0.01 two tailed).
Type of
effect
W-C
C-W
C-C
W-W

No
prime
1036
1051
1040
1045

Prime
trials
1111
1030
1075
1055

t(51)

p

6.4
-1.3
2.9
0.7

0.000*
0.193
0.006*
0.481

An additional between-trial effect, which has been
reported elsewhere (MacLeod, 1991), was found nonsignificant in this study. This effect would consist of
reduced RTs for trials where the to-be-ignored word of the
current stimulus names the color of the preceding stimulus.
Following the same coding scheme as above this effect
could be referred to as the Color-Word (C-W) effect. A
reduction in RTs of about 20ms can indeed be observed in
our data but it doesn’t reach the threshold of statistical
significance.
Table 2: Frequency of various trial types that have a
potential to produce between-trial effects.
Type of
effect
W-C
C-W
C-C
W-W

No prime
trials
6573
6660
5970
7048

Prime
trials
1377
1290
1980
902

%
17.3
16.2
24.9
11.3

1135

The data presented here mostly confirm well-known effects
in the Stroop task: interference, facilitation, and negative
priming. However, the C-C effect is less known and to our
knowledge has not been reported so far in the context of the
Stroop task.
While it seems plausible that within-trial effects
(inhibition and facilitation) can be explained only based on a
TEB mechanism, it is hard to imagine how the between-trial
effects can be explained without a TIB mechanism. Could
this TIB mechanism be the one suggested by the selective
inhibition account? This account would easily explain the
W-C effect. Because the to-be-ignored word feature has
been actively suppressed on the preceding trial, it takes
approximately 75ms longer to reactivate the name of the
color feature of the current stimulus. However, this account
would fail to explain the C-W and the C-C effects. Since the
color feature has been activated (and not suppressed) on the
preceding trial, the word feature of the current stimulus
would have an even stronger potential to interfere, that is to
increase RTs (and not decrease them as in the data). When
the color feature of the preceding stimulus re-occurs as the
color feature of the current stimulus there would be no
reason for the RTs to increase by about 35ms, as is observed
in the data, because the color feature has not been inhibited
according to the selective inhibition account.
Would perhaps the episodic retrieval account explain the
negative priming effects better? It explains well the W-C
effect but it fails to explain the other two. In the case of the
C-W effect, this account would predict increase in RT (in
opposition to the data) since the last episode involving the
color feature of the preceding stimulus contains the reaction
“response” which is not necessarily adequate for the current
stimulus. In the case of the C-C effect, the last episode
contains exactly the reaction that is needed for the current
stimulus, thus there would be no reason for the RT to
increase (as in the data).
A possible alternative account suggested by our data
could be referred to as semantic inhibition-of-return (SIOR)
by analogy with inhibition-of-return (IOR) – a well-known
effect in the field of visual search (Klein, 2000). IOR is the
delay in attending a visual stimulus at a location that was
previously attended. It is thought to have the function of
increasing efficiency of search and foraging behaviors by
preventing attentional resources to be wasted at locations
that were previously attended. By analogy, SIOR would be
the suppression of the concept that has just been activated
and used in the preceding trial, regardless of location. This
account would predict increased reaction times not only
when the preceding word but also when the preceding color
is identical to the to-be-named color of the current stimulus.

Unlike the selective inhibition account, the SIOR account
posits inhibition of both features (word and color) of the
preceding stimulus. The functional role of SIOR would be
to prevent the representation of the preceding stimulus from
interfering with processing of the current stimulus. Thus, the
functional role of SIOR seems identical to the role of
memory decay (Altmann, 2002; Anderson, 1989). Questions
arise whether an additional inhibitory mechanism is
necessary and how plausible such a mechanism is from a
neuro-cognitive perspective. These questions are addressed
in the next sections.

been run separately and their results compared against the
human data. These two versions differ only with regard to
the presence or absence of the TIB mechanism.
Figure 1 shows RT for each condition for the two versions
of the model and for the data.

An ACT-R Model of Stroop Effects
This model is largely based on the models of Altmann and
Lovett (Altmann & Davidson, 2001; Lovett, 2005) both
implemented in the ACT-R architecture. An extension was
necessary to account for the observed between-trial effects
while preserving a good account for the within-trial effects.
The word and the color features of the current stimulus
are encoded as parts of the goal representation and spread
activation to related information in memory. For example,
when the stimulus is the word “green” in red ink, both
features spread activation and two concepts are likely to be
retrieved – redness and greenness. If greenness is retrieved,
the system either commits an error or performs a second
retrieval to get the correct concept. If the two features of the
stimulus are congruent, they spread activation toward the
same concept, thus the probability of the right concept to be
retrieved and the retrieval speed are very high.
In order to account for between-trial effects an inhibitory
goal representation has been added. This inhibitory goal
behaves exactly as the original (activating) goal of ACT-R,
except it spreads negative activation in order to suppress the
features (word and color) of the previous stimulus. Thus,
after the current stimulus has been processed it is included
in the inhibitory goal representation. Normally, this
suppression of the previous stimulus reduces its chance to
interfere with the current stimulus. However, in some cases,
when a feature of the previous stimulus re-occurs with the
current stimulus, retrieval of the corresponding concept
from memory is significantly slowed down, because it has
been suppressed (i.e., negative activation has been spread
toward it). This way, as a result of activation and
suppression the model is able to account for both withinand between-trial effects.

Figure 1: Reaction time per condition showing
interference and facilitation effects (vertical bars represent
standard errors of the means in the data).
The two versions of the model, TEB and TIB+TEB, seem
to account equally well for the within-trial effects. RTs of
the TIB+TEB model are slightly higher overall because of a
generalized reduction in activation caused by TIB.
Figure 2 shows RT for the W-C and C-C trials as
compared with an average RT for no-prime trials, again
evaluating the two versions of the model against the human
data.

Results of Model Simulations
Simulations of the model have been designed to allow
comparison with the human data. The same number of
individuals and trials per individual were administrated as in
the actual study.
In general the model was able to account for a variety of
Stroop effects and task manipulations as shown in previous
modeling work (Lovett, 2005). Here a preferential treatment
is given to those results suggesting answers to the questions
posed above, that is, whether or not a TIB mechanism is
necessary and plausible. Two versions of the model have

1136

Figure 2: Reaction time for W-C, C-C, and no-prime
trials, showing that only the TIB+TEB model is able to
account for both negative priming effects (vertical bars
represent standard errors of the means in the data).

these circumstances, averaging across all individuals
might cause the W-W effect to disappear altogether.
The simulation results presented above show that withinand between-trial effects are independent of each other.
Although a small increase in RT was observed due to the
TIB mechanism, it is quite evenly distributed across
conditions thus not affecting the magnitudes of interference
and facilitation. The classical accounts of between-trial
effects assume that they are by-products of within-trial
effects. This assumption makes them fail to explain the
whole range of negative priming effects. When a separate
process is assumed to be responsible for between-trial
effects as in the SIOR account, the whole range of results is
well accounted for.

While the TIB+TEB version accounts reasonably well for
the data, the TEB version of the model is unable to account
for the between-trial effects observed in the data. For the noprime trials the two versions behave exactly the same the
difference between them becoming visible only for the
prime trials.

Discussion of the Simulation Results
The simulation results show that a TIB control mechanism
is indeed necessary and a TEB mechanism alone is
insufficient to account for the behavioral effects observed in
our study. It can be argued that the TEB model could have
been enriched with a within-trial selective inhibition or an
episodic retrieval mechanism and made able to account for
the W-C effect. However, such a model would still be
unable to account for the C-C effect.
It can also be argued that the TIB mechanism that we
propose could produce other effects that are not observed in
the data. For example, a W-W effect would be expected.
When the word feature of the preceding stimulus re-occurs
as the word feature of the current stimulus RT should be
decreased. Since the re-occurring word feature has been
suppressed it should have less interfering potential. This
effect has not been observed in our data. A C-W could also
be predicted by the proposed TIB mechanism. Since the
color feature of the preceding stimulus has been suppressed,
it has less interfering potential when it returns as the word
feature of the current stimulus, thus causing reduced RT.
This effect has been observed in our data but its magnitude
is small and it doesn’t reach statistical significance.
Although we don’t have a complete solution to this issue
yet, a mechanism is already in place that is responsible for
the differences in magnitude observed between the different
negative priming effects. This mechanism is based on the
well-known asymmetry between word reading and color
naming (Cattell, 1886). Word reading is a more dominant
and automatic process than color naming. In some of the
trials the color feature is not encoded. For example, in the
congruent condition a fast response can be generated based
only on the word feature. In these cases the color feature is
also not inhibited at the end of the trial, thus losing a chance
to increase the magnitude of the C-W or C-C effects. As for
a possible W-W effect, three scenarios are conceivable:
- It may actually exist but we failed to measure it. The
set size of the word feature (50 words) was much
larger than the set size of the color feature (4 colors).
Thus the chance that a word is repeated is relatively
small (see Table 2).
- It may be that the word reading routine is so strong
that a temporary top-down suppression has little to no
effect on it.
- Individual differences may exist with regard to the
ratio of inhibitory vs. excitatory control. Individuals
using TIB to avoid between-trials interference would
show decreased RT, whereas individuals using TEBonly would show increased RT in W-W trials. Given

General Discussion and Conclusion
The empirical and modeling results presented above suggest
that both excitatory and inhibitory processes are involved in
the sub-symbolic dimension of cognitive control. In accord
with previous models of the Stroop task (Herd, Banich, &
O'Reilly, 2006), a TIB mechanism was indeed not necessary
to account for within-trial effects. However, such a
mechanism was necessary to account for between-trial
effects.
TEB and TIB have been implemented by representing
task relevant information in two distinct goal
representations. The excitatory goal holds a representation
of the current stimulus and the inhibitory goal holds a
representation of the previous stimulus. Arguably, such
alternation of activation and suppression has a functional
role in tasks involving rapid serial presentations of stimuli:
the current stimulus should be activated and the previous
stimulus should be prevented to interfere with the current
stimulus. When it happens that features of the previous
stimulus (word, color or both) return as features of the
current stimulus, they need to be reactivated. Thus, in a time
interval of about 1s, a mental representation might be
exposed to a complete activation-suppression-reactivation
sequence. Such a fast adaptation mechanism is one of the
characteristics of cognitive control (Gilbert & Shallice,
2002). Mental representations and processes involved in
performing a task suffer only temporary top-down
influences that bias their regular state or activity.
A TIB mechanism has been rejected by Herd et al. (2006)
on basis of biological implausibility. They cited evidence
that inhibitory projections in the human brain are strictly
local (White, 1989). Our model suggests that the inhibitory
signal does not need to travel across the brain: its target
might be located in the same brain area. The effects we have
described happen at retrieval. PFC has been thought to be
involved in both retrieval (Anderson, Albert, & Fincham,
2005; Rugg, Henson, & Robb, 2003) and in holding mental
representations involved in cognitive control (Miller &
Cohen, 2001).
There are perhaps alternative ways to explain and model
the effects observed in our study. Fuentes (1999) proposed a
temporary inhibitory tagging mechanism to account for a

1137

variety of IOR effects. They argued that such a tagging
mechanism extended to semantic and response relevant
properties of stimuli (Fuentes, 1999), thus it could explain
our results. ACT-R has an inhibitory tagging mechanism
called finst that could be used to model inhibitory processes.
However, IOR seems a universal and stable phenomenon
that affects perhaps any search or foraging process.
Correspondingly, the finst mechanism consists of a set of
parameters that are usually set by the modeler and affect the
behavior of the model in a rather deterministic manner. The
inhibitory mechanism we propose here has the potential to
be adaptive and flexible, thus appropriate to model cognitive
control. Arguably, the effects we have described are
influenced by properties of the task environment as well as
individual strategies and learning effects. For example, the
magnitude of W-C and C-C effects would probably
diminish with practice because they work against the
adaptive role of SIOR, which is to reduce interference. If the
frequency of the prime trials increases people might change
their strategies and actually reverse the negative priming
effects. These predictions are to be addressed in further
empirical and modeling work.
The proposed mechanism to model the sub-symbolic
dimension is complementary to the symbolic dimension of
cognitive control. Our model employed a symbolic
dimension of control to ensure a proper sequencing of
actions and resist the influence of pre-potent responses. This
way, for example, the model avoided making too many
errors. This symbolic dimension of control is believed to be
localized in ACC (Anderson, 2005), whereas the subsymbolic dimension seems to be localized in PFC (Herd,
Banich, & O'Reilly, 2006; Miller & Cohen, 2001). The subsymbolic dimension of control seem to be useful in
modeling dynamic and temporary aspects of task
performance such as rapid serial presentation and repetitions
of stimuli and task switching. They are likely to be
influenced by practice, reward, cognitive strategies and
individual differences.
This paper has argued for a composite nature of the subsymbolic dimension of cognitive control. An alternation of
activation and suppression modulates performance in tasks
in which information rapidly changes its relevance.

Anderson, J. R. (1989). Human Memory: An Adaptive
Perspective. Psychological Review, 96, 703-719.
Anderson, J. R. (2005). Human symbol manipulation within
an integrated cognitive architecture. Cognitive Science,
29(3), 313-341.
Anderson, J. R., Albert, M. V., & Fincham, J. M. (2005).
Tracing Problem Solving in Real Time: fMRI Analysis of
the Subject-Paced Tower of Hanoi Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 17 1261-1274.
Cattell, J. M. (1886). The time it takes to see and name
objects. Mind, 11, 63-65.
Egner, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005). Cognitive control
mechanisms
resolve
conflict
through
cortical
amplification of task-relevant information. Nature
Neuroscience, 8(1784-1790).
Fuentes, L. J. (1999). Inhibitory Tagging of Stimulus
Properties in Inhibition of Return: Effects on Semantic
Priming and Flanker Interference The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Section A, 52(1), 149 - 164.
Gilbert, S. J., & Shallice, T. (2002). Task Switching: A PDP
Model. Cognitive Psychology, 44, 297-337.
Herd, S. A., Banich, M. T., & O'Reilly, R. C. (2006). Neural
Mechanisms of Cognitive Control: An Integrative Model
of Stroop Task Performance and fMRI Data J. Cognitive
Neuroscience MIT Press, 18(1 ), 22-32
Houghton, G., Tipper, S. P., Weaver, B., & Shore, D. I.
(1996). Inhibition and interference in selective attention:
Some tests of a neural network model. Visual Cognition,
3(119–164).
Klein, R. M. (2000). Inhibition of return. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 138-147.
Lovett, M. C. (2005). A Strategy-Based Interpretation of
Stroop. Cognitive Science(29), 493-524.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a Century of Research on the
Stroop Effect: An Integrative Review Psychological
Bulletin, 109(2), 163-203.
Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory
of prefrontal cortex function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 24,
167–202.
Neill, W. T. (1997). Episodic Retrieval in Negative Priming
and Repetition Priming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology; Learning, Memory, and Cognition 23(6),
1291-1305.
Rugg, M. D., Henson, R. N., & Robb, W. G. (2003). Neural
correlates of retrieval processing in the prefrontal cortex
during
recognition
and
exclusion
tasks.
Neuropsychologia, 41(1), 40-52.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Taatgen, N. A. (2007). The Minimal Control Principle. In
W. Gray (ed.), Integrated models of cognitive systems.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
White, E. L. (1989). Cortical circuits: Synaptic
organization of the cerebral cortex, structure, function,
and theory. Boston: Birkhauser

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported from ONR grant
no. N00014-06-1-0055. We would like to thank Andrea
Stocco, and Jelmer Borst for their comments on a previous
draft of this paper.

References
Altmann, E. M. (2002). Functional decay of memory for
tasks. Psychological Research, 66 287-297.
Altmann, E. M., & Davidson, D. J. (2001). An integrative
approach to Stroop: Combining a language model and a
unified cognitive theory Paper presented at the TwentyThird Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Hillsdale, NJ

1138

