UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Reflection: the 'Premature Temperature Convergence' Hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9wk5x4kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Silva, Jarbas
Linhares, Alexandre

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Reflection: the ‘Premature Temperature Convergence’ Hypothesis
Jarbas Silva (jarbas@intuition-sciences.com)
Getulio Vargas Foundation/EBAPE, Praia de Botafogo 190 office #509
Rio de Janeiro 22250-900 Brazil

Alexandre Linhares (linhares@clubofrome.org.br)
Getulio Vargas Foundation/EBAPE, Praia de Botafogo 190 office #509
Rio de Janeiro 22250-900 Brazil
Kahneman (2003) presented the black box framework of
Stanovich (1999) and Stanovich and West (2000) known as
‘dual systems theory’ to account for the different response
types. The modularity of the presented framework implies
that there is low or hardly any interaction between ‘system
1’ and ‘system 2’, and high interaction within each system.
We find that position untenable, for we posit that, even in
the most abstract, detached, form of thought, intuition plays
a key role, by guiding reasoning processes in subtle,
subconscious judgments. We therefore place the following
questions concerning figure 1:
How do these systems interact? Which subsystems of an
architecture could explain the different response types? In
this paper we claim that the architecture of a system known
as NUMBO (and, in fact, of all systems of the family to
which it belongs), is able to explain the distinction in
response types offered by ‘system 1’ and ‘system 2’
problems without resorting to a modular framework.

Abstract
We present a new hypothesis concerning cognitive reflection
and the relationship between System 1 and System 2,
corresponding roughly to intuition and reason.
This
hypothesis postulates a tighter integration between systems
than is implied by the common framework of separate
modules. If systems are tightly coupled, as we propose here,
an explanation of cognitive reflection may rest in the
premature convergence of an ‘entropy’, or ‘temperature’,
parameter.
Keywords: Intuition, reason, cognitive models, cognitive
reflection, perception, philosophy.

The cognitive reflection test
Kahneman (2003) pointed out an interesting problem in his
Nobel lecture: why do people generally err in simple
problems, such as “a bat and a ball cost 1.10. The bat costs
1.00 more than the ball. How much is the ball?” Frederick
(2005) proposed this problem, alongside two others, as a
cognitive reflection test (CRT)1, a task which would
measure a person’s ability to suppress from responding to
their first impulse and engage in more abstract cognition in
order to solve a problem.

Numbo: an integrated computational
architecture
Numbo is part of a family of cognitively plausible
architectures which has been applied to numerous domains
(see for instance French 1992; Mitchell and Hofstadter
1990; Mitchell 1993; McGraw 1995; Marshall 1999;
Rehling 2001, Linhares 2005, Linhares 2007). Let us start
by describing the problem with which it deals: le compte est
bon.

The task: le compte est bon
The game Numble, on which NUMBO is based, is known in
France as Le compte est Bon ("the total is correct") and has
the objective to construct a number, called the target (taken
from the interval between 1 and 150), from a set of 5 or less
numbers, called bricks (taken from the the interval between
1 and 25), using only three basic operations: addition,
subtraction and multiplication. The bricks can be used in
only one operation in the resolution of the problem, for
example:

Figure 1: Process and Content in two Cognitive Systems:
the “dual systems” view (Kahneman 2003).

1
The remaining problems of the CRT are: (ii) “If it takes 5
machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it take 100
machines to make 100 widgets?”, and (iii) “In a lake, there is a
patch of lilypads. Every day, the patch doubles in its size. If it
takes 48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long
would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake?”

Problem #2 Target: 87
Bricks: 8 3 9 10 7

1503

Let us see how NUMBO is designed to solve this task in a
psychologically-plausible way.

Numbo
Numbo is a parallel computational architecture which
operates in multiple levels of description and consists of 5
integrated subsystems2. It works in a parallel fashion, with
subcognitive processes we may refer to as codelets, or
pressing urges. It has five principal components:

Sub-cognitive processes
The
computational
processes
constructing
the
representations on short-term memory are subcognitive
processes named codelets. The system perceives a great
number of subtle pressures that immediately invoke
subcognitive urges to handle them. These urges will
eventually become impulsive processes. Some of these
processes may look for particular objects, some may look
for particular relations between numbers and create bonds
between them, some may group numbers into chunks, or
associate descriptions to chunks, etc. The collective
computation of these impulsive processes, at any given
time, stands for the working memory of the model. These
processes can be described as impulsive for a number of
reasons: first of all, they are involuntary, as there is no
conscious decision required for their triggering. They are
also automatic, as there is no need for conscious decisions
to be taken in their internal processing; they simply know
how to do their job without asking for help. They are fast,
with only a few operations carried out. They accomplish
direct connections between their micro-perceptions and their
micro-actions. Processing is also granular and fragmented –
as opposed to a linearly structured sequence of operations
that cannot be interrupted. Finally, they are functional,
associated with a subpattern, and operate on a subsymbolic
level (but not restricted to the manipulation of internal
numerical parameters—as opposed to most connectionist
systems).

perceived simultaneously, in parallel. So there is at any
point in time a list of subcognitive urges ready to execute,
fighting for the attention of the system and waiting
probabilistically to fire as an impulsive process.
Any run starts with a standard initial population of bottomup3 codelets (with pre-set urgencies) on the list. At each
time step, one codelet is probabilistically chosen to run and
is removed from the current population on the Coderack
(Mitchell 1993, Hofstadter and FARG 1995). The emerging
representation can put other codelets in the Coderack, as
well as change the urgency of the existing ones. So, the
proper allocation of resources could not be programmed
ahead of time, since it depends on what pressures emerge as
a given situation is perceived.

STM

List of parallel priorities - Coderack

This is the working (short-term) memory of the model. This
workspace is where the representations are constructed, with
innumerable pressing urges waiting for attention and their
corresponding impulsive processes swarming over the
representation, independently perceiving and creating many
types of subpatterns. Common examples of such subpatterns
are micro-operations perceiving numbers, or the addition of
two numbers, the perception that 6 is similar to 5 (in the
sense of being close to it in magnitude), or that 107 is
similar to 100, and so on.

Figure 2: A fragment of Numbo’s semantic network

Each subcognitive process executes a local, incremental
change to the emerging representation, but the philosophy
of the system is that many of these pressing urges are

The semantic network

2

The semantic associative network undergoes constant flux:
The system has very limited basic knowledge; it knows the
seed numbers, and some immediate relations entailed. The
long-term memory of the system is embedded into a
network of nodes representing concepts with links between
nodes associating related concepts. This network is a crucial
part for the formation of a chain reaction of conceptual

Because Numbo deals with simple number problems and its
description can be summarized more briefly than its other siblingprojects, it has been our preference for presenting the argument
here. The reader, however, should not be misguided to conceive of
it as a mere ad hoc program to solve such simple problems: it is, in
fact, a member of a growing family of architectures to model
general, abstract, human cognition in Chess, letter-string analogies,
stylistic font design, Bongard problems, number sequence
extrapolation, and, lately, music perception, auditory scene
analysis, and discovery in Euclidean geometry (Foundalis 2006,
Hofstadter and FARG 1995, Rehling 2001, Linhares 2005,
Linhares 2007, Linhares and Brum 2007). All these projects
embody the same fundamental architecture.
1504

3
Bottom-up codelets represent pressures present in all situations
(the desire to make descriptions, to find relationships, to find
correspondences, and so on). Top-down codelets represent
pressures evoked by the situation at hand (e.g. , the desire to find
similar numbers to the target 87 in the Problem #2) (Mitchell 1993,
Hofstadter and FARG 1995).

activation: any specific concept, when activated, propagates
activation to its related concepts, which will, in turn, launch
top-down, expectation-driven, urges to look for those
related concepts. This mode of computation not only
enforces a context-sensitive search but also is the basis of
the chain reaction of activation spreading – hence the term
‘active symbols’. One of the most original features of the
slipnet is the ability to “slip one concept into another”, in
which analogies between concepts are made (for details see
Hofstadter and FARG 1995, Mitchell 1993).

processing trajectories under either a system-1-type
response or a system-2-type response.

Numbo’s ‘intuition’ and ‘reason’: a premature
temperature convergence hypothesis

Temperature

By comparing possible dissimilar trajectories of "thought"
due to the system 1-response types and system 2-response
types, we claim that the same underlying subcognitive
mechanisms account for both response types. What
scientific basis supports such mechanisms? There are two
principal sources: the first one is experimental psychology,
and the evidence supporting mechanisms of activationspreading, such as semantic nets. The second source of
evidence comes from cognitive computational modeling,
where analogous processes had already been identified,
studied, and implemented in computational architectures,
such that all the mechanisms that we claim to act during
system 1 and system 2 problems possess a solid base in the
literature, more specifically in the system known as
NUMBO (Defays 1988, and personal correspondence,
2005). Let us, then, compare a system 2-type response in
Numbo to a system 1-type response.

It may be clear from the above that the system does not
zoom in immediately and directly into a faultless
representation. The process of representation construction is
gradual and tentative, with numerous impulsive processes
competing with each other. At the start, the system has no
expectations of the numbers to be found, so it slowly
wanders through many possibilities before converging on a
specific interpretation, through a process called the parallel
terraced scan (Hofstadter and FARG, 1995). Embedded
within it is the control parameter of temperature that
measures the global amount of disorder and
misunderstanding contained in the situation (Hofstadter and
FARG, 1995). So, at the beginning of the process, when no
relevant information has been gathered, the temperature will
be high, but it will gradually decrease as intricate
relationships are perceived, first concepts are activated, the
abstract roles played by numbers and chunks are found, and
meaning starts to emerge. Though other authors have
proposed a relationship between temperature and
understanding (Cagan and Kotovsky, 1997), there is still a
crucial difference here (see Hofstadter 1985, 1995): unlike
the simulated annealing process that has a forcedly
monotonically decreasing temperature schedule, the
construction of a representation for a proposed solution does
not seem to get monotonically more complete as time flows.
There are many instants when roadblocks are reached, when
snags appear, and incompatible structures arise. At these
moments, complexity (and entropy and confusion) grows,
and so the temperature decrease is not monotonic. Finally,
temperature does not act as a control parameter dictated by
the user, that is, preset to go either down or up, but as a
feedback mechanism to the system, which may reorganize
itself, accepting or rejecting changes as temperature allows.
As pressing urges are perceived, their corresponding
impulses eventually propose changes in working memory,
to construct or to destruct structures. How do these proposed
changes get accepted? Temperature guides the process, very
much like simulated annealing. At start it is high and the
vast majority of proposed structures are built, but, as it
decreases, it becomes increasingly more important for a
proposed change to be compatible with the existing
interpretation. And the system may thus focus on
developing a particular viewpoint. Let us present two runs
of the system in order to contrast its different information

A System 2-type response

1505

Now let us consider an execution of NUMBO in the
resolution of the problem Target: 87; Bricks: 8, 3, 9, 10,
7.
It is important to point out that what is presented is a
sequence of steps just for the sake of the reader’s
understanding, as the tasks (processes) are executed in nondeterministic parallel form, therefore, unable to follow a
strictly sequential narrative.
(1) the target is read and the closest landmark, 90 = 9 x 10,
is activated in the Pnet. This serves as a focus for the
triggering of other activations, such as of the multiplication,
subtraction and addition operations. For large targets, the
system ‘knows’ (given the structure of its LTM) that the
most likely way is though multiplication (Defays, 1995).
(2) the brick 8 is read and a codelet of syntactic comparison
between the brick and the target is loaded in coderack, that,
when executed, makes the system perceive a similarity
between 8 and 87. Then a new codelet is loaded in the
coderack, which, if executed, will increase the attractiveness
of the brick.
(3) The next bricks are read in the following order: 7, 9, 10
and 3. It is important to remember that the bricks are not
read from the left to the right but in a probabilistic way,
which influences its behavior. Afterwards, new codelets
with function of syntactic comparison between the bricks
and the target will be loaded in the coderack.
(4) At random, some low urgency codelets are placed in the
coderack with the function to try, for example, mathematical
operations with the bricks. However, the choice of which
ones is biased by their ‘attractiveness’, as well as for the
level of activation of the mathematical operation in the Pnet.

In this way, if 8 were judged to be an attractive brick, the
multiplication is activated (due to landmark 90), and, again,
randomly, the next brick read was 7; block 8 x 7 = 56 is
formed in the work area.
Multiplication

70

90

80

X

X

10

9

8
X

X

2

4

100

2

X
5

3

3

Figure 3. As target 87 is read, a great series of conceptual
activations is made in the Pnet. Here we can observe some
of these activations: (80=8x10), (90=9x10) - both by sheer
proximity to the target. These activations are active,
assuming command of the system, triggering off new
processes and new activations: in the example, nodes 70 and
100 activate in smaller scale, the relation (10=5x2) also goes
through a significant activation, then the system brings its
focus back toward related numbers, and numbers such as 50
or 5 will receive little or no activation. The multiplication
operation suffers a high activation, implying in a great
probability of such operation to be promising in this
scenario.

(7) Since block 56 = 8 x 7 has not been used, its
attractiveness is lowered, which helps to increase the
temperature of the system. With the increase of the
temperature, codelets capable of breaking up that chunk are
loaded in the coderack; which brings the possibility of
blocks to be destroyed. The chosen blocks are those of low
attractiveness and, in this case, 56 is the victim, liberating
the bricks that compose it.
(8) the creation of the secondary target triggers an activation
in the Pnet, as well as loads codelets of the type ‘seekreasonable-facsimile’ with the function of finding an ‘equal
or next in size’ brick. When executed, the codelet finds the
brick 3 equal to the secondary target and loads codelets of
the type "test-if-possible-and-desirable", in order to verify
whether the brick is free and can be used. Finally, brick 3 is
added to the new created block 87 = 90 - 3 and the system
reaches the final answer (9 x 10) - 3.
Notice that the reading order of the bricks was important
in this case, so that the system decided for some information
processing trajectories, in detriment of others. Although
problem #2 seems simple, NUMBO carries through some
calculations and explores rival pathways until finding the
definitive answer. It’s important to remember that other
possible answers exist, and that they might had been found
through other information processing trajectories.
In contrast with this, let us examine a system 1-type
response from NUMBO.

A System 1-type response
Let us see now as NUMBO solves problem # 4:: Target: 25;
Bricks: 8, 5, 5, 11, 2.
(1) the target is read, amongst many other triggered
activations, the node - 25 = 5 x 5 - is activated in the Pnet,
which activates the operation of multiplication. Codelets of
the type "seek-reasonable-facsimile" are loaded in coderack
with the objective to find similar bricks to the nodes
activated in the Pnet.
(2) the first brick (5) is read (randomly), which activates to a
still higher level the node 5 in the Pnet. A codelet with the
function to compare the newly read brick with the target is
loaded, searching for associations. When executed, the
codelet increases still higher the attractiveness of node 25 in
the Pnet; which, in turn, triggers codelets with the function
to increase the urgency of yet other codelets of the type
"seek-reasonable-facsimile" already loaded in coderack.
(3) Then, as a result of codelets "seek-reasonable-facsimile",
the two bricks with values equal to 5 are found and,
subsequently, codelets of the type "test-if-possible-anddesirable" are loaded and will verify if the bricks are free for
use and if the block created will be interesting. As the bricks
are free, NUMBO creates in the work area the block 25 = 5
x 5. Temperature drops with each created structure, and, in
this case, to its lowest level, as it consists in the answer to
the problem.

(5) The nodes activated in the Pnet trigger activations for
neighboring nodes, as well as load (also via codelets) new
codelets in the coderack, to verify the potential to create in
the work area blocks equal to or close to the ones already
activated in the Pnet. In this case, the landmark 90 = 9 x 10
is active in the Pnet, what it makes the NUMBO load
codelets (of the type "seek-reasonable-facsimile") with the
function to find similar bricks to 9 and 10. In this way, the
system quickly perceives the existence of bricks identical to
those looked (9 and 10) and loads codelets (of the type "testif-possible-and-desirable") with the function to verify if the
bricks are free and if the block to be created represents an
attractive track. It is important to call attention to the fact
that other alternative pathways are being explored; and that
the current pathway may not be necessarily the best one. In
this case, the result is the creation of the block 90 = 9 x 10
in the work area.
(6) A new codelet is then loaded in coderack with the
function to compare the new block created (90) with the
target. As the block and target are close, the creation of a
secondary target starts to be an interesting possibility. When
executed, the codelet creates the node 3 in the work area,
fruit of the subtraction 90 - 87, as ‘a secondary target’.

1506

give birth to 9 babies, how long would it take 100 women to
give birth to 100 babies?” (Frederick 2005).
In this second variation, of course, nobody should reply
100 months. Yet, they are, in essence, the same problem.
So what is the differing feature of the cases? In the ‘babies’
case, the ‘time-of-birth’ conceptual node simply does not
accept much variance in value (perhaps apart from
premature birth cases); while people obviously conceive of
a machine as working for a variable amount of time, for as
long as desired. So in the ‘machine’ case, the enormous
number of potential conceptual node activations make it
much more unlikely that the relevant answer will be easily
perceived. People are primed to see symmetry where there
is none.

26
5

5

25

4

5
X

10

+

20

X
5

X

2

Figure 4. In the instant when target 25 is read, a great
series of conceptual activations is made in the Pnet. Here we
can observe some of these activations: (25=20+5),
(25=5x5), (25 is close to 26), and so forth. These activations
assume command of the system, trigerring new processes
and activations: in the example, node 20 is active, and, in a
smaller scale, relations (20=10x2) and (20=5x4), ensuring
that the system immediately has its focus directed toward
related numbers (and that numbers such as 41 or 3 will
receive little or no activation).

Discussion: Implications of the hypothesis

The interesting point here is that NUMBO arrives at the
answer to problem #4 without executing any calculation,
only with the information stored in the Pnet. In this example
of execution, brick 5 is read in first place, which facilitates
the search for a solution. However, independent of any order
of reading of the bricks, when the first 5 is eventually read,
the activations triggered in the Pnet makes it such that the
system quickly finds the solution. We claim that this
immediate,
no-calculations-performed,
information
processing is a very close approximation of intuitive human
responses.
In a system 2-type response, temperature drops in a nonmonotonic fashion, triggering a whole, long, chain of
activation of nodes.
In a system 1-type response,
temperature drops rapidly and, for this reason, the solution
quickly converges—whether or not to the best possible
response.
It is possible that in ‘system 1’ problems, people rapidly
activate conceptual nodes to high levels; bringing
temperature down in short amounts of time. All the while,
in ‘system 2’ problems, a much larger number of conceptual
nodes are activated, the system goes through a much longer
information processing, as all those active nodes strive for
attention in the parallel workings of the architecture.
Therefore, temperature falls rather slowly, as relevant
structures take much more time to be found.
Consider again CRT problem #2: “If it takes 5 machines 5
minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it take 100
machines to make 100 widgets?” Frederick (2005) shows
that this is the most difficult problem; with over 50% of his
3000+ sample finding a wrong answer. Consider, now, a
variation of the problem: “If it takes 9 women 9 months to

What are the implications of this hypothesis? We advocate
that, in system 1-type responses, as much as in system 2type responses, there are a great number of pressureperceiving processes operating concurrently in multiple
levels. To the extent to which these processes activate
concepts in the semantic net, and structures are created in
STM, the degree of "temperature" gradually drops. We
claim that the basic distinction between systems 1 and 2
would be, then, the premature convergence of this measure
in system 1-type responses. What would bring answers
system 2 would be "the impulse not to yield to the first
impulse" - the acquired ability to suppress the initial
representation created after a fast drop of temperature. It’s
important to note that the system 1 ‘premature temperature
convergence’ is not only associated with errors and low
cognitive performance, since in many situations, intuition
remains the strongest tool we have to make decisions (see
Klein, 1998, 2003).
The skeptical reader may ask: Why is this hypothesis of
consequence? Because, as we have seen in figure 1, current
theory postulates two distinct systems operating largely in
separation from each other. This hypothesis postulates that
there should be a tight coupling of subcognitive processes
operating concurrently under both the intuition and reason
systems. We thus postulate an ontological distinction
between mental systems and response types; what would
bring a particular response type in a particular scenario
would not be the activation of system 2; it would, instead,
be the premature convergence of temperature, which would
lead to a smaller degree of activation of processes generally
associated with system 2 responses. This explanation goes
into more detail of the underlying information processing
between system 1 and system 2 response types, and does
not resort to a black boxes framework of human skills of
intuition and reason.

Acknowledgments

1507

The authors thank Daniel Defays, Shane Frederick, Doug
Hofstadter, Harry Foundalis, Adriano Bruni, Ricardo
Cardoso, and Eric Nichols. Financial support has been

generously awarded by EBAPE’s propesquisa program of
the Getulio Vargas Foundation.

References
Cagan, J., and Kotovsky, K., (1997). ‘Simulated annealing
and the generation of the objective function: a model of
learning during problem solving’, Computational
Intelligence, 13, 534-581.
Defays, D. (2005). (personal communication) Source code
of the NUMBO project. Université de Liège, Belgium.
Defays, D. (1998). L’Esprit en Friche: Les Foisonnements
de l’intelligence artificielle. Liège : Pierre Mardaga.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive Reflection and Decision
Making. Journal of Economic Perspectives. Volume 19,
Number 4, Fall 2005, pp. 24-42
French, R.M. (1992) Tabletop: an emergent stochastic
computer model of analogy making. Doctoral
Dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1985). Metamagical Themas: Questing
for the Essence of Mind and Pattern. New York: Basic
Books.
Hofstadter, D. R.; The Fluid Analogies Research Group.
(1995). Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies:
Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of
Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Kahneman, D. (2003) A perspective on judgment and
choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American
Psychologist, vol. 58, No.9, 697-720.
Klein, G. (1998). Sources of Power: How people make
decisions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Klein, G. (2003). Intuition at work: Why developing your
gut instincts will make you better at what you do. New
York: Doubleday.
Linhares, A. (2005) An active symbols theory of chess
intuition. Minds and Machines, 15, n.2, 131-181.
Linhares, A. (2007) On the nature of chess intuition:
manifesto for a renaissance, submitted for publication.
Linhares, A., and Brum, P. (2007) Understanding our
understanding of strategic scenarios: what role do chunks
play? Accepted for publication, Cognitive Science.
Marshall, J. B. (1999). Metacat: A self-watching cognitive
architecture of analogy-making and high-level perception.
Doctoral Dissertation, University of Indiana.
Mcgraw, G. E. (1995). Letter Spirit (Part One): Emergent
High-Level Perception of Letters Using Fluid Concepts.
Doctoral Dissertation, Universidade of Indiana.
Mitchell, M., & Hofstadter, D. R. (1990). The emergence of
understanding in a computer model of concepts and
analogy-making. Physica D, 42, 322-334.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception: A
Computer Model. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press/Bradford Book.
Rehling, J. (2001). Letter Spirit (Part Two): Modeling
Creativity in a Visual Domain. Doctoral Dissertation,
University of Indiana.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. ( 2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-665.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who Is Rational? Studies of
Individual differences in reasoning. Mahway, NJ:
Erlbaum Assc.

1508

