UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Combining Perception and Experience in Spatial Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1z06g8h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Crawford, L. Elizabeth
Jones, Erin L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Combining Perception and Experience in Spatial Categorization
L. Elizabeth Crawford (lcrawfor@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond
Richmond, VA 23173 USA

Erin L. Jones (erin.jones@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond
Richmond, VA 23173 USA

Abstract
Two experiments examined how categories derived from
experience and those derived from perception affect spatial
memory. Four kinds of objects were distributed within a circle
and spatially clustered so that all objects of each kind appeared
within the same spatial region. These identity-based categories
were either aligned with or in opposition to the perceptuallybased quadrant categories that are imposed on the circle by
default. When remembering only one object location at a time,
participants used only the default categories and not the
identity-based categories to reconstruct memories. When
remembering four objects simultaneously, participants
combined inductive experience with the default category
structure to organize space.

Figure 1: Memory biases for locations within a circular
frame.

Keywords: spatial categories; spatial memory; category
learning.

There are an infinite number of ways to carve an empty
space into categories, and yet people consistently default to
dividing the circle along its cardinal axes. While other kinds
of object categories seem to be derived from experience
with the range of presented object attributes (e.g., Crawford,
Huttenlocher & Hedges, 2006; Huttenlocher, Hedges and
Vevea, 2000), such inductive experience appears to have
little impact on how people organize undifferentiated space.
Huttenlocher and colleagues (Huttenlocher, Hedges,
Corrigan, & Crawford, 2004) had participants view and
reproduce the locations of dots within a circle under
different distribution conditions. In some cases, the dots
were densely clustered around the cardinal axes (the default
category boundaries) and very few appeared at diagonal
locations (the default category prototypes).
They
investigated whether people would revise their categories in
order to better capture regions of high density in the
stimulus space, placing boundaries at diagonal locations and
prototypes at the cardinal axes. Several experiments found
no evidence that estimates of location took the distribution
of stimuli into account: responses exhibited bias away from
the cardinal axes even though this meant that estimates
landed in locations where stimuli were less likely to have
appeared. Even having participants first classify each dot
into axes-centered categories (corresponding to up, down,
left and right) before reproducing the dot’s location did not
produce bias toward those axes. Spencer and colleagues
(Spencer and Hund, 2002; Schutte & Spencer, 2002) also

Introduction
The categories that people use to organize and retrieve
information have a variety of origins. Some stem from the
way the human perceptual system imposes structure on
experiences with objects. Others are formed inductively out
of observations of those objects and may thus reflect the
extant statistical structure of items in the world. Here we
examine the role of both perception and experience in
people’s organization of a spatial frame.
It is well known that memories of stimulus locations
within an empty frame are biased by the category
organization that people impose on space. A common
finding is that stimuli (dots) presented within a circular
frame are biased away from the circle’s horizontal and
vertical axes of symmetry and toward diagonal locations
(see Figure 1). Huttenlocher, Hedges, and Duncan (1991)
described these biases as resulting from a reconstructive
memory process in which inexact memory of a particular
stimulus location is combined with knowledge about the
spatial region, or category, in which that stimulus appeared.
Blending these sources of information causes estimates of
location to be biased toward category centers (prototypes)
and away from category edges (boundaries). Although
using categories in reconstructive memory causes bias,
Huttenlocher et al. argue that it can also make estimates
more accurate than they would have been had the category
information not been used.

899

examined the effect of experience with stimulus
distributions on spatial memory. They found that both
adults and young children were sensitive to the distribution
of presented stimuli, although the default organization still
had strong effects.
These studies and others (e.g. Crawford, Regier &
Huttenlocher, 2002; Sandberg, 1999; Wedell, Allen &
Fitting, in press) have used dots as stimuli, and thus they
have not examined how the identity of stimuli may be used
to organize spatial categories. Usually when trying to
retrieve a location from memory, we seek only a particular
object, such as our wallets or key rings. As Hund and
Plumert (2003) note, “For the vast and majority of such
tasks, people must remember the links between objects and
locations.” (p. 939). They have shown that such links
between location and object identity may be used to
organize a spatial array. They had children remember the
locations of 20 objects which, in some cases, were spatially
grouped by kind. After studying all of the objects,
participants reproduced the location of each one. The
pattern of bias in responses revealed that those who had
studied the clustered objects used that information to
estimate locations. Similarly, Crawford & Drake (2005)
showed that after viewing 60 positive and negative image
stimuli that were (in some conditions) spatially grouped by
valence, participants used those groupings to estimate
locations during a subsequent memory test. Specifically,
their estimates were biased toward the centers of regions
defined by the valence of stimuli that appeared there. These
studies suggest that at least under certain conditions,
participants use the distribution of object kinds to derive
categories that affect spatial memory.
A potentially important methodological feature of studies
that examined identity-based spatial categories is that
stimulus presentations and responses were blocked. Both
Hund and Plumert (2003) and Crawford and Drake (2005)
had participants view all stimuli in a study block and then
reproduce their locations in a subsequent testing block.
Thus the identity of an object is necessarily used as a cue to
retrieve its location. In contrast, earlier studies of spatial
category effects on memory had participants view the same
stimulus repeatedly and reproduce its location immediately
after each presentation. Object identity was not manipulated
and was not important for doing the task.
The present study seeks to combine aspects of prior
studies in order to examine whether and how people use
identity-based spatial groupings to organize space. In two
experiments, we present four kinds of objects within a
circular frame. They are spatially clustered by object type
in a manner that is congruent or incongruent with the default
quadrant categories. Experiment 1 examines whether
participants use the identity-based categories to estimate the
locations of single objects, a task in which identity
information is incidental. Finding that they do not, we then
examine whether increasing the number of stimuli to be
remembered will lead participants to rely on identity-based
categories.

Experiment 1: Single stimulus recall
Method
Participants Twenty-seven undergraduates at the
University of Richmond participated in exchange for
Psychology course credit.
Stimuli and Procedures
After informed consent
procedures, each participant was seated at a pc computer
with 17” monitor set to a resolution of 38 pixels per cm. It
was explained that they would see an object within a circle
and then would reproduce the object’s location from
memory in a comparable circle. There were four different
stimulus objects used in the experiment: a pink diamond, a
blue square, a red dot, and a yellow hourglass. Each was 13
x 13 pixels. The objects appeared at the same radial
location (240 pixels from the circle’s center) and at 120
unique angular locations, approximately every 3 degrees
around the circle.
Participants were randomly assigned to view stimuli that
were grouped so as to be congruent or incongruent with the
default quadrant organization. In the congruent condition,
the blue squares appeared between 0° and 90°, the red dots
between 90° and 180°, the yellow hourglasses between 180°
and 270°, and the pink diamonds between 270° and 360°.
Thus the prototypical location of each of object type was at
the center of one of the four quadrants (45°, 135°, 225°, and
315°). In the incongruent condition, this organization was
rotated 45 degrees so that the blue squares appeared
between 45° and 135°, the red dots appeared between 135°
and 225°, the yellow hourglasses appeared between 225°
and 315°, and the pink diamonds appeared between 315°
and 45°. In this condition, the prototypical location of each
object type was on one of the four quadrant boundaries (0°,
90°, 180°, and 270°). Each location was shown once except
for the locations at the object-category boundaries, which
were shown twice (once with each possible object),
resulting in 124 trials.
On each trial, a 668 pixel diameter circle was displayed
for 3000ms and then one of the four stimuli (drawn at
random without replacement) appeared within the circle for
600ms. The screen went blank (600ms) and then the circle
reappeared, shifted 100 pixels to the right. (This shift was
included to prevent participants from relying on unplanned
landmarks, such as a smudge on the monitor, to aid their
memory). The object then reappeared in the center of the
circle and participants used the mouse to move it to the
location where it had just been shown, relative to the circle.
A response was registered when the participant pressed the
mouse button.

Results
One participant was culled for having an average absolute
error that was more than 3 standard deviations above the
mean error by participant. In addition we culled individual
900

condition. The data mirror the negatively sloping bias
curves reported in previous work. Within each quadrant,
estimates are biased away from the quadrant boundaries and
toward quadrant centers, and there is no apparent difference
in this organization between conditions. To test for
differences, we collapsed across the four quadrants by
coding each stimulus angle relative to its position within the
quadrant, thus treating 93°, 183°, and 273° all as
comparable to 3°. We then submitted the average biases at
each angle (except 0°, the default boundary) to a regression
analysis that included a dummy variable for condition. This
allowed us to test for differences in the slope of the bias
curve between the two conditions. We found no significant
difference between the slopes (Congruent condition slope =
-.068, incongruent condition slope = -.074, slope difference
= .006, t(54) = 1.24, ns). These results provide no evidence
that participants use object identity clusters to reconstruct
memories of spatial location.

responses that had either an absolute error more than 3
standard deviations above the mean absolute error or an
angular bias more than 3 standard deviations above or below
the mean angular bias. These culls removed 5.6% of
responses.
Angular bias was calculated as the difference in degrees
between the angular position of each stimulus and the
angular position of the estimate of that stimulus. Positive
values indicate counter-clockwise bias and negative values
indicate clockwise bias. Thus, if estimates are biased
toward the center of the default quadrant categories as in
earlier work, plotting angular bias against actual angular
location will produce a negatively sloping curve within each
quadrant and this pattern will not differ between conditions.
Alternatively, if participants used the identity-based
categories in estimation, then this negative slope should be
attenuated or even reversed for the incongruent condition.

Discussion

7

The pattern of bias in estimates indicates that participants
relied on the default quadrant categories to organize the
circle and used those categories to estimate locations. The
results provide no evidence that participants took advantage
of available identity-based categories. In the incongruent
condition, like stimuli were spatially clustered so that items
of each kind appeared in separate regions that were centered
on the major axes (0°, 90°, 180°, 270°). If participants had
used that information, they would have shifted their
responses toward those angular locations, for instance,
placing a red dot in the middle of the region where red dots
appeared. Instead estimates exhibited bias away from those
locations. This means that people shifted memories of
stimuli away from regions where stimuli of that kind were
more likely to have appeared and toward regions where they
were less likely to have appeared.
If participants seek to maximize accuracy in spatial
memory, the identity-based clusters would seem to have
provided valuable information about object locations, and
yet participants do not take advantage of this information.
While this may seem to be irrational, another interpretation
is suggested by Huttenlocher et al. (2004). They note that
cardinal axes are coded very precisely and thus using them
as category boundaries may prevent people from making
classification errors which in turn lead to huge errors in
memory. Given the high cost of miscategorizing a stimulus,
it may not be adaptive to abandon such clearly defined
categories in order to adopt some with fuzzier boundaries,
even if those categories would better capture the extant
distribution of objects.
In addition, participants may ignore identity information
because the task does not require them to attend to it.
Encoding and retrieving the location of one object at a time
requires attention only to the object’s location and not to its
other features. Previous work (Hund & Plumert, 2003;
Crawford & Drake, 2005) suggests that when participants
must remember locations of several unique objects they do

Angular Bias (degrees)

5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
0

45

90

135

180

225

270

315

360

Stimulus Angle (degrees)

Figure 2a: Experiment 1, congruent condition, bias by
stimulus angle.

7

Angular Bias (degrees)

5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
0

45

90

135

180

225

270

315

360

Stimulus Angle (degrees)

Figure 2b: Experiment 1, incongruent condition, bias by
stimulus angle.

The pattern of angular bias in estimates against true
angular position is shown in Figure 2a for the quadrant
congruent condition and Figure 2b for the incongruent
901

because it obviates the tendency to focus on the temporal
order of stimuli, and thus it was emphasized during the
instructions. There were 3 practice trials followed by 42
trials.

use identity-based categories in estimation. These studies
did not compare conditions in which the identity-based
categories were either aligned or misaligned with the default
categories, and thus they do not address what role the
default quadrant organization might play in enabling people
to learn identity-based categories. In Experiment 2, we
consider this question by having participants view objects
that are clustered in a way that is either congruent or
incongruent with the default organization and by having
them reproduce the locations of multiple items within a trial.
It is expected that in the congruent condition, participants
will produce estimates that are biased toward the centers of
the four quadrants, thus producing the negatively sloping
bias pattern found in Experiment 1. The pattern of bias in
the incongruent condition will depend on participants’ use
of the identity-based categories. If participants use the
default quadrant organization even when reproducing
multiple objects, then the bias in estimates should be
comparable to that of the congruent condition. If they
abandon the quadrant organization and use identity-based
categories, their estimates should be biased toward the
cardinal axes and away from diagonal locations, producing a
positive bias slope across each quadrant. Alternatively, if
they use both kinds of category information, then they
should produce an intermediate pattern of bias.

Results
We culled individual responses that had either an absolute
error more than 3 standard deviations above the mean
absolute error or an angular bias more than 3 standard
deviations above or below the mean angular bias. These
culls removed 4.7% of responses. Angular bias was coded
as in Experiment 1.
25
20
Angular Bias (degrees)

15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
0

45

90

135

180

225

270

315

360

Stimulus Angle (degrees)

Experiment 2: Multiple stimuli recall

Figure 3a: Experiment 2, congruent condition, bias by
stimulus angle

Method
Participants Twenty-four University of Richmond
undergraduates participated in exchange for partial course
credit.

25
20
Angular Bias (degrees)

15

Stimuli and Procedures The stimulus objects and their
possible locations were the same as in Experiment 1.
Participants were randomly assigned to view stimuli from
either the congruent or incongruent distribution. On each
trial, the circle appeared and then four objects (one of each
type) appeared successively for 1000ms each. The order of
the objects was random and each was presented in a location
drawn randomly from the possible locations for that object.
After the fourth object was shown, there was a 1000ms
blank screen and the circle was shifted 100 pixels to the
right. Then participants reproduced the locations of each
object one at a time. First, one of the four objects appeared
in the center of the circle and participants used the mouse to
move it back to the location where it had been seen
previously. Participants pressed the mouse button to
register the response, the object was removed, and the next
object appeared in the center of the circle, to be moved to its
prior location. After each of the four objects had been
relocated, the circle shifted back to the original position and
the next trial began. During the reproduction phase of the
trial, the four objects were presented in a random order
which did not necessarily correspond to the random order in
which they had been presented for study. This is important

10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
0

45

90

135

180

225

270

315

360

Stimulus Angle (degrees)

Figure 3b: Experiment 2, incongruent condition, bias by
stimulus angle
The average bias by angular position for the congruent
and incongruent conditions is presented in Figures 3a and
3b. The graphs make clear that the previously observed
sinusoidal pattern with negative bias slopes for each
quadrant is replicated in the quadrant congruent condition
but not in the incongruent condition. As in Experiment 1,
we collapsed angular locations across quadrants and ran a
dummy-variable regression of bias on actual stimulus angle.
There was a significant difference in the slope of the
regression line between the two conditions (congruent
902

(2002) showed that during delays children’s memory of
spatial location drifted toward previously seen locations. It
may be that the long delays of Experiment 2 led our
participants to give relatively more weight to identity-based
categories.
Another difference between remembering one and four
objects may be that, with multiple objects, participants are
required to link the identity and location of each object,
whereas with a single object, participants may focus solely
on location while ignoring identity. Attention is required to
bind information about identity and location and participants
in Experiment 1 may not have devoted attention in such a
way as to learn the links between identity and position. In
contrast, Experiment 2 required that participants attend to
identity to retrieve location, increasing the likelihood that
participants would integrate this information and use the
identity-based categories.
In addition, remembering four objects produces
substantial memory load and as such is a more difficult task
than remembering one. If only one object is to be
remembered, participants are likely to know which quadrant
it appeared in, and thus additional information about its
identity may provide little further benefit. Under the
demands of trying to remember four objects within a trial,
participants may lose track of which stimulus appeared in
which quadrant. This would undermine the key benefit of
using the quadrant categories, which Huttenlocher et al.
(2004) argue is that they enable people to categorize objects
accurately, thus avoiding large memory errors that results
from miscategorization. Perhaps only when the quadrant
categorization is no longer useful do we find that people use
other sources of information to inform their estimates.
It is clearly adaptive for people to keep track of where
certain kinds of things are likely to be found, and previous
work has shown that people can use such information to
remember and infer locations of objects (Crawford &
Cacioppo, 2002; Hund & Plumert, 2003). Furthermore it is
well documented that people encode spatial information as
well as frequency information about objects, even when
such information is incidental to the task at hand (e.g.,
Hasher & Zacks, 1979). Thus it is somewhat surprising that
the presented stimulus distribution does not have stronger
effects on spatial memory. Even under conditions of long
delay, high memory load, and task demands that require the
integration of object identity and location, participants do
not simply form categories reflecting identity-based clusters.
Instead they combine their inductive experience with
perceptually derived categories to organize space.

condition slope: -.17, incongruent condition slope: +.02,
slope difference: 1.9, t(54) = 6.2, p < .001). In addition, the
bias is much more extreme in Experiment 2 than it was in
Experiment 1.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 show that when participants
must remember the locations of four objects during a trial,
their estimates are influenced by the identity-based
organization of stimuli. As predicted, when stimuli are
grouped in a manner congruent with the default quadrant
organization, participants use that organization in
estimation, producing estimates that are biased toward the
centers of the four quadrants. In contrast, when stimulus
clusters are incongruent with the default organization,
estimates reflect neither the default categories nor the
categories suggested by the identity based clusters. The
difference in bias patterns indicates that participants utilize
information about object identity clusters in their estimates.
Thus this experiment shows that under certain conditions,
knowledge that objects of a certain kind usually appear in
certain regions of space is used to reconstruct memories of
object locations. However it also shows that such
inductively acquired knowledge does not override
participants’ a priori default organization of space but rather
operates in conjunction with it.
When viewing objects that are organized in opposition to
the default categorization, participants do not simply
abandon the default organization and adopt the identitybased organization. If they had, the pattern of bias would
look like that of the congruent condition only phase shifted
by 45 degrees. The bias in this condition does not clearly
reflect either that of the two category organizations being
examined here and may reflect a blend of the two structures.

General Discussion
Two experiments examined how categories derived from
experience and those derived from perception affect spatial
memory. Objects were distributed so that each region of
space was devoted to only one kind of object. These
identity-based regions were either aligned with or opposed
to the default perceptually-based categories.
When
remembering only one object location at a time, participants
used only the default categories and not the identity-based
categories to reconstruct memories. When remembering
four different objects, participants used both categorization
schemes to inform their estimates of location.
In this study, the task of remembering multiple objects
differed from that of remembering a single object in several
ways which may have influenced reliance on identity-based
categories. For instance, viewing and then reproducing four
objects, as in Experiment 2, requires a longer delay between
presentation and response. Longer delays have been shown
to increase reliance on the default spatial categories (e.g.,
Huttenlocher et al., 1991). In addition, Schutte & Spencer

Acknowledgements
This project was supported by grants from the University of
Richmond Arts and Sciences Faculty Research Committee
and Undergraduate Research Committee. Please address
correspondence
to
L.
Elizabeth
Crawford,
lcrawfor@richmond.edu

903

Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., Corrigan, B., & Crawford,
L. E. (2004). Spatial categories and the estimation of
location. Cognition, 93, 75-97.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98, 352-376.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (2000).
Why do categories affect stimulus judgment? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 220-241.
Sandberg, E. H. (1999). Cognitive constraints on the
development of hierarchical spatial organization skills.
Cognitive Development, 14, 597-619.
Schutte, A. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2002). Generalizing the
dynamic field theory of the A-not-B error beyond infancy:
Three-year-olds’ delay- and experience-dependent
location memory biases. Child Development, 73,377-404.
Spencer, J. P. & Hund, A. M. (2002). Prototypes and
particulars: Geometric and experience-dependent spatial
categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131, 16-37.
Wedell, D. A., Fitting, S., Allen, G. L. (in press). Shape
effects on memory for location. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review.

References
Crawford, L. E. & Cacioppo, J. T. (2002). Learning where
to look for danger: Integrating affective and spatial
information. Psychological Science, 13, 449-453.
Crawford, L. E. & Drake, J. T. (2005, November). Valencebased spatial categories: The role of stimulus distribution
and orientational metaphor. Poster presented at the
annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Toronto.
Crawford, L. E., Huttenlocher, J., & Hedges, L. V. (2006).
Within-category feature correlations and Bayesian
adjustment strategies. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
13, 245-250.
Crawford, L. E., Regier, T., & Huttenlocher, J. (2000).
Linguistic and non-linguistic spatial categorization.
Cognition, 75, 209-235.
Hasher, L. & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful
processes in memory.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 108, 356-388.
Hund, A. M. & Plumert, J. M. (2003). Does information
about what things are influence children’s memory for
where things are? Developmental Psychology, 39, 939948.

904

