UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparing Semantic Space Models Using Child-directed Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19m6t658

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Riordan, Brian
Jones, Micheal N.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparing Semantic Space Models Using Child-directed Speech
Brian Riordan (briordan@indiana.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1021 E. Third St.
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Michael N. Jones (jonesmn@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. Tenth St.
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

for 365 days of the year, it would take more than four years
to read the full 100 million words of the BNC. This would
make 12 years to encounter HAL’s 300 million words, and
48 years to encounter all of the words COALS is trained on.
At the very least, it would seem that these models are
trained on the very high end of a scale of possible human
input.
For the most part, semantic space modelers have only
assessed model predictions after the entire training corpus
has been processed (the exceptions being LSA (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997) and BEAGLE (Jones & Mewhort, 2007)).
What is lacking is a consideration of the rate at which the
model learned its representations – information which may
be crucial for assessing model plausibility.
In order to remove these potential advantages, in this
study we compare a variety of semantic space models from
the cognitive science literature using age-stratified childdirected speech (CDS) from the CHILDES database. For
several reasons, CDS may offer us the important ability to
decide between equally plausible models that perform
comparably at a larger learning scale. First, CDS is arguably
much more realistic than the adult corpora that semantic
space models have been trained on: we know that children
learn the meanings of words with this kind of input. Second,
since the size of any corpus derived from the CHILDES
database will be much smaller than other training corpora, it
is more likely to be in the range of input for a human
learner. Third, the caregiver speech in the CHILDES
database can be divided according to the age of the target
child. This allows the construction of training corpora that
reflect changes in input over time, similar to what children
are actually exposed to.
Two previous studies have explored the behavior of
semantic space models when trained on CDS. Li, Burgess,
and Lund (2000) trained HAL on the caregiver speech in
CHILDES, at the time 3.8 million words. Denhière and
Lemaire (2004) derived an LSA space from a 3.2 million
word French corpus that included both children’s speech
and stories, textbooks, and encyclopedia articles written for
children. However, it is not clear what is being modeled in
these studies, as the training corpora aggregate a great deal
of data from the linguistic environments of children of a
variety of ages. The modeling target crucially affects the
data on which the models should be evaluated.

Abstract
A number of semantic space models from the cognitive
science literature were compared by training on a corpus of
child-directed speech and evaluating on three increasingly
rigorous semantic tasks. The performance of families of
models varied with the type of semantic data, and not all
models were reasonably successful on each task, suggesting a
narrowing of the space of plausible model architectures.
Keywords: semantic space models; child-directed speech;
lexical development

Introduction
Semantic space models have proven successful at
accounting for a broad range of semantic data, in particular
semantic priming (Jones, Kintsch, & Mewhort, 2006; Lowe
& McDonald, 2000). Since all the models are successful at
accounting for the semantic data in most cases, however,
finding tasks where the models make different predictions,
and narrowing the space of plausible models, has proven to
be quite difficult.
Semantic space models have traditionally been trained on
adult language input. Further, the models are trained on very
large corpora – in many cases, more data than humans
experience. Finally, the models are usually only applied to
modeling semantic data after processing the entire training
corpus. Each of these steps is problematic.
The corpora semantic space models have been trained on
range from Usenet postings (Burgess, Livesay, & Lund,
1998; Rohde, Gonnerman, & Plaut, submitted; Shaoul &
Westbury, 2006) to the British National Corpus (Bullinaria
& Levy, in press; Lowe & McDonald, 2000) to the TASA
corpus (Jones & Mewhort, 2007). These corpora vary
widely in their content and representativeness of human
experience. However, the rationale for using a particular
corpus is rarely supported by an evaluation of its
representativeness. For example, Burgess et al. (1998)
motivate the use of Usenet by claiming that Usenet
represents “everyday speech” and is “conversationally
diverse” – without presenting an analysis of the corpus that
would justify this claim.
The training corpora for semantic space models are not
only diverse, but large. The BNC totals 100 million words,
the Usenet corpora used for HAL and HiDEX approach 300
million words, while COALS is trained on more than 1.2
billion words. It has been estimated that at a rate of 150
words per minute (a high estimate), reading 8 hours per day

599

Experimental Setup

Table 2: Semantic space algorithms compared in this
study.

Corpus. Four corpora were constructed from caregiver
speech in the American section of the CHILDES database,
one for each of four broad age ranges of target child: 12-23
months, 24-35 months, 36-47 months, and 48-60 months.
The sizes of the corpora are listed in Table 1 1 . The Age 1
corpus represents all the American caregiver input to 12-24month-olds in CHILDES; the other corpora were chosen to
be of an approximately equal size.
Unlike previous studies that used CDS from the
CHILDES database, the age group corpora used in this
study were subjected to significant preprocessing. Given the
small size of the corpora, the orthographic variation in
CHILDES could potentially affect the semantic space
models’ representations. First, more than 700 word forms
were standardized to eliminate orthographic variation.
Second, all corpora were stemmed and lemmatized using a
version of the Snowball stemmer (Porter & Boulton, 2006)
augmented to change irregular verb forms to base forms.
Third, most proper names in the corpora were converted to a
single generic marker. The reason for this was to avoid
proper names appearing in the list of context words for
some models (see below).

Space Name

Context
Specification

Lexical
Association
Function

Similarity
Measure

“Paradigmatic” models

COALS

Window
(ramped)

Correlation

Correlation

HAL

Window
(ramped)

Vector length
normalization

Inverse
Euclidean
distance

HiDEX

Window
(ramped)

Word frequency
normalization

Inverse
Euclidian
distance

LLTR

Window

Log-likelihood
coefficient

Cosine

Lowe &
McDonald

Window

Positive log
odds ratio

Cosine

PosPMI

Window

Positive mutual
information

Cosine

“Syntagmatic” models

Models. Semantic space models may be classified into two
families based on architecture and representational scheme.
One family, exemplified by HAL, computes a word-byword co-occurrence matrix. In these models, words are
more similar when they have appeared with the same
neighboring words. Sahlgren (2006) dubs these
“paradigmatic” spaces because of their tendency to
emphasize paradigmatic relationships between words.
Another family, exemplified by LSA, computes a word-bycontext matrix, where a context may be a sentence,
paragraph, etc. In these models words are similar to the
extent that they appear in the same contexts. These spaces
emphasize proximal relationships between words
(“syntagmatic” spaces) 2 .
Models of each family were selected for comparison
(Table 2). The paradigmatic models included COALS
(Rohde et al., submitted), HAL (Burgess et al., 1998),

Full
dimensionality

20, 200, 2000
words

Entropy-based
(no SVD)

Cosine

LSA

200, 2000
words

Entropy-based
and SVD to 300
dimensions

Cosine

HiDEX (Shaoul & Westbury, 2006), a loglikelihoodtransformed model (McDonald & Lowe, 1998; Padó &
Lapata, 2003), Lowe and McDonald (2000), and a model
based on positive pointwise mutual information (Bullinaria
& Levy, in press). The syntagmatic models were LSA and a
corresponding model without dimensionality reduction. To
explore the effect of the size of the context region in
syntagmatic models, three versions of the full
dimensionality model and two versions of the LSA model
were compared. In total, 11 models were compared. All
models were reimplemented for this investigation.
For the paradigmatic models, context words were selected
using an automatic procedure that approximated a specified
number (500) of content words, considering words from
most to less frequent in the corpora (omitting stop words) 3 .
The context window size was constant, and set at 10
empirically (see Riordan (2007)). For consistency with the
other models, the Euclidean distance metric used in HAL
and HiDEX was converted into a similarity measure.

Table 1: Sizes of the corpora constructed from the
CHILDES database.
Corpus size (words) Cumulative corpus size
460,384
Age 1
460,743
921,127
Age 2
458,692
1,379,819
Age 3
450,097
1,829,916
Age 4

Target words. Target words for this investigation were
selected to be sufficiently frequent and reliable in the full
age group corpus. Reliability was determined through a
procedure adapted from McDonald and Shillcock (2001).
Words with a cumulative frequency of greater than twenty,

1

See Riordan (2007) for a list of the actual corpora used within
each age range.
2
Random indexing models use an alternative representational
scheme in which a word’s vector is assigned a distributed
representation (e.g., Jones & Mewhort, 2007; Sahlgren, 2006) and
may approximate either paradigmatic or syntagmatic models.

3
The implementation of HAL used this context word selection
procedure, rather than selecting the context words with the highest
variance in the corpus, as in some HAL implementations. Lowe
and McDonald’s context word selection procedure was maintained.

600

plus all content words from the MacArthur CDI (Dale &
Fenson, 1996) were included, for a total of 1892 targets.

F ratio
0

Program of evaluation. The models were subjected to three
increasingly rigorous semantic tasks: discriminating related
from random word pairs, modeling adult semantic data, and
modeling age-of-acquisition data.

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

COALS
HAL
HiDEX
LLTR
LOWE
PosPMI

Experiment 1: Word pair discrimination

20 EN
20 LSA r300

As a first test of the models’ abilities to derive adequate
semantic representations when trained on CDS, we apply
the models to the task of discriminating between, on the one
hand, words that are known to be semantically related, and
on the other, words that have been paired randomly. We
assume that the distributional information available to a
semantic space model should be sufficient for the model to
locate related words in closer proximity than unrelated
words in the high-dimensional space.
The related word pairs for this task were drawn from the
University of South Florida Word Association Norms (USF;
(Nelson, McEvoy, & Schreiber, 2004). In Nelson et al.’s
word association task, subjects were given a cue, to which
they were asked to respond with the first word that came to
mind that was “meaningfully related or strongly associated”
(2004: 403). Only one response was produced per cue.
A subset of 49,362 USF pairs that were included in the
Maki, McKinley, and Thompson (2004) database formed
the pool of candidate related word pairs. Of these, words
pairs were constrained to be made up of words that were
included in the 1892 word target set 4 . A set of 13,354 word
pairs met this criterion. Unrelated word pairs were created
by randomly pairing each cue with a response word, with
the following constraints: no cue-response pairs from the
actual cue-response word pairs could occur; no cueunrelated response pair could occur more than once; no cueunrelated response pair could be comprised of the same
word repeated.
Similarities in each model were derived for each of the
cue-response pairs and each of the cue-unrelated response
pairs. These sets of scores were submitted to a oneway
ANOVA. Models were deemed to have minimally
discriminated between the sets of word pairs if the scores
for the cue-response set were statistically greater than the
scores for the cue-unrelated response set (indicating tighter
clustering in the semantic space). The results for the
ANOVAs for each of the spaces are shown in Figure 1. The
ANOVAs for all spaces were significant, and in each case
the average similarity score for the related word pair set was
significantly greater than the unrelated word pair set. Thus,
on average, each space located the related words closer in

200 EN
200 LSA r300
2000 EN

Figure 1: Discriminative abilities of each of the spaces on
the full 13,354 word pair set.
semantic space than the unrelated words. At the same time,
there was substantial variation in the degree to which related
versus unrelated word pairs clustered in the spaces.
It should be noted that we cannot actually conclude from
the size of the F-ratio in this task that one model is “better”
than another. This is because we don’t know what the “real”
discrimination of these pairs, either for a child or for an
adult, would look like, since experimental data for humans
on this task does not exist.

Experiment 2: Modeling adult semantic data
As a more rigorous test of the models’ representations and
learning rates, we next compare the models on two related
tasks where human data exists: modeling word association
strengths, and modeling semantic distance in WordNet.
The forward strength in the USF word association norms
is the probability that a cue will elicit a particular response.
Using the 13,354 word pairs from Experiment 1, the models
were compared on their abilities to predict these forward
strengths from representation similarity. In this experiment
the age group corpora are organized cumulatively, so that
the models are exposed to greater amounts of ageappropriate speech (see Table 1).
For each of the cumulative corpora, the similarities in
each model were derived for each of the 13,354 cueresponse pairs. These similarities were entered into a linear
regression to predict the forward strengths for the
corresponding word pairs. The forward strengths were
drawn from the Maki et al. database.
With increasing age-appropriate input, we expect the
variance in the adult semantic data that is explained by the
models to increase, as the models’ semantic representations
become more “adult-like”. More specifically, after training
on each cumulative corpus there should be an increase in the
correlations of the word-pair similarity scores derived from
the models and the semantic similarity scores from the
human data.
Figure 2 plots the change in correlation of each of the
models’ similarity scores with both types of semantic data

4

Stemming the candidate word pairs further restricted the pool of
candidates,
since
some
cue-response
pairs
became
indistinguishable as a result (because of plural words used as cues,
etc.).

601

Figure 2: Correlations between the models' similarity scores and the semantic data.
as more age-appropriate caregiver speech is encountered.
The syntagmatic models generally explain more of the
variance in the word association data than the paradigmatic
models. They have higher average correlations with the data
after the Age 1 corpus (.184 vs. .120) and after processing
each of the corpora (.264 vs. .164). This may be related to
the better match of the syntagmatic architecture with the
word association data (see Sahlgren (2006)). On the other
hand, the syntagmatic models are nearly uniform in their
trajectory of improvement over time, while paradigmatic
models tend to show more variation.
In this task, even the best models only reached a
correlation of about .3 with the word association data. The
models’ concomitant R2 was also low, explaining less than
10% of the variance in the data.
Despite the instructions in the word association task to
consider “meaningfully related” responses (Nelson et al.,
2004), subjects often produce responses that are collocated
with the cue but not necessarily semantically related.
Although some researchers argue that distinguishing
between semantic and associated relationships is futile
(Nelson et al., 2004), other data regarding lexical semantic
relatedness that focus more on semantic relationships do
exist. Maki et al. (2004) derived semantic distances between
word pairs in WordNet using the Jiang-Conrath distance
measure (JCN). JCN is an information-theoretic measure of
semantic distance in the WordNet hierarchy. JCN distances
have been shown to correlate highly with human judgments
of semantic similarity (Maki et al., 2004).
Word pair similarities for the 13,354 word pair set were
used to predict the corresponding JCN distances as reported
in Maki et al. (2004). The lower half of Figure 2 plots the
correlations for the paradigmatic and syntagmatic models on
this task. Note that since the JCN measures are distances,

not similarity scores, the models’ scores are negatively
correlated with the distances.
On this task, the paradigmatic models explain more
variance in the adult data, reflecting the nature of the
WordNet resource: WordNet is a hierarchical taxonomy
split into noun and verb parts, and the links between words
reflect paradigmatic relationships. In addition, the models
that perform best on this task are not the same as those that
performed the best in accounting for the word association
data. For example, while the 200-word context syntagmatic
models predicted the most variance in the word association
task, here the 2000-word context model was the best. This
likely reflects the fact that more paradigmatic information is
available in the larger context.
The best models showed monotonically increasing
correlations with the semantic data as they were exposed to
more input, and relatively high correlations with the data in
both tasks. Among the paradigmatic models, COALS and
HAL met these criteria, while among the syntagmatic
models only the 200-word context full dimensionality space
did. HAL performed surprisingly well, especially given that
the other paradigmatic models were designed to be
improvements on its parameter choices. The LSA models’
non-monotonicity and similar performance to the unreduced
syntagmatic spaces indicate that dimensionality reduction
does not automatically produce spaces that are more highly
correlated with human semantic data.

Experiment 3: Modeling age-of-acquisition
Experiment 2 tested the models’ overall learning
trajectories. Most of the models gradually explained more of
the variance in the adult semantic data as they were trained
on age-appropriate input. In this experiment, we focus more

602

closely on models’ learning rates by comparing the models’
abilities to model age-of-acquisition (AoA) data when
trained on the cumulative input of the age group corpora.
Models that more closely match AoA data may be said to
have learning rates that more closely resemble those of
children.
For the purposes of this experiment, as a proxy for
acquisition, we consider stabilization in the neighborhoods
of words in semantic space. We will define a word’s
semantic neighborhood as the nearest n words in a given
space. At a given time, t, we can find the semantic
neighborhood for a word. At a later time, t+1, after the
model has been exposed to more input, we can again find
the neighborhood for the word, and compare it to the word’s
neighborhood at time t. As we continue this process, we
will produce a record of the stabilization of a word’s
semantic neighborhood over time. We hypothesize that
early-acquired words’ neighborhoods will stabilize more
quickly than those of later acquired words.
For age-of-acquisition (AoA) ratings, the norms of Bird,
Franklin, and Howard (2001) were used. After stemming,
there were 689 words that overlapped between the Bird et
al. norms and the target words.
To compare semantic neighborhoods, we use a modified
version of combinatorial similarity, originally proposed in
Hu, Cai, Graesser, and Ventura (2005):

C x′ ,T =

Correlation
0

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

COALS
HAL
HiDEX
LLTR
LOWE
PosPMI
20 EN
20 LSA r300
200 EN
200 LSA r300
2000 EN

Figure 3: Correlations of the models’ average change
coefficients with the Bird et al AoA norms
(Neighborhood size = 10; sample points = 8).
The correlations for the remaining models with the Bird et
al. data are presented in Figure 3. Differences in the models’
correlations were compared using Williams’ ratio for
nonindependent correlations (see Steiger, 1980). Among the
paradigmatic models, COALS, LLTR, and PosPMI were
significantly more correlated with the AoA data than HAL
and Lowe and McDonald (e.g. COALS vs. HAL: t(686) =
2.15, p < .05; COALS vs. Lowe and McDonald: t(686) =
3.92, p < .01). The syntagmatic models were comparable,
with the exception of the 20-word context LSA model,
which was significantly less correlated with the AoA data
(e.g. 200 LSA r300 vs. 20 LSA r300: t(686) = 2.83, p < .01).
However, the 200-word context full dimensionality model
was significantly more highly correlated with the AoA data
than PosPMI, the best paradigmatic model: t(686) = 2.26, p
< .05.
In this experiment, evidence of significant correlations
between the stabilization patterns in the models and a set of
AoA norms were found. While significant, however, the
correlations of the models and the data were still rather low
(all R2 values were less than .12). With a few exceptions, the
better-performing models on the previous tasks also
performed well on this task.

S1, x,t ∩ S 2, x,t
t

Here, S1, x, t is the top t neighbors of a word x in space 1. S1,
is composed of sets of si(x,y), the similarity scores of
words x and neighbors y in space 1. The numerator here is
simply the intersection of the top t neighbors, ignoring the
similarity scores. Instead of dividing by the union of the
neighbors in the neighborhoods as Hu et al. propose, we
normalize by the number of neighbors in the neighborhoods
being compared (e.g. 10).
Sample points of even intervals are established across the
age group corpus. At each sample point, the semantic
neighborhoods of the target words are computed. The
semantic neighborhoods of words at successive sample
points are compared using the above measure of
neighborhood overlap. Once the neighborhood change
history for the target words is established, a change
coefficient is calculated for each word. This is computed as
the average of the absolute values of the differences in
neighborhood overlap from point to point:
x, t

Conclusion
This study represents a first attempt to compare a number of
semantic space models on a common corpus with common
evaluation tasks. The type of corpus used – CDS – was
selected because it is more realistic than previous training
corpora in terms of quantity and content.
Using CDS from CHILDES also naturally allowed an
examination of the models’ learning rates. The learning rate
is a crucial yardstick by which to measure models’
performance: if models are to be taken as models of both
lexical acquisition and representation, as Landauer and
Dumais (1997) and others have argued, they must perform

p −1

∑ C'

i +1 −C 'i

change =

0.05

i =0

p

where p is the number of sample points and C’ is computed
neighborhood overlap. Early-acquired words should have
lower change coefficients, as their neighborhoods stabilize
quickly. The neighborhood size was set at 10 and the
number of sample points was 8.

603

Jones, M. N., Kintsch, W., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2006).
High-dimensional semantic space accounts of priming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55(4), 534-552.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114(1), 1-37.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104(2), 211-240.
Li, P., Burgess, C., & Lund, K. (2000). The acquisition of
word meaning through global lexical co-occurrences. In
E. V. Clark (Ed.), Proceedings of the Thirtieth Stanford
Child Language Research Forum (pp. 167-178). Stanford,
CA: CSLI.
Lowe, W., & McDonald, S. (2000). The direct route:
mediated priming in semantic space. In Proceedings of the
22nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 806-811). Hillside, NJ: LEA.
Maki, W. S., McKinley, L. N., & Thompson, A. G. (2004).
Semantic distance norms computed from an electronic
dictionary (WordNet). Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 36(3), 421-431.
McDonald, S., & Lowe, W. (1998). Modelling functional
priming and the associative boost. In Proceedings of the
20th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(CogSci '98) (pp. 675-680). NJ: LEA.
McDonald, S., & Shillcock, R. C. (2001). Contextual
Distinctiveness: A new lexical property computed from
large corpora: University of Edinburgh Informatics
Research Report EDI-INF-RR-0042.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C., & Schreiber, T. A. (2004). The
University of South Florida free association, rhyme, and
word fragment norms. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 36(3), 402-407.
Padó, S., & Lapata, M. (2003). Constructing Semantic
Space Models from Parsed Corpora. In Proceedings of the
41st Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, Sapporo, Japan (pp. 128-135).
Porter, M., & Boulton, R. (2006). Snowball stemmer.
Riordan, B. (2007). Comparing semantic space models
using child-directed speech. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Linguistics and Program in Cognitive
Science, Indiana University, Bloomington.
Rohde, D., Gonnerman, L., & Plaut, D. (submitted). An
improved model of semantic similarity based on lexical
co-occurrence. Cognitive Science.
Sahlgren, M. (2006). The Word-Space Model. Stockholm
University, Doctoral dissertation, Department of
Linguistics, Stockholm University.
Shaoul, C., & Westbury, C. (2006). Word frequency effects
in high-dimensional co-occurrence models: A new
approach. Behavior Research Methods, 38(2), 190-195.
Steiger, J. H. (1980). Tests for comparing elements of a
correlation matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 87, 245-251.

reasonably given a corpus that is an accurate representation
of what children learn from.
While all models showed significant discriminative ability
between random and related word pairs, over the course of
two further tasks, we discovered that some models did not
have plausible acquisition rates (given our broad
assumptions of what should constitute acquisition in a
semantic space). We also found a great deal of variation in
the representations that models derived from the same data,
which in turn likely affected their learning rates. Because
most models differed from each other on a number of
parameters, further investigation of the parameters that are
the sources of the variation in performance is necessary.
At a wider angle, corroborating Sahlgren (2006), we
found that certain families of models are better at certain
semantic tasks: “syntagmatic” models better accounted for
word association, a task that often emphasizes sequential
relationships between words, while “paradigmatic” models
better accounted for semantic data in the absence of
association. It would appear difficult to maintain the notion
that any one semantic space model is an optimal model of
human semantic learning and memory.
In general, the models’ abilities to explain the variance in
the human data were low. There are many possible reasons
for this: data sparsity in CHILDES, idiosyncrasy and noise
in the semantic data themselves, as well as limitations on
learning from co-occurrence data and lack of extra-linguistic
information. The relative contributions of these factors to
model performance deserve further investigation.

References
Bird, H., Franklin, S., & Howard, D. (2001). Age of
acquisition and imageability ratings for a large set of
words, including verbs and function words. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 33(1),
73-79.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (in press). Extracting
Semantic Representations from Word Co-occurrence
Statistics: A Computational Study. Behavior Research
Methods.
Burgess, C., Livesay, K., & Lund, K. (1998). Explorations
in Context Space: Words, Sentences, Discourse.
Discourse Processes, 25(2/3), 211-257.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavioral Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Denhière, G., & Lemaire, B. (2004). A Computational
Model of Children's Semantic Memory. In K. Forbus, D.
Gentner & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 297302). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Hu, X., Cai, Z., Graesser, A. C., & Ventura, M. (2005).
Similarity between semantic spaces. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.

604

