UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Difference in Action Tendencies Distinguish Anger and Sadness after Comprehension of
Emotional Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1w30t070

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Mouliso, Emily
Glenberg, Arthur M.
Havas, David
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Difference in Action Tendencies Distinguish Anger and Sadness after
Comprehension of Emotional Sentences
Emily Mouilso (Ermouilso@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Authur M. Glenberg (Glenberg@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

David Havas (Dahavas@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Lisa M. Lindeman (Llindeman@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
We investigate the complex relations among language,
emotion, and action. Emotions function to ready the body to
take effective action (Davidson, 1994; Frijda, 2005), but how
specific are these action tendencies, do they correspond to
actual physical impulses, or are they merely abstract? Work in
the neuroscience of language suggests that language
comprehension utilizes the neural substrates of perception,
action, and emotion (Gallese, Keysers & Rizzolatti, 2004;
Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998). Therefore, we hypothesize that
comprehending emotional language will prime particular
actions. To test this hypothesis we measured the amount of
time it takes participants to move a lever either toward or
away from the body while reading angry, sad or emotionally
neutral sentences. Reading angry (versus sad) sentences
results in faster movements away from the body, while
reading sad (versus angry) sentences result in faster
movements towards the body. The results suggest that
emotional action tendencies may result from emotional
language understanding, and that these tendencies may be
quite specific.
Keywords: Emotion; embodiment; language comprehension;
action tendencies; sadness; anger.

The present study is designed to investigate the complex
interplay of language, emotion, and action. Emotion and
action have been related in studies of the functions of
emotion. Some theorists propose that emotions function to
direct an organism towards a certain set of behaviors
(Frijda, 2005) or to allocate the necessary metabolic support
for emotion specific actions (Davidson, 1994). In each case,
situations that activate anger, for example, will motivate an
organism to engage in a certain set of anger behaviors (fist
clenching, threat display, and physical or verbal attack).
The organism can then execute the behavior that is most
adaptive in the situation. These theories suggest that the
autonomic nervous system activates the appropriate

physiological processes to allow the organism to carry out
the chosen behavior. Thus, for example, the experience of
anger should facilitate a different set of behaviors than the
experience of sadness (Davidson, 1993). If emotions
function to facilitate action, measurable changes in behavior
ought to exist between different emotional states.
Intriguingly, emotion has been implicated as a moderating
variable in many psychological processes that have
behavioral consequences such as perception, attention,
cognition, learning, recognition, and motivation; however,
research on the behavioral effects of emotion is scant
(Zajonc & McIntosh, 1992). In contrast, the powerful link
between emotion and language has been well documented
(Velten, 1968), and recent studies have shown that language
is ultimately grounded in bodily activity (Glenberg,
& Kaschak, 2002; Glenberg, Sato, Cattaneo, Riggio,
Palumbo, & Buccino, in press; Lakoff, 1987). That is, when
asked to comprehend language, people often make use of
the same neural systems that are used to produce action,
perceive the world, and experience emotion. These systems
are used to simulate the meaning of the language (e.g.,
Havas, Glenberg & Rinck, in press). Nonetheless, other
scientists suggest that language consists of abstract symbols,
some of which may remain ungrounded (e.g. Kintsch, in
press). Hence it becomes important to test if language about
emotional situations is grounded in emotion and action.
The embodiment position suggests that understanding
sentences about actions utilizes the same neural components
as producing literal action and that simulation of these
systems prepares the body to take the kind of literal action
described in the sentence. For example, Glenberg and
Kaschak (2002) investigated the relation between action and
language comprehension using a behavioral method.
Participants judged whether a sentence was sensible or
nonsense by, in one condition, moving to a response button
far from them, and in another condition moving to a

1325

Figure 1. The response lever in the Away condition. The
apparatus is rotated 180 degrees for the Toward condition.
response button close to them. Results indicated that
responding was faster when the action implied in a sentence
was compatible with the action participants used to respond,
than when the two were incompatible. Further support for
the neural link between action and language comprehension
comes from neural imaging studies. For example, Hauk,
Johnsrude, and Pulvermüller (2004) used fMRI to
demonstrate that silently reading action verbs such as
“kick,” “pick,” and “lick” was accompanied by activation in
traditional language areas as well as activation in areas of
motor and premotor cortex. Activation in motor areas for a
particular word corresponded to the effector that would be
used in making the action. Thus, “kick” activated areas of
the motor and premotor cortex that control the leg, whereas
understanding the word “pick” activated in areas that
control the hand, and so on.
The present study builds on theories about the behavioral
functions of emotion (Davidson, 1994 and Frijda, 2005) as
well as work on the link between language comprehension
and activation of the neural substrates of action and emotion
(Gallese, et al., 1996; Gallese, Keysers & Rizzolatti, 2004;
and Rizzolatti, et al., 1996). Little behavioral evidence
exists regarding the changes in action that result from the
experience of different emotions. Nonetheless, the
measurement of such changes could provide a useful
technique in answering questions not only about the
function of emotion itself but also about the existence of
autonomic specificity in general. The present study will
help determine if comprehending sentences about emotional
situations can be used to investigate these relations.
Participants read angry, sad or neutral sentences to decide
if the sentences made sense. Sense judgments are made by
moving a lever (see Figure 1) so that the time taken to move
the lever can be used as a behavioral measure of the level of
bodily activation associated with the emotion produced by
the sentence. Participants responded that a sentence was
nonsense by pushing a button located on top of the lever
without moving the lever itself.

Simply finding that reading angry sentences results in
faster lever movement times could be interpreted as the
result of a generally greater level of bodily arousal produced
by anger than sadness. Thus, the present study includes two
different lever motion conditions: some participants make
sense judgments by moving the lever towards their bodies
and others by moving the lever away from their bodies.
It was predicted that reading angry sentences would
facilitate movement away from the body whereas reading
sad sentences would facilitate movement towards the body.
Much work has been done proposing an asymmetry in
prefrontal cortex (PFC) processing such that the left PFC is
used in the processing of approach-related positive affect
while the right PFC is used in processing withdrawalrelated negative affect (Davidson, 1984). In this initial
conceptualization of the theory, anger and sadness as
negative emotions were both expected to be processed in the
right PFC; however, findings suggest that in fact the left
PFC process anger (Harmon- Jones, 2004).
As a result, Harmon-Jones (2004) proposed that the
positive-negative dimension be dropped from the model so
that approach-withdrawal exclusively defines the frontal
asymmetry of emotion. Recently, support for the inclusion
of anger as an approach emotion was found when increased
left PFC activation was demonstrated in response to
personally relevant anger-provoking stimuli when
participants had an approach-related action expectation
(Harmon-Jones, Lueck, Fearn, & Harmon-Jones, 2006).
Similarly, significant reductions in the processing of anger
were observed after rTMS was used to deactivate the left
PFC (Van Honk, & Schutter, 2006). In the case of the
present study, pushing a lever away from the body can be
seen as a type of approach action and also as a component
process of the prototypical response of aggression.
Therefore, reading angry sentences is hypothesized to be
associated with faster movement times when participants are
pushing the lever away from their bodies.
The predicted effect of sadness is, perhaps, somewhat
counterintuitive. One might expect, based on research
showing that depression is associated with slower motor
movements (Parker & Brotchie, 1992), or energy
conservation, that participants would move the lever more
slowly regardless of direction. However, there is a body of
research that suggests that some types of sadness,
specifically grief and sorrow, are associated with actions
designed to find and reunite with a lost figure or reacquire a
lost possession (Averill & Nunley, 1988; Bowlby, 1980).
Based on this work, some types of sadness would be
predicted to facilitate movements intended draw an object or
person closer to the body rather than to withdraw from a
situation and conserve energy. In the present study, many
of the sad sentences involve social loss or isolation so that it
is predicted that participants will be faster to pull the lever
towards their bodies.

1326

Participants

Method

Table 1: Examples of sentences
Type of
Sentence

One hundred and eight undergraduates (72 females and 36
males) from the University of Wisconsin-Madison enrolled
in an introductory psychology class participated in the
experiment for course credit. Four subjects were excluded
from the analysis due to missing data or failure to follow
instructions. In addition, data from the last two participants
were excluded in order to achieve balanced cells for the
analysis.

Angry
Sensible

Design

Sad
Sensible

The experiment used 3 (Sentence Valance) X 2 (Lever
Direction) design. The Independent variable of Sentence
Valance was manipulated within subjects and had three
levels: Sad, Angry and Neutral, while Lever Direction was a
between subjects variable with two conditions: Towards the
body and Away from the body. The dependent variable
was the amount of time that participants took to move the
lever from a start location to a stop location

Neutral
Sensible

Materials
The experiment used a lever that required some force to
move it away from the starting point and to move it back.
Analog signals of the lever’s position were sent to a
Logitech Attack 3 joystick for translation into digital
computer input. The program USB Overdive (2005) was
installed on the computer and used to read data from the
lever/joystick via a USB port on the computer. The time it
took the participant to move the lever from its starting
position (either close to or far from the body depending on
condition) to the end position where it made contact with a
stopping device, was calculated as the time at which the
lever first left the starting position (thus releasing a button)
until it made contact with the stopping device (thus
depressing a second button). Nonsense responses were
recorded from a thumb button attached to the top of the
lever handle.
Each block of sentences contained two sentences of each
valance randomly selected from the entire list of sentences
along with six nonsense sentences selected in the same
manner. The order in which sentences were presented within
blocks was also random. Each participant saw each of the
sentences only once. The 14 Neutral, 14 Angry and 14 Sad
sentences were selected from a larger set of previouslynormed sentences with high ratings on the intended emotion
as well as relatively low ratings on the unintended emotion.
On a 0 (Not at all) to 2 (Very much) scale, Angry sentences
were rated low on sadness (M = 0.26, SD = 0.18) and high
on anger (M = 1.61, SD = 0.15), while Sad sentences were
rated low on anger (M = 0.77, SD = 0.41) and high on

Nonsense

Example
The workload from your pompous
professor was unreasonable; this
course evaluation will make the jerk
pay.
Reeling from the fight with that
stubborn bigot, you slam the car door.
Because of your awkward appearance,
you will never win your love’s
affection.
Your parent just told you the news;
your grandparent had a stroke and is in
critical condition at the hospital.
You talk with your cousin the
telemarketer while passing the salt
during dinner.
Looking around your Madison
apartment, you decide you will go sit in
your favorite chair.
While in a rush to make your meeting
on the 24th floor, the empty box
elevators to a sudden stop.
You are unable to go home for Winter
break because the exam makes the
shaving company.

sadness (M = 1.75, SD = 0.13). Neutral sentences were
designed to be roughly equivalent to the emotional
sentences in terms of key words and syntax, and those
selected were rated both low on anger (M = 0.04, SD =
0.05) and sadness (M = 0.07, SD = 0.05). Sentences across
all emotional conditions were generally similar in number of
words (Mean = 17.58, SD = 3.82), complexity of words and
sentence topic (See Table 1).

Procedure

1327

The experimental room consisted of a small cubicle
containing a computer, a desk, a chair and a lever. After
obtaining informed consent, each participant was led
individually into the experimental booth by the
experimenter and told that the task would involve reading a
series of sentences on the computer screen and deciding if
the sentences made sense or not. Participants were then
instructed in the correct use of the lever and asked to
respond as quickly as possible.
During the trials, each sentence appeared on the computer
screen until the lever was moved or the button was pressed.
To make a “sense “ response, participants pushed the lever
either away from the body until it contacted a metal stop
(Away condition) or towards the body until it contacted a
metal stop (Towards condition). Participants then returned
the lever to its original resting position in preparation for the

Table 2: Subject analysis mean lever movement times and
standard deviations by condition

next trial. To respond “nonsense”, participants pressed the
button on the top of the lever handle with the thumb. The
dependent variable of greatest interest is the time taken to
move the lever from the start location to the stop location.
At the end of each block of sentences there was a rest
period, participants could decide when they wanted to
continue by clicking the “Next” button. At the end of the
final block of sentences, participants completed an exit
questionnaire. Each of the participants was thanked for
participating and given an oral debriefing by the
experimenter that outlined the purpose of the experiment,
and the predicted results.

Toward
Away

Mean
SE
Mean
SE

Sad
779
34.4
815
24.3

Neutral
799
37.9
795
22.8

Angry
791
36.7
789
23.2

Results

for the women (mean difference = 20 msec), t (32) = 2.510,
p=.02, but not for the men (mean difference = -2 msec),
t(17) < 1. Thus, the results are substantially in line with our
predictions, albeit with an interesting twist due to gender.

Discussion

Based on our prediction that different emotions are
associated with different action tendencies, we predicted
that the amount of time participants would take to move the
lever would vary depending on the emotional valance of the
preceding sentence as well as the direction of lever motion.
Specifically, we predicted an interaction between Lever
Direction and Sentence Valence such that when pushing
lever Away, participants would be faster after reading an
Angry sentence than after a Sad sentence and when pulling
the lever Toward themselves, participants would be faster
after a Sad sentence than after an Angry sentence.
A 2 X 3 between subjects ANOVA was conducted on
correct sensible trials. The data was trimmed to remove all
trials with reading times or lever-movement times greater
than two and a half standard deviations from their respective
overall means. In addition, we excluded lever movement
times that were 2.5 standard deviations from each
participant’s condition mean. The trimming procedure
removed approximately five percent of analyzable trials.
A sentence-emotion-by-lever-direction interaction in the
lever movement times was found in both subject, F1(2,
100)=4.41, MSe=2864, p < .02, and item analyses,
F2(2,26)=6.39, MSe=746.9, p < .01). No other significant
effects were found. Results of a Tukey’s HSD revealed a
simple effect in sad sentences across lever condition in the
item analysis, t(39)=4.42, p<.05. Specifically, lever
movement times after reading sad sentences were
significantly faster in the toward condition than in the away
condition (See Table 2).
The significant interaction between sentence emotion and
lever direction was also followed by several dependentsample t-tests designed to test our specific predictions.
When the lever was pushed in the Away direction, the
Angry sentences were responded to more quickly than the
Sad sentences, t(50) = 2.019, p=.05. The effect was most
prevalent for the male participants (mean difference = 54
msec), t(14) = 2.42, and was not statistically significant for
the female participants (mean difference = 13 msec), t(35) <
1. The reverse was found when the lever was pulled in the
Toward condition. That is, the Sad sentences were
responded to more quickly than the Angry sentences mainly

1328

The present study measured the effect of comprehending
sentences of different emotional content on the speed that
participants pushed the lever away or pulled the lever
toward their bodies. We predicted that participants who
pushed the lever away from their body would move the
lever faster after reading angry sentences than after reading
sad sentences, whereas participants who moved the lever
toward their body would be faster to move the lever after
reading sad sentences than angry sentences. This prediction
was largely confirmed by a significant and corresponding
interaction pattern in both subject and item analyses. Posthoc analyses confirmed a significant and predicted
difference between toward and away conditions for sad
sentences only. The null result for angry sentences might be
due to difficulty as reflected in higher error rates for angry
sentences (discussed below). In addition, men responded to
the Angry sentences more quickly than the Sad sentences in
the Away condition, whereas the women responded to the
Sad sentence more quickly than the Angry sentences in the
Toward condition. These gender-specific effects are
consistent with other (unpublished) results collected in our
laboratory and suggest interesting theoretical directions that
we explore elsewhere.
Overall, these data demonstrate several behavior
differences that arise from reading and understanding
emotional language. As such, the data are consistent with
the claim that language comprehension utilizes the same
neural substrates as action and emotional experience
themselves. These data represent a clear behavioral
difference resulting from reading and understanding
emotional language and as such is consistent with the theory
that language comprehension utilizes the same neural
substrates as action and emotional experience itself.
Movement time results from the current study provide
strong support for the theory that emotions differentially
affect bodily activity and that emotion itself functions to
prepare the body to take effective action. Beyond merely
suggesting that sadness subdued the amount of general
arousal and slowed action in general relative to anger, the
present study revealed that these emotions may each
facilitate different types of action. As predicted, bringing the

lever towards the body was facilitated by sadness relative to
moving the lever away from the body with anger. Thus, the
findings suggest that emotion maybe a key component in
the body's ability to mobilize resources to act effectively in
different situation.
An alternative explanation of the findings is that the
effects are attributable to processing of action words in the
sentences, as in the phrase, “you slam the car door as hard
as you can,” rather than to emotional content per se. On this
account, sad sentences contain more withdrawal-related
action words or concepts than angry sentences, while angry
sentences contain more approach-related words than sad
sentences. There are two reasons why this account is less
preferred. First, it is not clear on such an account how
readers might construe isolated action words like “slam” or
“give” to indicate approach or withdrawal apart from the
sentence context. Second, the results of our norming study
clearly shows that subjects perceive the situations described
by our sentences as emotional. Previously, we have
suggested that emotional language understanding involves a
simulation using action systems that underlie emotional
experience (Havas, Glenberg, & Rinck, in press). The
present study expands this account to show how emotion
simulation can influence subsequent actions.
A caveat to the understanding of the present results is the
similarity between the effects of Neutral and Angry
sentences on the motor system. Analysis of the percent of
trials in which participants correctly indicated that a
sentence was sense or nonsense reveals a main effect in
accuracy rates for sad trials (M = 92%) versus angry and
neutral trials (both M = 89%), F(2, 100) = 11.57, MSe=.002,
p = 0.00. Thus, greater difficulty in interpreting the
sentences may have obscured any effects of the lever for
these sentences. A second possibility is that outside of the
context of the norming study, participants may have reacted
to angry sentences with a degree of amusement (See Table
1); however, the authors have no statistical justification for
this possibility.
In conclusion, the present study accomplishes two goals.
First, it demonstrates how language about emotional
situations can be embodied. Second, it documents a
potentially useful method of investigating the effect of
emotion on action.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSF grants BCS-0315434 and
INT-0233175 to Arthur Glenberg as well as a University of
Wisconsin-Madison Hilldale Fellowship to Emily Mouilso.
Any
opinions,
findings,
and
conclusions
or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funding agencies. We thank Jerry Felderspiel for insightful
reading and indispensable computer programming skills.
Comments and questions may be directed to Arthur
Glenberg at Glenberg@wisc.edu

References
Averill, J. R., & Nunley, E. P. (1988). Grief as an emotion
and as a disease. Journal of Social Issues, 44, 79-95.
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and Loss. Vol. III: Loss:
Sadness and Depression. Harper Collins: Basic Books.
Davidson, R. J. (1984). Affect, cognition and hemispheric
specialization. In C.E. Izard, J. Kagan, & R. Zajonc
(Eds.), Emotion, cognition and behavior (pp. 320–365).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Davidson, R.
J.
(1993). Parsing affective space:
Perspectives from
neuropsychology
and
psychophysiology. Neuropsychology, 7, 464-475.
Davidson, R. J. (1994). Complexities in the search for
emotion-specific physiology. In P. Ekman, & R. J.
Davidson (Eds.).
The Nature of Emotion. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Frijda, N. (2005). Emotions and action. In A. S. R.
Manstead, N. Frijda, & A. Fischer (Eds.), Feelings and
emotions: The Amsterdam symposium. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.
Gallese, V., Luciano F., Leonardo F., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Action recognition in the premotor cortex.
Brain, 119, 593–609.
Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A
unifying view of the basis of social cognition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8, 396-403.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565
Glenberg, A. M., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Riggio, L.,
Palumbo, D., & Buccino, G. (in press). Processing
abstract language modulates motor system activity.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2004). Contributions from research on
anger and cognitive dissonance to understanding the
motivational functions of asymmetrical frontal brain
activity. Biological Psychology, 67, 51–76.
Harmon-Jones, E., Lueck, L., Fearn, M., & Harmon-Jones,
C. (2006). The effect of personal relevance and approachrelated action expectation on relative left frontal cortical
activity. Psychological Science, 17, 434–440.
Havas, D. A., Glenberg A. M., & Rink, M. (in press).
Emotion simulation during language comprehension.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human
motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Kintsch, W. (in press). Symbol systems and perceptual
representations. In M. de Vega, A. M. Glenberg, and A.
C. Graesser (Eds.) Symbols, Embodiment, and Meaning:
A debate. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Parker, G., & Brotchie, H. (1992). Psychomotor change as

1329

feature of depressive disorders: An historical overview.
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 26,
146-155.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga L., Gallese V., & Fogassi L. (1996).
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research, 3, 131–141.
Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. A. (1998). Language within our
grasp. Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 188-194.
Velten, E. (1968). A laboratory task for the induction of

1330

mood states. Behavior Research and Therapy, 6, 473482.
Van Honk, J., & Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2006). From
Affective Valence to Motivational Direction: The Frontal
Asymmetry of Emotion Revised. Psychological Science,
17, 963- 965.
Zajonc, R. B., & McIntosh, D. N. (1992). Emotion research:
Some promising questions and some questionable
promises. Psychological Science, 3, 70-74.

