UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Ducks Lay Eggs? How People Interpret Generic Assertions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tm460rm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Khemlani, Sangeet
Leslie, Sarah-Jane
Glucksberg, Sam
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Ducks Lay Eggs?
How People Interpret Generic Assertions
Sangeet Khemlani1 , Sarah-Jane Leslie2 , Sam Glucksberg1 , and Paula Rubio Fernandez1
{khemlani, sjleslie, samg, prubio}@princeton.edu
1 Department of Psychology
2 Department of Philosopy
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
Abstract

West Nile virus; if anything, the norm is for a mosquito to
be virus-free. Many theorists have proposed variations on
such an account (e.g. Asher & Morreau, 1995; Pelletier &
Asher, 1997; Greenberg, 2003). These accounts are discussed
at much greater length in Leslie (2007; forthcoming a).
One might suppose that generics are interpreted as existential statements, such that the generic ‘Ks are Fs’ is said to
be true whenever some Ks are Fs. One might hope to thus
explain the otherwise puzzling truth of ‘mosquitoes carry the
West Nile virus.’ Yet this interpretation fails to account for
generics such as ‘birds are female’, which is intuitively false
even though, of course, some birds are female.
As these examples suggest, generics cannot be accounted
for in terms of quantifiers such as ‘all’, ‘most’, or ‘some’.
Further, language acquisition studies suggest that while
generics lack explicit quantification, children acquire the conceptual framework of generics and employ them in their
speech at least a year before they use explicit quantifiers (Hollander, Gelman, & Star, 2002; Gelman, Geotz, Sarnecka, &
Flukes, forthcoming).
These observations suggest that generics are not quantificational. Quantificational statements are about how much or
how many in a way that generics are not. Notice that, upon
being asked ‘how many tigers are striped’, one might reply
‘most tigers are striped’, or ‘some tigers are striped’, but one
cannot reply ‘tigers are striped’. The generic is not an appropriate answer to this question (Carlson, 1997). Leslie (2007;
forthcoming b) argues at length that the truth and falsity of
generics does not depend on how many of the relevant individuals possess the predicated property. There is no sense,
she claims, in which generics are dependent on such quantitative considerations. The results presented here offer empirical
support for this claim.

Generics are statements that express generalizations, such as
‘ducks lay eggs’. Intuitively, such statements seem true. Even
the universal form of such statements e.g., ‘all ducks lay eggs’
seems true, despite our knowing that the majority of ducks do
not. We conducted an experiment to verify these intuitions,
and found that people overwhelmingly judged generic assertions true. People also judged universally quantified assertions
true, but to a lesser extent. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that generics express cognitively primitive generalizations, and so require fewer cognitive resources than do explicitly quantified assertions (Leslie, 2007). Hence when people encounter universally quantified assertions they treat them
as generics in order to minimize cognitive effort.
Keywords: generics; semantics; linguistics; philosophy

Introduction
Generics are statements such as ‘tigers are striped’, ‘cars have
radios’ and ‘ravens are black’. Such statements lack explicit
quantificational operators (e.g., ‘some’, ‘all’, or ‘most’) but
nevertheless express generalizations, rather than claims about
specific individuals. This is true not just for English, but for
all known languages for which generics have been explored
(Krifka et al., 1995; Dayal, 1999). Generic statements are
interesting for a number of reasons. Though they occur frequently in everyday speech, it is not immediately apparent
how generics are interpreted. They do not express exceptionless universal generalizations; while it is false that all
tigers are striped (a few unfortunate albino tigers are quite
stripeless), the generic claim ‘tigers are striped’ remains true
in the face of these exceptions. The generic claim ‘tigers
are striped’ is thus not equivalent to its universal counterpart
‘all tigers are striped’. Perhaps, then, generics might be assimilated to the quantifier ‘most’ — certainly it is true that
most tigers are striped. Such a proposal runs into difficulties
when we consider generics such as ‘lions have manes’ and
‘mosquitoes carry the West Nile virus’. The mature maned
males make up less than half of the lion population, so it is
false that most lions have manes, yet the generic strikes us as
true. Further, over ninety-nine percent of mosquitoes are perfectly virus free, yet ‘mosquitoes carry the West Nile virus’ is
a true generic.
If one were tempted to understand generics as meaning
“all normal”, the last two examples should give one pause
for thought. There is nothing abnormal about mane-less female lions, so it is surely not true that all normal lions have
manes. Nor is it true that all normal mosquitoes carry the

Leslie’s Account of Generics
As the foregoing discussion might suggest, the truth conditions of generics are an extremely complex matter. Generic
truth conditions are so divorced from quantitative considerations that ‘mosquitoes carry the West Nile virus’ is true even
though less than 1% of mosquitoes carry the virus, while
‘books are paperbacks’ is false, even though over 80% of
books are paperbacks. The philosophical and linguistic literature on generics offers accounts that are often so baroque as to
take a half a page to simply state. These accounts make use

395

• In matters of striking or dire consequences only the existential is satisfied, not necessarily the majority, e.g.,
‘mosquitoes carry the West Nile virus,’ ‘sharks attack
bathers’, ‘ticks carry Lyme disease’.

of everything from comparative probability to non-standard
logics. In short, they are exceedingly complex.
In this respect, semantic accounts of generics contrast
sharply with semantic accounts of quantifiers such as ‘all’,
‘some’ and ‘most’, which may be given simply and concisely
(e.g. ‘all Ks are F’ is true iff {x: x is K} ⊂ {x: x is F}).
The contrast, while remarkable enough on its own, becomes
quite vexing once we consider data from language acquisition. Generics, it appears, are considerably easier for children to acquire than are quantifiers (Gelman, 2003; Roeper,
Strauss, & Pearson, 2006). We should wonder, then, how it
is that children find the theoretically vexing generic easier to
acquire than the far more tractable quantifiers.
Leslie (2007; forthcoming a) argues that this tension is resolved if we understand generics to give voice to our cognitively primitive generalizations. The generalizations that
generics express are produced by a cognitively fundamental
mechanism, which is likely present even before the advent of
language acquisition. Quantifiers, in contrast, express generalizations that are more cognitively sophisticated.
Leslie argues that this mechanism deals with different
types of information in different ways. In particular, she argues that the mechanism generalizes information differently
depending on whether the information is characteristic of the
kind in question, whether it is striking (often horrific or appalling), or neither. Broadly speaking, a generic ‘Ks are F’
is judged true if a) the property of being F is characteristic of
the kind K, else b) being F is a particularly striking property,
and some members of the kind K possess it, else c) the majority of the kind K possess the property of being F (for far
greater detail, see Leslie (2007; forthcoming a; forthcoming
b)).
Prasada and Dillingham (2006) discuss what they call kproperties and t-properties. K-properties, on their view, are
statistically frequent properties that individuals are expected
to possess in virtue of belonging to a particular kind, while
t-properties are properties that are merely statistically frequent amongst the members of that kind. It should be noted
that their taxonomy, while related, is quite different from
the taxonomy presented here. One key difference between
Leslie’s characteristic properties and Prasada and Dillingham’s k-properties is that, on Leslie’s view, there is no expectation that characteristic properties will be statistically frequent amongst the members of the kind. (Quite the contrary:
‘lions have manes’ is an example of a characteristic generic in
which the property is possessed relatively infrequently.) Also,
the category of striking properties does not appear in Prasada
and Dillingham’s taxonomy.
Thus in Leslie’s taxonomy, there are three predicate types
that are relevant to understanding when generics are judged
true:

• The majority of the type in question satisfies the given
predicate, e.g., ‘cars have radios,’ ‘barns are red.’
While a generic statement may be true if it meets one of
these conditions, the same is obviously not true for universally quantified statements, which are strictly true only when
100% of the kind possess the relevant property — regardless,
of course, of whether that property is characteristic, striking,
or what have you. Nonetheless, we conjectured that people
might be inclined to mistakenly assent to universally quantified statements, especially when the predicate in question is
characteristic of the kind. Some characteristic predications,
we supposed, might pass muster when quantified universally,
e.g., ‘all ducks lay eggs.’ In contrast, universally quantified versions of majority and striking predications seem to be
false. For example, ‘all cars have radios’ and ‘all ticks carry
Lyme disease’ don’t ring true.
‘All ticks carry Lyme disease’ should be judged as false,
because each and every tick does not carry the disease, only
some individual ticks do. We should thus expect that striking/dire predicates should always be judged true when existentially quantified, but rarely judged as true when universally
quantified. Majority predications may be the simplest case.
Existentially quantified assertions are counted true, while universally quantified ones are counted false whenever the majority is less than 100%.
Characteristic predications present a more complex picture. Such predications may be interpreted as predicating a
property of a kind, yet it is not a property had by all individual members of that kind. Therefore the assertion ‘all ducks
lay eggs’ is false, and should be judged as such whenever any
counterexamples come to mind, e.g, when it is recognized
that male ducks and immature female ducks do not lay eggs.
Apparently, although such counterexamples are available
to people, they do not seem to be spontaneously accessible. If
they were spontaneously accessible, people should not agree
to universally quantified characteristic statements such as ‘all
ducks lay eggs’. Yet casual observation suggests that people
do agree with such statements. Leslie argues that understanding characteristic generics is a cognitively primitive operation, and so is easier than understanding quantified assertions
(cf. Hollander et al., 2002, on children’s acquisition of generics prior to quantified assertions). If characteristic generics
are easier to process than quantified assertions, then people
might default to the generic form of characteristic predications when they encounter universal characteristic predications. Specifically, when encountering an assertion such as
‘all ducks lay eggs’, people treat it as if it were ‘ducks lay
eggs’ in order to minimize cognitive effort.
In order to examine whether people do in fact accept universally quantified characteristic predications (at least those

• The predicate in question is characteristic of the type in
question, e.g., ‘ducks lay eggs’, ‘horses give live birth’,
‘lions have manes’.

396

Results and Discussion

that are true in generic form), while rejecting universally
quantified majority and striking consequence predications,
we conducted an exploratory experiment to see how people
judge the truth value of these three types of predications as a
function of statement type, be it existential, generic, or universal.

The proportions of ‘yes’ responses to each of the nine types
of assertions are provided in Table 1 and Figure 1. As expected, virtually all agreed that existentially quantified statements were true, regardless of predicate-type. The preponderance of characteristic predications in generic form were
judged true (.89), with somewhat fewer agreeing that striking
and majority were true in generic form (.68 for each type).
This difference between the characteristic predicates and the
other two predicate types may not hold in general because we
sampled only a few items of each type. Future work should
sample a wider variety of predicates of each type before we
can conclude that characteristic predicates are more readily
viewed as true than majority and striking generics.

Experiment
We asked a sample of Princeton University undergraduates
to judge the truth value of nine different kinds of assertions:
three types of predicates, each appearing in generic form, the
existential quantifier ‘some’, or the universal quantifier ‘all.’
That is, participants could see the majority-predicate ‘barns
are red’ as ‘barns are red’, ‘some barns are red’, or ‘all barns
are red’. The study thus employed a 3 (predicate-type: characteristic, majority, striking) × 3 (statement-type: existential,
generic, universal) repeated measures experiment.

Table 1: Mean proportions of ‘yes’ responses as a function
of predicate-type and statement-type (mean estimated proportion of category members with relevant property).

Method
Characteristic
Majority
Striking
Total

Generic
.89 (.70)
.68 (.80)
.68 (.36)
.75 (.62)

Universal
.46 (.97)
.07 (.97)
.07 (.95)
.20 (.96)

1.0

Participants. Twenty-eight undergraduate students at
Princeton served as participants. All spoke English as their
first language and none had participated in experiments
concerning generics before.
Procedure and Materials. Participants were first asked to
judge the truth-value of nine different types of assertions, using a PC running LispWorks 4.4 Professional Edition. They
pressed one key designated as ‘yes’ and another designated
as ‘no’ for each statement when it appeared on the computer
screen. An initial training phase consisting of responding to
the words ‘yes’ and ‘no’ respectively was used to familiarize
participants with the keyboard key assignments. Participants
were given nine types of assertions: the three predicate types,
each appearing in existential, generic or universal form. For
each item, the generic version of the statement was intuitively
true. These statements were counterbalanced via four distinct
9 × 9 Latin squares. In addition to the nine experimental
items in each Latin square, nine false filler statements (such
as ‘notebooks are pencils’ and ‘rats have stripes’) were presented to roughly equalize the number of ‘yes’ and ‘no’ responses.

Existential
.93 (.65)
1.00 (.66)
.93 (.26)
.95 (.52)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Characteristic
Majority
Striking

Existential

Participants first completed the statement-verification task
using the nine experimental items described above. They
were then given each statement that they had seen before
to estimate the proportion of members of each category that
shared the property in question. For example, if a participant
had seen the statement ‘ducks lay eggs’ in the verification
task, then he or she was asked to estimate the proportion of
ducks that lay eggs, e.g., “What percent of ducks lay eggs?”

Generic

Universal

Figure 1: Mean proportions of ‘yes’ responses as a function
of predicate-type and statement-type. Bars reflect 95% confidence intervals.
Finally, consider predications quantified by ‘all’. Characteristic predications were far more likely to be judged true
in universal form than were majority and striking (46% vs.
7% for the latter two types). In our set of items, the universally quantified majority predications are of course false,
since we chose them to be so. Universally quantified striking

Participants also completed a variety of other tasks related
to their understanding of generic assertions to provide information for future experiments, but they are not relevant to this
paper and so will not be discussed further.

397

predications will be judged as true or false depending upon
either of two conditions. First, if an item is construed as referring to the type of category member rather than to individual members, then it should be judged as true (e.g., ‘all
cigarettes cause cancer’ if construed as ‘all (kinds or brands)
of cigarettes cause cancer’). Second, if an item is construed
such that each individual member of the category contributes
to the striking consequence, then it should also be judged true
in ‘all’ form (e.g., ‘all cigarettes cause cancer’ is true given
this construal).
Obviously, very few of our striking predications were so
construed; only 7% of responses to striking predications in
universally quantified form were judged true. Again, given
the small sample of items used in this exploratory study, we
cannot generalize to the class of striking consequence predications, but the evidence is certainly suggestive. It is very
likely that counterexamples to such assertions are readily accessible that is, they come readily to mind, and so are rarely
if ever judged to be true.
The proportion of agreement data were subjected to a 3
× 3 within-subjects ANOVA. The test revealed a main effect of predicate-type, F(2, 216) = 8.47, p < .05, η2p = .071,
reflecting the higher agreement rate to characteristic generic
statements than to either of the other two types (.76 vs. .58
and .56 for majority and striking, respectively). There was
also a main effect of statement-type, F(2, 216) = 104.24, p <
.05, η2p = .491, reflecting the highest agreement for ‘some’
statements (.95) than for generic statements (.75), with the
lowest agreement for ‘all’ statements (.20). Finally, there
was an interaction between predicate-type and statementtype, F(4, 216) = 3.66, p < .05, η2p = .063. This can be interpreted in terms of the differences in agreement rate for
statement-type as a function of predicate-type. Agreement
rates for ‘some’ quantified assertions were virtually equivalent across predicate types. In contrast, only characteristic
predicates yielded a robust agreement rate in the universal
condition (.46 compared to .07 for the other two predicate
types). Finally, generic statements did differ as a function of
predicate-type, with characteristic assertions eliciting a somewhat higher agreement rate (.89) than either majority or striking (both .68).
Because agreement rates in the existential condition were
uniformly high, a 2 × 3 ANOVA omitting the existentially
quantified condition was conducted. The test revealed significant effects for statement-type, F(1, 135) = 80.96, p <
.05, η2p = .733, and predicate-type, F(2, 135) = 11.05, p <
.05, η2p = .429, though the interaction was not significant,
F(2, 135) = 0.95, p = .38, η2p = .061.
The participants’ estimates of the prevalence of the attributed properties for each item type are provided in Table
1. These estimates are quite consistent for characteristic and
striking predications in ‘some’ or generic form. With universally quantified predications, prevalence estimates are generally high, but the data for majority and striking predications
are based on only two responses each and so can be ignored.

The estimate for universally quantified characteristic predications is meaningful. In generic form, the mean prevalence
estimate for these types of predications was .70, with a range
from .52 to 1.0. This was substantially lower than the estimate for their universally quantified counterparts (.97 with a
range from .95 1.0). Clearly, people’s acceptance of a characteristic predication in generic form is not based on their beliefs about the number of category members with the relevant
property, and this is also the case for striking predications in
generic form, for which the mean prevalence estimate was
merely .36.
So, what are people doing when they agree with statements
of the sort presented? For existentially quantified predications, the answer is simple: if even one member of a category
has the attributed property, then the assertion is true, and this
is reflected in both the agreement rates and the prevalence estimates that we obtained.
For universally quantified predications, majority and striking predicate types are virtually always rejected. In contrast, universally quantified assertions involving characteristic
predicates were accepted 46% of the time, with a .97 prevalence estimate. With respect to the relation between agreement and prevalence rate estimates, the interesting cases are
the predicate statements in generic form. For these items,
people’s acceptance rates seem independent of their prevalence estimates: .89 acceptance for characteristic predications
with a .70 prevalence estimate, .68 acceptance for majority
predications with a .80 prevalence estimate, and a .68 acceptance rate for striking predications with a mere .36 prevalence estimate (range .01 to 1.0). Clearly, people do not treat
generic assertions as assertions about how many of the relevant individuals have the predicated feature.
Analogously, consider how people might be interpreting
universally quantified characteristic predications such as ‘all
ducks lay eggs’. Even though the prevalence estimates for
these assertions are high, a moment’s reflection reveals that
these estimates cannot be accurate. They may well have been
inflated by participants’ prior agreement with each item in
universal form, and so do not accurately reflect prevalence beliefs. Instead, the estimates in this condition may reflect participants’ trying to respond consistently: if an item had been
agreed to in universal form, then the only consistent prevalence estimate would be very close to 1.0.
A more interesting question is, why do people agree to universally quantified predications in the first place? One possibility is that counterexamples are not accessible at the moment, i.e., they do not come to mind, just as they do not come
to mind when interpreting generic characteristic assertions.
In effect, when people agree to universal characteristic assertions, they are treating them as if they were generic assertions,
perhaps to avoid the cognitive effort that would be required to
process quantifiers (cf. Leslie, 2007, forthcoming b).
One might wonder, however, that when people assent to
universally quantified characteristic predications, they are not
quantifying over individuals, but rather over sub-kinds of the

398

kind in question. On this hypothesis, people would assent to,
for example, ‘all ducks lay eggs’, because they understand the
universal quantifier to range over sub-types of ducks rather
than individual ducks. ‘All ducks lay eggs’, then, may be
judged true because mallard ducks lay eggs and Peking ducks
lay eggs, and so forth. We do not think that this hypothesis
is likely, however. For one, most of our items simply do not
have available sub-types (see Appendix). It is unlikely that
our participants assented to ‘all peacocks have blue tails’ or
‘all cardinals are red’ because they took these statements to
be quantifying over all the sub-types of these kinds, since it is
unlikely that our participants have any idea what, if any, subkinds of peacocks or cardinals exist. Further, this hypothesis
does not explain why we only found a significant degree of
assent to universal statements when the predicate was characteristic. Why would they not employ this strategy for the
other predicate types? If ‘all lions have manes’ is judged true
because it is interpreted as quantifying over sub-types of lions, why would ‘all lions claw people’ not be open to a similar interpretation?

This is what leads them to erroneously assent to these false
universal claims. We plan to test this hypothesis explicitly in
future work.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Phil Johnson-Laird, Adele Goldberg, Geoffrey Goodwin, Louis Lee, Carlos Santamaria, and Axit
Fumero for their helpful comments. We also thank three
anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and comments.

References
Asher, N., & Morreau, M. (1995). What some generic sentences mean. In The generic book (p. 330-339). Chicago:
Chicago University Press.
Carlson, G. (1997). Reference to kinds in english. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst.
Dayal, V. (1999). Bare np’s, reference to kinds, and incorporation. In T. Matthews & D. Strolovich (Eds.), Proceedings
of SALT IX (p. 34-51). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University.
Gelman, S. A.(2003). The essential child. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., Geotz, P., Sarnecka, B., & Flukes, J. (forthcoming). Generic language in parent-child conversations.
Language Learning and Development.
Greenberg, Y. (2003). Manifestations of genericity. New
York: Routledge.
Hollander, M. A., Gelman, S. A., & Star, J. (2002). Children’s interpretation of generic noun phrases. Developmental Psychology, 36(6).
Krifka, M., Pelletier, F., Carlson, G., Meulen, A. ter, Chierchia, G., & Link, G. (1995). Genericity: An introduction.
In The generic book (p. 1-125). Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Leslie, S. J.(2007). Generics, cognition, and comprehension.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Princeton University.
Leslie, S. J. (forthcoming a). Generics: Cognition and acquisition. Philosophical Review.
Leslie, S. J.(forthcoming b). Generics and the structure of the
mind. Philosophical Perspectives.
Pelletier, F., & Asher, N. (1997). Generics and defaults. In
J. van Benthem & A. ter Meulen (Eds.), Handbook of logic
and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and statistical connections in common sense conception. Cognition,
99(1), 73-11.
Roeper, T., Strauss, U., & Pearson, B. Z.(2006). The acquisition path of the determiner quantifier every: Two kinds of
spreading. In T. Heizmann (Ed.), Current issues in first language acquisition, university of massachusetts occasional
papers (Vol. 34, p. 97-129). GLSA.

General Discussion
Generics express generalizations that are not fundamentally
about how much or how many. Our subjects’ judgments of
their truth and falsity were not determined by their estimates
of prevalence. Unlike quantifiers, generics do not depend on
such quantitative considerations. Rather, the truth conditions
of generics are sensitive to factors such as whether the predicate in question expresses a property that is striking, or characteristic of the kind.
Hollander, Gelman, and Star (2002) found that three-year
olds treated both existentially and universally quantified statements as though they were generics. Four-year olds performed as did adults, discriminating between these two statement types. In light of these data and others, Leslie (2007) hypothesized that that generics give voice to cognitively primitive generalizations, while quantified statements give voice
to more cognitively complex ones. That is, she hypothesized
that quantified statements are more cognitively demanding to
process than generics. Thus, Hollander, Gelman, and Star’s
three-year olds were falling back on the less taxing generic
interpretation instead of attempting to process the more demanding explicit quantification.
Leslie further speculates that, under some circumstances,
adults may be susceptible to similar errors. We found this
to be true in the case of universally quantified characteristic
predications. When faced with these statements, adults have a
tendency to judge the statement to be true if the corresponding
generic statement is true. This, we conjecture, is because, like
the three-year olds, adults are incorrectly relying on the less
taxing generic interpretation. That is, instead of evaluating
the universally quantified statement, they are evaluating the
corresponding generic.

399

Appendix
Table 2: Sentence stimuli in generic form, separated by predicate-type.
Characteristic
Ducks lay eggs
Pigs suckle their young
Lions have manes
Peacocks have beautiful tails
Cardinals are red
Horses give live birth
Moose have antlers
Bees gather honey
Elephants have tusks

Majority
Cars have radios
Barns are red
Shoes have laces
Books have chapters
Jackets have zippers
Shirts have collars
Clocks are round
Radios have dials
Trumpets are loud

400

Striking
Mosquitoes carry malaria
Ticks carry Lyme disease
Sharks attack swimmers
Tigers claw people
Rottweilers maul children
Pit bulls attack people
Lions eat people
Birds carry avian flue
Cigarettes cause cancer

