UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do "Image Enhancement" Functions Really Enhance X-Ray Image Interpretation?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77k1s5xx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Michel, Stefan
Koller, Saskia M.
Ruh, Markus
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do "Image Enhancement" Functions Really Enhance X-Ray Image Interpretation?
Stefan Michel (s.michel@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland, and
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Dept. Bülthoff, Spemannstraße 38, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Saskia M. Koller (s.koller@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland

Markus Ruh (m.ruh@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland

Adrian Schwaninger (a.schwaninger@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland, and
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Dept. Bülthoff, Spemannstraße 38, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
State-of-the art x-ray screening systems offer a variety of socalled “image enhancement” functions (IEFs). Examples are
color inversion, edge-enhancement, organic only, metal only
etc. IEFs are often promoted because they would bring out
detail that is obscured or highlight certain features, such as for
example organic content. In this study, we investigated the
usefulness of IEFs for cabin baggage screening (CBS) and
hold baggage screening (HBS) in airport security. The results
showed that the standard image provided the best detection
performance. Some IEFs impaired detection performance
substantially, which was also dependent on threat type (guns,
knives, improvised explosive devices, other threat items).
Together with previous work (Klock, 2005), these results
highlight the importance of systematically studying the
usefulness of IEFs in order to optimize human-computer
interaction in x-ray screening.
Keywords: Aviation security; image enhancement filters;
computer based training; image display technology; object
recognition.

Introduction
In recent years, the importance of baggage x-ray screening
at airports has increased dramatically. The image quality of
older x-ray screening equipment was sometimes in need of
improvement. For example an early version of a coloring
algorithm as enhancement function did not serve the
purpose of increasing detection performance of threat
objects, actually it impaired it. This was due to the occlusion
of object parts by the opaque coloring algorithm
(Schwaninger, 2005a; Schwaninger, 2005b). But there has
been much technological progress in the last years,
especially regarding x-ray screening machines, which
nowadays provide high image quality and various image
enhancement functions (IEFs). The main objective of such
functions is to process an image so that the result is more
suitable than the original image for a specific application as
for example x-ray screening at airports (Gonzalez & Woods,
2002). In x-ray images, the image enhancements might
increase the visibility of objects within the bag and remove

1301

background noise. State-of-the-art x-ray machines provide
many IEFs. The aim of this study is to investigate whether
IEFs actually help human operators (screeners) to better
detect threat items in x-ray images of passenger bags.
Interestingly, reports regarding an evaluation of IEFs have
not been publicly available except two recent publications
(Klock, 2005; Schwaninger, 2005b). Klock (2005)
examined whether IEFs increase screeners’ threat detection
performance when visually inspecting carry-on bags using a
Rapiscan emulator. She found that high penetration, organic
stripping and inorganic stripping functions resulted in
decreased probability of detection (see below for more
information on different IEFs). Crystal clear, black and
white, and low penetration resulted in the best performance,
while it should be noted that the original color image was
not included in the analysis. Klock (2005) also found that
these effects are dependent on threat type, i.e. whether guns,
knives, improvised explosive devices (IEDs) or other
prohibited items had to be detected. Schwaninger (2005b)
reported a study on the effects of IEFs for the detection of
IEDs in hold baggage. He found that the original image
resulted in the best performance, whereas the organic
stripping, organic only and luminance negative functions
substantially impaired detection of IEDs. The purpose of
this study is to extend previous research in order to evaluate
the value of different IEFs. In addition, a comparison
between IEFs used in cabin baggage screening (CBS) and
hold baggage screening (HBS) was of interest.
The nine IEFs examined in this study can be applied to
the x-ray images online when working at an aviation
security checkpoint. Each pixel in the image format used in
these x-ray machines has a material and a luminance value.
To show the images on a screen, the pixel values are color
coded using red for organic, blue for metallic and green for
mixed organic/metallic material. The luminance value
defines the luminance of the pixel. Table 1 gives an
overview and description of all IEFs used in Experiment 1.

Table 1: Image Enhancement Filters
Grayscale (GR)

The Grayscale filter removes the
material information from the image
and shows only the luminance
value.

Luminance High
(LH)

In this filter, the luminance of the
image is increased by applying a
gamma correction (Pratt, 2001) to
the luminance value. This allows
the screeners to see details in dark
areas of x-ray images, but as a
consequence the visibility of details
in light areas of the images is
reduced.

Luminance Low
(LL)

Luminance
Negative (LN)

Metal Only (MO)

Metal Stripping
(MS)

As the opposite of the Luminance
High filter, the luminance of the
image is decreased. Details in light
areas of the image become more
visible, dark areas lose the details.

Organic Only
(OO)

The Organic Only filter shows the
organic parts of the image in color,
while the metallic pixels are set to
gray. The mixed organic/metallic
pixels are assigned to the metallic or
organic parts depending on the
proportion of metallic and organic
material. The difference to the
Metallic Stripping filter is that less
of the image remains visible and
that
the
remaining
mixed
organic/metallic pixels are still
green.

Original (OR)

Original (OR) refers to the unaltered
images as produced by the x-ray
screening machine without applying
any image enhancement filter.

Organic Stripping
(OS)

As the opposite to the Organic Only
filter, the metallic parts of the image
remain colored and the organic parts
are shown in light gray with low
contrast. The resulting image is
similar to the Metal Only image,
except that in this filter the mixed
organic/metallic pixels are still
green.

Super
Enhancement
(SE)

The Super Enhancement filter
adaptively adjusts the contrast of the
image. Similar to a Local Histogram
Equalization (Gonzalez & Woods,
2002) or an Adaptive Contrast
Enhancement (Stark, 2000), the
luminance of each pixel is adjusted
to the luminance of its surrounding
pixels. In the resulting image, each
area has a medium average
luminance.

In the Luminance Negative filter,
the luminance of the image is
inverted. The material value and
therefore the hue of each pixel
remains the same.
Here, only the metallic parts of the
image are shown in color. The
organic parts are transformed to
light gray with low contrast. The
organic parts of the mixed
organic/metallic pixels are removed
as well, giving them a blue color
similar to the all-metallic parts. The
motivation for this filter is to allow
the screeners to concentrate on the
metallic objects perhaps leading to
less search time for such objects.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was conducted to evaluate IEFs available in
conventional cabin baggage screening (CBS).

The Metal Stripping filter removes
the metal from the image. Metallic
parts are transformed to light gray
and from the mixed organic/metallic
pixels the metallic part is removed.
As some mixed organic-metallic
parts originate from metallic objects
laying upon organic objects, this
removal of metal sometimes shows
the complete organic object without
potentially distracting metallic
parts.

Participants
A total of 443 airport security screeners of the CBS at a
European airport participated in this study. All had on-thejob experience of at least 6 months. A between-subjects
design was used to compare the effect of the IEFs on
detection performance with each other. To this end,
participants were randomly assigned to one of nine
experimental groups, one group for each of the nine IEFs
specified in Table 1. The control group was used for testing
detection performance when images were displayed using

1302

the Original (OR) image type. The assignment of
participants to groups was conducted so that the distribution
of gender, age, and days on job were equal across groups.
The ten groups showed an equal average of detection
performance A’, which was calculated using data of a
separate test conducted prior to this study. The experimental
groups varied in size between 37 (Luminance Negative
filter) and 66 screeners (Grayscale filter); the control group
consisted of 39 screeners. The difference in the group sizes
is due to missing values (i.e. incomplete tests) for several
screeners who originally were assigned to the study.

Detection Performance (A')

security reasons, A’ scores are not shown in the figures. To
estimate effect sizes we employ effect size analysis and
interpret the results based on Cohen (1988).

Method and Procedure
The X-Ray Competency Assessment Test (X-Ray CAT)
was used in Experiment 1. This computer-based test
contains 256 x-ray images of real passenger carry-on bags.
Half of these images contain one prohibited item. The
prohibited items have been selected by police experts to be
representative for the variety of different threat types. The
test contains 32 x-ray images of passenger bags with guns,
32 images with knives, 32 images with improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), and 32 images with other
prohibited items. For further details on the X-Ray CAT, see
Koller and Schwaninger (2006). In order to create the
stimuli for Experiment 1, the nine IEFs explained in Table 1
above were applied to the x-ray images. The participants’
task is to visually inspect the images and to judge whether
they are OK (contain no prohibited item) or NOT OK
(contain a prohibited item). In this study, images
disappeared after 10 seconds. The experiment consisted of
two blocks. In block 1, each of the 9 experimental groups
was tested with only one IEF and the control group was
tested with the Original image (OR). The purpose of block 2
was to confirm that the participant groups are equivalent
regarding their x-ray image interpretation competency. In
block 2, all participants were tested again using the same
bags as in block 1 but images were displayed in the OR
format (see Table 1).

Results and Discussion
Detection performance was measured using A’, a measure
derived from hit and false alarm rates (Pollack & Norman,
1964; see Hofer & Schwaninger, 2004 for x-ray image
interpretation competency). The hit rate refers to the
proportion of all images containing a prohibited item that
have been judged as NOT OK. The false alarm rate refers to
the proportion of NOT OK judgments for harmless bags. A’
scores were calculated for each block separately. Figure 1
shows means and standard errors of A’ scores of block 1
broken up by IEF and pooled across threat categories,
including the results of the control group (OR). The results
in Figure 1 suggest that the OR image type results in the
best performance, while some IEFs result in substantial
impairment of detection performance. Note that due to

GR

LH

LL

LN

MO

MS

OO

OR

OS

SE

Enhancement

Figure 1: Detection performance Experiment 1, block 1,
pooled across threat categories.
IEFs were tested between participant groups: GR =
Grayscale, LH = Luminance High, LL = Luminance Low,
LN = Luminance Negative, MO = Metal Only, MS = Metal
Stripping, OO = Organic Only, OS = Organic Stripping, SE
= Super Enhancement, OR = Original (control group).
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the betweenparticipant factor IEF was carried out on individual A’
scores averaged per screener across threat category. There
was a main effect of IEF with a large effect size of η2 = .46,
F(9, 433) = 41.67, p < .001.
Figure 2 shows means and standard errors of A’ scores of
block 1 broken up by IEF and threat category. For all four
threat categories, the OR image type resulted in the best
performance. Again, some IEFs impaired detection
performance substantially. Moreover, the results in Figure 2
suggest that the effects of IEFs on performance vary
between threat categories. These results were confirmed by
a separate ANOVA using individual A’ scores calculated
for each of the four threat categories (guns, knives, IEDs,
other prohibited items). The ANOVA with the betweenparticipant factor IEF and the within-participant factor threat
category gave a large main effect of IEF with an effect size
of η2 = .48, F(9, 433) = 43.66, p < .001. There was also a
large main effect of threat type with an effect size of η2 =
.30, F(3, 1299) = 180.84, p < .001. And there was also a
large interaction between threat category and IEF with η2 =
.32, F(27, 1299) = 22.91, p < .001.
The same A’ scores were subjected to one-way ANOVAs
that were conducted separately for each threat category.
There was a large main effect of IEF for all threat
categories. For guns, there was an effect size of η2 = .64,
F(9, 433) = 86.09, p < .001, for IEDs η2 = .32, F(9, 433) =
22.38, p < .001, for knives η2 = .32, F(9, 433) = 23.10, p <
.001, and for other prohibited items η2 = .43, F(9, 433) =
36.27, p < .001.

1303

In short, the OR image type resulted in the best performance
for all threat categories. Moreover, some IEFs resulted in a
substantial impairment which clearly depended on threat
category. This interaction would be predicted if one takes
into account that color information in x-ray images
represents different materials and that different prohibited
items vary in their material composition. For example, the
Metal Only (MO) filter removes organic material from the
x-ray image (see also Table 1). Since guns and knives
usually consist of metallic material, their pixels in the
filtered x-ray image remain largely unaffected when the MO
filter is used. However, explosive material of IEDs is
organic, thus it is not surprising that the MO filter results in
a large impairment of IED detection (see Figure 2). A
similar explanation applies to the effect of the Organic
Stripping (OS) filter. When this filter is applied, all metallic
parts of the image remain colored and the organic parts are
shown in light gray with low contrast. The resulting image
is similar to the MO image, except that for this filter the
mixed organic/metallic pixels are still green. Since the
Metal Stripping (MS) filter removes metallic information
from the image, this IEF results in a substantial impairment
of the detection of guns and knives, which usually contain
much metal. Because organic explosive material in IEDs
remains visible when the MS filter is used, IED detection is
not affected substantially. The results in Figure 2 also
indicate that the MS filter might be a better option than the
Organic Only (OO) filter. As explained in Table 1, the MS
filter includes information about organic material hidden
behind metallic parts, whereas the OO filter simply removes
these parts from the image. A comparison between the
original image (OR) and the grayscale version gives some
indications on the relevance of color information. The
removal of the color-coded material information by the
Grayscale filter (GR) does impair threat detection, while
this effect is less pronounced for the detection of guns.
Apparently, the luminance information seems to be more
important than the material information. When inserting a
threat object into a bag, the part of the bag with the object
inside normally becomes darker than its surrounding. This is
particularly the case for guns which contain much metallic
material. Note however, that the removal of material
information can conceal objects with the same luminance
but different material than its surrounding. A similar
problem appears when using the Super Enhancement (SE)
filter. For this IEF, the material information remains the
same, but the luminance contrast is slightly reduced which
has a negative influence on detection performance. The
Luminance High (LH) filter allows better threat detection
than the Luminance Low (LL) filter. With the LL filter,
most objects inside the bag have a luminance close to black,
which generally reduces the differentiation of these objects.
When using the Luminance Negative (LN) filter, material
and luminance information remain in the image, but the
luminance is inverted. The impairment of threat detection

Detection Performance (A')

Guns

GR

LH

LL

LN

MO

MS

OO

OR

OS

SE

OO

OR

OS

SE

OO

OR

OS

SE

OO

OR

OS

SE

Enhancement

Detection Performance (A')

IEDs

GR

LH

LL

LN

MO

MS

Enhancement

Detection Performance (A')

Knives

GR

LH

LL

LN

MO

MS

Enhancement

Detection Performance (A')

Other

GR

LH

LL

LN

MO

MS

Enhancement

Figure 2: Detection performance in Experiment 1, block
1, broken up by threat category.
GR = Grayscale, LH = Luminance High, LL = Luminance Low, LN = Luminance Negative, MO = Metal Only,
MS = Metal Stripping, OO = Organic Only, OR = Original,
OS = Organic Stripping, SE = Super Enhancement.

1304

when using this IEF shows that screeners perform better
with a dark object on a light background than if the
luminance is inverted.
The results reported so far refer to block 1. As explained
in the method section above, all participants conducted the
X-Ray CAT again in block 2 using the original image type
(OR). This was conducted to confirm post-hoc that the
different participant groups are equivalent in terms of their
x-ray image interpretation competency. This a prerequisite
for the interpretation of the results reported above involving
ANOVAs with IEF as between-participant factor. Separate
ANOVAs of the data from block 2 confirmed that the 9
experimental groups and the control group were equivalent.
Individual A’ scores were calculated for each screener based
on all trials of block 2. These data were subjected to a oneway ANOVA with participant group as between-participant
factor. All groups were equivalent, since there was no effect
of group, η2 = .02, F(9, 433) = 1.08, p = .38. Individual A’
scores were calculated also for each threat category
separately and this data were then analysed using an
ANOVA with participant group as between-participant
factor and threat category as within-participant factor.
Again, the results show that the participant groups were
equivalent in terms of their x-ray image interpretation
competency, since there was no main effect of participant
group, and no interaction between participant group and
threat category, η2 = .02, F(9, 433) = 1.04, p = .41, and η2 =
.02, F(27, 433) = 0.86, p = .63, respectively.

Participants
Data of 83 aviation security screeners of the HBS of the
same European airport was analyzed.
As in Experiment 1, a between-subjects design was used
to compare the effect of the IEFs. Due to the smaller sample
size only 5 IEFs and the OR image could be tested. The 83
HBS screeners were randomly assigned to one of five
experimental groups (GR, LN, OO, OR, OS, SE filters) or
the control group (OR filter). The assignment of participants
to groups was conducted so that the distribution of gender,
age, and days on job was equal across groups. The six
groups showed an equal average of detection performance
A’, which was calculated using data of a separate test
conducted prior to this study. The number of screeners in
each experimental group were between 10 (GR) and 17
(OO); the control group (OR) consisted of 15 screeners. As
in Experiment 1, the difference in the group sizes is due to
missing values (i.e. incomplete tests) for several screeners.

Method and Procedure
The Bomb Detection Test (BDT) was used in this study.
This computer-based test contains 200 x-ray images of real
hold baggage, whereas 100 images contain an IED. The
IEDs were created by police experts. Participants were
instructed to decide for each x-ray image whether it is OK
(does not contain an IED) or NOT OK (contains an IED).
Images disappeared after 10 seconds. As in Experiment 1,
there were two blocks. In block 1, each of the 5
experimental groups was tested with their respective IEF. In
block 2 all participants were then tested again using the
same images but using the Original (OR) image function.
The control group conducted the test twice using the OR
image type in block 1 and block 2. As in Experiment 1, the
purpose of block 2 was to confirm the comparability of the
groups post hoc.

Experiment 2
In hold baggage screening (HBS) x-ray images feature
slightly different colors. Figure 3 shows examples of the
stimuli used in Experiment 2. As explained in the
introduction, screeners mainly search for IEDs, as other
threat objects like for example knives do not pose a threat to
the aircraft and passengers when placed in hold baggage.
HBS screeners are often also more experienced screeners as
it was the case in this participant sample. The main aims of
Experiment 2 were to examine whether similar results are
found in HBS regarding the effect of IEFs despite the
operational and training differences between HBS and CBS.

GR

LN

OO

OR

OS

SE

Figure 3: IEFs for HBS as used in Experiment 2. From
top left to bottom right: GR, LN, OO, OR, OS, SE (see
Table 1).

Results and Discussion
Analyses were similar to Experiment 1 but there was only
one threat category, i.e. IEDs. Figure 4 shows means and
standard errors of A’ scores broken up by image
enhancement function. As mentioned above, A’ scores are
not shown in the figure for security reasons. Effect sizes are
calculated using effect size analysis and they are interpreted
based on Cohen (1988). A one-way ANOVA with IEF as
between-participant factor revealed a large main effect of
IEF with an effect size of η2 = .26, F(5, 77) = 5.29, p < .001.
As in Experiment 1, the original image (OR) resulted in the
best performance. Consistent with the results found in
Experiment 1, we found in Experiment 2 that the Organic
Stripping (OS) and Luminance Negative (LN) functions
resulted in a substantial impairment of detection
performance for IEDs.
All participants conducted the test again in block 2 using
the original image type (OR). The aim was to confirm post-

1305

hoc that the different participant groups are equivalent in
terms of their x-ray image interpretation competency. To
this end, individual A’ scores from block 2 were subjected
to a one-way ANOVA with participant group as betweenparticipant factor. There was no main effect of group, η2 =
.05, F(5, 77) = 0.75, p = .59, confirming that the six groups
are equivalent regarding their x-ray image interpretation
competency.
Detection Performance (A')

useful for detecting certain threat objects under certain
conditions. Moreover, we are currently looking at CBT data
where screeners have the possibility to choose a filter and to
switch between filters. This allows investigating whether
perhaps a certain combination and sequence of IEFs is
useful for certain threat types and images. In addition, we
are trying to clarify, whether IEFs actually do not improve
detection of prohibited items or if however, when used
according to individual preferences and to specific features
of the image, they can improve the ability to locate targets.
Finally, we also have implemented IEFs in a CBT system
(X-Ray Tutor) to investigate potentially supporting effects
that only can become manifest through training and
familiarization.

Acknowledgments
GR

LN

OO

OR

OS

This research was financially supported by the European
Commission Leonardo da Vinci Programme (VIA Project,
DE/06/C/F/TH-80403). We thank four reviewers for
valuable comments. Many thanks to Zurich State Police,
Airport Division, for their help in creating the stimuli and
the good collaboration for conducting parts of the study.

SE

Enhancement

Figure 4: Detection performance Experiment 2, block 1.
GR = Grayscale, LN = Luminance Negative, OO =
Organic Only, OR = Original, OS = Organic Stripping, SE =
Super Enhancement.

References

General Discussion
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of image
enhancement functions (IEFs) on x-ray detection
performance of airport security screeners. Experiment 1 was
conducted with cabin baggage and Experiment 2 with hold
baggage. In both experiments the original image (OR)
resulted in the best performance. One interpretation could be
that for this manufacturer the default image is indeed the
best image. However, since the OR image is the default
image on the tested x-ray machine and since screeners
received more training with OR images, further research is
needed to clarify whether the benefit of the OR image type
is due to expertise and training or whether it truly reflects
better image quality. In both experiments, it was also found
that some IEFs resulted in substantial impairments of
detection performance. This general result is consistent with
previous reports (Klock, 2005; Schwaninger, 2005b). The
IEF effects are dependent on threat category; most likely
due to differences in material properties of the different
threat categories. For example, guns contain more metal
than IEDs. Removing metallic content (MS function)
therefore results in a larger impairment of detection
performance for guns than for IEDs.
The main conclusions of this study are that user testing is
crucial before implementing such filters into a system.
Moreover, training when and how to use each of the filters
is crucial to make effective use of them. We are conducting
a set of additional experiments to further investigate the
value of IEFs. For example, it could be that although on
average certain IEFs impair detection, they could still be

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioural sciences. New York: Erlbaum, Hillsdale.
Gonzalez, R.C., & Woods, R.E. (2002). Digital Image
Processing (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Hofer, F., & Schwaninger, A. (2004). Reliable and valid
measures of threat detection performance in X-ray
screening. IEEE ICCST Proceedings, 303-308.
Klock, B.A. (2005). Test and evaluation report for X-ray
detection of threats using different X-ray functions. IEEE
ICCST Proceedings, 182-184.
Koller, S., & Schwaninger, A. (2006). Assessing X-ray
image interpretation competency of airport security
screeners. Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Research in Air Transportation, ICRAT
2006, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, June 24-28,
2006, 399-402.
Pollack, I. & Norman, D.A. (1964). A non-parametric
analysis of recognition experiments. Psychonomic
Science, 1, 125-126.
Pratt, W. K. (2001). Digital Image Processing: PIKS Inside,
3rd Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY.
Schwaninger,
A.
(2005a).
Objekterkennung
und
Signaldetektion: Anwendungen in der Praxis. In B.
Kersten & M. Groner (Hrsg.), Praxisfelder der
Wahrnehmungspsychologie. Bern: Huber.
Schwaninger, A. (2005b). X-ray Imagery: enhancing the
value of the pixels. Aviation Security International, Oct
2005, 16-21.
Stark, J.A. (2000). Adaptive image contrast enhancement
using generalizations of histogram equalization. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, 9, 5, 889 - 896.

1306

