UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Visual and Phonological Distinctiveness on Syllogistic Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3q68646q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Quayle, Jeremy D.
Ball, Linden J.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Visual and Phonological Distinctiveness
on Syllogistic Reasoning
Jeremy D. Quayle (j.quayle@shu.ac.uk)

Brain, Behaviour & Cognition Research Group,
Psychology Division, Sheffield Hallam University,
Sheffield, UK

Linden J. Ball (l.ball@lancaster.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, UK
beekeepers and carpenters could be replaced by any nouns or,
alternatively, adjectives describing the properties or
characteristics of certain classes of entity.
As the two terms in each of the premises can be presented
in two possible orders, the terms for a syllogism can be
presented in four different arrangements (or ‘figures’): A-B,
B-C and B-A, C-B (called ‘asymmetrical’ figures), and A-B,
C-B and B-A, B-C (called ‘symmetrical’ figures). The term
‘mood’ is used to refer to the different combinations of
quantifiers contained within the premises and conclusion.
Four different quantifiers are used in standard syllogisms.
These are commonly referred to by letters of the alphabet: A
= all, E = no, I = some, and O = some….are not. The
syllogism in the above example, therefore, can be said have
the A-B, B-C figure, and the IEO mood.
Since four different quantifiers can be used and there are
four different figures, it is possible to produce 64 different
premise pairs. However, only 27 of these actually yield a
logically valid conclusion (called ‘determinate’ syllogisms).
Whilst people have little difficulty with a few of these
determinate syllogisms, many syllogisms are very difficult,
and often lead to logically invalid responding from
participants. Explaining the systematic patterns of logical and
non-logical responding that emerge has been a challenge for
theorists in this area.

Abstract
Mental models theorists (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991)
suggest that syllogism terms are represented in working
memory as ‘abstract tokens’. However, the role that working
memory sub-systems and prior knowledge play in the
representation and processing of such terms is poorly specified.
Two experiments are reported in which the representational
distinctiveness of syllogism terms was manipulated. In
Experiment 1 participants were required to evaluate the logical
validity of conclusions for syllogisms whose premises
contained visualisable terms (e.g., spotty or hairy), character
terms (e.g., friendly or stupid), or nonsense terms (e.g., drenful
or furplish). A logic x content interaction was observed, such
that the effect of logic was greatest with syllogisms whose
premises were visualisable and smallest with syllogisms whose
premises contained nonsense terms. In Experiment 2
participants were required to evaluate conclusions for
syllogisms containing either phonologically similar terms (e.g.,
fuds, fods and fids) or dissimilar terms (e.g., harks, paps and
fids). Again, a logic x content interaction was observed such
that a strong effect of logic arose with the dissimilar content,
but not with the similar content. Set within a mental models
framework, hypotheses are proposed to explain the importance
of phonological and visuo-spatial distinctiveness in syllogistic
reasoning.
Keywords: Syllogistic
distinctiveness.

reasoning;

working

memory;

Introduction

The Mental Models Theory of Syllogistic Reasoning

The traditional, categorical syllogism is a deductive reasoning
problem comprising two premises and a conclusion. For
example:

The mental models theory of syllogistic reasoning (e.g.,
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991) provides an account of the
patterns of responding that emerge from different forms of
syllogism. Its account of deductive reasoning competence and
biases has received considerable support in the reasoning
literature (e.g., see Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993, for a
review). The theory states that individuals begin reasoning
with syllogisms by constructing an initial mental model of the
two premises. The three terms are represented in the model by
‘abstract tokens’. An initial mental model for the example
syllogism (above) is shown as follows, using mental models
notation:

Some artists are beekeepers
No beekeepers are carpenters
Therefore, Some artists are not carpenters
Within the premises there are three terms: (1) the ‘A term’
is in the first premise (‘artists’ in this example), (2) the ‘C
term’ is in the second premise (i.e., ‘carpenters’), (3) and the
‘B term’ is in both premises (i.e., ‘beekeepers’ ). A logically
valid conclusion is one that describes the relationship
between the A term and C term (referred to as ‘end terms’) in
a way that is necessarily true, given that the premises are true.
It is valid as a function of the form or structure of the
syllogism, and not because of the content–the words artists,

a [b]
a [b]
[c]
[c]

569

In this notation, arbitrary numbers of letter-tokens are used
to represent members of the categories referred to by the three
terms. Tokens on the same row share category membership.
Hence, this model shows two members of the A term
category that are also members of the B term category, and
two members of the C term category that are not members of
the B term category. The brackets around the tokens signify
exhaustive representation (i.e., there is no necessity to add
further tokens to the model representing these categories).
Notice that the A term is not represented exhaustively,
suggesting that members of the A term category could exist
on different rows of the model. From this initial model
individuals generate a conclusion that describes the
categorical relationship between the two end-terms. The
model above supports the conclusions ‘Some A are not C’,
‘No A are C’, ‘No C are A’ and ‘Some C are not A’. The
truth of a putative conclusion is then tested against fleshed out
versions of the initial mental model (if it is necessary/possible
to flesh out the initial model):
a [b]
a [b]
a
[c]
[c]

construct alternative models…should correlate with spatial
ability” (Johnson-Laird, 1985, p.190) and that mental images
may be a sub-class of mental models (Johnson-Laird, 1983).
The suggestion that the generation and evaluation of
conclusions involves ‘first in first out’ scanning of mental
models (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991) also implies that
models are constructed and manipulated in a visuo-spatial
working memory sub-system.
Several studies have investigated the role of working
memory sub-systems in deduction (e.g., Duyck,
Vandierendonck, & De Vooght, 2003 ; Gilhooly, Logie,
Wetherick, & Wynn, 1993; Gilhooly, Logie, & Wynn, 2002;
Klauer, Stegmaier, & Meiser, 1997; Quayle & Ball, 2000;
Toms, Morris, & Ward, 1993; Vandierendonck & De Vooght,
1997). These studies have, however, yielded somewhat
inconsistent results (see Gilhooly, 2005, for a review). For
example, Gilhooly et al.’s (1993) investigation of syllogistic
reasoning revealed central executive involvement, limited
phonological loop involvement, and no visuo-spatial
involvement. In contrast, Quayle and Ball’s (2000) study
indicated more visuo-spatial than phonological involvement.

a [b]
a [b]
a
[c]
a
[c]

Content and Representation in Working Memory
Many well-known studies of syllogistic reasoning have used
neologisms or nonsense words as the premise terms, in an
attempt to avoid the potential confounds associated with
terms about which participants might have prior knowledge
(e.g., Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984; Johnson-Laird &
Steedman, 1978). The use of neologisms produce what is
sometimes termed ‘abstract’ content. This leads us to consider
how such terms might be represented within working
memory sub-systems.
Nonsense terms have a sound when they are read, so their
representation may have a phonological component.
However, they are not obviously visualisable, and they have
no associated concept within long-term memory. One
possible problem with such words as terms, therefore, is that
they are not particularly distinct from one another—they are
all nonsense words, with nothing but their sound
(phonological distinctiveness) and written appearance
(graphemic distinctiveness) making them different. Indeed,
the terms are so abstract that the boundaries between the
categories denoted by the terms may be somewhat imprecise,
making such syllogisms difficult to represent and process
within working memory. Consequently, the construction,
manipulation and scanning of mental models in order to
generate and test the validity of putative conclusions may be
more difficult than with syllogisms containing real words as
terms.
‘Real’ terms within syllogisms may be any nouns or
adjectives that denote category membership. They may be
classes of people, animals or objects (e.g., ‘artists’, ‘cats’ and
‘vehicles’), or words that describe these classes (e.g., ‘brave’,
‘tall’ or ‘red’). To varying degrees, these words are
phonologically distinct from one another, and are directly or
indirectly associated with visualisable concepts—a
characteristic that may facilitate the reasoning process, since

An extra token representing the A term has been added to
the model on the left to show a situation where some As are
Cs. This model falsifies the conclusions ‘No A are C’ and
‘No C are A’. In the model on the right a further A term token
as been added to show a possible situation where all Cs are
As, thus falsifying the conclusion ‘Some C are not A’. If the
conclusion cannot be falsified by a fleshed out mental model
(e.g., ‘Some A are not C’), then it is necessarily true, and is
therefore, generated, otherwise it is rejected and a new
putative conclusion is generated and tested. A similar process
takes place when conclusions are presented for evaluation; if
the conclusion cannot be falsified it is accepted, otherwise it
is rejected.
Mental models that require fleshing out (i.e., for ‘multiplemodel’ syllogisms) place greater loads on limited working
memory than those which do not require fleshing out (i.e., for
‘one-model’ syllogisms). Reasoning ability is, therefore,
constrained by working memory capacity, such that
participants more frequently generate valid conclusions to
one-model syllogisms than to multiple-model syllogisms
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). The mental models theory
also provides an account of the difficulty associated with
certain figures, and how figure affects the forms of
conclusion that are generated (see Stupple & Ball, in press).

Working Memory and Syllogistic Reasoning
Whilst Johnson-Laird and colleagues evoke the notion of
limited working memory capacity to explain aspects of
syllogistic reasoning performance, they do not subscribe to
any particular conceptualisation of working memory. Which
working memory sub-systems are involved is not stated,
although Johnson-Laird has suggested that “…the ability to

570

they more readily lend themselves to mental representation
than nonsense terms. For example, adjectives such as ‘tall’,
‘spotty’, ‘green’ and ‘thin’ can have a phonological
representation and a visual representation. It could be argued
that these characteristics make the terms more distinct from
one another than nonsense terms. Such visual distinctiveness
would make the representational boundaries between the
three categories clearer. Consequently, it would be easier to
construct, manipulate and scan a mental model of a syllogism
containing such terms than would be the case with a
syllogism containing nonsense terms. Syllogisms with visual
content would, therefore, result in superior reasoning
performance in comparison to syllogisms with nonsense
content. For example, in a conclusion evaluation task, where
participants are required to evaluate the validity of presented
valid and invalid conclusions, syllogisms with visual content
would be predicted to yield a greater effect of logic than
syllogisms with nonsense content.

Materials
Four forms of multiple-model syllogism were presented.
These were in the asymmetrical A-B, B-C and B-A, C-B
figures, and in the IEO and EIO moods. Each form of
syllogism was presented with its logically valid conclusion
and with an ‘indeterminately invalid’ conclusion (i.e., one
that is consistent with the premises, but not necessitated by
them). Hence, conclusions were presented in both the C-A
and A-C forms.
The premises of the syllogisms amounted to descriptions of
fictitious monsters. By using this type of content it was
possible to have visual, nonsense and character syllogisms
that were comparable in their essential form. To be able to do
this, the A terms were the names of monsters (e.g., grobbles,
flurbs and broggs), and the B and C terms were adjectives.
The ‘visual’ syllogisms contained B and C terms that referred
to visual and spatial concepts (e.g., tall, spotty and red). The
‘nonsense’ syllogisms contained B and C terms that were
nonsense words designed to sound like adjectives (e.g.,
wurtly, drenful and geltric). The ‘character' syllogisms
contained B and C terms that referred to traits that the
monsters might possess (e.g., brave, polite and dangerous).
The four forms of syllogism were each presented with the
three types of content, making 12 problems in total.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we set out to test the prediction that
syllogisms with visual content will yield a greater effect of
logic than syllogisms with abstract/nonsense content. An
experiment in which reasoning performance with these two
types of content is compared would, however, be confounded.
Visual terms may not only lend themselves more readily to
visual representation than nonsense terms, but they are also
associated with concepts already existing with long-term
memory, whilst nonsense terms are not. The involvement of
pre-existing concepts may work, for example, to ease the
representational loads placed on limited working memory
capacity. Hence, if a difference in performance was found
between visual and nonsense syllogisms, then this may not be
because of a visual/non-visual distinction, but because the
visual terms are pre-existing concepts and nonsense terms are
not.
To arbitrate between these two possibilities, participants
may also be presented with syllogisms containing abstract
adjectives that are non-visual, pre-existing concepts, such as
words describing personality characteristics or dispositional
traits (e.g., friendly, brave or eccentric). We would argue that
these character terms, not being directly associated with
visual information, are less distinct from one another than
visual terms, and thus will yield a smaller effect of logic than
visual terms. Character adjectives do, however, have preexisting representations in long-term memory, which could
mean that they will yield a greater effect of logic than the
nonsense adjectives.

Design
A repeated-measures design was used, with all participants
receiving the 12 syllogisms. These were preceded by three
practice, one-model syllogisms. The 12 experimental
problems were presented in a random order, which was
rotated so that each problem appeared once in each serial
position, creating 12 versions of the test booklet. There were
two independent variables: (1) logic (two levels: valid vs.
invalid), and (2) content (three levels: nonsense vs. visual vs.
character). Participants were required either to accept or reject
presented conclusions (the dependent variable).

Procedure
Participants were presented with the syllogisms in printed test
booklets. The following instructions were presented on the
second page:
“This is an experiment to test people's reasoning ability.
You will be given 15 problems. On each page, you will be
shown two statements describing monsters (called broggs,
grobbles, flurbs and zutters). Some of the characteristics in
the statements you will recognise (e.g., tall, spotty, clever),
and some you will not (e.g., lurthy, drenful, geltric) as they
are unique to these monsters. You are asked if certain
conclusions (given below the statements) may be logically
deduced from the two statements. You should answer this
question on the assumption that the two statements are, in
fact, true. If, and only if, you judge that the conclusion
necessarily follows from the statements, you should tick the
‘true’ box, otherwise the ‘false’ box. Please take your time
and be sure that you have the right answer before moving on
to the next problem. You must not make notes or draw
diagrams to help you in this task”.

Method
Participants
An opportunity sample comprising 33 female and 27 male
participants was tested. The mean age of participants was
38.6 years (sd = 17.1). None of the participants had taken
formal instruction in logic and all were tested individually.

571

representation; (2) whether they are associated with preexisting concepts in long-term memory–that potentially ease
loads on working memory; and (3) their capacity to have a
visuo-spatial representation. The nonsense terms can be
represented in phonological working memory, but only in an
abstract fashion in visuo-spatial working memory. These
terms do not evoke pre-existing concepts within long-term
memory. Hence, nonsense terms produce the smallest effect
of logic. The character terms share the phonological and
visuo-spatial characteristics of the nonsense terms. However,
they are associated with pre-existing concepts, causing them
to yield a greater effect of logic than the nonsense terms.
Representation of the visual terms can involve phonological
and visuo-spatial working memory sub-systems, as well as
the evocation of concepts within long-term memory. Hence,
they produce the largest effect of logic.
Alternatively, these findings might be explained purely in
terms of varying degrees of distinctiveness. That is, it is not
that terms vary in the extent to which they can be visualized
or relate to pre-existing concepts, but that they vary simply in
their distinctiveness. The visual terms are the most distinctive,
since they correspond to fairly unambiguous visual and
spatial concepts that pre-exist in long-term memory. The
character terms are the next most distinctive—whilst they are
abstract terms, they will be indirectly associated with concrete
concepts. For example, the word ‘brave’ might be associated
with soldiers, medieval knights or specific daring acts.
Nonsense terms, however, are the most abstract, having no
obvious visual representation and no obvious prior
associations. The distinctiveness of terms may affect the ease
with which premises can be represented within a mental
model, irrespective of their visuo-spatial or phonological
qualities, and thus more distinctive terms yield greater effects
of logic than less distinctive terms.

Results
The percentages of conclusions accepted as a function of
logic and content are presented in Table 1. A Wilcoxon
signed-ranks test showed that overall, significantly more valid
conclusions were accepted than invalid ones (z = 3.71, p <
.001, one-tailed). The effect of logic was also significant for
each type of content: visual (z = 4.15, p < .001, one-tailed);
character (z = 3.24, p < .001, one-tailed); and nonsense (z =
1.84, p < .05, one-tailed).
Table 1.
Percentages of conclusions accepted as a function of logic
and content in Experiment 1.
Content
Valid
Invalid
Difference

Visual
83
53

Character
81
61

Nonsense
75
62

Overall

30

20

13

21

80
59

In order to test for the interaction between logic and
content, scores for the invalid problems were subtracted from
scores for the valid problems across participants to give an
index of the size of the effect of logic for the visual, character
and nonsense syllogisms. A Wilcoxon signed-ranks test was
used to see if the size of the effect of logic differed
significantly between visual and nonsense syllogisms. This
showed a significant interaction between logic and content,
such that the size of the effect of logic was greater with the
visual syllogisms than with the nonsense syllogisms (z = 3.71,
p < .05). A Friedman's Chi-square test was then used to test
for a logic × content interaction, when the three types of
content are considered together. Whilst the character
syllogisms yielded a smaller effect of logic than the visual
syllogisms but a greater effect of logic than the nonsense
syllogisms (see Table 1), this interaction fell short of
significance (χ2 (df = 2), p = .077).

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we set out to test the idea that differences in
the size of the logic effect between the different types of
content in Experiment 1 can be explained in terms of
distinctiveness alone, rather than visualisability or the easing
of working memory demands associated with pre-existing
concepts. The visual, character and abstract terms in
Experiment 1 were phonologically distinctive (i.e., for each
content type, the adjectives in a syllogism were not
phonologically similar to each other). The content varied in
terms of visual distinctiveness, and distinctiveness in the
evocation of pre-existing concepts. In Experiment 2,
therefore, we aimed to test for the effect of purely
phonological distinctiveness on syllogistic reasoning,
controlling for visual distinctiveness and the possible effect of
pre-existing concepts by using only nonsense terms. If the
results of Experiment 1 are attributable to distinctiveness,
then we would expect syllogisms with phonologically
dissimilar content to yield a greater logic effect than those
with phonologically similar content.

Discussion
Our main prediction was supported, in that the visual
problems resulted in a greater effect of logic than the
nonsense problems, thus supporting the idea that the
visualisability of syllogism terms affects the ability to
construct, manipulate and scan mental models of the
premises. These results would also seem to provide further
support for the involvement of visuo-spatial working memory
in syllogistic reasoning (cf. Quayle & Ball, 2000).
When all three forms of content were entered into the
analysis, the interaction between logic and content was only
marginally significant, although, as can be seen from Table 1,
the trend is such that the effect of logic is greater with the
visual problems than with the character problems, and greater
with the character problems than with the nonsense problems.
A possible explanation for this observed pattern in the effect
of logic considers how the terms vary in relation to three
characteristics: (1) their capacity to have a phonological

572

Method

Table 2.
Percentages of conclusions accepted as a function of logic
and content in Experiment 2.
Content

Participants
An opportunity sample of 41 female and 23 male participants
was tested. The mean age of participants was 28.27 years (sd
= 11.63). None of the participants had taken formal
instruction in logic and all were tested individually.

Materials
The logical forms of the problems used in Experiment 2 were
identical to those used in Experiment 1. The terms were all
one-syllable, nonsense adjectives. In this way, word-length
was controlled, and it was simple to produce terms that were
either phonologically similar or phonologically dissimilar.
The phonologically similar terms within a syllogism were
words with the same beginning and end consonants, but
different middle vowels (e.g., juks, jeks and jiks). The
phonologically dissimilar terms were words with different
beginning and end consonants, and also different middle
vowel sounds (e.g., zaps, toks, and yugs) The four forms of
syllogism were each presented with the two types of content,
making eight problems in total.

Similar

Dissimilar

Overall

Valid
Invalid

72
68

78
61

75
65

Difference

4

17

11

To test for the interaction between logic and content,
scores for the invalid problems were subtracted from scores
for the valid problems across participants to give an index of
the size of the effect of logic for the similar and dissimilar
syllogisms. A Wilcoxon signed-ranks test was used to see if
the size of the effect of logic differed significantly between
similar and dissimilar syllogisms. This showed a significant
interaction between logic and content, such that the size of the
effect of logic was greater with the dissimilar syllogisms than
with the nonsense syllogisms (z = 2.09, p < .05).

Discussion
The finding that phonologically dissimilar content yielded a
greater effect of logic than phonologically similar content
supports a representational distinctiveness explanation for the
results of Experiment 1. It would seem that phonologically
distinctive terms as well as visuo-spatially distinctive terms
are easier to represent within working memory than nondistinctive terms. In the context of the mental models theory
of syllogistic reasoning, it may be that distinctiveness affects
the ease with which models are constructed, manipulated and
scanned, which in turn affects reasoning performance. These
results also provide further support for the involvement of
phonological working memory in syllogistic reasoning (cf.
Gilhooly et al., 1993). Below we offer a detailed explanation
for our findings that integrates the theoretical ideas
considered so far.

Design
A repeated-measures design was used, with all participants
receiving the eight syllogisms. These were preceded by two
practice, one-model syllogisms. The eight experimental
problems were presented in a random order, which was
rotated so that each problem appeared once in each serial
position (creating eight versions of the test booklet). There
were two independent variables: (1) logic (two levels: valid
vs. invalid), and (2) content (two levels: similar vs.
dissimilar). Again, conclusion acceptance or rejection was the
dependent variable.

Procedure
Participants were presented with the syllogisms in printed test
booklets. The instructions were the same as those used in
Experiment 1, except for the sentence explaining how the
syllogisms were descriptions of monsters, which read: “You
will be given 10 problems. On each page, you will be shown
two statements describing monsters”.

General Discussion
In accounting for syllogistic reasoning performance and
biases, the mental models theory invokes assumptions
concerning working memory, such as its limited processing
capacity and its role in the serial storage and scanning of
information. The theory also states that the terms within
syllogisms are represented in working memory by ‘abstract’
tokens. However, the representational sub-system(s) where
these abstract tokens are stored are not explicitly specified,
although Johnson-Laird has indicated that model construction
may take place in some spatial medium. By manipulating the
phonological and visuo-spatial nature of terms within
syllogisms we have provided further support for the
involvement of both phonological and visuo-spatial working
memory in syllogistic inference. Our results, therefore, accord
with previous findings as reported by Gilhooly et al. (1993)
and Quayle and Ball (2000).

Results
The percentages of conclusions accepted as a function of
logic and content are presented in Table 2. A Wilcoxon
signed-ranks test showed that overall, significantly more valid
conclusions were accepted than invalid ones (z = 2.03, p <
.05, one-tailed). The effect of logic was significant for the
dissimilar problems (z = 2.91, p < .01, one-tailed). There was,
however, no significant effect of logic with similar problems
(z = 0.81, p = .21, one-tailed).

573

Based on our results we would suggest that the notion of
'abstract tokens' referred to in the mental models theory is
unsatisfactory, since the tokens representing term categories
within mental models are only purely abstract when no
distinctive phonological, visual or spatial information is
available to the individual. The data from our experiments
support the idea that without this information individuals
struggle to construct, manipulate and scan mental models.
This is because the representational boundaries between
categories are vague, so that the processing of tokens
becomes a muddled endeavor. Such an explanation can
account for the generally poor performance of participants in
Experiment 2 when evaluating conclusions to syllogisms
containing phonologically, visually and spatially indistinct
terms. With these problems participants were mostly unable
to establish the validity of presented conclusions.
When phonological, visual or spatial information is
available, tokens representing terms become less abstract.
This information makes the representational boundaries
between categories more distinct, such that the processing of
tokens is a less muddled activity. This can explain how the
greatest effect of logic was observed with syllogisms
containing terms referring to visual or spatial concepts in
Experiment 1. With these materials phonological, visual
and/or spatial information was available to bolster
representations of categories within working memory (see
Capon, Handley, & Dennis, 2003, for related evidence from
an individual differences study). In this instance, the
difference between valid and invalid conclusion acceptances
was 30%—over seven times greater than for the
phonologically similar terms in Experiment 2.
The second largest effect of logic was observed with
syllogisms containing terms referring to character concepts.
With these materials phonological information was available,
but no obvious visual or spatial information. However, since
the terms are linked with concepts stored within long-term
memory, they are indirectly associated with visuo-spatial
information, which may serve to bolster the mental
representation of categories. The third largest effect of logic
was observed with syllogisms containing phonologically
dissimilar nonsense terms. If we assume that graphemic
variations between words are of little help in constructing
mental models, then with these materials the only information
that obviously distinguishes between term categories is their
phonological code.
Finally, the results of these experiments suggest that further
insights into the role of working memory in syllogistic
reasoning may be gained through exploration of the relative
importance of phonological and visuo-spatial distinctiveness
in syllogistic reasoning performance, as well as the relative
importance of visual and spatial distinctiveness. A similar
method to that used here may prove fruitful, although we
acknowledge that devising suitable materials that facilitate
these comparisons may prove to be quite a challenge.

Acknowledgments
We thank Richard Nakielny, Karen Matthews and Rachael
Tidswell for their assistance in the collection of data.

References
Capon, A., Handley, S.J., & Dennis, I. (2003). Working
memory and reasoning: An individual differences
perspective. Thinking and Reasoning, 9, 203—244.
Duyck, W., Vandierendonck, A., & De Vooght, G. (2003).
Conditional reasoning with a spatial content requires visuospatial working memory. Thinking and Reasoning, 9, 267—
287.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993).
Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction. Hove,
U.K.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd.
Gilhooly, K. J. (2005). Working memory and strategies in
reasoning. In M. J. Roberts and E. J. Newton (Eds.),
Methods of thought: Individual differences in reasoning
strategies. Hove: Psychology Press.
Gilhooly, K. J., Logie, R. H., Wetherick, N. E., & Wynn, V.
(1993). Working memory and strategies in syllogisticreasoning tasks. Memory & Cognition, 21, 115—124.
Gilhooly, K. J., Logie, R. H., & Wynn, V. (2002). Syllogistic
reasoning tasks and working memory: Evidence from
sequential presentation of premises, Current Psychological
Research, 21, 111-120.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1985). Deductive reasoning ability. In
R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Human abilities: An information
processing approach. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Bara, B. G. (1984). Syllogistic
inference. Cognition, 16, 1—62.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J (1991). Deduction.
Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Steedman, M. (1978). The
psychology of syllogisms. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 64—
99.
Klauer, K. C., Stegmaier, R., & Meiser, T. (1997). Working
memory involvement in propositional and spatial reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 9—47.
Quayle, J. D., & Ball, L. J. (2000). Working memory,
metacognitive uncertainty and belief bias in syllogistic
reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
53A, 1202—1223.
Stupple, E. J. N., & Ball, L. J. (in press). Figural effects in a
syllogistic evaluation paradigm: An inspection-time
analysis. Experimental Psychology.
Toms, M., Morris, N., & Foley, P. (1994). Characteristics of
visual interference with visuospatial working memory.
British Journal of Psychology, 85, 131—144.
Vandierendonck, A., & De Vooght, G. (1997). Working
memory constraints on linear reasoning with spatial and
temporal contents. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50A, 803—520.

574

