UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Inter-associate Connectivity on the Persistence of False Recall

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1pc902f9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Goh, Winston D.
Khoo, Bee Hong

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Inter-associate Connectivity on the Persistence of False Recall
Winston D. Goh (psygohw@nus.edu.sg)
Bee Hong Khoo (seventh@singnet.com.sg)
Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore
11 Law Link, Singapore 117570, Singapore
Abstract
False recall of critical non-presented words in lists of
associated words was examined with immediate testing and
after a one-week delay. The word lists were manipulated
such that the density of the inter-associate connectivity – the
number pre-existing connections between the associates of the
critical non-presented target – was either high or low. When
recall occurred immediately after the study phase, high
connectivity lists facilitated veridical recall compared to low
connectivity lists, but connectivity had no effect on false
recall. When recall was delayed for a week, low connectivity
lists induced more false recall than high connectivity lists, but
connectivity had no effect on veridical recall. The overall
pattern of results is broadly consistent with the predictions of
the Processing Implicit and Explicit Representations model of
associative memory and not with the predictions of Fuzzy
Trace Theory.
Keywords: False recall; connectivity effects; retention
interval; associative memory; long-term memory.

Introduction
More than a decade ago, Roediger and McDermott (1995)
adapted Deese’s (1959) original list learning procedure and
introduced what is now known as the Deese-RoedigerMcDermott (DRM) paradigm for producing false memory
in the laboratory. In this paradigm, participants are
presented a study list of words (e.g. bed, rest, awake, tired,
dream) which are the strongest associates of a critical target
(e.g. sleep) that was not presented. The extent of false
memory is indexed by the probability of remembering the
critical non-presented target in a subsequent free recall or
recognition test.
Research on false memory using this paradigm or variants
of it has been extensive. However, only a handful of studies
have explicitly examined the persistence of false memory
over time (e.g. McDermott, 1996; Thapar & McDermott,
2001; Toglia, Neuschatz, & Goodwin, 1999). The common
finding among these studies is that false memory tends to
persist over time, although the specific trends differ.
McDermott (1996) reported that false recall exceeded
veridical recall after a two-day retention interval. Toglia et
al. (1999) reported that the level of false memory was not
affected by retention intervals that varied between 0, 1, and
3 weeks, athough veridical recall declined over time.
Thapar and McDermott (2001) reported that both veridical
and false memory declined over retention intervals of 0, 2,
and 7 days, but the rate of decline for veridical memory was
more pronounced than that of false memory. Across these
studies, veridical memory declined over time, as expected.

Despite the inconsistent trends for false memory rates, taken
together, the general pattern of results strongly suggests that
the false memory effect using the DRM lists is robust and
persistent over time.
One theoretical account that has been used to explain the
persistence of false memory is Fuzzy Trace Theory (Reyna
& Brainerd, 1995; Brainerd & Reyna, 2002). In this theory,
two types of independent memory representations are
extracted in parallel – verbatim and gist traces. Verbatim
traces are representations of the surface features of an
experienced word and the concurrent contextual cues. Gist
traces include overall patterns of the experience during list
presentation, including meaning, relations, and patterns that
are retrieved during the encoding of the words. When DRM
lists are presented, an item-specific verbatim trace is created
for each word. At the same time, the overall theme of each
list is extracted and contributes to the gist traces. Memory
for a word is dependent on both verbatim and gist traces.
However, when one of the other trace is stronger, retrieval
can be predominantly based on the stronger trace. Veridical
memory is based on both types of representations, but false
memory of critical non-presented targets can only arise from
the gist traces since there is no verbatim trace. Gist and
verbatim traces are assumed to have different rates of
forgetting, with gist traces being more stable while verbatim
traces fade more quickly. The loss of verbatim traces over
time leads to the decline of veridical memory. As false
memory of critical targets is dependent on the more stable
gist traces, false memory is predicted to persist.
An alternative account of false memory has been
suggested that is based primarily on the idea of activations
among associative networks, but which also relies on having
two types of memory representations. The Processing
Implicit and Explicit Representation (PIER 2) model of
associative memory (Nelson, McKinney, Gee, & Janczura,
1998; Nelson, Schreiber, & McEvoy, 1992) assumes that
the encoding of a word generates two independent memory
representations – explicit and implicit representations. An
explicit representation contains contextual information of
the presentation of the word and its relation to other
presented items, and arises through conscious processing.
An implicit representation is created when the word’s
lexical representation and its network of inter-related
associates in long-term working memory are automatically
and unconsciously activated. The spreading activation
metaphor is used to describe the encoding of words by the
implicit processing component. The sum activation of the
encoded word depends on the number and strength of preexisting connections between the word and its associates, as

1031

well as the density of the connections between associates, or
inter-associate connectivity.
In the DRM paradigm,
presentation of associates of a critical non-presented target
will activate each associate’s implicit representation and
some of these implicit representations will include the
critical target. Hence, the non-presented target is repeatedly
activated and becomes more accessible and susceptible to
being falsely remembered.
McEvoy, Nelson, and Komatsu (1999) demonstrated a
novel prediction of false memory arising from the
assumptions of PIER 2. Greater activation converging on a
word leads to greater accessibility of the word. A recalled
word can also act as a retrieval cue for further recall, i.e.,
words that are recalled first will prompt recall of more
associated words. Therefore, high connectivity lists in the
DRM procedure facilitated veridical recall of presented
words because a recalled word can potentially cue many
other presented associates and these have higher activation
levels compared to words from low connectivity lists.
Counter-intuitively, the effect was the opposite for false
recall. Although critical non-presented targets from high
connectivity lists gained higher activation from densely
connected associates, false recall of the critical targets was
shown to decrease with increased inter-associate
connections. This is because the non-presented targets are
less likely to be cued by already recalled words as the range
of alternative associates available for cueing is greater. In
other words, critical non-presented targets are less likely to
be retrieved due to competition from other presented
associates, resulting in lower false recall. Low connectivity
lists, on the other hand, produced less veridical but more
false recall because a recalled word is sparsely connected to
other associates and therefore have potentially fewer
associates to cue, which in turn increased the chances of
falsely recalling a critical non-presented target.
One problem for associative accounts is the persistence of
false memory across time. Implicit activation has been
commonly assumed to be short-lived and decays over time
(e.g. Collins & Loftus, 1975; Anderson, 1983; Hutchison &
Balota, 2005). In McEvoy et al. (1999), the memory tests
were conducted immediately after list presentation. One of
the goals of the present study is to determine if the effects of
inter-associate connectivity will persist across time. It is
possible that connectivity effects may persist within the
PIER 2 framework. The model assumes that target
activation is reinstated when cues are presented. A critical
non-presented target can therefore be reactivated during free
recall by recalled items that are associates of the target.
False recall is thus possible, through reactivation at test even
after the original activation of the critical target by the DRM
lists have decayed. This idea is similar to the associative
activation during retrieval hypothesis proposed by
Hutchison and Balota (2005), who adapted Anderson’s
(1983) argument that associates of recalled items may
overlap sufficiently with associates of the critical target to
induce a sense of familiarity through which the target is
misattributed as a list item. The critical target need only be

activated or perhaps re-activated during test to be falsely
remembered. False memory would have persisted due to
the reactivation and cueing processes during retrieval.
Fuzzy Trace Theory in a strict sense would not be able to
account for connectivity effects because an exact definition
of the gist representation and factors affecting gist strength
has not been specified (Payne, Elie, Blackwell, &
Neuschatz, 1996; Roediger, Watson, McDermott, & Gallo,
2001). Connectivity may not affect the strength of the gist
trace since all lists are created the same way, around a
central theme, which is extracted during encoding. The
theory could assume that densely linked associates would
have greater semantic relatedness than sparsely connected
associates. One could then argue that the overall meaning
of the list would be stronger and easier to detect for high
connectivity than low connectivity lists. However, this
conceptualization would predict that high connectivity
would result in higher false recall because the theory
predicts that false memory correlates positively with gist
strength. Since gist traces are relatively stable across time,
this effect of connectivity should also be evident at a longer
retention interval.
The fuzzy trace framework would therefore predict an
outcome for false recall that is opposite to that predicted by
PIER 2. The present study will also allow an investigation
of the pattern of connectivity effects across time to see if the
results are more consistent with either one of the theoretical
accounts. Specifically, Fuzzy Trace Theory would predict
that both false and veridical recall would be higher for high
connectivity than low connectivity lists, and this pattern
would be true across immediate and delayed recall. On the
other hand, based on McEvoy et al’s (1999) results, PIER 2
would predict that for immediate recall, veridical recall
would be higher for high connectivity than low connectivity
lists, whereas false recall would be higher for low
connectivity than high connectivity lists. This pattern of
connectivity effects may or may not persist at delayed
recall.

Method
Participants
Ninety-six psychology undergraduates from the National
University of Singapore participated for course credit.

Design
A 2 x 2 x 2 mixed design was used, with Connectivity (high,
low) and Recall Type (veridical, false) run within-subjects
and Retention Interval (immediate, delayed [1-week]) run
between-subjects.

Materials

1032

Twenty-four lists, with 12 in each of the high and low
connectivity conditions, were constructed. Eighteen were
adapted from McEvoy et al. (1999) while 6 were selected
from the University of South Florida Free Association
Norms (Nelson, McEvoy, & Schrieber, 1998). Each list

comprised a critical non-presented target and 10 associates.
Care was taken to ensure that associates that appeared in
more than one list were not selected.
The connectivity level of each list was determined by the
mean number of connections per associate of the critical
non-presented target (ConnM). High connectivity lists were
defined as those with a ConnM value greater than 2.00,
while low connectivity lists were defined as those with
ConnM value less than 1.00. An independent t-test showed
that the average connectivity of the lists in the high
condition (M = 3.08, SD = 0.43) was reliable denser than
those in the low condition (M = 0.75, SD = 0.10), t(22) =
18.41, p < .01.
The lists were also equated on other word properties
pertaining to the critical non-presented target and its
associates listed in the norms. These include meaning set
size (Mss), which refers to the number of associates of the
target, the average meaning set size of the target’s associates
(MssA), the concreteness rating of the target (Conc), the
average concreteness rating of the target’s associates
(ConcA), the frequency of the target (Freq); the resonance
or probability that associates produce the target as an
associate (ResP), and the backward associative strength
(BAS), which refers to the probability that the 10 selected
associates produced the critical target as an associate.
Additionally, familiarity ratings (FAM) of all critical nonpresented targets were obtained from 24 undergraduates
who did not take part in the main experiment. They rated
each word on a 7-point scale where 1 = do not know the
meaning of the word at all, 7 = know the meaning of the
word, and points 2-6 represented intermediate levels of
familiarity.
Separate independent t-tests for each property revealed
non-significant differences between the high and low
connectivity lists, all ps > .05. The mean property values
are summarized in Table 1.

a rate of one word per second. Each list was preceded by a
“READY” prompt followed by a fixation cross and ended
with a row of hexes to indicate the end of the list. Within
each list, words were presented from the strongest associate
to the weakest, following the procedure of Roediger and
McDermott (1995). The order of presentation of the 24
study lists was randomized for each participant.
To ensure that participants paid attention to the monitor
display during the 240-word presentation, a secondary task
was interspersed within the presentation of each list. An
arrow (either Å or Æ) sometimes appeared on screen after a
word was removed from the display. At this point,
participants were to respond as quickly as possible by
pressing the corresponding arrow key on the keyboard. In
each list, there were three such arrows. Response latency
for this secondary task was recorded in order to
subsequently screen out participants who may not have been
paying attention to the monitor.
After all 24 lists have been presented in the study phase,
participants in the immediate recall condition proceeded to
the recall phase immediately, while the participants in the
delayed recall condition returned a week later for the recall
phase. During the recall phase, participants were given 10
minutes to write down as many words as they could
remember from the study phase on a recall sheet.

Results

Table 1: Equated Properties of the Word Lists.

The mean reaction time for the secondary arrow task was
583.72 ms (SD = 727.51) across all participants. The
average reaction time of two participants in the delayed
recall condition was more than two SDs above this mean,
and the subsequent analyses did not include these two
participants as their slow response may indicate that they
were not paying attention to the monitor display during the
study phase.
Table 2 summarizes the average recall rates across the
experimental conditions.
A three-way mixed design
analysis of variance revealed significant main effects of
Retention Interval, F(1, 92) = 23.13, MSe = 0.004, p < .001;
Recall Type, F(1, 92) = 16.80, MSe = 0.002, p < .001; and
Connectivity, F(1, 92) = 4.55, MSe = 0.002, p < .05. All
two-way interactions were also significant, all Fs (1, 92) >
12, ps < .01. There was also a reliable three-way
interaction, F(1, 92) = 8.08, MSe = 0.001, p < .01. The
following analyses will focus on the interpretation of the
highest order interaction.

Connectivity
Property
Mss
MssA
Conc
ConcA
Freq
ResP
BAS
FAM

High
M
20.08
15.08
3.88
4.12
23.58
0.30
0.55
6.86

SD
4.17
1.59
2.55
0.57
26.15
0.17
0.68
0.18

Low
M
19.50
15.14
3.59
4.07
55.50
0.32
0.80
6.93

SD
3.09
1.44
2.74
1.41
56.55
0.19
1.58
0.09

Table 2: Recall Rates.

Connectivity

Procedure

High
Low

Participants were tested in small groups in a computer
laboratory. Half were randomly assigned to the immediate
recall condition while the other half were assigned to the
delayed recall condition.
During the study phase, words were presented one at a
time in uppercase letters centered on a computer monitor at
1033

High
Low

Retention Interval
Immediate
Delayed
M
SD
M
SD
Veridical Recall
.099
.061
.021
.022
.047
.032
.016
.015
False Recall
.026
.049
.016
.038
.031
.068
.033
.048

The source of the three-way interaction was the
differential nature of the significant Recall Type x
Connectivity simple interactions at each Retention Interval
level [for immediate recall, F(1, 47) = 32.13, MSe = 0.001,
p < .001; for delayed recall, F(1, 45) = 7.32, MSe = 0.001, p
< .05], as shown in Figures 1 and 2.

Recall Probability

0.12
0.1
High
Connectivity

0.08
0.06

Low
Connectivity

0.04
0.02
0
Veridical

False

Recall Type

Figure 1. High connectivity facilitates veridical recall in the
immediate recall condition.
In the immediate recall condition, simple effects analyses
showed that high connectivity lists facilitated veridical
recall compared to low connectivity lists, F(1, 47) = 44.39,
MSe = 0.00, p < .001; whereas the effect of connectivity was
not reliable for false recall, F < 1.

Recall Probability

0.12
0.1
High
Connectivity

0.08
0.06

Low
Connectivity

0.04
0.02
0
Veridical

False

Recall Type

Figure 2. Low connectivity facilitates false recall in the
delayed recall condition.
In the delayed recall condition, simple effects analyses
showed an opposite pattern of results. The effect of
connectivity was not reliable for veridical recall, F(1, 45) =
2.18, MSe = 0.00, ns; whereas low connectivity lists
facilitated false recall compared to high connectivity lists,
F(1, 45) = 4.12, MSe = 0.00, p < .05.

Discussion
Does the effect of inter-associate connectivity on false recall
persist over time? Is the pattern of connectivity effects
consistent with the predictions of Fuzzy Trace Theory or
PIER 2? These were the questions the present study set out
to investigate.

In the immediate recall condition, the pattern of results
partially replicates the findings of McEvoy et al. (1999).
High connectivity DRM lists facilitated recall of presented
words compared to low connectivity lists. However, we did
not replicate the previous results where low connectivity
lists induced more false recall than high connectivity lists.
Although the trend was in the correct direction, the
difference was not statistically reliable.
The facilitation of false recall by low connectivity lists
emerged only when the recall phase was performed a week
after the study phase, whereas connectivity effects for
veridical recall was not evident. The present results seem to
indicate that connectivity effects may dissipate over time for
veridical recall but become more prominent for false recall.
The general pattern of connectivity effects for false recall
is more consistent with the predictions of PIER 2 than
Fuzzy Trace Theory. In the latter, the prediction was that
high connectivity lists would produce more false recall as a
result of increasing the strength of gist traces. There was no
evidence of this in immediate testing and the effect was the
opposite at delayed testing. The increase in false recall rates
with low connectivity lists is consistent with PIER 2’s claim
that false memory is mediated by reactivation of the implicit
traces at encoding and subsequent cueing of associates,
including the critical non-presented target. When there are
fewer associates to be cued in the low connectivity lists, the
chances of retrieving the critical non-presented target are
higher.
PIER 2 also predicts that connectivity effects should be
evident for veridical recall. High connectivity lists should
facilitate recall for associated words because multiple
activation and cueing from denser connections should result
in greater activation strengths for their implicit
representations. This was clearly the case in immediate
recall, but not in delayed recall. If activation strength
decreases over time, then the diminishing effects of
connectivity for veridical recall after a week is not
unexpected. However, why does diminished activation still
result in reliable connectivity effects for false recall?
We offer the following plausible explanation, although it
remains speculative and will require further research.
Recall that PIER 2 proposes that encoding a word results in
an explicit as well as an implicit representation. Both types
of representations can affect veridical recall. Explicit
representations are made by conscious encoding processes
and should not be affected by the pre-existing connections
to other words in long-term memory, which constitute the
implicit representation of the word. During immediate
recall, when the activation levels of the implicit
representations are high, connectivity effects arising from
the implicit representations should be evident. However,
when activation levels have diminished in delayed recall,
more emphasis may have been placed on a search for
explicit representations for veridical recall.
Since
conscious, explicit encoding processes during the study
phase should not be affected by the underlying connectivity,
the probability of recovering words from high or low
connectivity lists should be the same. Decreased activation
and increased reliance on explicit search may explain the
lack of connectivity effects for delayed veridical recall. On

1034

the other hand, since critical non-presented targets would
not have an explicit representation, the only way to retrieve
them would be via the underlying associative connections,
which may be reactivated upon retrieving other associated
words. Hence, the effects of connectivity would be more
evident for delayed false recall.
We should point out a number of limitations of the
present study. The recall rates are low compared to the
previously cited studies on false recall, which can be as high
as 50% depending on the condition. One possible reason
for this is that the number of words used in our study is
relatively large and the presentation rate of one second per
word is also relatively fast compared to previous studies,
which ranged from two to four seconds per word. The use
of a secondary task during the study phase could also have
inadvertently led to lower levels of encoding.
In summary, the main goal of the present study was to
determine if connectivity effects on false recall persisted
across time. Connectivity effects were evident for veridical
recall at immediate testing, but emerged for false recall only
at delayed testing. The overall pattern of results is broadly
consistent with the predictions of the PIER 2 model of
associative memory and not with the predictions of Fuzzy
Trace Theory.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Research Grant R-581-000048-112 to WDG.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of
memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 22, 261-295.
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2002). Fuzzy-trace theory
and false memory. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 11, 164-169.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading
activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 58, 17-22.
Hutchison, K. A., & Balota, D. A. (2005). Decoupling
semantic and associative information in false memories:

Explorations with semantically ambiguous and
unambiguous critical lures. Journal of Memory and
Language, 52, 1-28.
McDermott, K. B. (1996). The persistence of false
memories in list recall.
Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 212-230.
McEvoy, C. L., Nelson, D. L., & Komatsu, T. (1999).
What is the connection between true and false memories?
The differential roles of iteritem associations in recall and
recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1177-1194.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998).
The University of South Florida word association, rhyme,
and
word
fragment
norms.
http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/.
Nelson, D. L., McKinney, V. M., Gee, N. R., & Janczura,
G. A. (1998). Interpreting the influence of implicitly
activated memories on recall and recognition.
Psychological Review, 105, 299-324.
Nelson, D. L., Schreiber, T. A., & McEvoy, C. L. (1992).
Processing implicit and explicit representations.
Psychological Review, 99, 322-348.
Payne, D. G., Elie, C. J., Blackwell, J. M., & Neuschatz, J.
S. (1996). Memory illusions: Recalling , recognizing,
and recollecting events that never occurred. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 261-285.
Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (1995). Fuzzy-trace theory:
An interim synthesis.
Learning and Individual
Differences, 7, 1-75.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating
false memories: Remembering words not presented in
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Roediger, H. L., Watson, J. M., McDermott, K. B., & Gallo,
D. A. (2001). Factors that determine false recall: A
multiple regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 385-407.
Thapar, A., & McDermott, K. B. (2001). False recall and
false recognition induced by presentation of associated
words: Effects of retention interval and level of
processing. Memory & Cognition, 29, 424-432.
Toglia, M. P., Neuschatz, J. S., & Goodwin, K. A. (1999).
Recall accuracy and illusory memories: When more is
less. Memory, 7, 233-256.

1035

