UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evolutionary Cognitive Science: Constraints and Unification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7132m4c9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
de Carvalho, Fernando O.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evolutionary Cognitive Science: Constraints and Unification
Fernando O. de Carvalho (fernaoorphao@gmail.com)
Laboratory of Psychobiology, Institute of Psychology
University of Brasília, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Asa Norte
Brasília, Brazil
“Grading the evolutionary constraint is deeply problematical
(…)the best we can do is ask loosely how the theory relates to
evolutionary and comparative considerations”
Anderson & Lebiere (2003, 5)

Abstract
The present paper proposes an evolutionary constraint on
theories of cognitive architecture. The framework proposed
dispels some pessimistic assessments concerning the
feasibility of such project and criticizes some current
evolutionary thought in cognitive science. Implications of the
constraint are also discussed.
Keywords: evolutionary psychology; phylogeny; theorychoice.

Introduction
Most theories in Cognitive Science, and specially in the
field of Evolutionary Psychology (Cosmides & Tooby
(1992), Buller (2005)) have exposed the idea that
compromises with the independently motivated framework
of the modern, Neo-Darwinian theory of evolution imply an
acceptance of specific “design features” for the organization
of cognitive architectures. Foremost among these is innate
modularity (Samuels (1998); Buller (2005; chap. 4)). In
order to show the fragility of this line of reasoning it would
be enough to point out that for other researchers, the same
chain of reasoning leads to the exact opposite: massiveaction distributed systems and “constructivist modularity”,
if any (Buller (2005), von der Malsburg (1996)). But the
plot deepens1.
The unifying core of modern evolutionary theory is the
theory of population genetics (Fisher (1930), Beatty (1986),
Sober (1986)) or its extensions to non-genetic or optimality
models in behavioral ecology (e.g., Maynard Smith (1982),
Grafen (1991)). In its own terms, the theory makes no
definite, a priori assertions on which are and which are not
the evolvable phenotypes. The theory deals with forces
impinging on populations, shifting the relative frequencies
of hereditary factors or with predictions that may be true of
the design of physiological, morphological or behavioral
traits of the organisms subject to study, given some set of
specifiable selective pressures and trade-offs. Indeed, the
same framework has been carried to the study of the
dynamics of very different factors from those commonly
1

It should be clear at this point that we are not downplaying any
imaginable way to justify the hypothesis of modular organization,
but only this particular a priori, evolutionary argument.

studied by zoologists and in other fields of biology, often as
brief suggestions (Dawkins (1976)) or within more
articulate and formal theories (Boyd & Richerson (1985)).
Given this state of affairs, how could we overcome the
pessimistic assay of Anderson & Lebiere (2003) presented
in the epigraph to this paper and devise some workable and
conceptually sound “evolutionary criterion” on theories of
cognition? How could we work out some operational
research program to include the vast array of
methodologically and theoretically insulated researchers
working with “evolutionary concerns” on cognition and
behavior? How can we make sense of the huge body of
available data on the cognitive and behavioral capacities of
human and non-human animals? In the next section we will
provide a sketch for a program of research that may help in
the attainment of these goals.

1. The Framework
Our main idea, to be explained in the remaining of the
paper, is that studies on the evolution of cognition should
stick fiercely to the methods and concerns of the field of
phylogenetic analysis, in a complementary approach to that
commonly employed to study adaptation in cognition and
behavior, exemplified by experimental research in
Evolutionary Psychology (Buss & Haselton (2005)) and in
Behavioral Ecology (e.g., Hill & Hurtado (1996)) and as an
implementation of an evolutionary constraint on theories of
cognition.
Although many authors have expressed cogent views on
the importance of a phylogenetic or general “historical”
outlook on these matters (cf. e.g., Byrne (2000), Povinelli
(1993), Foley (1996)) none has, in our view, explored these
tools with the due depth nor have any of these authors
established a link with broader concerns in the Cognitive
Sciences, such as theory choice. Nevertheless, many
researchers (Foley and Byrne included) have stressed the
dependence of Evolutionary Psychology on comparative
and historical considerations in their “reverse engineering”
of the mind, for example, as related to the critical notion of
EEA (Environment of Evolutionary Adaptedness, Tooby &
Cosmides (1990)). Not surprisingly, there are some
dissenting voices arguing that Evolutionary Psychologists

1367

present purposes, those criteria dependent on particular
evolutionary assumptions are clearly the most relevant (cf.
e.g., Kluge (2001))1. From these “data-driven” or apparently
objective initial steps, a number of manipulations of the data
can be made in order to infer biologically significant
relationships among the represented groups, such as the
existence of putative adaptive radiations that lead to the
observed patterns, the existence of phyletic lines of “least
resistance” (where differentiation has been greater) or even
the inference of ancestral (non-observable) states for
particular character in putative ancestors.
In the last two decades, the field of phylogenetic analysis
went through a revolution in the application of differing
statistical methods, and has overcome a number of
misguided assumptions concerning the extent of their role in
understanding evolution. One standard opinion is that the
study of phylogenetic and historical patterns is at a
“different level of analysis” from the study of adaptation (cf.
Tooby & Cosmides (1989)). Modern PCMs do embody
mechanisms for the extraction of information on
microevolutionary patterns affecting particular lineages, for
example, through the decomposition of observed variance in
continuous variables in terms of phylogenetic variance (or
‘phylogenetic signal’, that is, the patterns in data that can be
accounted for in terms of common descent) and “error” in
the test of this null-hypothesis that can be assigned to other
forces, such as natural selection (Cheverud et al. (1985)).
Likelihood ratio tests can also be used to compare models of
phylogenetic evolution with observed data (Baum &
Donoghue (2001)). The development of such models also
dispels the idea that the only approach to the evolution of
adaptive traits in phylogenetic analysis is the equation of
derived and species-specific character-states with adaptation
(Reeve & Sherman (1993)).
A number of functions of comparative data can be
quantitatively derived, such as measures of variance or
covariance or measures of phenetic distance (overall
similarity). Based on measurements such as these, Hansen
& Martins (1996) proposed a model where information on
evolutionary processes can be quantitatively estimated on
the basis of comparisons between “expected data matrices”
derived from specific evolutionary models and the observed
patterns. In figure 1 below, we expect a matrix of expected
values for variances and covariances in comparative data,
given particular phylogenies and assumptions on the
processes leading to the observed patterns (cf. Martins
(1995). The matrix for phylogeny A gives the predicted
values for the variances in each of six species that diverged
once from a common ancestor and experienced equal
evolutionary change thereafter. Phylogeny B assumes less
branching in a first speciation event and further branching
events leading to three clades of closely related pairs of
species, ((A, B), (C, D), (E, F)).

have not paid attention to such issues properly (Daly &
Wilson (1999), Heyes (2000)).
As a flagrant measure of how poor is the general
understanding of the phylogenetic approach to evolutionary
psychology, Buller (2005) in his throughout critique of
some particular strains of thought in the field makes the
following remark at page 96:
“nonhuman primate species differ considerably with respect to
foraging, parental care, and mating system. So we face the
problem of which nonhuman primate to take as our model of
Pleistocene humans (…) Rather, similarity of ecological
conditions is a more important determinant of similarity of
behavioral traits than is degree of relatedness.”

The striking point missed by Buller is that no approach to
matters of phylogeny reconstruction takes any single species
as a “model” for the inference of ancestral states. Even those
researchers that have not explored in great depth the tools of
phylogenetic analysis could not endorse such a simplistic
position (Povinelli (1993), Byrne (2000)). This process of
ancestral state estimation is, to the contrary, a much more
complex intermingling of statistical methods operating on
comparative data and with explicit assumption concerning
the evolutionary processes that could have lead to the
observed comparative patterns (Hansen & Martins (1996),
Schultz et al. (1996)).
The field of phylogenetic analysis is also more inclusive
than that of “comparative considerations” mentioned in the
Anderson & Lebiere (2003) epigraph. It does not bother
only to describe and code for the similarities and differences
among different species, but crucially, with the inference of
evolutionarily significant information from the observed
patterns, based on a definite theory about which processes
played a role in bringing the observed outcomes about. This
includes the postulation of ancestral states, the particular
forces that lead to differentiation or convergence among
related groups or, in a nutshell, it deals with the inference of
evolutionary causes from extant patterns and auxiliary
assumptions (Kemp (1985), Kluge (2001)). As the study of
evolutionary relations from comparative data is a broad and
fascinating field, as old as the discipline of evolutionary
biology, we will concentrate on those aspects which stand
out as more relevant for our purposes.
A number of different phylogenetic comparative methods
(PCMs) work in a very similar way: observable properties
of related species are coded in some form (e.g., in a binary
code of character states of ‘absence’ (0) or ‘presence’ of a
given trait (1), or in terms of multi-state characters
represented by positive integers) and then used to describe
the groups (taxa) under study. The distribution of character
states is used to describe the pattern in terms of optimallysimple hierarchies of characters (cladograms) which
actually split the space of characters under scrutiny in the
set of primitive and derived character states. Of course that
the Devil lies in the details about which optimality criteria is
used in selecting among alternative cladograms. For reasons
of editorial brevity we can only point out that, given our

1368

1
It should also mentioned at this point, and this will be clear in
the following paragraphs, that the algorithms and methods better
suited for those with evolutionary concerns in mind operate upon
continuous rather than discrete data.

Theoretical syntheses of predicted patterns of comparative
data, such as those in figure 1, are used to estimate the
extent to what extent the observed data fit the predictions
embodied in the phylogenies and evolutionary processes
assumed.

Figure 1: Expected Data Matrices (see text)

2. Ranking Theories
The specific proposal made in our paper concerning the
evolutionary constraint and its function in theory-choice in
cognitive science is based on the following remark: both the
problem of theory choice (inference to the best explanation
or “non-demonstrative inference”) and the problem of
finding the correct depiction of evolutionary relations
among observed and ancestral taxa, are what statisticians
call inverse problems (Evans et al. (2006)). So, instead of
walking through a space of competing theories with some
“grading function”, we could assign different theories the
task of providing existing PCMs with characters (“cognitive
states”) and watching how well they fare. That is, the
evolutionary constraint is formalized as a test proposed to
competing theories, and the criterion for grading is provided
by the way they are able to cope with the independently
motivated body of explicit, formal methods of phylogenetic
analysis.
To take an example on how this might work, consider the
(non-trivial) problem of character choice and coding. It is
not the case that every trait seen in the individuals of a
population or species is equally useful for phylogenetic
analysis. Good characters vary more between species than
intraspecifically; show high heritability (h2 ) estimates; are
quantifiable; are independent units and can be compared in
different species, so that preliminary hypotheses of
homology (identity through common descent) can be
framed. At this preliminary stage, it is not difficulty to see
that theories will differ on how well phylogenetic analysis
can be carried along with the characters they are able to
furnish. Chomskyan-like linguistic theory, for example,
would fare very poorly, mainly because it works with
cognitive capacities that show little if any variation in the

species (so that h2 estimates cannot be made; or rather, the
theory is unable to account for existing variation (Bishop
(2003)) and because even analogs of syntactic competence
are hard to come by in comparative data. ACT-R on the
other hand, would fare much better (especially in its
“neurally realistic” variants). Many of the parameters in the
learning equations of ACT-R can be inferred for a number
of motor and perceptual tasks in different species. Features
of the architecture can be related with its neural substratum
(e.g., the loop involved in the selection of production rules
and frontostriatal systems) and experimental measures can
be related to these parameters of the architecture (e.g., the
time to select a production rule can be related to the density
of striatal connections or to mean axon diameter; cf. Roth &
Dicke (2005)). This sort of tight relation between differing
levels of analysis opens the way for phylogenies based on
neurocognitive characters which may furnish information
(predictions) on other characters (in this case, behavioral
measures). This property of “informativeness” is also
necessary for a good phylogeny (Mayr (1969)).
Alternatively, a number of semi-continuous characters
related, for example, to the complexity of declarative
chunks or the mean number of parallel subcortical features,
can be used for the derivation of measures such as phenetic
distances or inter-specific variances, useful in a number of
PCMs for the assessment of microevolutionary causal
processes (Hansen & Martins (1996)).
In synthesis, our proposal grades alternative theories in
terms of their ability to provide adequate data (characters)
for phylogenetic comparative methods (PCMs). The fact
that different data sets differ in their usefulness relative to
these methods and that different theories vary in the kind of
data they can provide (as we purported to show in the
previous discussion) provides the criteria for theory-choice
on the basis of this constraint. There are, to be sure, other
steps involved in the development of phylogenies beyond
character choice and the determination of their usefulness.
These further steps may also be included within the
constraint. The determination of character polarity
(primitive-derived relations among character states) lies
among these. To this end, comparisons with more distant
taxonomic groups (outgroup comparison) or the use of
fossil and developmental data is employed, at least
heuristically. It is again not difficult to see that not all
theories will fare equally well in meeting these conditions.
The important point is, however, that the evolutionary
significance of these theories is being subject to test in term
of their interaction with a body of complex methods
independently justified for their capacity to promote our
understanding of similar evolutionary relations holding
between slightly different characters: physiological
processes, anatomical structures and behaviors (Lauder
(1986)). It is a natural extension to consider their
significance to the study of cognition in order to proceed
beyond
“loose
evolutionary
and
comparative
considerations” as suggested by Anderson & Lebiere
(2003)).

1369

3. Integration
A crucial property of our proposal is its “therapeutic”
qualities relative to current approaches to the evolution of
cognition. Mainstream hypothesis on evolutionary cognitive
science could be aptly seen as almost literary, lacking
explicitness and often getting lost in a huge amount of
disconnected data (e.g., Donald (1991)). The perspective of
phylogenetic analysis allows one to focus on manageable
problems, to make explicit its assumptions on the nature of
the relevant evolutionary processes, to integrate in a single
framework of formal methods a number of distinct data sets
often discussed in loosely ways (fossil data, developmental
mechanisms; e.g. Mithen (1996)) and to answer different
questions (niche specific effects and resulting adaptations,
measurement of phylogenetic signal, etc).
The adoption of the methodology of PCMs for
evolutionary cognitive science also paves the way for
fruitful interactions between comparative studies and
equilibrium-based or dynamic models of evolutionary
process, such as Artificial Life models (Christiansen &
Kirby (2003)) and Game-Theoretic approaches (Nowak &
Komarova (2001)). It is well-known, for example, that
many complex evolutionary games show multiple ESS
(Maynard Smith (1982: 126)). This means that an
understanding of the initial conditions of a population may
be critical for framing empirical hypothesis.
The way the application of PCMs to matters of cognitive
and behavioral evolution relates to other expanding fields of
research, such as Evo-Devo, or to models of cultural
evolution and non-genetic inheritance seems to be more
complex and problematic. Development as a dynamic and
highly interactive process is poorly understood and has not
been properly integrated into evolutionary theory, due to a
number of factors (cf. Maynard Smith (1982), Wilkins
(2001), Turkheimer (1998), (2000)). Questions regarding
development are virtually untouched by studies confined to
estimating genetic contributions to phenotypic variance in
particular traits (Turkheimer (1998)) even tough measures
such as heritability are among the relevant variables for
character choice in phylogenetic analysis (Lieberman
(1999)). It should also be mentioned that within the field of
developmental science (and specially in developmental
social psychology) there is a huge methodological gulf
insulating human and non-human studies (and the data
derived thereof) due to obvious ethical constraints on the
permissible experimental designs applicable to humans
(Turkheimer (2000)). This gulf shrinks to a considerable
degree when we abstract from matters of development and
consider what, from this perspective, we could call “ideal”
cognitive architectures, especially in the context of efforts to
integrate the traditional field of animal learning psychology
with computational theories endemic to cognitive science
(Gallistel (2003), Ristau (1991)).
As it seems to be clear by know, notwithstanding the
comments of the previous paragraph, the relative
dependence of particular psychological traits on culture or

social learning is built in our proposal during character
choice and the weighting of particular characters on the
basis of its heritability estimate. Characters that show up
with low heritability factors when things like shared/nonshared environment are controlled for are less suitable for
phylogenetic analysis. We acknowledge the problems
immanent in behavior genetics, but the fact that the field is
taken as a useful platform for a more significant and
exhaustive developmental science (Wahlsten (2003)) fuels
optimistic prospects of better understanding.

4. Final Discussion
In this work it was presented a preliminary discussion of
an ongoing project of devising an explicit, formal and
conceptually sound evolutionary constraint on theories of
cognition. A tentative conclusion that seems to stem from
these proposals seems to be that low-level,
neurobiologically constrained theories and architectures
would be selectively preferred under this constraint. Such
theories can provide conceptual tools to assess fine-grained
inter-individual variation, may furnish continuous or semicontinuous characters (to which most PCMs show greater
sensitivity) and may be used in comparative research. This
result offers another reason to embrace approaches based on
the burgeoning field of computational neuroscience (Quartz
& Sejnowski (1997), Churchland & Sejnowski (1992)).
To the extent that this result can be justified, some other
interesting, broader effects can be seen in the theoretical
landscape of the cognitive sciences. First, it provides
another motivation for the increasing effort in developing
biologically realistic connectionist models (Churchland &
Sejnowski (1992), Crick (1989)). Second, it can converge
with some strains of thought in Cognitive Science which
acknowledge the role of higher level symbolic accounts of
cognitive processes but assign full causal power in
generating actual behavior to sub-symbolic processes
(Smolensky, Legendre & Miyata (1992)). That is, a single
descriptive framework could be applied to proximate
questions (causation of behavior) and to ultimate questions
(evolutionary characterization).

5. References

1370

Anderson, J. & Lebiere, C. (2003) “The Newell Test for a
Theory of Cognition” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26,
587-637.
Baum, D. & Donoghue, J. (2001) “A Likelihood Framework
for the Study of Adaptation” In: S. Orzack & E. Sober
(eds.) Adaptationism and Optimality. Cambridge
University Press.
Beatty, J. (1986) “The Synthesis and the Synthetic Theory” In:
W. Bechtel (ed.) Integrating Scientific Disciplines: Case
Studies from the Life Sciences. Dordrecht.
Bishop, D. (2003) “Genes and Language” In: T. Krude (ed.)
DNA: Changing Science and Society. Cambridge
University Press.

Boyd, R. & Richerson, P. (1985) Culture and the Evolutionary
Process. University of Chicago Press.
Buller, D. (2005) Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology
and the Quest for Human Nature. MIT Press.
Buss, D. & Haselton, M. (2005) “The Evolution of Jealousy”
Trends in Cognitive Science 9, 506-507.
Byrne, R. (2000) “The Evolution of Primate Cognition”
Cognitive Science 24 (4), 543-570.
Cheverud, J. et al. (1985) “The Quantitative Assessment of
Phylogenetic Constraint in Comparative Analyses: Sexual
Dimorphism in Body Weight among Primates” Evolution
39, 1335-1351.
Christiansen, M. & Kirby, S. (2003) “Language Evolution:
Consensus and Controversies” Trends in Cognitive
Science 7, 300-307.
Churchland, P. & Sejnowski, T. (1992) The Computational
Brain. MIT Press.
Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. (1992) “The Psychological
Foundations of Culture” In: J. Barkow , L. Cosmides & J.
Tooby (eds.) The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology
and the Generation of Culture. Oxford University Press.
Crick, F. (1989) “The Recent Excitement about Neural
Networks” Nature 337, 129-132.
Daly, M. & Wilson, M. (1999) “Human Evolutionary
Psychology and Animal Behaviour” Animal Behaviour 57,
509-519.
Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selfish Gene. Oxford University Press.
Donald, M. (1991) Origins of the Modern Mind. Harvard
University Press.
Evans, S., Ringe, D. & Warnow, T. (2006) “Inference of
Divergence Times as Statistical Inverse Problems” In: P.
Forster & C. Renfrew (eds.) Phylogenetic Methods and the
Prehistory of Languages. MacDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research.
Fisher, R. (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection.
Oxford University Press.
Foley, R. (1996) “An Evolutionary and Chronological
Framework for Human Social Behaviour” In: Runciman,
W., J. Maynard Smith & R. Dunbar (ed.) Evolution of
Social Behaviour Patterns in Primates and Man. London,
British Academy.
Gallistel, R. (2003) “Conditioning from an InformationProcessing Perspective” Behavioral Processes 61(3), 1-13.
Grafen, A. (1991) “Modelling in Behavioural Ecology” In: J.
Krebs & N. Davies (eds.) Behavioural Ecology. Blackwell
Scientific.
Hansen, T. & Martins, E. (1996) “Translating Between
Microevolutionary Processes and Macroevolutionary
Patterns” Evolution 50, 1404-1417.
Heyes, C. (2000) “Evolutionary Psychology in the Round” In:
C. Heyes & L. Huber (eds.) The Evolution of Cognition.
MIT Press.
Hill, K. & Hurtado, A. (1996) Ache Life-History: The Ecology
and Demography of a Foraging People. Aldine Press.
Kemp, T. (1985) “Models of Diversity and Phylogenetic
Reconstruction”. In: R. Dawkins & M. Ridley (eds.)
Oxford Surveys in Evolutionary Biology, Vol. 2. Oxford
University Press.
Kluge, A. (2001) “Parsimony with and without Scientific
Justification” Cladistics 17,199-210.

Lauder, G. (1986) “Homology, Analogy and the Evolution of
Behavior” In: M. Nitecki & J. Kitchell (eds.) Evolution of
Animal Behavior: Paleontological and Field Approaches.
Oxford University Press.
Lieberman, D. (1999) “Homology and Hominid Phylogeny:
Problems and Potential Solutions” Evolutionary
Anthropology 7, 142-151.
von der Malsburg, C. (1996) “The Binding Problem of Neural
Networks” In: R. Llinás & P. Churchland (eds.) The MindBrain Continuum. MIT Press.
Maynard Smith, J. (1982) Evolution and the Theory of Games.
Cambridge University Press
Mayr, E. (1969) Principles of Systematic Zoology. McGrawHill.
Mithen, S. (1996) The Prehistory of Mind.Cambridge
University Press.
Nowak, M. & Komarova, N. (2001) “Towards an Evolutionary
Theory of Language” Trends in Cognitive Science, 5 (7),
288-295.
Povinelli, D. (1993) “Reconstructing the Evolution of Mind”
American Psychologist 48, 493-509.
Quartz, S. & Sejnowski, T. (1997) “The Neural Basis of
Cognitive Development: A Constructivist Manifesto”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (4), 537-596.
Reeve, H. & Sherman, P. (1993) “Adaptation and the Goals of
Evolutionary Research” Quarterly Review of Biology 68
(1), 1-32.
Ristau, C. (ed.) (1991) Cognitive Ethology. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum
Roth, G. & Dicke, U. (2005) “Evolution of the Brain and
Intelligence” Trends in Cognitive Science 9 (5), 250-257.
Samuels, R. (1998) “Evolutionary Psychology and the Massive
Modularity Hypothesis” British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 49, 575-602.
Schultz, T., Cocroft, R., Churchill, G. (1996) “The
Reconstruction of Ancestral Character States” Evolution
50 (2), 504-511.
Smolensky,P., Legendre, G. & Miyata, Y. (1992) Principles for
an Integrated Connectionist/Symbolic Theory of higher
Cognition. (Tech. Rep. CU-CS-600-92). Department of
Computer Science, University of Colorado at Boulder.
Tooby, J. & Cosmides, L. (1989) “Adaptation versus
Phylogeny: the Role of Animal Psychology in the Study of
Human Behavior” International Journal of Comparative
Psychology 2, 105-118.
Tooby, J. & Cosmides, L. (1990) “The Past Explains the
Present: Emotional Adaptations and the Structure of
Ancestral Environments” Ethology and Sociobiology 11,
375-424.
Turkheimer, E. (1998) “Heritability and Biological
Explanation” Psychological Review 105, 182-191.
Turkheimer, E. (2000) “Three Laws of behavior Genetics and
What They Mean” Current Directions in Psychological
Science 9, 160-164.
Wahlsten, D. (2003) “Genetics and the Development of Brain
and Behavior” In: J. Valsiner & K. Connoly (eds.)
Handbook of Developmental Psychology. London: Sage
Wilkins, A. (2001) The Evolution of Developmental Pathways.
Sinauer Associates

1371

