UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
External Regulating Agents' Adaptive Content and Process Scaffolding: The Key to Fostering
Mental Model Development during Hypermedia Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rq6g2hf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Azevedo, Roger
Moos, Daniel C.
Greene, Jeffrey A.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

External Regulating Agents’ Adaptive Content and Process Scaffolding:
The Key to Fostering Mental Model Development during Hypermedia Learning
Roger Azevedo
Department of Psychology, Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
3693 Norriswood Avenue, Memphis, TN, 38152, USA
{razevedo@memphis.edu}
Daniel C. Moos and Jeffrey A. Greene
University of Maryland, Department of Human Development
3304 Benjamin Building, College Park, MD, 20742, USA

provide adaptive scaffolding to students who are learning
about well-structured tasks with traditional CBLEs such
as intelligent tutoring systems (ITS; e.g., Anderson et al.,
2005), providing adaptive scaffolding for students
learning about conceptually-challenging domains remains
a challenge for non-linear hypermedia instruction (e.g.,
Azevedo, 2005; Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006). We
argue that harnessing the full power of hypermedia
learning environments will require empirical research
aimed at understanding what kinds of scaffolds are
effective in facilitating individualized instruction and
when these scaffolds are best deployed (see Azevedo,
2005).
In this study, we examined the effectiveness of
different human scaffolding conditions in both facilitating
adolescents’ learning about the circulatory system with a
hypermedia environment, and facilitating adolescents’
ability to regulate their learning with hypermedia. We
also investigated why and how different types of
scaffolding were differentially effective. We created three
scaffolding conditions based on Winne and colleagues’
(Winne, 2001) information-processing model of selfregulated learning (SRL), research on scaffolding (e.g.,
Azevedo & Hadwin, 2005; Chi et al.;, 1996, 2001;
Graesser et al., 1995, 2005; Pea, 2004; Wood et al., 1976)
and research on learning with hypermedia (Azevedo et al.,
2005, in press). The empirical results from our human
tutoring studies can be used to inform the design of
adaptive hypermedia learning environments.
In this paper we focused on three research questions—
1) Does a confirmatory factor analysis of our four
measures of circulatory system knowledge meet common
fit criteria? 2) What is the influence of the pretest,
developmental level, and condition on participant posttest
scores, as examined using structural equation modeling?
3) How are different scaffolding conditions and
developmental levels related to students’ use of selfregulatory processes during learning with hypermedia?

Abstract
We examined the effectiveness of different scaffolding
interventions in facilitating adolescents’ shift to more
sophisticated mental models as indicated by both performance
and process data. Ninety-three (N = 93) adolescents were
randomly assigned to one of three scaffolding conditions
(adaptive content and process scaffolding [ACPS], adaptive
process scaffolding [APS], and no scaffolding [NS]) and were
trained to use a hypermedia environment to learn about the
circulatory system. Pretest, posttest, and verbal protocol data
were collected. The performance data revealed that the
students in the ACPS condition gained significantly more
conceptual knowledge, as examined using a structural
equation model, than did those in the other two comparison
conditions. The verbal protocol data revealed that students in
the ACPS condition used a significantly higher proportion of
planning processes than students in the NS condition, and a
significantly higher proportion of monitoring processes than
students in the APS and NS condition. By contrast, students
in the NS condition used a significantly higher proportion of
handling task difficulty processes than students in the ACPS
and APS condition.

Keywords: self-regulated learning; mental models;
science; metacognition; learning strategies; hypermedia
Objectives of the Study
Computer-based learning environments (CBLEs) are
effective to the extent that they can adapt to the needs of
individual learners by systematically and dynamically
providing scaffolding of key learning processes
(Anderson et al., 1995; Lajoie & Azevedo, 2006). These
environments’ ability to provide adaptive, individualized
instruction is derived from an understanding of how
learner characteristics, system features, and the mediating
learning processes interact during learning in particular
contexts. A critical aspect of providing individualized
instruction is scaffolding, or instructional support in the
form of guides, strategies, and tools which are used
during learning to support a level of understanding that
would be impossible to attain if students learned on their
own (Chi et al., 1996; 2001; Collins et al., 1989; Graesser,
McNamara, & VanLehn, 2005). Despite our ability to

Method
Participants. Ninety-three (N=93) adolescent students
(mean age = 13.7 years, 55% girls) from both a middle

71

4. At time prompts, prompt student to Monitor Progress
towards Goal (e.g., “You have 20 minutes left, do you
feel like you’ve met your learning goal?”)
5. Then prompt student to activate prior knowledge (e.g.,
“Can you tell me back in your own words what you just
learned”).
6. Repeat from Step 1.

and high-school located in the mid-Atlantic received
community service credit for their participation in this
study. The students had limited exposure to the
circulatory system in their science classes.
Human Tutors. All three tutors had completed a
bachelor’s degree; when we collected data, two of the
tutors were enrolled in a doctoral program, and one was
enrolled in a Master’s program, all in Human
Development. Their mean age was 33 (range = 29–39);
there were 1 male and 2 female tutors. All tutors had
completed a 6-hour tutor training, including viewing
videotapes, analyzing coded transcriptions of tutoring
sessions, and reading our previously published studies.
Two hours of that training were specific to the condition
(ACPS or APS) assigned to the tutor. Each tutor had also
been responsible for collecting data from 50-150
participants in our previous studies (e.g., Azevedo et al.,
2005). Therefore, they were familiar with the
experimental protocol, including all sections of the
hypermedia
environment,
collecting
think-aloud
protocols, administering the pre- and posttest measures,
and all other experimental materials and procedures.

The script for the ACPS condition was as follows:
1. Student selects a paragraph to read, but before student
reads
1a. Prompt student to activate prior knowledge (e.g., “Tell
me what you already know about [topic of
paragraph]”). Regardless of students’ responses, prompt
with “Let’s read on and see what the paragraph says.”
2. If the student stops reading after Step 1a and enacts an
effective SRL strategy, take no action. If the student
does not enact any SRL strategy, prompt the student to
use a specific effective strategy, for example, “I want
you to summarize what you just read”
3. If the strategy in Step 2 was enacted correctly, give
positive feedback. If the strategy was enacted
incorrectly,
4a. Give negative feedback (optional), or
4b. Prompt the student to use a fix-up strategy, such as rereading or
4c. Tutor gives a correct explanation, and tells student to
correct his/her summary, drawing, etc.
5. Ask student to continue reading, following Steps 1-4.
6. At time prompts, prompt student to Monitor Progress
towards Goal (e.g., “You have 20 minutes left, do you
feel like you understand [topic]?”)
7. Prompt student to select next passage to be read,
ensuring that at least 5 minutes are spent in each of the
three main articles. Give feedback about the relevance
of the passage the student selected.
7a. If the passage is relevant, tell student so (TIIAI)
7b. If the passage is irrelevant, tell student so (TICE), and
suggest a more relevant passage (TIIAI)
8. Repeat from Step 1.

Tutoring Scripts. We developed standardized scripts for
both tutoring conditions. For the APS condition, the script
was designed to be relatively domain-independent,
whereas the script for the ACPS condition necessarily
included content relevant to the human circulatory
system.
The script for the APS condition was as follows:
1. Student selects a paragraph to read, and reads it out
loud.
2. If the student stops reading after Step 1 and enacts an
effective SRL strategy, take no action. If the student
does not enact any SRL strategy, prompt the student
with, “Can you think of anything that you could do to
help you learn this?”
2a. If the student then enacts an effective SRL strategy,
take no action. If the student does not enact any SRL
strategy, prompt the student with, either “Do you think
that strategy will help you learn?” ([TIMUS] if the
student had previously used a strategy) or “Do you
think [name of strategy; e.g., summarizing] would help
you learn this?”
3. If the student does not stop reading after Step 1,
interrupt and prompt the student with, “You have read a
lot, can you think of anything that you could do to help
you learn this?”
3a. If the student then enacts an effective SRL strategy,
take no action. If the student does not enact any SRL
strategy, prompt the student with, either “Do you think
that strategy will help you learn?” (scaffolding
monitoring of strategy if the student had previously
used a strategy) or “Do you think [name of strategy;
e.g., coordinating informational sources] would help
you learn this?”.

Paper and Pencil Measures. Paper-and-pencil materials
consisted of a consent form, a participant questionnaire, a
pretest, and a posttest. All of the paper-and-pencil
materials have been used by Azevedo and colleagues (see
Azevedo et al., 2005). The measures consisted of a
consent form, a participant questionnaire, a pretest, and a
posttest. There were four parts to the pretest: (1) a sheet
on which students were asked to match 13 words with
their corresponding definitions related to the circulatory
system (matching task), (2) a color picture of the heart on
which students were asked to label 14 components
(labeling task), (3) another sheet which contained the
instruction, “Please write down everything you can about
the circulatory system. Be sure to include all the parts
and their purpose, explain how they work both
individually and together, and also explain how they

72

who provided two types of adaptive scaffolding during
learning: 1) content scaffolding—i.e., scaffolding
students’ learning by assessing their emerging
understanding of the circulatory system to ensure that
they met their overall learning goal, 2) and process
scaffolding—i.e., scaffolding students’ learning by
assisting them in enacting various self-regulatory process,
such as helping them plan their learning by activating
their prior knowledge, monitoring their emerging
understanding, using different strategies to learn about the
circulatory system, handling task difficulties and
demands, and assessing their emerging understanding.
Similar to published human tutoring studies that
considered naturalistic tutoring (e.g., Chi et al., 1996,
2001; Graesser et al., 2001), both this type of adaptive
scaffolding and the one described next were used
dynamically and adaptively by the tutor during learning to
ensure that the learner reached the overall learning goal.
In the Adaptive Process Scaffolding (APS) condition,
the students were given the same overall learning goal
and also had access to a tutor. This condition was
identical to the ACPS condition, except that the tutor
provided only process scaffolding (see ACPS above). The
students were never provided content scaffolding in this
condition.
Following the instructions, a practice task was
administered to familiarize all participants with the thinkaloud procedure while they used the hypermedia
environment to learn about the circulatory system. In all
three conditions, an experimenter sat next to the
participant and reminded the participant to keep
verbalizing when they were silent for more then three
seconds (e.g., “say what you are thinking”). All
participants were reminded of the global learning goal
(“Make sure you learn about the different parts and their
purpose, how they work both individually and together,
and how they support the human body”) as part of their
instructions for learning about the circulatory system.
Participants had access to the instructions (which included
the learning goal) during the entire learning session.
Participants in the ACPS and APS conditions had access
to the tutor. All participants were given 40 minutes to use
the hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory
system. Participants were allowed to takes notes and draw
during the learning session, although not all chose to do
so. All participants were given the posttest after using the
hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory
system. They were given 20 minutes to complete the
posttest. All participants independently completed the
posttest without their notes or any other instructional
materials by writing their answers on the sheets provided
by one of the experimenters.
Coding and Scoring of Product and Process Data . The
coding of the participants’ answers to the matching,
labeling, and blood flow tasks, mental model essays, the
segmentation of the participants’ verbalizations while
they engaged in the learning tasks, along with the coding

contribute to the healthy functioning of the body” (mental
model essay), and (4) a flow diagram in which the
students were asked to identify the correct order of blood
flow (flow task). The posttest was identical to the pretest.
These measures were posited to be valid indicators of the
latent factor circulatory system conceptual knowledge,
both at pretest and at posttest. Our first research question,
below, tested a measurement model to assess whether this
model fit our data.
Hypermedia Learning Environment. Participants learned
about the circulatory system by using a commerciallybased hypermedia environment which included several
important sections including the circulatory system,
blood, and heart, and contained multiple informational
sources—text, static diagrams, photographs, and a
digitized animation depicting the functioning of the
circulatory system. Together these three articles
comprised 16,900 words, 18 sections, 107 hyperlinks, and
35 illustrations.
Experimental Procedure. The authors tested the
participants individually in all conditions. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of three scaffolding
conditions: ACPS (n = 31), APS (n = 31), and NS (n =
31). First, the participant questionnaire was handed out,
and participants were given as much time as they wanted
to complete it. Second, the pretest was handed out, and
participants were given 20 minutes to complete it.
Participants wrote their answers on the pretest and did not
have access to any instructional materials. Third,
participants were trained on how to use the hypermedia
environment to learn about the circulatory system. Fourth,
the experimenter provided instructions for the learning
task. The following instructions were read and presented
to the participants in writing.
No Scaffolding (NS) Condition. In this condition the
instructions were: “You are being presented with a
hypermedia encyclopedia, which contains textual
information, static diagrams, and a digitized video clip of
the circulatory system. We are trying to learn more about
how students use hypermedia environments to learn about
the circulatory system. Your task is to learn all you can
about the circulatory system in 40 minutes. Make sure you
learn about the different parts and their purpose, how
they work both individually and together, and how they
support the human body. We ask you to ‘think aloud’
continuously while you use the hypermedia environment
to learn about the circulatory system. I’ll be here in case
anything goes wrong with the computer and the
equipment. Please remember that it is very important to
say everything that you are thinking while you are
working on this task.”
In the Adaptive Content and Process Scaffolding
(ACPS) condition, the students were provided with an
overall learning goal (the same as for NS, above: “Make
sure you learn about the different parts and their purpose,
how they work both individually and together, and how
they support the human body.”) and had access to a tutor

73

2) What is the influence of the pretest, developmental
level, and condition on participant posttest scores,
as
examined using structural equation modeling?
The structural model with covariates is shown in Figure 1.

scheme we used to analyze the participants’ regulatory
behavior are described in detail in Azevedo and
colleagues (2005, p. 393-397). A trained graduate student
used the coding scheme and coded all of the transcriptions
by assigning each coded segment with one of the 33 SRL
variables. Inter-rater agreement established for the mental
models was .96 (agreement on 179/186 mental model
essays), and participants’ and tutors’ coded verbalizations
was .98 (agreement on 1,956 out of 1,984 segments).
Inconsistencies were resolved through discussion among
the co-authors.

Results
1) Does a confirmatory factor analysis of our four
measures of circulatory system knowledge meet common
fit criteria?
Before moving to our structural model and a test of the
first of our two main research questions, it was necessary
to assess the measurement model using confirmatory
factory analyses (CFA; Kline, 2004). In this case, the
CFA involved both continuous (matching, labeling, flow)
and categorical (mental model) indicators both at pretest
and posttest. This type of CFA was performed using
Mplus version 4.1 (Muthén & Muthén, 2006a) with the
default estimator for models with continuous and
categorical indicators: the robust weighted least squares
estimator (WLSMV; Muthén & Muthén, 2006b). This
estimation procedure uses simple linear regressions to
model the continuous factor indicators and probit
regressions for the categorical indicator (Muthén &
Muthén, 2006b). The initial measurement model consisted
of the four pretest measures as indicators of the latent
pretest conceptual knowledge factor, and the four posttest
measures as indicators of the latent posttest conceptual
knowledge factor. The Lagrange Multiplier Test showed
that the measurement model fit could be significantly
improved through covarying the errors of the mental
model pretest and posttest indicators. We added this
covariance to the model given that we could theoretically
support it. Both mental model essay measures utilized
writing skills, as opposed to the other indicators which
involved only matching or writing single words
(labeling). With this added covariance, the chi-square test
of model fit was non-significant, indicating good fit [χ2
(8, N = 93) = 9.289, p = .318]. In addition, the
Comparative Fit Index (CFI) value was .983, and the Root
Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) value
was .042, both indicative of good fit (Kline, 2005). With
this evidence, we retained our measurement model as a
reasonable fit to the data. Satisfied with the measurement
model, we then imposed a structural model with
covariates upon the data, also called a MIMIC (MultipleIndicator, Multiple-Cause) model, to address our second
research question.

* p < .05; ** p < .01

Figure 1: Structural Model with Covariates (MIMIC
model)
The covariance between the latent variables for pretest
and posttest was changed to a causal relation and dummycoded covariates were inserted to test the influence of
developmental level upon the pretest and the posttest as
well as condition upon the posttest. There were no
statistically significant interactions between covariates,
thus these predictors were not included in the final
structural model. The fit of this structural model could not
be compared to the measurement model using a chisquare difference statistic due to the necessity of using the
WLSMV estimator (Muthén & Muthén, 2006b).
However, this model also had a non-significant chi-square
value [χ2 (18, N = 93) = 23.586, p = .169] as well as a
CFI of .954 and a RMSEA of .058, all indicators of good
fit (Kline, 2005). As such, we retained the structural
model as a reasonable fit to the data. Standardized path
coefficients can be found in Figure 1, showing
statistically significant factor loadings for each indicator
for each latent variable. The pretest latent factor had a
statistically significant relation with the posttest latent
factor, meaning that all other causal arrows predicting
posttest are considered to be effects above and beyond
both each other and pretest. In essence, this model can be
thought of as akin to a 2 by 3 (developmental level and
condition) analysis of covariance with a latent covariate
(pretest) and dependent variable. Developmental level had
a statistically significant relation with both the pretest and
the posttest, indicating that high-schoolers had a higher

74

Planning. A 3 X 2 ANOVA showed a significant main
effect of condition (F [2, 87] = 13.70, p < .01, η2 = .24), a
significant main effect of development level (F [1, 87] =
5.07, p < .05, η2 = .06), and a non-significant interaction
between condition and development level (p > .05). A
post-hoc LSD test on condition indicates the participants
in the ACPS condition used, on average, a significantly
higher proportion of planning processes (M = .15) than
participants in the NS condition (M = .08; p <.01).
Additionally, participants in the APS also used, on
average, a statistically significantly higher proportion of
planning processes (M = .17) than students in the NS
condition (M = .08; p <.01), but participants in the ACPS
and APS condition did not significantly differ (p > .05).
Lastly, a follow-up independent t-test indicates that
middle school students used, on average, a significantly
higher proportion of planning processes (M= .15) than
high school students (M = .12), t(91) = 2.023, p < .05.
Monitoring. A 3 X 2 ANOVA showed a significant
main effect of condition (F [2, 87] = 18.28, p < .01, η2 =
.30), a non-significant main effect of development level (p
> .05), and a non-significant interaction between
condition and development level (p > .05). A post-hoc
LSD test on condition indicates the participants in the
ACPS condition used, on average, a higher proportion of
monitoring processes (M = .37) than participants in the
APS condition (M = .25; p <.01) and participants in the
NS condition (M = .22; p <.01). Participants in the APS
and NS condition did not significantly differ (p > .05).
Strategies. A 3 X 2 ANOVA showed a non-significant
main effect of condition (p > .05), a non-significant main
effect of development level (p > .05), and a nonsignificant
interaction
between
condition
and
development level (p > .05).
Task difficulty and demands. A 3 X 2 ANOVA
showed a significant main effect of condition (F [2, 87] =
15.30, p < .01, η2 = .26), a non-significant main effect of
development level (p > .05), and a non-significant
interaction between condition and development level (p >
.05). A post-hoc LSD test on condition indicates the
participants in the NS condition used, on average, a
significantly higher proportion of task difficulty and
demands processes (M = .28) than participants in the
ACPS condition (M = .12; p <.01) and participants in the
APS condition (M = .17; p <.01). Participants in the APS
and ACPS condition did not significantly differ (p > .05).

average score than middle-schoolers on both latent
factors. Developmental level explained 29 percent of the
variance in the latent pretest factor. The non-significant
causal arrow from “control v. APS” to posttest indicates
that these two conditions did not differ in their mean
scores on the latent posttest after adjusting for latent
pretest and developmental level. However, the arrow for
“control v. ACPS” is statistically significant and shows
that the ACPS condition had a higher adjusted mean than
the control condition. Analyses comparing the ACPS and
APS conditions showed a statistically significant
difference as well, with the ACPS adjusted mean higher
than that of the APS condition. Effect sizes for these
statistically significant causal relations are shown in Table
1. Pretest, developmental level, and condition combined
to explain 89% of the variance in the latent posttest
conceptual knowledge variable. The variance extracted
for the pretest factor was .34 and for the posttest factor
was .60. Given that we were using latent factors rather
than summed scores, we assessed reliability with
Coefficient H, a maximal reliability measure. Coefficient
H indicates the degree to which the factor is described by
the information found within its measured indicators (see
Hancock & Mueller, 2001), and was .88 for the pretest
factor and .87 for the posttest factor.
Table 1: Effect Sizes for Statistically Significant
Paths in the Structural Model
Independent
Dependent
Variable
Variable
Developmental
Pretest
Level
Developmental
Posttest
Level
Pretest
Posttest
Control v. ACPS
Posttest
APS v. ACPSa
Posttest
a
Path not shown due to dummy-coding

Effect Size
.381
.147
.162
.222
.315

3) How are different scaffolding conditions and
developmental levels related to students’ use of selfregulatory processes during learning with hypermedia?
A series of 3 x 2 ANOVAs were run to determine whether
there were significant differences in the proportion of
SRL processes students used during learning with
hypermedia, by condition and developmental level. We
examined how students regulated their learning of the
circulatory system by calculating the proportion of
variables related to the five main self-regulated learning
categories of planning, monitoring, strategy use, handling
task difficult and demands, and interest. As such, we
conducted five 3 x 2 ANOVAs for each of the five SRL
categories, with condition (ACPS, APS, and NS) and
developmental level (High school and Middle School) as
between-subjects factors and SRL category proportion as
the within subjects factor.

Scientific Importance of this Study
Our results show that young students’ learning of a
challenging science topic with hypermedia can be
facilitated if they are provided with adaptive content and
process scaffolding designed to regulate their learning.
We have demonstrated the effectiveness of adaptive
content and process scaffolding (ACPS) in facilitating
students’ conceptual learning of the circulatory system. In
contrast, providing students with either adaptive process
scaffolding without content, or no scaffolding, was

75

Chi, M. (2000). Self-explaining: The dual processes of
generating inference and repairing mental models. In R.
Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology:
Educational design and cognitive science (vol.5) (pp.
161-238). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. (1996). Constructing self-explanations and
scaffolded explanations in tutoring. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 10, S33-S49.
Chi, M., Siler, S., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann,
R. (2001). Learning from human tutoring. Cognitive
Science, 25, 471-533.
Collins, A., Brown, J., & Newman, S. (1989). Cognitive
apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading, writing,
and mathematics. In L.B. Resnick (ed.), Knowing,
learning, and instruction: Essays in the honor of Robert
Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Graesser, A., McNamara, D., & VanLehn, K. (2005).
Scaffolding deep comprehension strategies through
Pint&Query, AuthTutor and iSTART. Educational
Psychologist, 40(4), 225-234.
Graesser, A., Person, N., & Magliano, J. (1995).
Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-toone tutoring. Applied Cognitive Pscyhology, 9, 495522.
Hancock, G., & Mueller, R. (2001). Rethinking construct
reliability within latent variable systems. In R. Cudeck,
S. du Toit, & D. Sörbom (Eds.), Structural Equation
Modeling: Present and Future — A Festschrift in honor
of Karl Jöreskog (pp. 195-216). Lincolnwood, IL:
Scientific Software International, Inc.
Hmelo-Silver, C. & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding
complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53-61.
Kline, R. (2005). Principles and Practice of Structural
Equation Modeling (2nd Ed.). NY: Guilford Press.
Lajoie, S., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Teaching and learning
in technology-rich environments. In P. Alexander & P.
Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd
ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Muthén, B., & Muthén, L. (2006a). Mplus Version 4.1.
Los Angeles, CA: Muthén & Muthén,
Pea, R. (2004). The social and technological dimensions
of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts for
learning, education, and human activity. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 13, 423-451.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (2005). A theoretical
framework and approach for fostering metacognitive
development. Educational Psychologist, 40, 211-233.
Winne, P. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from
models of information processing. In & B. Zimmerman
& D. Schunk (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and
academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp.
153-189). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wood, D. Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of
tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 17,
89-100.

associated with less substantial conceptual knowledge
gains. Verbal protocols provided evidence that students in
the ACPS condition used significantly higher proportion
of planning and monitoring processes when using a
hypermedia environment to learning about the circulatory
system. We conclude that the tutors’ role in providing
both content and process scaffolding is a key to
facilitating students’ self-regulated learning with
hypermedia.
Our study contributes to an emerging field that merges
cognitive and learning sciences, and educational
technology and science learning research by addressing
issues related to learning about challenging science topics
(Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006) and recent criticisms
that research on learning with hypermedia is atheoretical
and lacks empirical evidence (Azevedo, 2005). Our study
also contributes to an emerging body of evidence which
illustrates the critical role of SRL in students’ learning
with hypermedia (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2005), and extends
recent research regarding the role of adaptive scaffolding
in facilitating students’ learning with hypermedia.
Furthermore, our data contributes to Azevedo and
colleagues emerging model of SRL in learning with
hypermedia and contributes to the SRL literature (e.g.,
Winne, 2001) by using verbal protocols to analyze how
learners in different adaptive scaffolding conditions
deployed SRL skills during learning with hypermedia.
These two sources of data allow us to examine the critical
role of tutors as external regulatory agents whose
scaffolding methods facilitate students’ self-regulated
learning (e.g., Chi et al., 2001; Graesser et al, 2001).
Lastly, our process data can be applied to inform the
design of hypermedia environments as Metacognitive
tools (Azevedo, 2005) to foster learners’ self-regulated
learning of challenging science topics by providing
adaptive scaffolding (e.g., Graesser et al., 2005; White &
Frederiksen, 2005).

References
Anderson, J., Corbett, A., Koedinger, K, & Pelletier, R.
(1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned. The Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 4, 167-207.
Azevedo, R. (2005). Using hypermedia as a
metacognitive tool for enhancing student learning? The
role
of
self-regulated
learning.
Educational
Psychologist, 40, 199-209.
Azevedo, R., & Cromley, J. (2004). Does training on selfregulated learning facilitate students’ learning with
hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96,
523-535.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J., Winters, F., Moos, D., &
Greene, J. (2005). Adaptive human scaffolding
facilitates adolescents’ self-regulated learning with
hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33, 381-412.
Azevedo, R., & Hadwin, A. (2005). Scaffolding selfregulated learning and metacognition: Implications for
the design of computer-based scaffolds Instructional
Science, 33, 367-379.

76

