UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Four Theories of Amodal Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3td65034

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Nanay, Bence

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Four Theories of Amodal Perception
Bence Nanay (nanay@syr.edu)
Syracuse University, Department of Philosophy, 535 Hall of Languages
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA

perceive (Clarke, 1965; Strawson, 1979; Noë, 2004, p. 76).
Do we perceive the entire cat? Or those parts of the cat that
are visible, that is, a tailless cat? I do not intend to answer
any of these questions here. My question is not about what
we perceive but about the way in which we represent those
parts of objects that are not visible to us.
Also, I need to emphasize that amodal perception is not a
weird but rare subcase of our everyday awareness of the
world. Almost all episodes of perception include an amodal
component. For example, typically, only three sides of a
non-transparent cube are visible. The other three are not
visible – we are aware of them ‘amodally’. The same goes
for houses or for any ordinary objects. We perceive the back
side of any (non-transparent) object only amodally. It is
very difficult to come up with a scenario, where one
perceives, but does not perceive amodally. Thus, it is not
possible to fully understand perception itself without
understanding amodal perception.

Abstract
We are aware of those parts of a cat that are occluded behind
a fence. The question is how we represent these occluded
parts of perceived objects: this is the problem of amodal
perception. I will consider four theories and compare their
explanatory power: (i) we see them, (ii) we have nonperceptual beliefs about them, (iii) we have immediate
perceptual access to them and (iv) we visualize them. I point
out that the first three of these views face both empirical and
conceptual objections. I argue for the fourth account,
according to which we visualize the occluded parts of
perceived objects. Finally, I consider some important
consequences of this view with regards to the content and the
evolution of visualization.
Keywords:
Amodal
perception;
Mental
Visualization; The Dependency Thesis; Evolution.

imagery;

Introduction
Do we see the occluded parts of objects? Suppose that I am
looking at a cat behind a picket fence, but the cat’s tail is not
visible, because it is occluded by one of the pickets. The
question is how I represent the cat’s tail? Do I see it? Do I
have a non-perceptual belief about it?
This problem is sometimes referred to as the problem of
amodal perception and sometimes it is called the puzzle of
perceptual presence. I will consider three possible solutions,
point out that they all face serious objections and then
propose an alternative that may fare better than the rival
theories. Maybe surprisingly, my claim is that we visualize
the cat’s tail.
I will mainly use visual examples and I will talk about
amodal perception as visualization. But amodal perception
is not an exclusively visual phenomenon – it is very
important in the tactile sense modality, for example: when
we hold a glass, we are (amodally) aware of those parts of
the glass that we do not have any tactile contact with. A
sense-modality neutral way of stating the main claim of this
paper would be to say that amodal perception is sensory
imagination. All the arguments I give in this paper can be
extended to non-visual sense modalities.
Before I turn to the possible ways of explaining amodal
perception, I need to make it clear what I am not trying to
explain. I am not trying to solve the old philosophical
puzzle about what the object of our perception is. A
question that is often raised in connection with objects
occluding one another, such as the cat’s tail behind the fence
is about the object of our perception: what is it that we

The first theory: perception
There are two straightforward answers to the question I
posed. The first is that we do perceive the cat’s tail and the
second is that we do not see it, but only infer that it is there:
we have a non-perceptual belief about it (Gibson, 1972).
The perceptual view may sound puzzling. The cat’s tail
does not project onto our retina. We receive no sensory
stimulation from it. The necessary and sufficient conditions
for perceiving an object have been notoriously difficult to
pin down, but the only non-controversial necessary
condition for perception is the presence of sensory
stimulation. If I receive no sensory stimulation from an
object, then I can’t perceive it.1
Suppose that I receive no sensory stimulation from an
object – I have no image of it on my retina. If we counted
this case as perception, then having hallucinations would
count as perception. Closing one’s eyes and visualizing a
chair would also count as perceiving a chair, but
1
One may wonder about the blind spot. When we are looking at
objects with one eye (and keep our eye fixated), we do not receive
any sensory stimulation from objects that are projected onto the
part of the retina where the blind spot is. Does this mean that we
do not see them? The short answer is that we may ‘fill in’ part of
objects that are projected onto our blind spot if the rest of the
object is visible to us (this phenomenon itself is thought to be a
version of the amodal perception problem by some), but we are not
aware of those objects that project onto our blind spot entirely.
Thus, it does not sound wrong to say that we do not perceive these
objects at all.

1331

hallucination and visualization are exactly those mental
events that are supposed not to be covered by the definition
of perception.
Thus, amodal perception is not perception at all. But then
what is it?

The second theory: belief
The second relatively straightforward view about amodal
perception is that there is nothing perceptual about it. We
see those bits of the cat that are visible – that are not
occluded – and we infer, on the basis of perceiving the
visible parts of the animal (as well as on the basis of our
familiarity with cat tails) that the occluded parts have such
and such properties. In other words, we do not see the cat’s
tail at all, we just come to have a (non-perceptual) belief
about it.
There are various problems with this suggestion (see Noë,
2004, pp. 62-64 for a couple of them). I would like to raise a
new objection to the belief account. Amodal completion of
occluded contours has been examined by psychologists for a
long time. One of the most important findings from our
perspective is that we use the simplest possible shape for
completing the occluded part of a contour.

Because of all the other horse contours, we do know that we
should complete the occluded part of the picture with the
front half of the horse on the left and the back of the half
horse on the right. Still, we cannot help seeing one
extremely long horse.
If the belief-account of amodal completion were correct,
then this would mean that we infer on the basis of our
background beliefs as well as the visible parts of the horses
that the occluded shape is such and such. Thus, we form a
non-perceptual belief that the occluded shape is such and
such. But, as we have seen, we come to represent the
occluded shape to be a long horse, in spite of the fact that
we have firm beliefs that it is supposed to be completed as
two normal size horses. The way we complete this shape is
insensitive to our other beliefs. But a belief cannot be
insensitive to our other beliefs, at least not too often and not
for too long (see, for example, Harman, 1984). Even worse,
my belief that is said to represent the occluded long horse is
supposed to be inferred from my background beliefs about
the shape of (short) horse contours. Even if a belief could at
least sometimes be insensitive to some of our other beliefs,
it certainly cannot be insensitive to those of our beliefs it is
supposed to be inferred from. Thus, the representation of the
occluded shape is very unlikely to be a belief.

The third theory: access

Figure 1: Amodal completion
In the example above (figure 1), for instance, when we see
the image in the middle, we tend to complete it in the way
shown on the left and not the way shown on the right. More
importantly, even if we have some firm beliefs about how
we should complete the contour, we cannot help completing
it in the simplest way possible. Take the following example
(figure 2):

Figure 2: The horse illusion

It has been suggested recently that what makes us visually
aware of the cat’s tail is that we have perceptual access to it.
I do not see the cat’s tail now, but if I moved my head, I
would see it. Thus, I have immediate perceptual access to
the very fine-grained properties of this object right now –
even if it is occluded from me at the moment (Pessoa et al.,
1998; Noë, 2002; Noë, 2004; Noë, in press). This
suggestion is an interesting alternative to the perceptual- and
the belief-view, but I will argue that it will fail to provide a
coherent account of amodal perception, for the following
three reasons.
First, it is important to emphasize that amodal perception
relies heavily on our background knowledge of how the
occluded parts of the object (may) look. If I have never seen
a cat, I will have difficulties attributing properties to its tail
behind the fence. If I am familiar with cats, however, then
this would not be a problem. Our perceptual presence of the
cat’s tail will be very different if we know how cat tails look
and if we do not. And here we get a conflict with the access
account. I would have the same perceptual access to the
cat’s tail whether or not I know how cat tails look. Thus, the
access account cannot allow for the difference between our
awareness of the cat’s tail in these two cases.
Second, suppose that the cat has just disappeared behind
the corner of the house. I hear it meow, and I can localize
where it is. If I know the cat well enough, its tail can be as
perceptually present to me as it was when the tail was
occluded by the picket fence. It seems that the transition
between being aware of the partly occluded cat’s tail behind

1332

the fence and of the fully occluded cat’s tail is a gradual
one.
However, an immediate consequence of the access
account is that immediate perceptual access does not come
in degrees. I may have immediate perceptual access to the
partly occluded cat’s tail, but I certainly do not have
immediate perceptual access to the tail of the cat in the next
room. According to the access account, what constitutes
amodal perception is that I have immediate perceptual
access to the very fine-grained properties of the occluded
object right now – even if it is not visible to me at the
moment. We can never have a similar kind of access to
anything in the next room. We could have some kind of
access to the cat in the next room, but not immediate
perceptual access.
Thus, it follows from the access account that if the cat
disappears entirely behind the fence, my way of
representing it must change radically. So far, I had
perceptual access to the cat’s occluded parts – if I had
moved my head, I could have seen them. Now, however, no
matter, how I move my head, I cannot see the cat’s tail. This
is a very problematic consequence of the access account,
especially given that in some cases I can localize the cat’s
tail in my egocentric space (almost) as well as I could when
I saw it occluded by the picket fence and I may have almost
as vivid an awareness of it in the two cases.
It is not clear what is supposed to constitute the difference
between our access to the cat’s tail behind the fence and in
the next room, according to the access account. After all, I
do have some kind of access to the cat’s tail in the next
room: I could walk over and have a look. The advocates of
the access account tried to clarify the distinction between
these two cases in several different ways. As Alva Noë
points out in his latest attempt to do so, the big difference
between our access to the cat’s tail behind the picket fence
and in the next room is the following. Our sensory
stimulation varies as we move around in both cases (but in
different degrees: I would move my head more in the
second case), but in the second case, our sensory stimulation
does not vary as the object moves. If the cat behind the
picket fence wags its tail, this brings about a change in my
sensory stimulation. If it does so in the next room, it does
not (Noë, 2004, pp. 64-65). My main point is that regardless
of the way we draw this distinction, the very existence of
such a distinction is problematic.
One would expect that the advocates of the accessaccount would deny the intuition that there is a gradual
transition between these two cases, which would be a valid
move and it would weaken this objection significantly.
Interestingly, they acknowledge this gradual transition and
explicitly state that this is an important feature of amodal
perception (Noë, 2002, p. 11, footnote 14; Noë, 2004, p.
65). The problem is that the access-account in general and
Noë’s way of drawing the distinction (Noë, 2004, pp. 64-65)
in particular do not allow for such gradual transition. Thus,
as it stands, the access account is inconsistent.

A third argument. Some of the most famous examples of
amodal perception are examples of two dimensional figures,
like the two pictures above. It is unclear what the access
account would say in the case of amodal completion of the
occluded parts of two dimensional figures (although the
proponents of this account often use these examples of
amodal perception when outlining their view. See Pessoa et
al., 1998, pp. 729-730; Noë, 2002, p. 9; Noë, 2004, p. 61, p.
70), since there is no head- or eye-movement that would
give us perceptual access to the momentarily invisible part
of the curve in the first figure above. Thus, we do not have
any perceptual access to the occluded parts of the circle.2
Still, we are visually aware of them.

The fourth theory: visualization
My suggestion is very simple: we visualize the cat’s tail.
By visualization I mean roughly what Stephen Kosslyn
means by visual imagery (Kosslyn, 1980). A paradigmatic
case of visualization would be closing one’s eyes and
imagining seeing an apple ‘in the mind’s eye’ (see also
Ryle, 1949, chapter 8.6; Currie & Ravenscroft, 2002).
The proposal that we visualize the occluded parts of
perceived objects does not face the problem that I posed in
the case of the access-view. I can visualize a cat in the next
room or even thousands of miles away from here. I will not
be as accurate in doing so as I would be if I visualized the
occluded parts of a cat I am looking at right now. For
example, if I visualize the occluded parts of the cat I am
looking at, I can use the highly specific properties of the
color of the cat’s visible parts as a basis for my visualization
of the color of the occluded parts. If I visualize the cat in the
next room, I cannot help myself to this – the cat’s tail will
be less accurately visualized. Nevertheless, I can still
visualize it. The way I represent the cat’s tail in the next
room and the way I represent the occluded tail of the cat I
am looking at are of the same kind – the difference between
them is a difference in degree. As we have seen, the access
view needs to say that they are different ways of
representing the cat’s tail – one is by means of our
perceptual access, the other is not.
I pointed out earlier that amodal perception relies heavily
on our background knowledge of how the occluded parts of
the object (may) look. If I have never seen a cat, I will have
difficulties representing its occluded tail behind the fence.
The same is true for visualization. In order to visualize a
chair, I need to know how chairs look. This is yet another

2

One could try to block this argument by saying that we do have
expectations about how the occluded shape would look were we to
look behind the occluding surface, even if I will never look behind
the occluding surface. This move, however, would make the notion
of ‘immediate perceptual access’ vacuous, as we could also have
expectations about how a cat in the next room would look if we
were to look, but the access account, rightly, wants to deny that we
have immediate perceptual access to these objects.

1333

indication of the similarity between amodal perception and
visualization.3

Discussion
Take the following image, which is considered to be an
example of not amodal, but modal completion (figure 3).

Figure 3: The Kanizsa triangle
Modal and amodal completion are different (see Singh,
2004 for example). The standard way of drawing this
distinction is the following. In the case of the amodal
perception, we are aware of objects behind an occluder,
whereas in the case of modal completion, we are visually
aware of an object in front of inducers, such as the three
circles in the figure above (See, for example, Michotte et al.,
1964; Tse, 1999, pp. 37-38).
There are, however, very important similarities. In the
case of both modal and amodal completion we are
perceptually aware of shapes or objects we do not see. In
both cases, we experience contours that are not there. It is
generally assumed that the early stages of the mental
processes responsible for modal and amodal completion are
the same. It has been argued that the neural mechanisms
responsible for modal and amodal perception are the same
in early vision and they only come apart in a very late stage
of visual processing (Kellman & Shipley, 1991;
Ramachandran, 1995; see also Driver et al., 2001). As a
result, many early vision researchers as well as philosophers
do not even make this distinction (Grossberg & Mingolla,
1985; Noë, 2002; Noë, 2004; Noë, in print).
Thus, in what follows, I assume that what is true for the
early neural mechanisms responsible for our awareness of
the nonexisting sides of the Kanizsa triangle and of the
occluded contour of the horse above are the same. Thus, the
empirical study of our awareness of the sides of the Kanizsa
triangle may give us some important results about amodal
perception.
The perception of Kanizsa triangle has been thoroughly
examined experimentally. It turns out that although there is
no activation of the cells in the retina that would correspond
3
It is important to point out that this dependence of amodal
perception on background knowledge is an issue that is
independent from the question of the way we represent occluded
parts of perceived objects. A number of our representational
abilities (perception, belief, visualization) can depend on our
background knowledge, after all.

to the sides of the triangle, we do find such corresponding
activation patterns in the primary visual cortex, which is the
earliest stage of visual processing (Lee & Nguyen, 2001; see
also Kamatsu, 2006). Incidentally, this is also where cells
are activated when we visualize objects with our eyes closed
(see e.g., Kosslyn et al., 1995). I take this result to be
indicative that I am on the right track, but I will not argue
that this confirms my suggestion. I do want to argue,
however, that these empirical results help us to disqualify
the other candidates we have been considering.
It would follow from the perceptual view that the cells of
the retina are active when we are looking at the Kanizsa
triangle. This turns out not to be the case. The belief-view
would predict that there is no cell-activation in the early
stages of visual processing. But, it turns out, there is. Thus,
both the perceptual and the belief view seem to contradict
these empirical results. Also, as we have seen in the last
section, it is unclear how the amodal perception of two
dimensional contours could even be explained by the access
view.
Thus, it seems that the alternatives to my suggestion face
some serious objections, both conceptual and empirical
ones. Let us see whether similar objections could be raised
in the case of my suggestion.
One possible worry about my suggestion is that this view
implies that we visualize objects all the time, since we
perceive partially occluded objects all the time. However,
this sounds intuitively implausible. When I’m walking down
the street, looking at one house occluding another one, it
does not appear to me as if I visualized anything.
In order to answer this worry, it needs to be pointed out
that attention plays a very important role in our everyday
perception, thus, we should not be surprised if it played an
equally important role in amodal perception. The
inattentional blindness experiments demonstrated that we
can be shockingly blind to those features of our
surroundings that we are not paying attention to. Probably
the most famous inattentional blindness experiment is the
following (Simmons & Chabris, 1999). We are shown a short
video-clip of two teams of three, dressed in white and black,
passing a ball around. We are asked to count how many times
the white team passes the ball around. On first viewing, most
of the observers come up with an answer to this not very
interesting question. On second viewing, however, when
there is no counting task to be completed, they notice that a
man dressed in gorilla costume walks right in the middle of
the passing game, makes funny gestures and then leaves. The
gorilla spends nine seconds in the frame and most viewers do
not notice it when attending to the passing around of the ball
(see Mack & Rock, 1998 for more inattentional blindness
experiments).
To move to a less radical example for the importance of
attention in our everyday perception, I have no idea what
color my office telephone is. I must have seen it millions of
times, but this was not a property that I have been paying
attention to. Properties of objects we are not attending to
usually go unnoticed in our everyday perception.

1334

Dependency Thesis, but this would not be a very attractive
option. Further, if my argument is correct, then we can
seriously weaken the most important argument in favor of
the Dependency Thesis.
The most serious and most convincing argument among
the ones Martin gives in support of the Dependency Thesis
(Martin, 2002, p. 410) is the following:

Given the similarities between perception and
visualization (see Kosslyn, 1980; Laeng & Teodorescu,
2002; O’Craven & Kanwisher, 2000), it is hardly surprising
that the same is true for the way we visualize objects. If I
visualize the house I grew up in as seen from the front, I am
unlikely to be aware of whether there is light in the left
window on the first floor. But if I attend to this specific
feature of the visualized image, I can be aware of this.
Finally, if visualizing in general depends on our attention,
then it the same argument can be run in the case of
visualizing partially occluded objects. Most of the time, the
shape, size or color of occluded object-parts go unnoticed,
because we pay no attention to them. If, however, we do
attend to them – if, for example, we wonder, what color an
occluded part of the building is – then we do visualize them.
To sum up, the worry was that we do not seem to be
consciously visualizing every occluded part of every object
that surrounds us. But neither do we consciously perceive of
every part (or property) of every object that surrounds us.
We only perceive those parts (or properties) of objects
consciously that we attend to. Similarly, we only visualize
those parts of objects consciously that we attend to. The
worry turned out to be unjustified.

(a) Visualize a red light on the left and a right light on
the right. There is nothing else in the visualized world.
(b) What I visualize is not in the actual world, but in an
imagined one. But the red light is still on the left. Then
what is it left of? Certainly not of myself, because I’m
not in the imagined world.
(c) Thus, the red light must be on the left in the
experience I imagine.
Note that this argument takes it for granted that what I
visualize is in the imagined world, not the actual one. As
Martin explicitly puts it, visualization can only “have
consequences for what one accepts about the imagined
situation” (Martin, 2002, p. 414), that is, not about the
actual one. But if this is true, then visualization could never
provide us with a way of attributing properties to objects in
our actual surroundings, which contradicts the claim I have
been arguing for in this paper.
One can, of course, respond that while the Dependency
Thesis is true for visualizing with our eyes closed, it is not
true for the kind of visualizing that constitutes amodal
perception. This response, however, would seriously limit
the scope of the Dependency Thesis and, as we have seen in
the discussion of the second objections above, positing such
strict boundary between these two kinds of visualization is
unmotivated.
In short, if my claim about amodal perception as
visualization is right, then we have one less reason to
subscribe to the Dependency Thesis.

The Dependency Thesis
One of the most interesting recent debates about
visualization is the following. When I imagine seeing a
chair, what is it that I imagine? What is the object of my
imagination? The chair or the experience of the chair? Mike
Martin, following Christopher Peacocke, argues that when
we visualize a chair, we imagine experiencing the chair
(Martin, 2002; Peacocke, 1985). The content of my
imagination is an experience, not an object. This suggestion
has been criticized (Noordhof, 2002; Currie – Ravenscroft,
2002, section 2.2), but it still seems to be a very influential
view about the content of visualization.
If it is true that we visualize the unseen parts of objects
we are looking at, then we can construct a new objection
against the Dependency Thesis. If seeing the cat’s tail is
visualization, but seeing the rest of the cat is not, then it
would follow from the Dependency Thesis that our way of
representing the tail and the rest of the cat is very different.
The content of one is (some part of) the animal, whereas the
content of the other is an experience. When the cat
disappears behind the fence, not only the way we represent
the cat changes (we perceived it before, but we visualize it
now), but the content of our awareness of the cat also
changes. Before it disappeared, the content of our awareness
was the cat, but now the content is an experience. This
consequence may be especially troubling if one sees the cat
through a wire fence or a mosquito net, because in this case
the content of one’s experience changes radically several
times within a very small area of the visual field.
The advocate of the Dependency Thesis may bite the
bullet and accept these consequences of the conjunction of
my claim about amodal perception as visualization and the

Conclusion: the evolution of visualization
It is not obvious whether visualizing has significant
selective advantage. Action planning does have some
selective advantage, but action planning may happen in an
entirely non-perceptual manner. If visualization has an
evolutionary explanation, it is likely to lie elsewhere.
Notice, however, that amodal perception has huge selective
advantage. Being able to localize the unseen parts of an
animal hiding in a bush is an extremely survival-enhancing
skill (Ramachandran, 1987 makes a similar suggestion).
Thus, if amodal perception is nothing but visualization, then
we can say that as amodal perception have a considerable
selective advantage and amodal perception is a version of
visualization (another variant of which is visualizing with
one's eyes closed), visualizing with one's eyes closed could
be thought of as an evolutionary exaptation.

1335

Acknowledgments
I am grateful for the comments of Alva Noë and Robert Van
Gulick as well as the members of my PhD seminar on
Imagination at Syracuse University.

References
Clarke, Thompson (1965). Seeing surfaces and physical
objects. In: M. Black (Ed.), Philosophy in America.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 98-114.
Currie Gregory and Ian Ravenscroft (2002). Recreative
Minds: Imagination in Philosophy and Psychology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Driver, Jon, Greg Davis, Charlotte Russell, Massimo
Turatto and Elliot Freeman (2001). Segmentation,
attention and phenomenal visual objects. Cognition, 10,
61-95.
Gibson, J. J. (1972). A theory of direct visual perception. In:
J. R. Royce and W. W. Rozeboom (Eds.), The
Psychology of Knowing. New York: Gordon and Breach,
pp. 215-240.
Grossberg, Stephen and Mignolla, Ennio (1985). Neural
Dynamics of Form Perception: Boundary Completion,
Illusory Figures, and Neon Color Spreading.
Psychological Review, 92, 173-211.
Harman, Gilbert (1984). Logic and Reasoning. Synthese, 60,
107-127.
Lee, Tai Sing – Nguyen, My (2001). Dynamics of
subjective contour formation in the early visual cortex.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98,
1907-1911.
Kellman, P. J. and T. F. Shipley (1991). A theory of visual
interpolation in object perception. Cognitive Psychology,
23, 141-221.
Komatsu, Hidehiko (2006). The neural mechanisms of
perceptual filling-in. Nature Review Neuroscience, 7,
220-231
Kosslyn, Stephen M. (1980). Image and Mind. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kosslyn, Stephen M., William L. Thompson, Irene J. Kim
and Nathaniel M. Alpert (1995). Topographical
representations of mental images in primary visual cortex.
Nature, 378, 496-498.
Laeng, B. and Teodorescu, D-S (2002). Eye scanpaths
during visual imagery re-enact those of perception of the
same visual scene. Cognitive Science, 26, 207-231.

1336

Mack A. and Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional Blindness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Martin, MGF (2002). The Transparency of Experience.
Mind & Language, 17, 376-425.
Michotte, A., Thinés, G., & Crabbé, G. (1964). Les
complements amodaux des structures perceptives. In: G.
Thinés, A. Costall, & G. Butterworth (Eds.), Michotte’s
experimental phenomenology of perception. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Noë, Alva (2002). Is the Visual World a Grand Illusion?
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9, no. 5-6, 1-12.
Noë, Alva (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Noë, Alva (in press). Real Presence.
Noordhof, Paul (2002). Imagining Objects and Imagining
Experiences. Mind & Language, 17, 426-455.
O’Craven, K. M. and N. Kanwisher (2000). Mental Imagery
of Faces and Places Activates Corresponding StimulusSpecific Brain Regions. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12, 1013-1023.
Peacocke, Christopher (1985). Imagination, Experience, and
Possibility: A Berkeley-an View Defended. In: John
Foster and Howard Robinson (Eds.), Essays on Berkeley.
Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 19-35.
Pessoa, Luiz, Evan Thompson and Alva Noë (1998).
Finding out about filling-in: A guide to perceptual
completion for visual science and the philosophy of
perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 723-802.
Ramachandran, V. S. (1987). Visual perception of surfaces:
a biological theory. In: Petry S. Meyer (Ed.), The
perception of illusory contours. Berlin: Springler, pp. 93108.
Ramachandran V. S. 1995 Filling in the gaps in logic: reply
to Durgin at al. Perception, 24, 841-843.
Simmons, Daniel J. and Chabris, Christopher F. (1999).
'Gorillas in our Midst: sustained inattentional blindness
for dynamic events,' Perception, 28, 1059-1074.
Singh, Manish (2004). Modal and amodal completion
generate different shapes. Psychological Science, 15, 454459.
Strawson, P. F. (1979). Perception and its objects. In: G. F.
MacDonald (Ed.), Perception and Identity: Essays
Presented to A. J. Ayer with His Replies. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, pp. 41-60.
Tse, Peter Ulric (1999). Volume Completion. Cognitive
Psychology, 39, 37-68.

