UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Heuristics in Multi-attribute Decision Making: Effects of Representation Format

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zq453gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Jahn, Georg
Renkewitz, Frank
Kunze, Sonja

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Heuristics in Multi-attribute Decision Making: Effects of Representation Format
Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology
Wilhelm-Raabe-Str. 43, D-09107 Chemnitz, Germany

Frank Renkewitz (frank.renkewitz@uni-erfurt.de)
University of Erfurt, Department of Psychology
Nordhäuser Str. 63, D-99089 Erfurt

Sonja Kunze (sonja.kunze@s2001.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology
Wilhelm-Raabe-Str. 43, D-09107 Chemnitz, Germany
Abstract

of the murderer. The description of suspects and the
description of the murderer contained four cues
(accompanying dog, type of the jacket, type of trousers, and
color of the shirt) that were the more valid the more
witnesses were said to agree on the respective cue value.
The results of this experiment suggested that participants
differed with regard to how completely they considered cue
dimensions and cue validity. Furthermore, the format in
which cue values were learned affected how they were used
in decisions. Participants who were presented with suspects’
images in the learning phase considered more cue
dimensions than participants who learned lists of suspects’
attributes. This effect of presentation format supported
Bröder and Schiffer’s prediction that integrated images
should induce a holistic memory representation of
alternatives. A holistic memory representation should then
support retrieving and comparing several cue values in
parallel in memory-based decisions.
More or less complete information integration
corresponds to presumed strategies and heuristics in human
information processing. Using all cue dimensions and cue
validity, decisions could be based on all available cue values
that are weighted by their validity. This strategy would
choose the alternative with the highest weighted sum.
Following Gigerenzer and his colleagues (1999), we will
refer to this strategy as Franklin’s rule (FR) after Benjamin
Franklin who proposed a similar procedure.
A second strategy that also considers all cue dimensions
but disregards cue validity has been named Dawes’ rule
(DR) after Robyn Dawes (Dawes, 1979). DR weighs each
cue dimension equally and decides based on summed cue
information. For example, if one suspect would match the
description of the murderer in two attributes and the other
suspect would match in three attributes, DR would select the
latter.
A third strategy – prominent for its efficiency as a “fast
and frugal” heuristic in some real-world domains as shown
by Gigerenzer and his colleagues – is known as “Take the
Best” (TTB). TTB uses cue validities, but decides on the
basis of a single cue. Cue dimensions are considered in the
order of validity starting with the most valid cue. As soon as
a cue dimension is found on which the alternatives differ,
the alternative with the superior cue value is selected and all
dimensions of less validity are ignored. Consequently, TTB

When probabilistic inferences have to be drawn based on cue
values stored in long term memory, participants appear to use
a number of different heuristics. These heuristics vary in the
amount of available cue information that is retrieved and
integrated, and in the degree to which cue validities are
considered. One factor that is assumed to affect strategy
selection is the representational format of cue information:
Holistic, image-based representations should induce the
parallel retrieval of cue values and thus foster the use of
compensatory strategies that take into account multiple cue
dimensions. In contrast, verbal representations should favor
non-compensatory strategies that draw inferences based on a
single cue dimension. We tested this hypothesis in an
experiment and explored how the learning procedure
modulates the use of cue validities. The results suggest that
the acquisition of cue knowledge from holistic images
increases the use of a compensatory prototype matching
strategy that neglects cue validities.
Keywords: Multi-attribute decision making, Probabilistic
inference, Bounded rationality, Take-the-best heuristic .

Memory-based Multi-attribute Decisions
In most decisions the alternatives to choose from differ with
regard to several attributes. Such multi-attribute decisions
are linked to a fundamental issue in the study of human
rationality: How do individuals integrate information?
A single attribute may be viewed as a value on a cue
dimension. Then alternatives can be described by the values
that they carry on cue dimensions. Usually, cue dimensions
are not equally important. If cue values signal the likelihood
of positive or negative outcomes (in probabilistic
inferences), cue importance is referred to as cue validity.
In deciding between two alternatives, cue values and cue
validity can be factored in to varying degrees (e.g.,
Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC Research Group, 1999).
Individuals could compare cue values of alternatives on
single dimensions, they could integrate the results of such
comparisons from several dimensions, and they could weigh
cue dimensions according to their validity.
Consider, for example, the task studied by Bröder and
Schiffer (2003b, Experiment 4): Participants learned about
ten suspects in a murder and then had to decide for several
pairs of suspects who in a pair was more likely to be guilty
based on the match with the description that witnesses gave

383

is non-compensatory. Positive values on less valid
dimensions cannot compensate for a negative value on a
higher differentiating dimension.
The consistent application of a decision strategy (TTB,
DR, or FR) produces a characteristic pattern of decisions
(for a set of suitable decision items). Thus, the pattern of an
individual’s decisions can be classified by comparing it with
the patterns that would be produced by TTB, DR, or FR.
Such a strategy classification can be used to test the format
hypothesis (Bröder & Schiffer, 2003b).
The format hypothesis predicts a prototype-matching
strategy if internal representations are holistic and imagebased (cf., Juslin & Persson, 2002). Prototype-matching
would integrate cues in parallel and would appear as
compensatory decision making (DR or FR). In contrast,
with verbal encoding of cue values, the format hypothesis
predicts sequential information retrieval, for which a
sequential strategy such as TTB is better suited.
In Bröder and Schiffer’s experiment (2003b, Experiment
4), participants’ decision patterns were more often
consistent with the sequential, non-compensatory strategy
TTB when the cue values were presented verbally, and more
often consistent with DR and FR when the cue values were
presented as integrated images (i.e., pictures that each
showed a dog and a human figure wearing the respective
clothes). This result supported the format hypothesis.
The experiment that we report is similar to Bröder and
Schiffer’s experiment. Our objective was to test the format
hypothesis with different materials and a change in the
learning procedure that allowed us to disentangle to what
extent sequential retrieval of information that favors TTB is
induced by the presentation format or by the learning
procedure.

We presume that in addition a learning procedure that
induces sequential retrieval in the order of cue validity
favors strategies that use validity information (TTB and
FR). Bröder and Schiffer’s learning procedure potentially
induced retrieval of cue values in descending order of
validity, because their participants learned cue values by
sequentially guessing them in descending order of validity.
If this procedure induced later retrieval in descending order
of validity, their learning procedure might have favored
TTB and FR (cf., Bröder & Gaissmaier, in press).
Our participants learned cue values by guessing them in
randomly changing order. Thus, our learning procedure
neither induced sequential retrieval in descending order of
cue validity, nor in any other particular order. Therefore, we
expected that our participants’ retrieval sequence would
conform to the order of validity to a lesser degree.
Consequently, decisions conforming to cue validity would
not be boosted by our learning procedure. Any TTB and FR
classifications would reflect more clearly the deliberate
consideration of cue validity.
In addition to strategy classifications, we also measured
decision times. If participants classified as TTB users would
consider cues sequentially in descending order of validity
and would stop as soon as they find a discriminating cue,
decision times should be longer if the first discriminating
cue is lower in validity (Bergert & Nosofsky, 2007; Bröder
& Gaissmaier, in press; Glöckner & Hodges, 2006).

Method
Participants. Seventy-five students at Chemnitz University
of Technology participated in the experiment (53 women,
22 men; mean age 23.1). They were either paid the
equivalent of $5 or received partial course credit. Three
participants had the chance to win another $10 contingent
on their performance in the learning phase. 7 participants
were replaced, because they did not meet the learning
criterion after 90 minutes, 4 participants quit the learning
phase earlier and were also replaced.
Design. Presentation format (image, symbols, and verbal)
was varied between subjects. Participants were assigned
randomly to three groups enforcing equal numbers in each
condition.
Materials. We constructed 10 travel offers for family trips
(see Table 1). Each consisted of the name of the organizing
company and a combination of values on four cue
dimensions: main attraction (animal park, botanic garden, or
mosque), transportation (flight, bus, train, or car),
accommodation (resort, hotel, or vacation home), and sport
facilities (tennis, pool, or fitness). In the learning phase of
the experiment, participants memorized these 10 offers
without knowing the optimal cue values. In the decision
phase, we presented pairs of these offers for binary choice.
Participants were provided with information about optimal
cue values and cue validities framed as results from
marketing research and were asked to indicate which of two
offers should be included in the catalogue of a travel
agency.

Experiment
Our participants learned about travel offers (see Table 1)
and then performed a sequence of binary choices (see Table
2 for examples). For each binary choice only the names of
two offering companies were presented. The cue values of
the respective offers had to be retrieved from memory.
Participants were instructed to decide which of two travel
offers a travel agency should include in its catalogue based
on results of marketing research about optimal attributes
(cue values) and attribute importance (cue validity).
Presentation format was varied as in Bröder and Schiffer
(2003b). One group of participants learned lists of attributes
(verbal condition), a second group learned the offers as
integrated images (image condition, see Figure 1 for an
example). A third group (symbols condition) learned lists of
attributes, however, the attributes were listed as pictures of
single attributes instead of verbally. Such lists of symbols
produced no format effect compared to verbal lists in Bröder
and Schiffer’s Experiment 3. Thus, we expected a format
effect between the image condition and the verbal and
symbols conditions.
According to the format hypothesis, having learned
attributes as lists should favor the sequential strategy TTB.

384

Table 1: The decision alternatives that were presented in three different formats (image, symbols, and verbal) in the
learning phase of the experiment. In the decision phase, only the names of alternatives were presented in paired choice items.
The optimal combination of cue values was presented after the learning phase and determined the cue pattern of alternatives.

Alternative
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal cue values

Cue 1: Main
Attraction
animal park

Cue 2:
Transport
flight

Cue 3:
Accommodation
resort

Cue 4:
Sport
tennis

Cue
pattern
++++

Name
Eberhardt
Sander
Mayer
Hansen
Pohl
Wieland
Berentz
Jäger
Schönherr
Zimmermann

animal park
botanic garden
animal park
animal park
botanic garden
animal park
mosque
botanic garden
animal park
mosque

bus
flight
flight
car
train
train
flight
flight
bus
flight

resort
resort
hotel
hotel
resort
resort
hotel
resort
vacation home
vacation home

tennis
tennis
fitness
tennis
tennis
pool
tennis
pool
fitness
fitness

+-++
-+++
++-+--+
--++
+-+-+-+
-+++---+--

Table 2: Item types and predicted choices between alternatives A and B. Take the Best (TTB) choices are determined by
the first differentiating cue, Dawes’ Rule (DR) chooses the alternative with more positive cue values, Franklin’s Rule (FR)
weighs cues according to their validity.
Alternative

Item type 1
A
B

Item type 2
A
B

Item type 3
A
B

Cue 1
Cue 2
Cue 3
Cue 4

+
+
+

+
-

+
+
-

TTB choice
DR choice
FR choice
Guessing

+
+
-

A
A
A
A or B (50%)

+
+

A
B
B
A or B (50%)

+
+

A
A or B (50%)
A
A or B (50%)

Table 3: Percentages of participants classified as using a certain heuristic (Take the Best, Dawes’ Rule, Franklin’s Rule or
Guessing) based on the pattern of their choices among alternatives in items of type 1, 2 and 3 (Bayesian strategy
classification following Bröder & Schiffer, 2003a).

Condition
Image
Symbols
Verbal
Total

TTB

DR

24.0
36.0
36.0
32.0

72.0
36.0
28.0
45.3

Strategy classification
FR
Guessing
4.0
24.0
24.0
17.3

385

0.0
4.0
4.0
2.7

unclassified

N

0.0
0.0
8.0
2.7

25
25
25
75

As shown in Table 2, three item types can be
constructed from the 10 offers. For items of type 1, all
three strategies (TTB, DR, and FR) predict the same
choice. Only item types 2 and 3 are informative. Among
all possible 45 binary choice items, 19 are of item type 1,
9 are of item type 2, and 17 are of item type 3. We
presented all 45 possible pairs of offers and repeated the 9
items of type 2. In the repeated items, the order of offers
was reversed. Thus the decision phase consisted of 54
binary choices after two practice trials.
In the image condition, travel offers were presented as
integrated images in the learning phase. On a landscape
background, smaller pictures were arranged that indicated
single cue values (see Figure 1). In the symbols condition,
the same pictures were used as symbols in lists of cue
values. In the verbal condition, lists of verbal labels for
cue values were presented.

learning and testing. The assignment of offers to sets of
five was balanced.
After the learning phase, participants were asked to
imagine they had to decide which of two presented offers
a travel agency should select for its catalogue.
Information about cue validity was framed as the result of
marketing research. Participants were told that the main
attraction was rated the most important feature of family
travel offers and that most customers would prefer the
attraction animal park. The second important feature was
transportation with a preference for flights, third was
accommodation with a preference for resorts, and fourth
was sport facilities with a preference for tennis.
In each trial of the decision phase, the names of two
organizing companies were presented next to each other
in the bottom half of the screen together with a display of
the optimal cue values in the top half of the screen.
Participants responded with two keys on a standard
keyboard.
After the decision phase, participants completed a
memory test that was similar to testing in the learning
phase. In addition, in the image condition, the memory of
participants for the offers was tested as a manipulation
check. They were presented with two images and were
asked to select the original image. The distractors
contained the same small pictures representing cue values
just at different, but still plausible locations in the image.

Results
On average, the participants completed the learning phase
after 55.3 min (SD = 44.4). Learning took more time in
the image condition (M = 64.1 min) than in the symbols
and the verbal conditions (52.9 and 49.4 min,
respectively). However, due to large interindividual
differences this effect of presentation format was not
statistically significant, F(2, 71) = .72, p = .49. The
subsequent decision phase took on average 13 min in all
three conditions.
In the memory test after the decision phase,
participants’ mean performance was 86.5% (SD = 1.5),
which suggests that they remembered the alternatives
during the decision phase quite well. Performance in the
memory test did not differ significantly between format
conditions, F(2, 72) = 0.60, p = .55. Participants in the
image condition could discriminate between original and
distractor images after the decision phase. On average,
they correctly identified 8.1 of 10 images (SD = 1.0) in
the manipulation check. Thus, the image condition
successfully induced holistic memory representations.
Strategy classification. The format hypothesis predicts a
higher frequency of compensatory strategies in the image
condition than in the verbal and symbols conditions. To
test this prediction, we classified participants’ decision
patterns with the same method as Bröder and Schiffer
(2003b). This Bayesian strategy classification method is
comprehensively presented and discussed in Bröder &
Schiffer (2003a). We provide a brief description in the
Appendix. The frequencies with which participants were

Figure 1: Example of a travel offer as it was learned in
the image condition.
Procedure. In the learning phase, participants went
through three levels. First, they learned single travel
offers. They were shown one offer. Then the cue values
disappeared and they had to construct the offer cue by
cue. For each cue, cue values were presented for
selection. Participants received acoustic feedback and the
correct value was added to the offer. Learning of single
offers proceeded until the first reconstruction without
errors. Cues were tested in random order and cue values
for selection were shown in random order.
After 5 single offers had been learned, these 5 were
tested and practiced as in single offer learning until a
criterion of 95% correct cue value selections was
achieved. Then, the cue values of these offers were
presented without the name of the organizing company
and participants had to select the correct name of the
organizing company. This naming practice continued
until all five offers were named correctly. Then, the same
learning and testing procedure was completed for the
remaining 5 offers.
Finally, all 10 offers were tested with cue
reconstruction and naming until 90% correct selections
were achieved. The order of offers was random in

386

Discussion

classified as using TTB, DR, FR, or Guessing are shown
in Table 3.
The symbols condition and the verbal condition
induced strategies with similar frequencies, as expected.
However, the format hypothesis was not clearly
supported. TTB classifications were only slightly less
frequent in the image condition (24%) than in the symbols
and verbal conditions (36%). Nonetheless, presentation
format affected the frequency of strategies.
In the image condition, DR clearly was the predominant
strategy, whereas in the symbols and the verbal
conditions, DR was only slightly more frequent than FR.
Thus, the frequencies of TTB, DR, and FR significantly
differed between the three conditions, χ2(4, N = 71) =
10.25, p = .04. The symbols and the verbal conditions did
not differ significantly from each other, χ2(2, N = 46) =
0.16, p = .92, whereas the image condition differed
significantly from the symbols as well as from the verbal
condition, χ2(2, N = 49) = 7.15, p = .03, and χ2(2, N = 47)
= 8.86, p = .01, respectively.
Decision times of TTB users. To test whether the
decision times of participants who were classified as TTB
users increased if cues high in validity did not
discriminate and lower cues had to be considered, we split
the set of 54 items into four sets, depending on the
position of the best discriminating cue in descending
order of validity. For each participant we computed the
median response time in each of the four sets. For
example, if in an decision item the most valid cue had the
same value in both alternatives and the second valid cue
had differing values, this item would belong to the set of
“Cue 2” items.
Table 4: Mean decision times (and standard errors) in
seconds as a function of presentation format and of the
first discriminating cue in descending order of validity for
participants who were classified as TTB users (N = 24)
Condition
image
(N = 6)
symbols
(N = 9)
verbal
(N = 9)

Cue 1
15.82
(5.27)
5.06
(0.47)
4.49
(0.61)

First discriminating cue
Cue 2
Cue 3
18.33
14.51
(6.10)
(4.69)
7.20
5.60
(1.01)
(1.04)
7.81
5.60
(1.85)
(1.48)

We obtained a clear effect of presentation format on
strategy frequencies, however, our results differ from the
prediction of the original format hypothesis. TTB was
only slightly less frequent in the image condition than in
the verbal and the symbols condition. Thus, the original
format hypothesis that predicts a lower frequency of TTB
compared to compensatory strategies (DR and FR) in the
image condition was not clearly supported. However, DR
alone was more frequent in the image condition than in
the verbal and symbols conditions and only a single
participant in the image condition was classified as using
FR.
DR is the compensatory strategy that ignores cue
validity. FR is compensatory as well, but factors in cue
validity. Thus it seems that those participants in our image
condition who considered several cues (those not
classified as TTB users) did not weigh cues according to
validity. This is consistent with prototype matching as it
would be expected with holistic images that do not signal
cue validity. A shift towards DR indicates prototype
matching with such images even more convincingly than
a shift towards DR and FR, because pure image matching
does not include a consideration of cue validity. The low
frequency of TTB users in the verbal and symbols
conditions presumably was a consequence of the learning
procedure.
Overall, our participants were less often classified as
TTB users than Bröder and Schiffer’s (2003b)
participants. Consequently, TTB was not more frequent
than DR and FR combined in the verbal and in the
symbols condition. We presume that our learning
procedure, which - other than in Bröder and Schiffer’s
experiments - did not induce sequential retrieval in
descending order of cue validity, reduced the frequency of
TTB users (cf. Newell & Shanks, 2003). If cue values are
less strictly retrieved in the order of validity, cues lower
in validity might receive more attention. In turn, the
frequency of compensatory strategies DR and FR
increases and the frequency of TTB decreases. The
decision times of TTB users did also suggest that memory
retrieval did not strictly follow the order of cue validities.
Bröder and Gaissmaier (in press) report decision times
for TTB users in the experiments reported in Bröder and
Schiffer (2003b). Decision times were the longer the
lower in validity the first discriminating cue was (see also
Bergert & Nosofsky, 2007; Glöckner & Hodges, 2006).
They also report an experiment, in which learning order
did not conform to validity as in our experiment. In this
experiment, decision times did not increase with
descending validity of the first discriminating cue. This
finding is consistent with decision times of TTB users in
our experiment. Participants classified as TTB users thus
did not perform sequential cue retrieval in the exact order
of validity and with the strict stopping rule of TTB. The
high decision times of TTB users in the image condition
suggest that those participants who learned images and

Cue 4
13.79
(4.86)
5.26
(0.71)
6.54
(2.38)

Table 4 shows the means of these individual response
time medians across the 24 participants who were
classified as TTB users. Clearly, the median decision
times did not increase across the four item sets, however,
decision times were higher in the image condition. This
effect of presentation format was confirmed in a 3
(condition) x 4 (item set) mixed ANOVA, F(2, 21) =
4.535, p = .023. In all conditions, decision times were
increased for items, in which the second cue was the first
discriminating cue. This resulted in a significant effect of
item set, F(3, 63) = 5.385, p = .002. Condition and item
set did not interact significantly, F(6, 63) = .919, p = .488.

387

tried to compare cues one by one were at a disadvantage
compared with participants who chose a similar strategy
with learned lists.
To summarize, we found more holistic information
integration with a disregard for cue validity when decision
alternatives were learned as integrated images. This result
is consistent with the basic idea of Bröder and Schiffer’s
format hypothesis, however, our participants did not
receive support from the learning procedure in the
consideration of cue validity. Hence, the overall
frequency of TTB classifications was lower in our
experiment.

Glöckner, A., & Hodges, S. D. (2006). Strategy selection
in memory based decisions: Simplifying fast and frugal
heuristics versus weighted compensatory strategies
based on automatic information integration. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Juslin, P., & Persson, M. (2002). PROBabilities from
EXemplars (PROBEX): A "lazy" algorithm for
probabilistic inference from generic knowledge.
Cognitive Science, 26, 563-607.
Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. R. (2003). Take the best or
look at the rest? Factors influencing "one-reason"
decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 53-65.

Conclusions

Appendix: Bayesian Strategy Classification

We presented evidence that the presentation format as
well as the learning procedure affect information
integration in multi-attribute decision making. Both
factors influence the accessibility of information and thus
the ease with which information can be retrieved and the
cognitive processes by which it is processed. We have
demonstrated that the extent to which presented
information enters multi-attribute decisions can be
increased or diminished. Thus, the strategies and
heuristics in human decision making not only vary
depending on how well they are adapted to the
information structure of a domain given the boundaries of
human information processing (Gigerenzer et al., 1999),
but also depending on how the information about a
domain is learned and represented in memory. With
regard to the possibility of improving the quality of
human decisions, this deserves attention, because memory
representations are easier to optimize than the information
structure of a real-world domain.

As Bröder & Schiffer (2003b), we presented participants
with binary choice items each consisting of two
alternatives. The alternatives differ with respect to their
values on four cue dimensions. Table 2 presents three
types of decision items and the predicted choices of TTB,
DR, FR, and Guessing. The cues are listed in descending
order of cue validity.
The core assumption of the classification method is that
one of the three strategies or random guessing is used, but
that deviations from a strategies’ predictions occur with
an unknown error rate ε that does not change across item
types.
The likelihood function of a decision pattern given a
strategy k (k = TTB, DR, FR, or Guessing) can then be
computed by a joint binomial function. Let nj be the
number of items of each item type j. Let njk be the number
of choices in item type j predicted by strategy k. The
number of choices in item type j not predicted by strategy
k is then (nj - njk). Let εk be the error probability of
choosing the option not predicted by strategy k. Then the
likelihood of a decision pattern given a strategy k is
determined by

References
Bergert, F. B., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2007). A responsetime approach to comparing generalized rational and
take-the-best models of decision making. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33, 107-129.
Bröder, A., & Gaissmaier, W. (in press). Sequential
processing of cues in memory-based multiattribute
decisions. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Bröder, A., & Schiffer, S. (2003a). Bayesian strategy
!
assessment in multi-attribute decision making. Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, 16, 193-213.
Bröder, A., & Schiffer, S. (2003b). Take the best versus
simultaneous feature matching: Probabilistic inferences
from memory and effects of representation format.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132,
!
277-293.
Dawes, R. M. (1979). The robust beauty of improper
linear models in decision making. American
Psychologist, 34, 571-582.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New
York: Oxford University Press.

3 #
nj &
njk
(nj+njk )
Lk = p( n jk | k,"k ) = )% ( * (1+ "k ) * "k
n
j=1 $ jk '

(A1)
The unknown error probability εk can be determined by

%J
( %J (
"ˆk = '$ ( n j # n jk )* ÷ '$ n j *
'& j=1
*) '& j=1 *)

(A2)

Because DR has to guess with item type 3, the index j in
Equation A2 only runs from 1 to 2, if k = DR. For the
same reason, εk = 0.5 in Equation A1 for the case k = DR
and j = 3. For k = Guessing, all error probabilities are set
to .5 in Equation A1 and Equation A2 is not needed to
compute them.
Likelihoods for all three strategies and Guessing are
determined in this way. A decision pattern is then
classified as presumably being generated by a particular
strategy, if all likelihood ratios in favor of this strategy are
larger than 1. Otherwise, the pattern remains unclassified.

388

