UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hidden Structure: Indirect Measurement of Relational Representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vp7j6bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Day, Samuel B.
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hidden Structure: Indirect Measurement of
Relational Representation
Samuel B. Day (s-day2@northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

the prior structure to solve the problem. In the absence of
such an explicit hint, however, those studies (and countless
replications) found that individuals were very unlikely to
use the structure from the prior story to solve the problem,
or even to notice the structural commonalities between the
two. Additional research has confirmed that while concrete
features serve as robust reminders for previous episodes,
purely relational knowledge is typically quite poor in this
regard, even when the prior structure is demonstrably
retained in memory (e.g., Gentner, Rattermann & Forbus,
1993; Ross, 1987). This pattern suggests that the
representation of relational knowledge—or at least our
ability to access these representations—is both fragile and
fleeting.
These findings reflect the vexing problem that educators
call “inert knowledge” (Whitehead, 1929), or the inability of
students to apply potentially useful knowledge in new
contexts. For cognitive theory, however, they pose a
mystery and a challenge. It seems intuitively clear that
people can acquire some relational knowledge through
experiential learning. But if the representation of relational
structure is as ephemeral and elusive as the analogical
transfer literature suggests, the exact means of this
acquisition remains a puzzle.
In the current research, we focus on the early stages of
relational learning, and explore the conditions under which
incipient representations may become the stronger kinds of
knowledge that ultimately drive behavior. In order to detect
subtle early representational changes, however, we must
employ measures that are more sensitive than those that
have generally been used in this area. In this paper, we
utilize measures that explore changes in processing
fluency—the ease with which a stimulus is processed. Some
of these measures are obvious, such as the fact that easier
processing generally leads to faster responses. Others, such
as the fluency-based misattributions discussed below, are
much less intuitive.
Drawing on this literature, we examine whether
processing a relational structure instantiated in one context
facilitates its processing in a new context. Specifically, we
use these measures to explore whether a target passage will
be processed more easily after exposure to an analogous
passage, even in the absence of conscious awareness of this
analogy. We also explore the role of representational
strength in these effects by examining the impact of prior
knowledge or expertise on these processing changes. First,

Abstract
Structured mental representations underlie much of human
cognitive ability. However, research has repeatedly found
that people are generally quite poor at spontaneously applying
structure acquired from one kind of situation to a dissimilar
domain. This would seem to present a serious impediment to
learning abstract structures experientially. The current study
employs a novel approach designed to be more sensitive to
the relational learning that is taking place. By using implicit
measures of processing fluency, we demonstrate that
relational
commonalities—even
between
dissimilar
domains—can indeed exert a measurable, if subtle, influence
on subsequent processing. Despite having no explicit
awareness of the structural commonalities, participants in our
study rated a scientific passage to be better understood, better
written, and more interesting when it was preceded by an
(overtly dissimilar) analogous passage. This finding has
important implications for the acquisition of complex
knowledge structures.
Keywords: analogy, fluency, relational representation,
implicit learning

Introduction
Human cognition is characterized by a remarkable
capacity for acquiring and using complex knowledge
structures. Most knowledge involves much more than just a
list of independent parts—it contains considerable
information about the role that each concept or entity plays
relative to the others. In capturing these semantic
relationships between elements, structured representations
are crucial to human thought—they underlie our ability to
generate new inferences, to make accurate predictions, and
to transfer existing knowledge to novel problems or
domains (see Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988; Gentner, 1983;
Markman, 1999).
It is therefore surprising that participants in many
laboratory tasks have shown great difficulty with relational
knowledge. The classic example of such difficulty is the
research by Gick and Holyoak (1980, 1983) on spontaneous
analogical transfer. In those studies, participants were
exposed to an instantiation of a particular relational
structure, such as a “convergence” structure in which
several small forces acted upon a single target to produce a
significant effect. Participants were then given an analogous
problem from a different domain—that is, a situation with a
similar underlying relational structure, but different concrete
and contextual details. When participants were made aware
of the relationship between the scenarios, they readily used
935

we briefly review the literature on processing fluency, and
some related research on relational learning.

which exposure to character strings conforming to a
particular abstract “grammar” led to higher liking ratings for
new grammatical strings. Other researchers have looked at
priming for individual semantic relations, such “lives in”
(e.g., BIRD–NEST), with somewhat mixed results (Estes &
Jones, 2006; Gagne, Spalding & Ji, 2005; McKoon &
Ratcliff, 1995; Spellman, Holyoak & Morrison, 2001).
The current research differs from these previous efforts
not only in the nature of the measurements used, but also in
the use of large-scale semantic structures, involving systems
of semantic relations rather than individual relational
concepts. A concomitant difference is a much longer delay
between processing a relation in the base and target than
that used in prior studies.

Processing fluency
It is well-established that for most types of stimuli,
repeated exposure leads to facilitated processing—this fact
underlies basic repetition priming. Recently, a considerable
amount of research has expanded upon this phenomenon by
examining situations in which people use their own ease of
processing, or “fluency”, as a source of information in itself
(see Schwarz, 2004). Specifically, it has been shown that the
recognition that a stimulus is easy to process may lead
individuals to make inferences and attributions about the
cause of this facilitation.
For example, Witherspoon and Allan (1985) asked
participants to judge the duration of words that were flashed
on a computer screen. They found that these estimates were
significantly longer for words that had been seen in an
earlier phase of the experiment. The authors argued that the
prior exposure had made these words easier to process, but
that the participants were misattributing this fluency to the
salient dimension of presentation duration—that is, they
incorrectly inferred that the words were easy to process
because they were presented for longer. This sort of
misattribution has been shown across a range of
dimensions—as a striking example, Mandler and colleagues
(Mandler, Nakamura, & Van Zandt, 1987) found that
participants could be led to indicate that a fluently processed
stimulus was either lighter or darker than a control stimulus,
depending on which question they were asked. It seems that
individuals are in some way able to recognize that a
stimulus is easy to process, but that in the absence of
knowledge about the true source of this fluency they are
willing to attribute the facilitation to a variety of sources—
frequently whatever dimension is made salient by the
current task.
This effect has been shown to operate in the opposite
direction as well: increasing processing fluency by
perceptually manipulating a stimulus often leads to higher
rates of recognition (including false recognition). For
instance, participants are more likely to endorse a word as
previously seen when it is presented with a light rather than
a heavy visual mask at test (Whittlesea, Jacoby, and Girard,
1990).
While these fluency-based attributions generally seem to
take place quickly and effortlessly, they are not simply
perceptual effects—they have been shown to depend
critically on an individual’s beliefs and expectations (e.g.,
Schwarz, 2004; Unkelbach, 2007; Westerman, Lloyd &
Miller, 2002; Whittlesea & Williams, 2001a&b).

Experiment
The current experiment explores the possibility of
increased processing fluency for abstract relational
structures. Specifically, we investigate whether a text
passage will be processed more easily when it is preceded
by an analog (i.e., a passage with the same relational
structure but different concrete content) than when it is
preceded by a matched control passage. In keeping with
previous work in analogy, we refer to the first presentation
of a particular instantiation of a structure as the base, and
the subsequent presentation of the structure instantiated in a
new context as the target, reflecting the fact that the former
may serve as a source of information for the latter.
Given the relative novelty of our approach, we included
several different dependent measures of fluent relational
processing, including changes in reading time,
improvements in comprehension, and misattributions to
various aspects of the text.
Processing time is often used as a measure of fluent
processing; for example, here it could be predicted that a
target passage may be read more quickly when it is
preceded by an analog. However, it is important to
remember that text passages differ in important ways from
many other kinds of stimuli—they are quite complex, and
their processing unfolds over an extended period of time,
allowing for much more strategic variation. Furthermore, it
is possible that increased fluency may actually encourage
greater interest and therefore greater elaboration of the
material, potentially leading to longer reading times. The
effects of fluency on reading speeds are therefore an open
empirical question.
We also explored three areas in which the fluent
processing of a text might lead to misattributions: subjective
comprehension of the target passage, interest in the topic of
the passage, and the perceived quality of writing. (We also
examined the effects of relational fluency on participants’
actual comprehension of the target passage, as measured by
performance on content questions. However, this measure
proved to be problematic, due to participants’ introduction
of outside knowledge to the task, and will not be discussed
here.)

Structural priming
Several researchers have used implicit measures to
explore other forms of structure, such as perceptual or
syntactic structure (e.g., Bock, 1986; Gordon & Holyoak,
1983; Reber, 1967). For example, Gordon & Holyoak
(1983) reported a “structural mere exposure effect,” in
936

Finally, we also investigated how these effects may vary
with expertise. Specifically, we predicted stronger effects
for individuals with relatively little prior knowledge about
the target domain. We reasoned that for individuals with
well-established domain knowledge, strong existing mental
representations would leave less opportunity for any
benefits of recent exposure.
The study uses passages from rich, real-world domains;
specifically, they draw on an extended analogy between the
domains of genetics and computer information storage.
These domains were selected both because they represent a
good structural match, and because they seem well suited to
exploring issues of expertise in fluency, since they are areas
in which prior knowledge can vary greatly.

informed of the additional content questions for the target
passage. They then read three passages at their own pace.
All participants were first presented with a filler passage
describing the operation of lasers. For the second passage,
half of the participants (the Analogy group) read the base
passage on data storage (which was analogous to the target),
while the other half (the Control group) read the control
passage describing data compression. Finally, all
participants read the target passage on genetics.
After each passage, participants provided various ratings
about the text, with each rating entered by clicking on a
horizontal bar on the computer screen. The four ratings
provided were: (1) Quality of writing: “Please click
anywhere on the scale below to rate how clearly the
information in the previous passage was presented”, with
scale endpoints labeled “Not at all clear, very difficult to
understand” and “Very clear and easy to understand”; (2)
Interest: “Please indicate how interesting you found the
material in the passage”, with endpoints labeled “Not at all
interesting” and “Very interesting”; (3) Subjective
comprehension: “Please indicate how well you now
understand the material that was presented”, with endpoints
labeled “Do not understand at all” and “Understand
extremely well”; (4) Prior knowledge: “Please rate how
much of the material in the passage you already know prior
to reading it”, with endpoints labeled “Knew none of it

Participants
One hundred Northwestern undergraduates participated in
this study for partial course credit.

Materials
The materials consisted of expository texts from fairly
technical domains, each about half a page in length (with an
average of 328 words per passage). In addition to a filler
passage describing the operation of lasers, participants read
a base or control passage describing computer information
storage, and a target passage describing aspects of genetics.
The information in the base and target passages drew on a
number of structural commonalities between these domains
(see Table 1 for a list of correspondences). In order to avoid
ceiling effects, the target passage was intentionally written
to be somewhat opaque.
The control passage also described computer storage—
specifically, data compression. The passage was similar in
length and style to the base text, but did not share
meaningful structural commonalities with the target. The
passages were also controlled for wording, such that the
base and control texts did not differ substantially in the
content words that each shared with the target. More
specifically, there were only seven words uniquely shared
by the base and target passages (also, become, into, it,
multiple, one, and sometimes), and eight words uniquely
shared by the control and target passages (frequently,
involves, may, necessary, sequence, string, than, and
within). Furthermore, latent semantic analysis (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997) produced similar ratings of semantic overlap
between the target and the base and control passages (.25
and .30, respectively). These steps helped to ensure that any
observed effects of the base on the target would be solely
due to shared abstract structure between the two.

Table 1: Structural correspondences between passages
Correspondences
• Composed of discrete alphabet (0,1 / A,C,G,T)
• Elements combined into units of determinate
size (bytes / codons)
• These units combined into larger meaningful
sequences of indeterminate length (files /
genes)
• Indicators of starting location for information
sequences (file allocation table / promoter site)
• Information sequence is not necessarily stored
contiguously
• Information is copied to a new location for use
(RAM / RNA)
• During
this
copying,
non-contiguous
information is consolidated
• Information about how to use this data is also
copied (applications / tRNA, rRNA)
• Original information is not changed during
copying
• May be organized such that the same action is
performed on multiple units simultaneously
• Some latent information remains stored
• This latent information may be reactivated (via
changes to the file allocation table / promoter
site)

Design and procedure
The study was implemented as a computer-based task. In
the instructions, participants were told that they would be
reading passages describing topics in science and
technology, and assessing those passages in various ways.
They were instructed to read each passage carefully, but not
to spend too much time on any one. Participants were not
937

before reading” and “Knew all of it before reading”. For
analysis, the location of the click for each rating was
transformed into a continuous value from zero to one.
After rating the final text, participants were presented
with questions about the content of the target passage. These
were open-ended questions designed to assess
comprehension of the relevant structure; for example “How
is the organization of the information in a gene different in
DNA and RNA?” Participants answered five such questions
at their own pace (questions and responses were part of the
computer-based task), and were allowed to enter as much or
as little information as they wished.
Finally, participants answered a few general questions
designed to assess their potential awareness of the structural
commonalities between the base and target. They were first
asked for their general impression of the task, and whether
they had found anything interesting or unusual. Next, they
were specifically asked whether they had noticed any
commonalities between any of the passages, and if so to
describe them. Finally, for those participants who indicated
that they had noticed commonalities, they were asked
whether these had been noticed during reading or
afterwards.

2.84, p < .01), and quality of writing (.42 v. .23, t (1, 41) =
3.53, p < .01) for the target. However, analysis of the high
knowledge group revealed no such differences (all t < 1).
Thus, although the high knowledge group tended to give
higher ratings in general, the experimental manipulation of
exposure to an analogy increased the ratings only for those
with low prior knowledge of the target domain.
Remarkably, virtually none of the participants indicated
that they had noticed the structural commonalities between
the base and target passages. When asked at the end of the
session (“Did you notice any commonalities between any of
the passages, and if so, what were they?”), the most
common response was that all of the passages were about
science or technology, and several participants simply said
no. A few participants in both the analogy (2 Ps) and control
(6 Ps) conditions noted that both genetics and computer
storage had to do with the storage of information, or that
both involved larger components being built from smaller
constituents. However, only two of the 50 participants in the
analogy condition reported noticing any of the deeper
structural commonalities between the domains.

Discussion
This study provides direct evidence for fluency effects
based on structured semantic relations. Participants rated a
passage as better written, better understood, and more
interesting when it had been preceded by an analogous
passage. This occurred even though the passages were from
very different domains, and despite the fact that participants
uniformly failed to recognize the structural commonalities
between the two. These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that participants are forming a representation that
includes structural information, and that this representation
may facilitate processing for subsequent input that shares
this structure.
The study also begins to establish some possible boundary
conditions for this type of effect. When people came to the
task already in possession of a solid representation for the
target material, exposure to the analog appeared to provide

Results
The purpose of this study was to explore differences in
the processing of a target passage resulting from prior
exposure to an analogous text, and to see how these
differences might vary as a function of prior knowledge.
However, initial examination of the data revealed that some
participants had read the base or target passage quite
quickly. Given that our theoretical questions require
adequate encoding of the material, we omitted from analysis
any participant who read either the base or target in less than
half of the average (mean) reading time for that passage,
resulting in the exclusion of 16% of the participants.
Tests revealed that participants in the Analogy condition
gave significantly higher ratings for subjective
comprehension of the target (.52 v. .38, t (1, 83) = 2.94, p <
.01), interest (.49 v. .37, t (1, 83) = 2.18, p < .05), and
quality of writing (.55 v. .44, t (1, 83) = 2.15, p < .05),
relative to those in the Control condition. Prior exposure to
the relevant relational structure thus appears to have
facilitated its subsequent processing in a new context. We
also verified that, as expected, the Analogy and Control
groups did not differ in their ratings of prior knowledge of
the target domain, or in any of their ratings for the filler or
base passages (all ps > .1). Interestingly, there was no
significant difference between conditions for the reading
time of the target passage (75.4 v. 78.0 sec, t < 1).
In order to assess the influence of prior knowledge on
these fluency effects, we performed a median split on the
ratings of prior knowledge for the target passage, and
analyzed the low and high groups separately. In the low
prior knowledge group, we again found significant
differences on ratings of subjective comprehension (.44 v.
.23, t (1, 41) = 3.79, p < .001), interest (.43 v. .25, t (1, 41) =

0 .8
A nalogy

0 .7

Control

0 .6
0 .5
0 .4
0 .3
0 .2
0 .1
0

Comprehension

Interest

Writing quality

Figure 1: Ratings were significantly higher for
participants in the Analogy group
938

0.80

Comprehension

Interest

W riting quality

0.70

Analogy

0.60

Control

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Low
High
knowledge knowledge

Low
High
knowledge knowledge

Low
High
knowledge knowledge

Figure 2: Fluency effects were only seen in participants with low prior knowledge.
In addition to the insights about relational knowledge
itself, we believe that this research provides an approach
which may open the door for more in-depth explorations of
abstract learning. For example, we are beginning to explore
how these early representations evolve over time, and how
they are affected by the overt similarity between situations.
We are also investigating the relationship between these
effects and more traditional measures of learning; for
example, examining whether early implicit measures are
predictive of later performance on learning and transfer
tasks. We believe that this work marks a new and fruitful
approach to understanding human knowledge.

no processing benefit. This suggests that structural fluency
effects are indeed most appropriate as a measure of the
weaker, emerging representations that develop early in the
learning process.
Finally, the study provides some insight into appropriate
measures of these effects, and into the kinds of attributions
that are likely to result from fluent processing of a large
semantic structure. Interestingly, fluent processing did not
appear to produce faster overall reading times. As noted
earlier, individual reading strategies and cognitive styles
could have introduced a significant amount of noise to this
measure. However, indirect measures of fluency—through
subjective ratings—seemed to be a more sensitive indicator
of processing changes.
To varying degrees, the
experimental manipulation increased participants’ ratings of
comprehension, interest, and writing quality.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by ONR award N00014-02-10078. Thanks to Jennifer Asmuth, and the Northwestern
Similarity and Analogy group.

Conclusions

References

Abstract, structured knowledge representations provide
much of the power of human cognition. They allow a
person to understand the relationships between concepts and
between entities, and to use these relationships to make
accurate inferences and predictions across a variety of
situations. It has been surprising, then, to find that people
seem to have such difficulty in acquiring such knowledge
experientially.
The current study provides some important insight into
this issue. The results suggest that relational knowledge
may be acquired gradually, but that even a single exposure
may lead to some degree of representational change.
However, these changes may be too subtle to manifest
themselves in tasks that require active knowledge
application, or even the explicit recognition of common
structure. More implicit measures, which explore changes
in the simple processing of a stimulus, may be better able to
detect the incipient representational changes that are taking
place.

Bock, J.K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355–387.
Estes, Z., & Jones, L.L. (2006). Priming via relational
similarity: A copper horse is faster when seen through a
glass eye. Journal of Memory & Language, 55, 89–101.
Fodor, J.A., & Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1988). Connectionism and
cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition, 28,
3–71.
Gagne, C.L., Spalding, T.L., & Ji, H. (2005). Re-examining
evidence for the use of independent relational
representations during conceptual combination. Journal of
Memory & Language, 53, 445–455.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating

939

Schwarz, N. (2004). Metacognitive experiences in consumer
judgment and decision making. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 14, 332–348.
Spellman, B.A., Holyoak, K.J., & Morrison, R.G. (2001).
Analogical priming via semantic relations. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 383–393.
Unkelbach, C. (2006). The learned interpretation of
cognitive fluency. Psychological Science, 17, 339–345.
Westerman, D.L., Lloyd, M.E., & Miller, J.K. (2002). The
attribution of perceptual fluency in recognition memory:
The role of expectation. Journal of Memory & Language,
47, 607–617.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). The aims of education and other
essays. New York: Macmillan.
Whittlesea, B.W.A., Jacoby, L.L., & Girard, K. (1990).
Illusions of immediate memory: Evidence of an
attributional basis for feelings of familiarity and
perceptual quality. Journal of Memory & Language, 29,
716–732.
Whittlesea, B.W.A., & Williams, L.D. (2001a). The
discrepancy-attribution hypothesis: I. the heuristic basis
of feelings of familiarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory & Cognition, 27, 3–13.
Whittlesea, B.W.A., & Williams, L.D. (2001b). The
discrepancy-attribution hypothesis: Ii. expectation,
uncertainty, surprise, and feelings of familiarity. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory &
Cognition, 27, 14–33.
Witherspoon, D., & Allan, L.G. (1985). The effect of a prior
presentation on temporal judgments in a perceptual
identification task. Memory & Cognition, 13, 101–111.

retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524–575.
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306–365
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–38.
Gordon, P.C., & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Implicit learning and
generalization of the mere exposure effect. Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 45, 492–500.
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Mandler, G., Nakamura, Y., & van Zandt, B.J.S. (1987).
Nonspecific effects of exposure on stimuli that cannot be
recognized. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory & Cognition, 13, 646–648.
Markman, A.B. 1999: Knowledge Representation. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mckoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1995). Conceptual
combinations and relational contexts in free association
and in priming in lexical decision and naming.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 527–533.
Reber, A.S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 6, 855–
863.
Ross, B.H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 13(4), 629–639.

940

