UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How the Statistical Structure of the Environment Affects Perception of the Müller-Lyer
Illusions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30g5h1mb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Blessing, Stephen
Svetlik, Martina

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How the Statistical Structure of the Environment Affects Perception
of the Müller-Lyer Illusion
Stephen Blessing (sblessing@ut.edu)
Martina Svetlik (msvetlik@ut.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Tampa
401 W. Kennedy Blvd., Box Q
Tampa, FL 33606 USA
through variants of the original stimulus (see Figure 1) in
which the corner explanation is not valid, and also through
behavioral accounts as well (McGraw & Stanford, 2001).
Other explanations include an eye movement account,
stating that because the eye moves more in analyzing the
figure where the adornments point out than with the other
figure, the observer perceives that line as longer (Carr,
1935). However, research has shown that even in the
absence of eye movements, the illusion still exists (Bolles,
1969). Another account is referred to as assimilation theory,
as it states that the illusion exists because the observer finds
it hard to separate the single horizontal line from the rest of
the figure (Pressey, 1971). However, this account has also
shown not to be upheld by behavioral data (Bross, Blair,
Longtin, 1978). More recently, Bulatov, Bertulis, and
MicKiene analyzed the Müller-Lyer according to its spatial
properties, and developed a neurophysiogical model. They
obtained similar patterns between their model and
behavioral data.
The research presented here takes the probabilistic
explanation of the Müller-Lyer illusion by Howe and Purves
(2005a) and attempts to match it to behavioral data. In
contrast to the accounts mentioned above, this one bases
itself on the statistical nature of the environment. In that
regards, this account is consonant with theories that explain
human behavior and cognition as adapting to the
environment (e.g., Anderson, 1993; Gibson, 1966). Howe
and Purves analyzed natural scenes for the standard version
of the Müller-Lyer illusion and four of its variants. These
natural scenes were gathered in a variety of settings using a
laser device that converts 3-D space into numerical data
representing the distance and direction of all points on
visible surfaces that can then be related to retinal images
(see Howe & Purves, 2005b, for a more detailed
explanation). Using a selection of such scenes, they
generated probability distributions of various line lengths
and adornments. These distributions indicate that given a
target adornment found in the scene, the probability of

Abstract
Past researchers have attempted to explain the Müller-Lyer
illusion through such means as eye movements (Carr, 1935)
and isolating parts from the whole (Pressey, 1971). A recent
explanation is that observers are sensitive to statistical
regularities within the environment (Howe & Purves, 2005a).
Certain configurations of lines appear more often than others
within the environment, and this accounts for the illusion.
Experiment 1 investigated whether these observed
environmental statistical regularities are matched by
behavioral data. In Experiment 2 the probability of shorter or
longer lines within the illusion was manipulated in order to
influence people’s perception of the illusion. The evidence
from both experiments provides data that are consistent with
the hypothesis that perception of the Müller-Lyer Illusion is
affected by the statistical nature of the environment.
Keywords: perception; geometrical illusions; probability
distributions

Introduction
The Müller-Lyer effect is a classic visual illusion. The
standard presentation is shown in Figure 1a. The horizontal
line contained within the figure on the bottom is generally
perceived as longer than the horizontal line in the upper
figure, though both are in fact the same length. Somehow
the arrowhead adornments pointing out drive the observer to
perceive that figure differently than when the arrowhead
adornments are pointing in. Several hypotheses have been
posited to explain this observation. Most concern
themselves either with properties of the figure itself or
properties of the visual system, though more recent attempts
have examined the nature of the environment itself.
An older explanation by Gregory (1963) suggested that
the illusion exists because the observer interprets the figure
where the arrowheads point out as a concave corner (that is,
the corner is farther away than the walls), whereas the figure
with the arrowheads pointing in is interpreted as a convex
corner (that is, the corner is closer). However, this account
is called into question not only by the illusion persisting
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Standard Müller-Lyer illusion (a), box variant (b), shaftless variant (c), and dot variant (d).
827

examined a fourth variant, one that was vertical in
orientation; we did not use that variant in this experiment,
due to a desire to have consistently horizontal stimuli.)
These different distributions suggest that the variants may
differ in the magnitude of the illusion. The expectation
would be that this difference should vary proportionately
with the amount of overlap that one sees between the
distributions for when the adornment is pointing in versus
when the adornment is pointing out. That is, more overlap
between the curves should indicate a weaker sense of the
illusion, as that would mean the probability of shorter or
longer lines becomes more equal to one another. Past
researchers (Coren & Girgus, 1974) measured differences in
the illusion magnitude of Müller-Lyer variants. However,
they did not use one of the variants analyzed by Howe and
Purves (2005a). This experiment serves as a partial
replication of the prior study, with the addition of another
variant. The results we obtain will be compared with the
prior Coren and Girgus findings, in addition to all data
being correlated with the environmental analysis of Howe
and Purves.

finding a matching adornment is greater at a shorter line
length when the adornments are in the “pointing in”
orientation. Put another way, it is more probable to find
shorter Müller-Lyer-like configurations in the environment
for when the tails point in than when the tails point out.
Figure 2 shows such a distribution for the standard
variation, based on the original data of Howe and Purves
(2005a). For instance, consider the black arrowhead
adornment at the top of the figure. The probability of
finding a matching adornment to the left (thereby creating a
figure where the adornments point in) of any specific length,
such as the 25 units indicated in the figure, is greater than
finding a matching adornment traveling to the right at that
same length (which would create a figure where the
adornments point out). Considering lines of length 25, one
is 10% more likely to find the matching adornment to the
left than to the right. The probability distribution essentially
reverses if the initial adornment flipped, as the dark grey
arrowhead and distribution in Figure 2 show.
If the probabilistic findings that Howe and Purves (2005a)
show in their data are indeed a driver of our perceptions,
then it should show up in behavioral data as well. The two
experiments presented here attempt to check this claim.
Experiment 1 examines some of the data they present
regarding Müller-Lyer variants. As a stronger manipulation,
Experiment 2 changes the distribution curves of what
participants experience regarding figures with adornments
pointing in versus pointing out, to see if that influences their
perceptions, at least within the experimental session.

Method
Participants The participants were 40 undergraduate
students attending the University of Tampa recruited from
various psychology classes. Participants received course
credit for their participation.
Material Custom computer software was created to display
the stimuli. The computers used were running the Windows
XP operating system with 17” color CRT monitors. The
software used the four variants displayed in Figure 1
(referred to as “standard,” “boxes,” “shaftless,” and “dots”).
Each of the variations could be displayed with the
adornments either facing inward or outward. Furthermore,
the length of each line was varied between 150 to 400
pixels, in 50 pixel increments, for a total of six possible
lengths. This combination of six lengths, four variants, and
two adornment types yields 48 possible stimuli. Each
participant saw each stimuli exactly once. The order of
stimuli presentation was determined randomly for each
participant, with the only stipulation being that each variant
had to be seen once before it could be repeated again. Each
trial presented one of the 48 stimuli in the upper half of the
screen, and below that was a line containing no adornments
that whose size the participant could manipulate. The lower
figure was placed off center to the upper one so that the
participant could not line up the end points of the two lines.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-125

-75

-25

25

75

125

Line Length (pixels)

Figure 2. Probability distribution for the standard MüllerLyer variant (adapted from Howe & Purves, 2005a).

Experiment 1

Procedure The procedure used is similar to the one
followed in Crawford, Huttenlocher, and Engebretson
(2000). For each trial, the chosen stimulus was shown in the
upper part of the screen. Beneath that figure was a
horizontal line presented without adornment. The
participant could manipulate this plain line by tapping the
‘s’ key to make the line shorter or by tapping the ‘l’ key to
make the line longer (both done in single pixel increments).

In addition to analyzing the natural scenes for the relative
distributions of the standard version of the Müller-Lyer
illusion, Howe and Purves also analyzed the scenes for
several of its variants (see b-d in Figure 1). Perhaps not
surprisingly, the distributions differ depending on the
variant, but the general finding that shorter line lengths for
when the adornment points in is more probable than when
the adornment points out is true in all versions. (They also
828

results and the results from Coren and Girgus (1974). It
should also be noted that in both sets of results the dots
variant is the weakest.
Our hypothesis is that, if the perception of the illusion has
a basis in the environment, there should be a relationship
between our results and the data and graphs provided by
Howe and Purves (2005a). We analyzed their data first with
respect to the amount of overlap between the two
distributions they plot on their graph (for an example, see
Figure 2; Howe & Purves, 2005a, provided figures for all
variants). One distribution plots the probability of finding a
matching adornment based on length if the first adornment
initially points to the right (the black distribution in Figure
2), and the other distribution plots the probability if the
initial adornment points left (the grey distribution). The
amount of non-overlap was found by computing the
proportion of non-shared area between the two curves. All
curves have much overlap, as can be seen in Table 2.

The participants were told to match this line’s length as
closely as possible to the horizontal line contained or
implied within the stimulus above (in both the “shaftless”
and “dots” variants, the horizontal line is not actually
drawn). The lower line was offset 75 pixels either to the left
or to the right of the stimulus, so that the participant could
not adopt a strategy of visually lining up the endpoints (the
offset direction was randomly chosen for each trial). No
time restraints were placed on any trial, allowing the
participant to work at their own pace. For each trial, the
difference between the line that the participant could adjust
and the length of the actual stimulus was recorded.

Results
The difference between the participant’s length estimate and
the actual line length was obtained for each trial. We
divided this difference by the actual line length, to get the
proportion error for each trial. For each participant on each
variant, we took their average error across length on the
stimuli with adornments pointing out (typically
overestimates) and subtracted their average error across
length on the stimuli that had the adornments pointing in
(typically underestimates). This difference we consider to be
the magnitude of the illusion for each variant.
Data from five participants were discarded, because they
were over three standard deviations away from the average
performance on one of the variants (“boxes”). It appears
they were matching the subset of the full horizontal line.
Table 1 displays the data from both our experiment and
the experiment by Coren and Girgus (1974) that also
examined variants of the Müller-Lyer illusion (Coren &
Girgus did not compare the boxes variant; they did examine
two additional variants, but as Howe and Purves did not
analyze them, those data are not included.) Our data are the
computed magnitude illusion as described above, and the
Coren and Girgus results are a similar measure, based on
information in their paper (they tested 10 participants per
variant, with 2 trials per participant).

Table 2: Comparison of Current Results with Proportion
Non-Overlap between Distributions.
Variant
Standard
Shaftless
Dots
Boxes

Standard
Shaftless
Dots
Boxes

Coren & Girgus
Results
0.27
0.20
0.08

Magnitude
of Illusion
0.25
0.23
0.09
0.14

What is perhaps more important than the proportions, is
the relative rankings. The Standard variant has the least
overlap, and it has the strongest illusion magnitude. The
Dots variant has the least overlap (there is a difference in the
two distributions, but obviously very little). Comparing the
non-overlap of the shaftless and boxes variants in Table 2,
one would have expected perhaps reversed results in Table 1
concerning these two variants. In looking at those two
distributions in particular, the boxes variant does indeed
have less overlap, but the modes on the shaftless variant
distributions are much further apart, by over a 2 to 1 factor.
The standard’s variants modes are farthest apart.

Table 1: Differences in Illusion Magnitude of MüllerLyer Variants.
Variant

Proportion
Non-Overlap
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.04

Discussion

Current
Results
0.25 (0.07)
0.23 (0.08)
0.09 (0.07)
0.14 (0.10)

Previous researchers have shown how physical attributes
(length and height of the adornments, the angle that the
adornments make with the horizontal) of the Müller-Lyer
illusion stimuli can vary the results (Bulatov, Bertuli, &
Mickiene, 1997). Given that and with the experimental
differences, the degree of similarity between our results and
those of Coren and Girgus (1974) is quite high (considering
that in their experiment participants manipulated a wooden
version of the illusion; ours was done on a computer).
Comparing these behavioral results to the environmental
data of Howe and Purves (2005a), there appears to be some
degree of correspondence. The variant with the highest
illusion magnitude is the variant one would expect based on
the probability distributions (that is, the standard form of the

A repeated measures ANOVA on our results shows a
significant difference of variant, F(3,96)=38.08, p<.01,
η2 = .54. Performing pairwise comparisons, it is found that
all variants are significantly different from one another
(p<.05), except for the standard and shaftless variants. One
obvious result seen in Table 1 is that the ordering from the
variant with the most illusion magnitude to the least
(Standard, Shaftless, and Dots) is the same for both our
829

middle of the screen, with one variant on top, and the other
beneath it (slightly offset to one side of the other, as in
Experiment 1). The length of one line was between 150 –
400 pixels (50 pixel increments). The length of the other
line was then set to be either 25% larger or smaller than that
of the first line. This percentage was based on the illusion
magnitude of the first experiment, so as to somewhat
“erase” the effects of the illusion. For half of the
participants, 70% of the time the stimuli that had the
adornments pointing in would be longer (Group L), and for
the other half of the participants, 70% of the time the stimuli
with outward facing adornments would be longer (Group
M). Participants in Group L, then, were receiving stimuli
not consistent with their experiences outside of the
experiment as shown in the Howe and Purves (2005a) data
(that is, they were seeing a majority of cases where the
variant with the adornments pointing in actually was
longer).

illusion). Likewise, the variant with the least illusion
magnitude, the dots variant, also corresponds. The middle
two variants (boxes and shaftless) might have some
interplay that would be difficult to account for between the
overlap of the distribution curves and how far apart the two
curves are, resulting in their lack of direct correspondence.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 provides a stronger examination to the idea
that people’s perceptions of the environment are at least
partly influenced by the statistical nature of the
environment. If a person’s perceptions are indeed influenced
in such a way, then it might be possible, in a laboratory
setting, to change their apparent perception of the illusion
by manipulating in some way the statistical information they
are receiving from the environment.
In this experiment we execute such a manipulation by
having participants perform a judgment task in which they
indicate which of two standard Müller-Lyer stimuli is
longer. We manipulate the answers such that half of the
participants see proportionately more stimuli in which the
Müller-Lyer stimulus with the adornments pointing in is
truly longer than a Müller-Lyer stimulus with the
adornments pointing out. The other half of the participants
encounters what would be considered the more likely
scenario, given the environmental factors, where the longer
stimulus is usually the figure with outward facing
adornments. Our hypothesis is that the first group of
participants, by observing more cases where what used to be
statistically more likely the shorter stimulus is truly the
longer stimulus, will become more accurate in their size
adjustments of the illusion.

Procedure First, participants were randomly placed into
either Group L or Group M. The experiment consisted of
three parts. The first and third parts were identical to
Experiment 1, except that only one variant was used (the
“standard” one), resulting in 12 stimuli being presented
within each part. Participants in both groups saw the same
stimuli in these two sections. Which stimulus was presented
on each trial was randomly determined for each participant.
As before, the difference between the length of the plain
horizontal line that the participant could adjust and the
horizontal line of the stimulus was recorded for both of
these experimental sections.
In the second, middle part of the experiment the
participants were still presented with two horizontal figures,
but both had adornments (one pointing out, the other
pointing in). They were instructed to indicate which of the
two figures had the longer horizontal line. If the upper
figure was longer, they were instructed to hit the ‘s’ key,
and if the lower figure was longer, they were instructed to
hit the ‘l’ key. If the participants chose the incorrect answer
they would receive feedback indicating so, the experiment
would pause for 5 s, and then it would move on to the next
trial. If the participant was correct, there was no pause.
Participants in Group L saw one distribution of stimuli, and
Group M participants saw a different distribution, as
described above. There were a total 200 trials for part two,
with the order of the stimuli being randomly chosen for each
participant. How accurately participants performed on these
trials were recorded. There were no pauses or breaks in the
experiment between the three parts.

Method
Participants The participants were 65 undergraduate
students attending the University of Tampa recruited from
various psychology classes. Participants received either
course or extra credit for their participation.
Material The same computers were used for Experiment 2,
and the software was very similar as what was used in
Experiment 1. For this experiment, only the standard
variation of the Müller-Lyer illusion was used. The
experiment was divided into three parts. The first and third
sections were identical to the adjustment task used in
Experiment 1, except with fewer stimuli. With only the one
variant (the standard one), but the same six line lengths
(150 – 400 pixels, at 50 pixel increments) and the two types
of adornments, there were 12 possible stimuli. During each
of the first and third parts of the experiment, each of these
12 stimuli was presented exactly once, as they were in
Experiment 1. The middle part of the experiment was a
judgment task where the participant had to decide on each
trial which of two standard Müller-Lyer variants had the
longer horizontal line. In each pair, one stimulus had the
adornments pointing out, and the other had the adornments
pointing in. These two stimuli were presented near the

Results
The illusion magnitude as described in the results of
Experiment 1 was computed for each participant for both
the first and third parts of the experiment. In addition, an
accuracy measure was computed for the judgment task that
comprised the second part of this experiment. Being how it
is critical for participants to pay attention and accurately
830

process these stimuli, those participants with poor accuracy,
defined as 80% or less, were not included in subsequent
analyses. This affected eight participants in Group L (the
harder of the two conditions, as the 25% difference between
the two stimuli put the illusion magnitude right at the
breakpoint for the average participant) and one participant
in Group M. Thus, there were 25 participants in Group L
(M = 0.908 for accuracy, SD = 0.050) and 29 participants in
Group M (M = 0.906, SD = 0.051).

the magnitude of the illusion of the various Müller-Lyer
variants in the behavioral data reflect to some degree those
that are observed in the environmental probabilities found
by Howe and Purves. Experiment 2 shows that a person’s
perception of the illusion can be manipulated in a laboratory
setting by providing them a sequence of stimuli that is either
consistent with or not consistent with their prior
perceptions.
In future work we hope to further investigate the extent to
which this probabilistic account of perception can be
applied to behavioral findings. First, we are interested in
how robust the finding is, and what may influence that
robustness within individuals. In pilot testing for
Experiment 2, we determined that 200 judgment trials was
likely to be sufficient to detect if the effect existed or not,
that the difference between the two stimuli, particularly for
Group L participants, should be 25%, and that an adequate
ratio to use was 70/30 between the longer/shorter stimuli
depending on condition. One could manipulate any of these
variables to determine its effect on perception of the stimuli,
and which of these has the stronger influence. Also, it
appears that there may be individual differences as to how
strong the effect is. Some participants in Group M got
considerably worse at the adjustment task after doing the
judgments (5 participants had difference scores greater than
10%; none in Group L had such a large decrease in
performance). Another interesting set of experiments to
pursue would examine transfer issues and how long the
effect lasts. Given the information we have about variants
from Experiment 1, one could examine if seeing different
probability distributions within one variant transferred to a
different variant (Coren & Girgus, 1974, did see transfer
across variants in terms of people making better size
determinations after exposure to a different variant). Given
the manipulations here, and the fact that we have a lifetime
of exposure to such probability distributions as shown in
Figure 2, one would not expect this effect to be long lasting,
nor exist beyond the immediate experimental session.
However, it would be interesting to see how durable the
change might be.
Howe and Purves use their probabilistic-based theory to
explain a much wider spectrum of perceptual phenomena,
such as perception of line length and angle in general, and
also other illusions such as the Poggenndorff Illusion
(2005b). In findings similar to that discussed here for the
Müller-Lyer illusion, they show how the probability
distributions of these phenomena exist in the natural world.
The implication is that our perceptions for all these
phenomena are tuned to those statistical probabilities that
exist within the environment.
Howe and Purves’ theory could be placed with other
theories that attempt to explain human cognition as adapting
to the environment, such as Gibson’s ecological approach
(1966) and Marr’s computational approach (1982).
Anderson constructed his latest iteration of his ACT theory
around such a rational analysis, as he termed it (1993;
Anderson & Lebiere, 1998). In his work, Anderson and his

Table 2: Differences in Illusion Magnitude.
Condition
Group L
Group M

Pre-Judgment
0.236 (.066)
0.225 (.073)

Post-Judgment
0.201 (.065)
0.234 (.053)

The means and standard deviations of all conditions are
shown in Table 2. Difference scores for each participant
were obtained by subtracting post-judgment performance
from pre-judgment performance. A between-subject t-test
on these difference scores reveals a significant difference
between the two groups (t(52) = 2.17, p < .05, d = 0.55; no
difference existed before the judgment task, t(52) = 0.41,
n.s.). Also of note, though not significant, is that whereas
76% of the participants in Group L improved their
performance between the first and third parts, only 55% of
the participants in Group M did so. This means that almost
twice as many people in Group M actually did worse on
their second attempt at the adjustment task.

Discussion
While the absolute differences in improvement between the
two groups are not large, there is a difference (3.5% in
Group L, -0.9% in Group M). If one examines relative
changes, the Group L participants got 14.8% better at the
task on average, whereas, the people in Group M were
actually 4.0% worse, on average, at making their
adjustments than they were initially.
We were surprised by the number of people in Group M
who performed worse on the post-judgment task relative to
their pre-judgment performance (45%). Past research has
demonstrated an improvement across time in making such
adjustments (this was one main finding of the Coren &
Girgus, 1974, research discussed in Experiment 1). Prior to
conducting the experiment, we expected both groups to
improve, but that Group L, given their judgment
experiences, would improve more. However, whereas
Group L did improve, Group M did not. If anything, Group
M’s experience in the judgment task, where the stimuli they
saw confirmed prior experience (that is, Müller-Lyer-like
stimuli with adornments pointing out tend to be long)
resulted in worse performance at the adjustment task.

General Discussion
Both experiments provide behavioral evidence for the
findings and theory put forward by Howe and Purves
(2005a). In Experiment 1, the differences that one sees in
831

Carr, H. A. (1935). An introduction to space perception.
New York: Longmans, Gree, & Co.
Coren, S., & Girgus, J. S. (1974). Transfer of illusion
decrement as a function of perceived similarity. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 102, 881-887.
Crawford, L. E., Huttenlocher, J., & Engebretson, P.H.
(2000). Category effects on estimates of stimuli:
Perception or reconstruction? Psychological Science, 11,
280-284.
Gibson, J.J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual
systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gregory, R.L. (1963). Distortion of visual space as
inappropriate constancy scaling. Nature, 199, 678-680.
Howe, C. Q., & Purves, D. (2005a). The Müller-Lyer
illusion explained by the statistics of image-source
relationships. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 102, 1234-1239.
Howe, C. Q., & Purves, D. (2005b). Perceiving geometry:
Geometrical illusions explained by natural scene
statistics. New York: Springer.
Lebiere, C., Byrne, M.D., Anderson, J.R., Qin, Y., Bothell,
D., & Douglass, S.A. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111, 1036-1060.
Marr, D., (1982). Vision, San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
McGraw, K.O., & Stanford, J. (2001). The apparent distance
of interior and exterior corners: A test of Gregory’s
misapplied size constancy explanation for the MüllerLyer illusion. The Journal of General Psychology, 121,
19-26.
Pressey, A. W. (1971). An extension of assimilation theory
to illusions of size, area and direction. Perception &
Psychophysics, 9, 172-176.

colleagues have shown how various memory,
categorization, and problem solving phenomena can be
explained by understanding how the mind adapts itself to
the statistical regularities of the environment (1991).
Developing a perceptual model within such a system would
be an interesting undertaking (the ACT theory has been
augmented with perceptual capabilities, Lebiere et al.,
2004). Perhaps our perception of the Müller-Lyer illusion,
as well as that of visual space in general, is one more
phenomenon that can at least partially be explained via such
a mechanism.

Acknowledgments
The second author received an Undergraduate Honors
Research Fellowship from the University of Tampa to assist
in this project.

References
Anderson, J.R., (1991). Is human cognition adaptive?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14, 471-517.
Anderson, J.R., (1993). Rules of the Mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anderson, J.R., Lebiere, C. (1998). Atomic Components of
Thought. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bolles, R. C. (1969). The role of eye movements in the
Müller-Lyer illusion. Perception & Psychophysics, 6,
175-176.
Bross, M., Blair, R., & Longtin, P. (1978). Assimilation
theory, attentive fields, and the Müller-Lyer illusion.
Perception, 7, 297-304.
Bulatov, A., Bertulis, A., & Mickiene, L. (1997).
Geometrical illusions: Study and modeling. Biological
Cybernetics, 77, 395-406.

832

