UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Differences and the Impact of Forward and Backward Causal Relations on the
Online Processing of Narratives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02f7h4gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Briner, Stephen W.
Kurby, Christopher A.
McNamara, Danielle S.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences and the Impact of Forward and Backward Causal Relations
on the Online Processing of Narratives
Stephen W. Briner (sbriner@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Christopher A. Kurby (ckurby@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152

Abstract
This paper investigated the impact of causality on reading time by
examining the contributions of forward antecedent and backward
consequence connections. Undergraduate students read four
narrative texts, sentence by sentence. Reading times for each
sentence were regressed onto the number of antecedents
connecting forward to a sentence and backward to prior sentences.
Overall, forward antecedents and backward consequences
explained unique variance in reading times, with increases in
antecedents and consequences predicting decreases in reading
time. However, causal consequences did not contribute unique
variance to participants with higher literature knowledge. Further,
the presence of forward antecedents significantly attenuated
reading time differences in reading skill, and lower knowledge
participants read sentences significantly faster than higher
knowledge participants when forward antecedents were present.
These results suggest that readers track both forward causal
antecedents and backward causal consequences in online
comprehension.
Keywords: reading comprehension; reading time; narrative;
individual differences; causal relations; causal relatedness;
situation model; causality.

Introduction
According to the event-indexing model, readers track at
least five situational dimensions during language
comprehension (i.e., causality, temporality, spatiality,
protagonist goals, and intentionality; Zwaan, Langston, &
Graesser, 1995). Based on these dimensions, readers create
a mental model (i.e., situation model) of the events
described in the text. As comprehension unfolds, readers
track the continuity of each dimension. When a
discontinuity is encountered, readers must update their
situation model to account for this shift (Zwaan et al.,
1995). The tracking of these dimensions contributes to
maintaining a coherent situation model of the events.
Central to the maintenance of coherence is the extent to
which an event or action is causally related to previous
events or goals (Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994;
Zwaan et al., 1995). Causal relatedness, as described by
Trabasso and Sperry (1985), refers to the internal structure
of a particular text’s causes and effects. In a narrative text,
for example, character desires may cause the character to
commit certain actions. These actions may in turn result in
a change in the character’s motivation or reactions from

125

other characters. However, not every event in a text is
clear-cut. Sometimes events or states in a text flesh out the
background of the narrative without those states having
explicit causes or effects. Or, the events in a text may have
little apparent causal structure. For example, the narrative
structure of William S. Burroughs’ Naked Lunch (1959)
deliberately obscures the causal relations in the story by rearranging the sequence of events, seemingly at random.
The seminal paper by Trabasso and Sperry (1985) argued
that certain items in a text should be more important to the
story than others based on their causal relations within the
text. They proposed that conceptual dependencies, or the
number of concepts that rely on a particular event in the
text, are a major factor in determining the importance of a
given item to the text as a whole. In this framework, Item A
in a text is conceptually dependent on Item B if the events
in Item B psychologically motivates, physically causes, or
otherwise enables the events in Item A. Trabasso and Sperry
(1985) found that the number of causal connections
between particular clauses accounted for a significant
amount of the variance in judgments of importance.
Trabasso and van den Broek (1985) found that causal
connectivity also influences the memory representation for
text. They found that more causal connections between
particular clauses led to improved recall.
Zwaan, Graesser, and Magliano (1995) demonstrated that
causal connections have an impact on reading time. In their
experiment, they collected sentence-by-sentence reading
times of narrative texts. The results indicated that reading
times slowed when encountering a sentence on new causal
chain. Thus, reading time increases (i.e., slows down) when
a causal relationship is difficult to infer from the text.
Further evidence for the importance of causal relatedness
on reading time comes from Wolfe, Magliano, and Larsen
(2005), in which participants read two-sentence stories. The
second sentence of each story was either causally related or
unrelated to the first sentence. Sentences with a high degree
of causal relation to each other were read more quickly than
sentences with a low degree of causal relation. These
results suggest that causal relatedness has an impact on ease
of processing; the easier the causal relations are to infer, the
more quickly a reader will process the sentences. Others,
such as Myers, Shinjo, and Duffy (1987), have reported
similar findings.

The above studies clearly demonstrate the impact of
causal structure on reading comprehension, yet several
aspects of causal relatedness have yet to be explored.
Though previous studies on causal relations have examined
whether or not an event lies along a causal chain, few
studies have explored the potentially different impacts of
direction of causality on comprehension. Notable
exceptions have been studies investigating the role of
causal antecedents (which explain why an event in a text
happened) and causal consequences in the form of
predictions (what happens next as the result of an event). It
has typically been found that readers generate causal
antecedent inferences (a cause for the current event) but
rarely predict what will happen next as a result of a cause
presented in a current sentence (e.g., Magliano, Baggett,
Johnson, & Graesser, 1993; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1986).
This suggests that readers more reliably make inferences
that serve to establish and maintain coherence.
However, these studies have only examined causal
consequences which followed an event described in the
sentence. But in many cases, an event's consequence is read
before the event’s cause, or antecedent. Consider the
following example from Trabasso and Sperry (1985):
1. A father and his son
2. were taking their donkey to town
3. to sell him

of text cohesion on comprehension, suggest the possibility
that individual differences may play a key role in causal
inference generation and maintenance of coherence.
The purpose of the current study was twofold; we
explored the effects of forward and backward causal
connections in online comprehension. Specifically, we
investigated the extent to which readers are influenced by
forward antecedents and backward consequences during
online comprehension. Secondly, we investigated possible
knowledge and reading skill differences in the influence of
these causal relations during comprehension. In this study,
we conducted causal network analyses of four texts
consistent with the approach detailed in Trabasso and
Sperry (1985). Based on these networks, we tested the
variance of sentence-by-sentence reading times accounted
for by forward and backward causal relations (antecedents
and backward consequences).

Method
Participants
Forty-eight undergraduate students at the University of
Memphis participated in exchange for course credit. The
mean age of the participants was 22.21 years (SD = 6.04).

Materials

In this example, (2) is a consequence of (3); the father
and son take the donkey to town because they want to sell
him; there is a backward consequence from (3) to (2).
Given that Trabasso and van den Broek (1985) were
interested in offline memory representations of texts, they
only investigated the number of connections, not the
direction of those connections. However, the online
construction of a situation model involves dynamically
using the causal connections in order to integrate and
update situation models. Given that backward
consequences explain events that occurred in the previous
text, they may require a reader to update his or her situation
model online.
Despite these promising findings about the importance of
causal relations within a text, there is some evidence that
not all readers are equally influenced by these relations.
Van den Broek (1988) found that while causal connections
(along with goal hierarchy) were important to ratings of
sentence importance, causal connections seemed to be more
important to participants over the age of 11. This finding
implies that some readers are more skilled at picking up on
causal connections than others, as the causes may often be
implicit and not particularly transparent to a less trained or
less skilled reader. A study of the differences between
reading ability and prior knowledge is needed to further
clarify the circumstances under which certain types of
causes are more or less influential. The findings of
McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, and Kintsch (1996), that
individual differences play a significant role in the effects

126

Stimulus Texts Four excerpts from narratives were used as
the stimulus material for this experiment. These texts were
selected from the Metametrics corpus, a collection of high
school textbooks. The excerpts were taken from A
Christmas Memory, by Truman Capote (30 sentences; 416
words); The World on a Turtle’s Back, an Iroquois creation
story (28 sentences; 394 words); Seventeen Syllables, by
Hisaye Yamamoto (19 sentences; 407 words); and A Man
Called Horse, by Dorothy M. Johnson (38 sentences; 393
words). The average number of words across passages was
402.5 (SD = 11.03).
Causal Networks Causal networks were derived for the
four texts. Following Trabasso and Sperry (1985), a
sentence was judged to have a causal relation if the events
or states in a sentence cause an event or state in another
sentence. In order for a sentence to be judged as causally
related to another sentence, a counterfactual test was
applied. Consider two sentences A and B. Sentence A is
considered causally related to sentence B if the events or
states in sentence B could not have occurred if not for
sentence A. In order for a sentence to be considered a
cause, the sentence must motivate, physically cause, or
enable an effect in another sentence.
A sentence was considered to have a causal antecedent if
a previous sentence in the text causes a subsequent
sentence. As an example, consider the following excerpt
from The World on a Turtle’s Back. This passage describes
a duel between the left-handed and right-handed twins.

23. On the last day of the duel, as they stood, they at
last knew how the right-handed twin was to kill his
brother.
24. Each selected his weapon.
25. The left-handed twin chose a mere stick that
would do him no good.
26. But the right-handed twin picked out the deer
antler, and with one touch he destroyed his
brother.
In this example, (23) is the causal antecedent of (24); if
the twins had not met for a duel, they would not have
selected weapons. Likewise, (24) is the antecedent of (25);
if the twins had not selected weapons, the left-handed twin
would not have chosen a stick as a weapon. However, (25)
cannot be said to cause (26); the choosing of the stick is not
a sufficient cause for the choosing of the antler. Instead,
(24) is an antecedent of (26) in the same way that (24) is an
antecedent of (25).
A sentence was considered to have a backward causal
consequence if a previous sentence in the text was caused
by a subsequent sentence. Consider the following excerpt
from A Christmas Memory, where a young man describes
the present that his friend is making for him:
27. I am fairly sure that she is building me a kite—the
same as last year and the year before.
28. The year before that we exchanged slingshots.
29. All of which is fine by me.
30. For we are champion kite-fliers who study the
wind like sailors; my friend, more accomplished
than I, can get a kite aloft when there isn't enough
breeze to carry clouds.
In the above example, (30) psychologically motivates
(29) and (27). If the friends had not been champion kiteflyers, then they would not have exchanged kites year after
year. Likewise, if they were not champion kite-flyers, the
main character, the narrator, would not likely be fine with
receiving the same gift over and over.
Sentences were judged to belong to the causal chain if a
sentence’s effect could be linked to an antecedent or
previous sentence in the text. Sentences were also judged to
belong to the causal chain if the sentence caused a
consequence earlier in the text. The first two authors coded
two of the four texts together, then, as a check of reliability,
coded the other two separately, with differences being
resolved by mutual agreement. The authors agreed on
whether or not a sentence belonged on the causal chain
83% of the time. All differences were resolved by
discussion between the first two authors.
Individual Difference Measures To assess individual
differences in reading skill, the Nelson-Denny reading
comprehension test was administered. This test consists of
seven short literature passages and a total of 38 multiplechoice comprehension questions about the passages.

127

To assess individual differences in literature knowledge,
10 multiple-choice literature questions were employed. The
questions were generated by developing questions based on
books that are commonly read in high school. A list of
books which are customarily read in high school were
obtained from study guides by Bellmore-Merrick Central
High School District. Questions were developed from the
brief study guides and included various aspects of the
books such as the characters, plot, setting and authors
(http://www.bellmore-merrick.k12.ny.us/guides.html). An
example question is:
Which of the following most closely captures the central
theme of “Animal Farm”?;
a. environmental problems
b. struggle in the animal kingdom
c. vulnerability of the socialist system to corruption
d. problems in capitalist society

Procedure
The participants were first administered the Nelson-Denny
test, with a 15-minute time limit. Upon completion of the
Nelson-Denny test, students were administered the
literature knowledge test.
After completing the literature knowledge test, students
were presented with the four narrative texts. Using E-Prime
(2000), these texts were presented on a computer screen,
with black text on a white background. The texts were
displayed one sentence at a time, with the title of each story
preceding the text. Participants read each text one sentence
at a time, and were instructed that they could continue to
the next sentence by pressing the space bar. Reading times
for each sentence were recorded in milliseconds. At the end
of each text, participants were notified that they had
finished the text, and that they could proceed to the next
text by pressing the spacebar. After reading each text
participants were asked to type everything they could
remember about the text. When they had finished typing
their recall, participants again pressed the space bar, which
took them to the title of the next text. Having the students
recall the texts helped to ensure that they read them for
comprehension. Because the goal of this study is to
investigate the role of causation in online comprehension,
we report here only the reading time results.

Results
All reading times which fell outside of two standard
deviations of the grand mean were excluded from these
analyses. These outliers constituted 5% of the data.
Additionally, four participants were excluded from these
analyses because their overall reading times fell outside of
two standard deviations of the grand mean.
In order to check that the participants’ scores on prior
knowledge and reading ability were not highly correlated
with each other, a Pearson’s bivariate correlation was
performed. Participants’ performance on prior knowledge
was significantly but only weakly correlated with
performance on reading ability, r = .318, p < .05. Because

For the participants overall, both antecedents and
consequences explained unique variance of the reading
times. This trend was mirrored in all groups except for the
higher knowledge groups, where antecedents explained
unique variance, but consequences did not. This provides
evidence that participants of varying ability and knowledge
levels integrate causal information and update their
situation models accordingly during online comprehension.
Although backward consequences did not significantly
predict reading times for higher knowledge participants, the
trend approached significance, p = .057.
To test for interactions between reading skill and
knowledge differences, the difference in mean reading
times were computed between the low and high skill, and
low and high knowledge participants. These differences
were then correlated against the number of antecedents and
consequences in each sentence. The results of these
correlations are presented in Table 2.
High Skill
Low Skill
High Know ledge
Low Know ledge

500

400

RT (ms)

of this weak correlation we can be reasonably confident
that reading skill and literature knowledge are to some
extent measures of different constructs.
To determine the extent to which reading time was
influenced by reading ability and literature knowledge, we
performed a median split on the scores of both the Nelson
Denny and the literature knowledge test, with cases falling
exactly on the median excluded. As such, 20 participants
were designated higher skill and 18 as lower skill; and 18
participants were designated higher knowledge and 20 as
lower knowledge. The higher skill participants correctly
answered a significantly higher proportion of questions (M
= .686, SD = .093) than the lower skill participants (M =
.402, SD = .066), t(36) = 10.686, p < .001. The higher
knowledge participants correctly answered a significantly
higher proportion of questions (M = .606, SD = .094) than
the lower knowledge participants (M = .235, SD = .106),
t(33) = 10.977, p < .001).
To examine the possibility that antecedents and
consequences contributed unique variance to reading time,
a series of hierarchical regressions were conducted.
Sentence reading times (divided by the number of words)
for all participants, high skill participants, low skill
participants, high knowledge participants, and low
knowledge participants served as the dependent variables.
To determine the unique contribution of antecedents,
consequences were added into the first step of the
regression, then antecedents were entered into the second
step. To determine the unique contribution of
consequences, antecedents were added at the first step, and
then consequences were added at the second step. The
results of these regressions are summarized in Table 1. A
negative beta weight indicates that reading times decreased
(i.e., became faster) as the number of causal connections
increased. The mean reading times for each group as a
function of forward antecedents and backward
consequences are presented in Figures 1 and 2.

300

200

Antecedents
1

0

Figure 1: Reading times as a function of forward
antecedents.
High Skill
Low Skill
High Know ledge
Low Know ledge

500

Table 1: Unique variance contributed by antecedents and
backward consequences.

All
Higher
Skill
Lower
Skill
Higher
Know.
Lower
Know.

Ant.
Con.
Ant.
Con.
Ant.
Con.
Ant.
Con.
Ant.
Con.

-50.19*
-49.26*
-39.45*
-42.66*
-63.99*
-55.68*
-40.02*
-42.98
-68.88**
-65.29*

Std.
Error
14.49
21.38
14.18
20.92
16.53
24.38
15.17
22.38
16.41
24.22

R2
0.106
0.074
0.125
0.067
0.147

400

∆R2

RT (ms)

ß

2

.097*
.043*
.065*
.035*
.118*
.041*
.059*
.031
.135**
.056*

300

200
0

Consequences

1

Figure 2: Reading times as a function of backward
consequences.
The difference between higher and lower knowledge
participants correlated significantly with the number of
forward antecedents connected to a sentence (r = -.23, p <
.05), suggesting that the difference between the higher and
lower knowledge groups decreased as the number of
forward antecedents increased. The negative correlation

* Significant at the .05 level.
** Significant at the .01 level.

128

between differences in reading skill and the number of
forward antecedents connected to a sentence was also
significant, (r = -.19, p < .05), suggesting that the
differences between the higher and lower skill groups
decreased as a function of number of forward antecedents
connected to a sentence.
Table 2: Correlations between knowledge, skill,
antecedents and backward consequences.
Antecedents

Backward
Consequences

Knowledge
Difference
-0.19*
Skill Difference
-0.23*
* Significant at the .05 level.

-0.04
-0.00

As can be seen in Figures 1 and 2 (and as suggested by
the correlations in Table 2), the differences in reading times
appear to diminish for the high and low knowledge and
high and low skill groups as the number of antecedents
increase. But it is unclear if there are significant group
differences when antecedents are present or absent. To
further explore these interactions we conducted t-tests
between each level of knowledge and skill, for each level of
causal connection. We collapsed the number of connections
into a present group (1 and 2 connections) and an absent
group (0 connections) for each type of connection. The
mean reading times per word for each skill and connection
group are presented in Table 3. The reading times for the
higher skill participants were significantly faster than the
lower skill participants when antecedents were present t(74)
= 15.979, p < .001, and when antecedents were absent,
t(38) = 9.729, p < .001. There were no differences between
levels of knowledge when antecedents were absent, t(38) =
.194, p = .847, but lower knowledge participants read
significantly faster than higher knowledge participants
when antecedents were present, t(75) = 6.223, p < .001.
Table 3: Mean reading time (ms) as a function of presence
of forward antecedents.
Ant.
Presence
Absent

Present

Group
Higher Skill
Lower Skill
Higher PK
Lower PK
Higher Skill
Lower Skill
Higher PK
Lower PK

Mean RT
Per Word
310.20
429.33
352.96
356.61
277.31
364.95
319.31
285.59

SD
101.81
138.33
109.28
159.28
91.68
94.91
97.45
75.75

129

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to investigate the extent to
which forward antecedents and backward consequences
explain unique variance in reading time, and to investigate
the possible interaction between levels of reading skill and
literature knowledge in the influence of these connections.
Our results further contribute to previous work with respect
to causal consequences because the results suggest that,
counter to the findings of Magliano et al. (1993), readers
are able to generate causal consequence inferences during
comprehension. However, the causal consequences
explored in the present study were not predicting future
events but rather explaining previously unexplained events.
This is consistent with work that argues that readers
generate inferences in the service of maintaining coherent
situation models (Graesser et al., 1994).
We further found that both types of connections
explained unique variance for all groups except for the
higher knowledge group, where backward consequences
did not contribute unique variance over and above forward
antecedents. What cognitive mechanisms could explain the
lack of reliance on backward consequences for higher
knowledge readers? At this point our data do not pinpoint
an explanation for this finding. Nonetheless, it is probable
that readers of high literary knowledge possess schematic
knowledge of narrative and literary story structure. As such,
even though some events in the story remain unexplained,
these readers may be able to infer explanations based on
their previous experience with literature.
Recent research by Meyer and Wijekumar (in press)
highlights the importance of a reader’s domain knowledge
in creating a representation of the text. Indeed, Bartlett’s
study on schema knowledge (1932) clearly demonstrates
the role of schema production on comprehension (see also,
Kintsch, 1998). Accordingly, readers who are highly
knowledgeable about story structure may not rely on the
information presented in backward consequences because
they have already formed predictions about the described
situation before they encountered these backward
consequences.
For example, imagine a mystery novel in which the
reader is given a general framework of events that led to a
particular crime. As the novel continues, the reader may be
presented with additional information and events that
explain previous events in the text (for instance, the story
could open with the robbing of a bank, and by the end of
the story, it has been revealed which character robbed the
bank, and why). A reader who is intimately familiar with
the workings of mystery novels may not need these
subsequent explanations to understand the events of a text,
because their story schemas for how events typically occur
allow them to infer the cause. When the cause is finally
encountered in a text their situation model does not need to
be updated. A reader who is unfamiliar with these stories
may benefit from backwards explanations, as they have not
developed a sufficient schema for mystery stories. In this
way, readers with more experience reading narrative texts

would benefit less from backward causal relations in the
text, whereas a reader who is less knowledgeable about
story structures would benefit.
Another compelling finding in this study is that lower
knowledge participants read sentences with causal
antecedents significantly faster than the higher knowledge
participants. There are several possible explanations for this
phenomenon. Causality may be a more basic level of the
situation model, allowing all readers to track changes in
that dimension. Indeed, causality has been shown to be
routinely tracked by readers (Therriault, Rinck, & Zwaan,
2006). Other aspects of the situation model however, such
as spatiality, may be more accessible to readers with higher
knowledge of literature because of their schemas of where
and when actions usually take place. Thus, the fluctuations
in reading time seen in high knowledge readers may be
reflective of other dimensions of the situation model, while
lower knowledge readers track only the more basic aspects,
like causality. However, such an explanation is only
speculation at this point, and further experimentation would
need to be conducted to validate such a hypothesis.
Another explanation of the decrease in skill and
knowledge differences due to presence of antecedents may
be related to findings by Gernsbacher and Faust (1991).
That is, less skilled readers require more context for
successful updating than high skilled readers. In the context
of the current study, an increase in antecedents increases
the amount of relevant context. A similar possibility exists
for high vs. low knowledge participants. In this case,
knowledge schemas for literature structure may provide a
sufficient “macro-context” for the high knowledge readers,
whereas low knowledge readers rely mostly on context
provided by the text.
In sum, these results provide further evidence for the
utility of causal network analyses in studies of reading
comprehension. The current research advances the field by
demonstrating that many readers are sensitive to directional
changes in causality, and are able to process consequences
online, if the consequence explains previously unexplained
ideas or events in the text

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Institute for
Education Sciences (IES R3056020018-02). Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the IES.

References
Bartlett, F.C. (1932).
Remembering:
A study in
experimental and social psychology. London:
Cambridge University Press.
Bellmore-Merrick Central High School District: English
Study
Guides.
(http://www.bellmoremerrick.k12.ny.us/guides.html).
Burroughs, W.S. (1959). Naked Lunch. Paris: Olympia.

130

E-Prime 1.0 [Computer software]. (2000). Pittsburgh, PA:
Psychology Software Tools.
Gernsbacher, M.A., & Faust, M.E. (1991). The mechanism
of suppression: A component of general comprehension
skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 17, 245-262.
Graesser, A.C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Magliano, J.P., Baggett, W.B., Johnson, B.K., & Graesser,
A.C. (1993). The time course of generating causal
antecedent and causal consequence inferences. Discourse
Processes, 16, 35-53.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1986). Inferences about
predictable events. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 12, 82-91.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch,
W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of
text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Meyer, B.J.F, & Wijekumar, K. (in press). A Web-based
tutoring system for the structure strategy: theoretical
background, design, and findings. In D. S. McNamara
(Ed), Reading Comprehension Strategies: Theories,
Interventions, and Technologies (pp. 349-376). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Myers, J.L., Shinjo, M., & Duffy, S.A. (1987). Degree of
causal relatedness and memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 26, 453-465.
Therriault, D.J., Rinck, M., & Zwaan, R.A. (2006).
Assessing the influence of dimensional focus during
situation model construction. Memory & Cognition, 34,
78-89.
Trabasso, T., & Sperry, L. (1985). Causal relatedness and
importance of story events. Journal of Memory and
Language, 24, 595-611.
Trabasso, T., & van den Broek, P. (1985). Causal thinking
and the representation of narrative events. Journal of
Memory and Language, 24, 612-630.
van den Broek, P. (1988). The effects of causal relations
and hierarchical position on the importance of story
statements. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 1-22.
Wolfe, M.B.W., Magliano, J.P., & Larsen, B. (2005).
Causal and semantic relatedness in discourse
understanding and representation. Discourse Processes,
39, 165-187.
Zwaan, R.A., Langston, M.C., & Graesser, A.C. (1995).
The construction of situation models in narrative
comprehension. Psychological Science, 6, 292-297.
Zwaan, R.A., Graesser, A.C., & Magliano, J.P. (1995).
Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 386-397.

