UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infants Rapidly Learn Words from Noisy Data via Cross-Situational Statistics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kn61162

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Smith, Linda
Yu, Chen

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infants Rapidly Learn Words from Noisy Data via Cross-Situational Statistics
Linda Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, and Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, and Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
uncluttered as the experimental settings in which fastmapping has been demonstrated. In everyday contexts, there
are typically many words, many potential referents, limited
cues as to which words go with which referents, and rapid
attentional shifts among the many entities in the scene. It is
possible that young learners just ignore the information in
such highly ambiguous learning contexts and wait for
contexts in which the referents of heard words are more
certain (Brent & Siskind, 2001). However, a more optimal
learner might be expected to make use of all the available
data.
Second, the evidence indicates that 9-, 10-, and certainly
12-month old infants are accumulating considerable
receptive lexical knowledge (Fenson et al, 1994; Swingley
& Aslin, 2000). Yet many studies find that children even as
old as 18 months have difficulty in making he right
inferences about the intended referents of novel words (e.g.,
Katz, Baker & Macnamara, 1974; Moore, Angepoulos
&Bennett, 1999; Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff & Hollich, 1999;
Pruden, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff & Hennon, 2006). There are
studies showing that infants as young as 13 or 14 months
(Woodward, Markman & Fitzsimmons, 1994; Woodward &
Hoyne, 1999; Schafer & Plunkett, 1998; but perhaps not
younger, Werker, Lloyd, Cohen, Cassola & Stager, 1998)
can link a name to an object given repeated unambiguous
pairings in a single session. Overall, however, these effects
are fragile with small experimental variations often leading
to no learning (see especially, Woodward & Hoyne, 1999;
Werker, et al, 1998; also Oviatt 1980, 1982; and Bloom
2000 for a discussion). This raises the possibility that there
might be some other way that young children learn wordreferent mappings.
The experiment reported here shows for the first time that
infants rapidly learn multiple word-referent pairs by
accruing statistical evidence across multiple and
individually ambiguous word-scene pairings.
The
indeterminacy problem is solved not in a single trial but
across trials, not for a single word and its referent but for a
system of many words and referents. This learning is shown
to be sufficiently rapid and robust that it could play a
significant role in early lexical learning.
Figure 1 illustrates how cross-trial statistics might work.
The learner hears the unknown words “bat” and “ball” in the
context of seeing a BAT and BALL. Without other
information, the learner cannot know whether the word form
“ball” refers to one or the other visual object. However, if
subsequently, while viewing a scene with the potential

Abstract
First word learning should be difficult because any pairing
of a word and scene presents the learner with an infinite
number of possible referents. Accordingly, theorists of
children’s rapid word learning have sought constraints on
word-referent mappings. These constraints are thought to
work by enabling learners to resolve the ambiguity inherent
in any labeled scene to determine the speaker’s intended
referent at that moment. The present study shows that 12and 14-month old infants can resolve the uncertainty
problem in another way, not by unambiguously deciding the
referent in a single word-scene pairing, but by rapidly
evaluating the statistical evidence across many individually
ambiguous words and scenes.
Keywords: language acquisition, word learning.

Introduction
The pairing of a word and a scene is not enough to
determine the meaning of the word. To illustrate this point,
Quine (1960) famously imagined a stranger who hears a
native say “gavagai” and points to a scene. To what does
“gavagai” refer -- a rabbit, the grass, a tree, the rabbit’s ears,
or perhaps the beauty of the whole? Even if one assumes a
perceptual system that segments the scene into separate
objects and an attentional system biased towards objects, the
intended referent is indeterminate from this one experience.
Infants are like strangers who do not know the native
language, yet they solve this indeterminacy problem. This
paradox -- the uncertainty of the referent in word-scene
associations and the fact that infants learn object names
nonetheless --is a core theoretical problem in the study of
early word learning. For the past 30 years most research on
children’s word learning has concentrated on how the
learner resolves the ambiguity at the moment the novel word
is first encountered. Experimental studies leave no doubt
that by the time they are 2 years old children do this at least
for object names. That literature points to attentional (Smith,
2000), social (Baldwin 1993, Tomasello, 2000), linguistic
(Gleitman, 1990) and representational (Markman, 1990)
constraints as crucial to children’s ability to resolve
referential ambiguity and fastmap a word to its intended
referent.
There are two reasons to suspect that this one-encounter
solution to referential uncertainty is not the only (or even
the most important) mechanism of early word learning.
First, not all opportunities for word learning are as

653

must apply (Akhtar, 2002; Akhtar and Montague, 1999;
Markman, 1990; Namy and Gentner, 2000.) However, there
is no evidence as to whether young learners can combine
and evaluate information from highly ambiguous contexts
over many trials. Until recently, there was no evidence as to
whether even adult learners were capable of this, although
Yu and Smith (in press) have now shown that this form of
learning is rapid and robust in adults even in situations of In
the following experiment, 12- and 14- month old infants
were taught 6 word-referent pairs via a series of individually
ambiguous trials. On each trial, two word forms and two
potential referents were presented with no information about
which word went with which referent. Although wordreferent pairings were ambiguous within individual trials,
they were certain across trials. For example, for a particular
infant, whenever the form tobi occurred its assigned referent
always occurred. After training, infants were presented with
a single word and two potential referents, the cross-trial
correct referent and a foil. Past research (e.g., Golinkoff, et
al, 1997; Swingley & Aslin, 2000) shows that within this
kind of preferential looking task, infants look longer at the
labeled test object. Thus if infants have calculated the
statistics appropriately, despite the uncertainty on individual
learning trials, they should look longer at the referent that is,
across trials, the referent of the word form.

referents of a BALL and a DOG, the learner hears the words
“ball” and “dog” and if the learner can combine the
conditional probabilities of co-occurrences from two
streams of data across trials, the learner could correctly map
“ball” to BALL. This example represents the simplest case
– two words, two objects, two adjacently informative trials.

Figure 1. Associations among words and referents
across two individually ambiguous scenes.
Several formal simulations of word-referent learning
suggest the plausibility of cross-situational word learning in
much more complex situations with many words, many
possible referents, highly ambiguous individual learning
trials, and the statistical resolution of the ambiguities only
through the accumulation and evaluation of information
over many word-referent pairings and many trials (Siskind,
1996; Yu, Ballard, & Aslin, 2005). Consider the more
complex case in Table 1. On trial 1, a learner could
mistakenly link word A to referent b on trial 4, the mistake
could be corrected, if the system registers that word A
occurred on trial 4 without possible referent b, if the
cognitive system remembers the prior word-referent pairing,
if it registers both co-occurrences and non co-occurrences,
and if it calculates the right statistics. Can babies do this?

Method
Participants. The participants, drawn from a working and
middle-class population of a midwestern college town,
were 28 12-month old infants (range -- 11 mo 17 days to 13
mo - 0 days; mean -- 12 mo 7 days; 13 males, 15 females)
and 27 14-month old infants (range --14 mo 2 days to 15 mo
14 days; mean --14 mo 12 days; 14 males, 13 females).
Two additional children began but did not finish the
experiment.
Stimuli. The 6 “words” -- bosa, gasser, manu, colat, kaki
and regli --followed the phonotactic probabilities of English
and were recorded by a female speaker in isolation and were
presented to infants over loudspeakers. The 6 “objects” were
drawings of novel shapes, shown in Figure 2; each was a
unique bright color. On each trial, two objects (12 by 14
inches in projected size and separated on the screen by 30
inches) were simultaneously presented on a 47 by 60 inch
white screen.

There is evidence in such phenomena as the mutualexclusivity effect and contrast that 2- to 3-year-old children
combine information across two adjacent naming events,
using, for example, knowledge of the just-heard name of
one thing to infer the object to which a subsequent name

Figure 2. The stimulus objects

654

each frame was to categorize the direction of look as right,
left or away from the screen (hands, ceiling, mother’s face,
floor, etc). For reliability, the two coders each coded the
same random sample of 25% of the frames. Agreement on
these frames was 90.8%.

Procedure. Infants sat (on their mother’s lap) 3.5 feet in
front of screen with the mother’s chair set at the center of
the screen. Infants’ direction of eye gaze was recorded from
a camera centered at the base of the screen and pointed
directly at the child’s eyes. Parents were instructed to keep
their own eyes shut through the entire procedure so as to not
to influence their infant’s behaviors. A camera directed on
the parent through out the procedure confirmed their
adherence.
There were 30 training slides. Each presented two objects
on the screen for 4 sec; the onset of the slide was followed
500 msec later by the two words –each said once with a 500
msec pause between. Across trials, the temporal order of the
words and spatial order of the objects were varied such that
there was no relation between temporal order of the words
and the spatial position of the referents. Each correct wordobject pair occurred 10 times. The two words and two
objects appearing together on a slide (and creating the
within trial ambiguities and possible spurious correlations)
were randomly determined such that each object and each
word co-occurred with every other word and every other
object at least once across the 30 training trials. The first
four training trials each began with the centered presentation
of a Sesame street character (3 sec) to orient attention to the
screen. After these first four trials, this attention grabbing
slide was interspersed every 3 to 6 trials to maintain
attention. The entire training – an effort to teach six wordreferent pairs – lasted less than 4 minutes (30 training slides
and 19 interspersed Sesame Street character slides).
There were 12 test trials, each 8 seconds. This duration
was chosen from pilot studies to optimize the number of
participants able to complete all 12 test comparisons (2 per
target word). Each test trial presented one word, repeated 4
times with 2 objects – the target and a distracter – in view.
The distracter was drawn from the training set. Each of the
6 words was tested twice. The distracter for each trial was
randomly determined such that each object occurred twice
as a distracter over the 12 test trials.
There were 2 unique sets of training slides with different
orderings of objects, different mappings of words to the
objects, and different combinations of word-referent pairs
on the slides.
For each set, the left-right locations of
objects on the slides and the order with which the names
were presented were randomly generated with the constraint
that the object on the left was the target referent for the first
presented word on half the trials and the target referent for
the word presented second on the other half. There were
also two unique test orders with unique randomly generated
pairings of target and distracter, with the target appearing on
the left on half the slides on the right on the other half. Half
the infants at each age level were randomly assigned to each
slide set.
Two coders naïve to condition and trial type coded direction
of eye gaze from the video recorded from the camera
directed at the infant’s eyes. They coded, frame-by-frame,
all frames from the start to the end (indicated by light on the
video) of each training and test trial. The coder’s task for

Results
Training trials. Infants were highly attentive to the training
slides, looking (sum of right and left looks) at each 4 sec
slide on average 3.27 sec (12 month olds) and 3.04 sec (14
month olds). On average, infants looked at the left and right
sides of each training slide for equal durations (t < 1.00 for
both 12- and 14-month olds). On 87% of all training slides,
the infants looked at both sides (both objects) for at least 1
sec.
Test trials. On average, infants looked at each 8 sec test
slides for a total of 5.6 sec for 12 month olds and 6.1 sec for
14 month olds. To examine whether infants preferentially
looked in the direction of the target object, the object that
across trials was associated with the auditorally presented
label, each infant’s
looking time to target and distracter on each test trial was
submitted to a 2(Age) by 2(Target/Distracter) X 6 (Word)
X2 (Block –first or second test of each target word) analysis
of variance for a mixed design. The analysis revealed a
highly reliable main effect of looking time to
Target/Distracter, F(1,54) = 35.32, p < .001. As shown in
Figure 3, 12- and 14-month old children looked reliably
longer to the Target than to the Distracter. The analysis also
revealed a reliable interaction between Word and
Target/Distracter, F(5,54) = 3.85, p < .05. This result, that
infants showed a greater difference in looking time to the
target than distracter for some words than for others
suggests that some word-picture correspondences were
learned better than others. Finally, the analysis revealed an
interaction between Age and Target/Distracter that
approached significance, F(5,54) = 3.13, p < .08. The older
group of children, as can be seen in Figure 3, showed a
bigger preference for the target than did the younger
children, although the difference in looking times to target
and distracter is individually reliable for both age groups
(Tukey’s hsd, p < .05). No other main effects or
interactions approached significance.
Post-hoc analyses (Tukey’s hsd, p<.05) conducted on the
difference in looking time to target and distracter for the 6
individual words indicated reliably greater looking time to
target than distracter for 4 of the 6 words for the 12 month
old group and for 4 of the 6 words for the 14-month old age
group. (Three of the individual words were that same at the
two age levels, one was different; at neither age level were
there reliable differences in the wrong direction for the
remaining two words). Since half the children at each age
level had different word-object pairings as well as different
training orders, and since analyses for effects of slide set
yielded no effects or interactions that approached

655

significance, the source of these differences is not readily
apparent. However, the fact that looking times for 4 of the
6 words (67% of the training set) show reliable preferences
for the target does indicate that infants can figure out
multiple word-referent mappings from a system of
experienced associations. Finally, the group patterns appear
to characterize the performance of individual infants in that
46 of the 55 participants infants looked, on average, at the
targets more than distracters.
4

3.5

3

2.5

Target
Distractor

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
12-month olds

14-month olds
age group

Figure 3. Mean looking time to target and distracter per 8 sec test
trial (and standard error of the mean) for younger and older infants.

In sum, these results tell us that cross-situational statistical
learning is in the repertoire of young word learners. Despite
the ambiguity of word-referent mappings on any individual
training trial, infants clearly accumulate information across
trials and use that information to determine the underlying
mappings. In less than four minutes, with six different word
forms and six different objects, infants learned enough to
systematically look longer at the objects more strongly
associated with the forms than those more weakly
associated.

General Discussion
Parents, on average, direct between 300 to 400 words an
hour to their children (Hart & Risley, 1995). Even with
social, linguistic and conceptual constraints in play, so many
words in so little time seems likely to generate considerable
ambiguity about intended referents. These ambiguities are
most likely greater than those in this experiment.
Nonetheless, the mechanisms responsible for the present
results may be relevant to making use of the complexity in
natural learning environments in that these mechanisms can
keep track of multiple word-referent co-occurrences,
evaluate the regularities in the data set as a whole, and
determine the underlying mappings. Such mechanisms
could even benefit from increased complexity in the data
set. Consistent with this idea, Yu & Smith (in press), using
a task much like the infant task used here, showed that
adults actually learned more word-referent pairs when the
set contained 18 words and referents than when it contained
only 9. This is because more words and referents mean

656

better evidence against spurious correlations. Although
much remains to be discovered about the relevant
mechanisms, they clearly should help children learn from
the regularities that accrue across the many ambiguous
word-scene pairings that occur in everyday communication.
The present findings are thus reminiscent of evidence
showing that infants’ use sequential probabilities to discover
segmental units in speech (e.g., Saffran, Aslin, & Newport,
1996; Gomez & Gerken 1999; Kirkham, Slemmer, &
Johnson, 2002). The statistical regularities to which infants
must attend to learn word-referent pairings are different
from those underlying the segmentation of a sequential
stream in that word-referent pairings require computing cooccurrence relations across two streams of events (words
and referents) simultaneously for many words and
referents. Nonetheless, the present findings, like the earlier
ones showing statistical learning of sequential
probabilities, suggest that solutions to fundamental
problems in learning language may be found by studying
the statistical patterns in the learning environment and the
statistical learning mechanisms in the learner (Saffran,
Newport, & Aslin, 1996; Newport & Aslin, 2004).
There are several possible learning mechanisms that
could accomplish the cross-situational learning of wordreferent mappings. One is the formulation and evaluation
of hypotheses (e.g., Tennenbaum & Xu, 2000). Building on
the “ball/bat” example in Figure 1, the learner could, for
example, wrongly hypothesize on the initial trial that “ball”
refers to BAT but correct that hypothesis on trial 2, which
presents disconfirming evidence. Given enough data across
individually ambiguous trials, the co-occurrence
probabilities would support the “right” hypotheses for the
language over others. The outcome of this learning would
seem to be a list of confirmed hypotheses, each specifying a
word and its referent.
Alternatively, the learner could solve this learning task via
simple (or not so simple, see Krushke, 2001; 2005; Yu and
Smith, 2007) associative learning mechanisms. Across
trials, the learner could accumulate associations between
words and potential referents by strengthening and
weakening associative links with each co-occurrence or
nonco-occurrence (see, Plunkett, 1997).. Building on the
example in Figure 1, the learner could equally associate
“ball” with BALL and BAT but after the experience of
“ball” in the context of BALL and DOG, the association
between “ball” and BALL would be stronger than that
between “ball” and BAT. Over enough trials, these
association strengths would converge on the real world
statistics. The outcome of this learning, unlike the
hypothesis testing accoung, might not be knowledge that an
individual word refers to one thing, but may only be
stronger correct associations than spurious ones.
The present results cannot distinguish these
possibilities. Perhaps early associative learning lays the
ground work in infancy for more rapid (and perhaps more
hypothesis-testing like) processes in later word learning. A
recent simulation study by Yu (in press) makes this point.

Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1 1-55.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Cauley, K. M., &
Gordon, L. (1997). The eyes have it: Lexical and
syntactic comprehension in a new paradigm. Journal of
child language, 14(1), 23-45.
Gomez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (1999). Artificial grammar
learning by 1-year-olds leads to specific and abstract
knowledge. Cognition, 70(2), 109-135.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful Differences in
the Everyday Experience of Young American Children.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hollich, G. (1999).
Trends and transitions in language development:
Looking for the missing piece. Developmental
neuropsychology, 16(2), 139-162.
Katz, N., Baker, E., & Macnamara, J. (1974). What's in a
name? A study of how children learn common and
proper names. Child development, 45(2), 469-473.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83(2),
B35-B42.
Kruschke, J. K. (2001). Toward a unified model of attention
in associative learning. Journal of mathematical
psychology, 45(6), 812-863.
Kruschke, J. K., Kappenman, E. S., & Hetrick, W. P.
(2005). Eye gaze and individual differences consistent
with learned attention in associative blocking and
highlighting. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(5), 830-845.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints Children Place on
Word Learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Moore, C., Angelopoulos, M., & Bennett, P. (1999). Word
earning in the context of referential and salience cues.
Developmental psychology, 35(1), 60-68.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out
of two sow's ears: Young children's use of comparison
in category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:
General, 131(1), 5-15.
Oviatt, S. L. (1982). Inferring what words mean: Early
development in infants' comprehension of common
object names. Child development, 53(1), 274-277.
Oviatt, S. L. (1980). The emerging ability to comprehend
language:
An
experimental
approach.
Child
development, 51(1), 97-106.
Plunkett, K. (1997). Theories of early word learning. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 146-153.
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Hennon, E. A. (2006). The birth of words: Ten-montholds
learn words through perceptual salience. Child
development, 77(2), 266-280.
Plunkett, K. (1997). Theories of early word learning. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 146-153.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).

That study examined a probabilistic associative learning
mechanism that learns a system of associations (Yoshida &
Smith, 2003). In such a system, a single word-referent
pairing is correlated with all the other pairings that share the
same word and all the other pairings that share the same
referent, which are in turn correlated with more wordreferent pairs, yielding a system of correlations. Such large
systems of associations create system-wide accelerations of
word-referent learning even when the individually
contributing associations are partially learned. This is
because a system of even partially learned associations
yields latent structure that can be used to guide subsequent
learning. In this way, the lexical knowledge of 12- to 14month olds, even if based on associations could contribute
significantly to the later, more rapid, and more seemingly
sophisticated one-trial word learning of older children.
Regardless of which kind of mechanism proves right, the
present results suggest that the relevant mechanisms may be
best conceived not being about the learning of individual
words and referents – not about the testing of individual
hypotheses or the learning of a single association, but rather
as being about processes that evaluate the regularities in
data sets of many words and referents (a point originally
made by Billman & Knutson, 1996). The human learning
environment is data rich. If human learners possess the
right learning mechanisms, they may mine this complexity
and in so doing solve the problem of referential uncertainty.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ling Jiang, Lisa Cantrell and Char Wozniak for
collection of the data and Rich Shiffrin for insightful
discussions. This research was supported by National
Science Foundation Grant BCS0544995.

References
Akhtar, N. (2002). Relevance and early word learning.
Journal of child language, 29(3), 677-686.
Akhtar, N., & Montague, L. (1999). Early lexical
acquisition: The role of cross-situational learning. First
Language, 19(57, Pt 3), 347-358.
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Early referential understanding:
Infants' ability to recognize referential acts for what
they are. Developmental psychology, 29(5), 832-843.
Billman, D., & Knutson, J. (1996). Unsupervised concept
learning and value systematicitiy: A complex whole
aids learning the parts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(2),
458-475.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA, US: The MIT Press.
Brent, M. R., & Siskind, J. M. (2001). The role of exposure
to isolated words in early vocabulary development.
Cognition, 81(2), 33-44.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., & Bates, E. (1994).
Variability in early communicative development.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59(5), v-173.

657

ssociations by 14-month-old infants. Developmental
psychology, 34(6), 1289-1309.
Woodward, A. L., & Hoyne, K. L. (1999). Infants' learning
about words and sounds in relation to objects. Child
development, 70(1), 65-77.
Woodward, A. L., Markman, E. M., & Fitzsimmons, C. M.
(1994). Rapid word learning in 13- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental psychology, 30(4), 553-566.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B. (2003). Shifting ontological
boundaries: How Japanese- and English-speaking
children generalize names for animals and artifacts.
Developmental Science, 6(1), 1-17.
Yu, C., Ballard, D. H., and Aslin, R. N. (2005). The role of
embodied intention in early lexical acquisition.
Cognitive Science, 29, 961-1005.
Yu, C. & Smith, L.B. (in press). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty
via
cross-situational
statistics.
Psychological Science.
Yu (in press) A statistical asssociative sccount of
vocabulary growth in early word learning. Language
Learning and Development.
Yu and Smith (2007) Hypothesis testing and associative
learning in cross-situational word learning: Are they
one and the same? To be presented at the 2007
Cognitive Science Society Conference, August, 2007.

Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926-1928.
Schafer, G., & Plunkett, K. (1998). Rapid word learning by
fifteen-month-olds under tightly controlled conditions.
Child development, 69(2), 309-320.
Siskind, J. M. (1996) A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61(1-2):1--38.
Smith, L.B. (2000) How to learn words: An Associative
Crane. In R. Golinkoff & K Hirsh-Pasek. (Eds.)
Breaking the word learning barrier. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 51-80.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Spoken word
recognition and lexical representation in very young
children. Cognition, 76(2), 147-166.
Tenenbaum, J.B. & Xu, F. (2000) Word learning as
Bayesian inference. In L. Gleitman and A. Joshi (eds.),
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tomasello, M. (2000). Perceiving intentions and learning
words in the second year of life. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development (pp. 111-128): Cambridge University.
Werker, J. F., Cohen, L. B., Lloyd, V. L., Casasola, M., &
Stager, C. L. (1998). Acquisition of word-object a

658

