UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Information Pooling and Processing in Group Problem Solving: Analysis and Promotion of
Collaborative Inferences from Distributed Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/013539s0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Maier, Anne
Spada, Hans

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Information Pooling and Processing in Group Problem Solving: Analysis and
Promotion of Collaborative Inferences from Distributed Information
Anne Meier (anne.meier@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Engelbergerstr. 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Hans Spada (hans.spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Engelbergerstr. 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

an integrated problem solution building on inferences. In
addition, we explored two kinds of instructional support in
order to promote the collaborative drawing of inferences.

Abstract
An experiment was designed to study the drawing of
inferences from a set of shared and unshared information in
dyads collaborating on a specially developed task. Three
types of inferences (common, individual, and collaborative)
were distinguished based on information sharedness and
distribution. In addition, two kinds of instructional support
were explored in order to promote the collaborative drawing
of inferences, in particular from unshared, distributed
information. Results show substantial effects of information
sharedness on all levels of the problem solving process
(information pooling, inferences, and solution), as well as in a
memory post-test. Instructional support led to more correct
solutions and a stronger focus on inferences during
discussion, but did not improve the drawing of inferences
from unshared information. In-depth analyses of inference
patterns in discussion shed further light on why inferences
from unshared, distributed information are particularly
difficult to draw. The reported findings go well beyond the
existing literature on the effects of information sharedness
that has primarily focused on “hidden profile” group decision
tasks.

Information Sharedness
Groups start out with a certain amount of shared
knowledge, i.e. knowledge that is known to all members,
and a certain amount of unshared knowledge, i.e.
knowledge that is only known to individual group members
(Stasser & Titus, 1985). One of the most consistent findings
in small group research has been that, when pooling and
discussing information, groups tend to focus on shared
information and neglect unshared information, thus failing
to use their informational resources to their best potential.
This so-called “information pooling effect” affects the
amount of information that is pooled, the number of times a
piece of information is repeated during discussion, and the
influence it has on the final decision (Mojzisch, & SchulzHardt, 2006). The effect is usually studied in so-called
“hidden profile” tasks, in which the relevant pieces of
information are distributed in such a way that individual
group members will tend to choose an inferior alternative,
while the best alternative can only be found if all available
information is pooled (Stasser & Titus, 2003). Typically,
groups fail to detect the best solution in a hidden profile,
falling short of their potential (for overviews see Mojzisch,
& Schulz-Hardt, 2006; Wittenbaum, Hollingshead, &
Botero, 2004).

Keywords: problem solving; collaboration; inferences;
hidden profiles

Group Problem Solving
Two heads are usually assumed to be better than one in
solving knowledge-rich problems. For example, in today’s
increasingly specialized organizations, complex problems
are often assigned to teams whose members bring very
diverse knowledge backgrounds into the problem-solving
process. If members of these teams pool and integrate their
complementary knowledge efficiently, high-quality problem
solutions become possible that go beyond the capabilities of
an individual problem-solver (e.g. Brodbeck, Kerschreiter,
Mojzisch, & Schulz-Hardt, 2007; Kraut, 2003). To better
understand the processes involved in group problem
solving, many researchers apply concepts from cognitive
psychology to group level cognition (Hinsz, Tindale, &
Vollrath, 1997; Larson & Christensen, 1993; Mojzisch &
Schulz-Hardt, 2006). Likewise, the present study examines
information processing not at the individual, but at the
group level. In particular, we focus on plausible inferences
involved in constructing new shared knowledge at the group
level. Our experiment was designed to trace the flow of
information from an initial set of distributed information to

The Role of Plausible Inferences
The voluminous body of existing research in the hiddenprofile tradition has so far focused on decision tasks in
which the mere aggregation of information is sufficient for
finding a solution. However, more complex problems often
require the group to go beyond the resources contributed by
its members, producing synergy effects rather than
aggregation (Kraut, 2003). Inferences are of particular
importance in this respect, because they establish
meaningful connections between individual pieces of
information, and generate new knowledge that can be used
to solve the problem at hand. For the purpose of the present
study, the term “inference” is used in a broad sense,
encompassing instances where at least two pieces of
information are combined and, on the background of general

473

knowledge, transformed into a new piece of information
(i.e. “plausible” inferences, cf. Black, Freeman, & JohnsonLaird, 1986; Collins & Michalski, 1989). For example,
imagine that the readers of a murder mystery story have
already learned that the victim of a crime was drugged
around midnight, and some pages later read that a certain
suspect has talked to the victim over a glass of whisky
around that time. Very likely, these two pieces of
information, together with their general background
knowledge about murder mystery stories, will enable the
readers to infer that the suspect might have drugged the
victim’s whisky. While this inference does not yield certain
knowledge (e.g. some other person might have slipped the
drug into the whisky glass), it will nevertheless help to get a
clearer picture of what happened, and, together with
converging evidence, lead towards a solution of the case. In
realistic group problem solving tasks (for example, in
medical decision making teams discussing a patient), of
course, many such inferences have to be drawn from a large
set of information, that, most importantly, is distributed
between group members.
In one study on group decision making, Fraidin (2004)
deliberately implemented pairs of interdependent
information items and thus required participants to draw
inferences. However, the main focus of his study was on the
effects of cognitive load and the perceived relevance of
information on decision making, but not on the inference
processes involved. The main goal of the present study,
therefore, was to shed light on the effects of information
sharedness and distribution on the inferences drawn in
collaboration. In designing the experiment, three levels of
information processing were taken into account. On the
lowest level, we looked at information pooling, i.e. the
amount of shared and unshared information brought into
discussion. On a higher level of information processing, we
focussed on the synthesis of new knowledge by drawing
inferences. On the highest level, the decisions made by the
group regarding the problem solution were assessed. Our
main focus, however, was on the drawing of inferences.

either one or two persons. In this case, three types of
inferences can be distinguished (Table 1):
- “collaborative inferences” from unshared information
distributed between participants
- “individual inferences” from unshared information
located with the same participant (“undistributed”), and
- “common inferences” from shared information, which
both participants possess.
Table 1: Visualization of collaborative, individual, and
common inferences (adapted from Härder & Spada, 2004)
Information

Inference type
Person
A

Person
B

Unshared
distributed

Collaborative

Unshared
undistributed

Individual

Shared

Common

An unshared piece of information can only be entered into
discussion by one person, while a shared piece of
information can be entered by both. In line with the existing
literature (e.g. Wittenbaum et al., 2004; Fraidin, 2004), it
can be hypothesized that more shared than unshared, and
more undistributed than distributed unshared information
will be pooled. Regarding the three types of inferences
(Table 1), common inferences should be the easiest type,
because they can be drawn individually as well as
collaboratively. Collaborative inferences, on the other hand,
should be the hardest type, because they can only be drawn
collaboratively during discussion.

Instructional Support
How can collaborators be supported in pooling the available
information effectively and generating new knowledge from
shared and, in particular, from unshared information? At the
level of information exchange, there have been numerous
attempts to eliminate the information pooling effect.
However, as Stasser and Titus (2003, p. 310) conclude in
their review, “(the) basic effect has been surprisingly
robust.” Still, specific kinds of tools and instructions given
to collaborators have had beneficial effects (see Brodbeck et
al., 2007, for an overview). Most of these successful
interventions have in common that they try to induce a
critical, “problem-solving” attitude towards the task, and
help collaborators to separate information-pooling from
decision making. The effects of these kinds of interventions
on the drawing of inferences have not yet been studied.
However, from research on collaborative learning, we know
that structuring collaboration by means of “collaboration
scripts” is an effective means of fostering the generation of
new knowledge (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006;

Studying Inferences from Shared and
Unshared Information
To study inference processes in group problem solving more
closely, we developed a “hidden-inference” problem where
the crucial achievement of the group is not only to detect a
pattern of negative and positive pieces of information (as in
a hidden profile task), but also to synthesize new knowledge
from the available information by drawing inferences.
Individual pieces of information in a hidden-inference
problem point toward a wrong decision alternative, while
only the resulting inferences enable the group to choose the
right alternative. As in a classical hidden profile task,
“sharedness” is manipulated at the level of individual
information items. In addition, the distribution of unshared,
interdependent pairs of information is manipulated.
To simplify matters, the problem is given to dyads instead
of larger groups, i.e. each piece of information is known by

474

To succeed, a dyad had to draw 12 inferences from both
shared and unshared pieces of information, yielding the
motive, the alibi, and one further piece of evidence for each
of the four suspects. The task was constructed in such a way
that, if all information items were pooled without drawing
the appropriate inferences, the dyad was led to choose the
wrong suspect. However, if all inferences were drawn, a
second suspect turned out to be the only possible murderer.
The distribution of the information items allowed each
dyad to draw four “common”, four “individual”, and four
“collaborative” inferences. Three different text versions
were realized in order to not confound the sharedness of
information items and inferences with the implications of
their specific content: Each of the 12 possible inferences
was “common” in one text version, “individual” in another,
and “collaborative” in again another. All data were
aggregated over these text versions.

O’Donnell, 1999). If collaborators hold complementary (i.e.
unshared) knowledge, scripting phases of parallel individual
work is particularly beneficial for knowledge integration
(Rummel & Spada, 2005). Thus, a first way of instructional
support might be a collaboration script ensuring the
separation of information pooling and decision making as
well as phases of individual work. In addition, explaining
the nature of the task to collaborators may foster a
“problem-solving” attitude and call their attention towards
the drawing of inferences. Collaboration scripts, however,
also bear the danger of reducing motivation, in particular if
they do not conform to participants’ own ideas of effective
collaboration and problem solving (Kollar et al., 2006).
Therefore, a second option for instructional support may be
to facilitate self-regulation by informing collaborators about
typical task difficulties and giving them the opportunity to
plan their own collaboration. In the experiment, both forms
of instructional support were realized.

Setting The desktop-videoconferencing system included
two shared text editors which both participants could edit at
the same time. One shared editor contained the decision
questionnaire, the other served to produce the written
justification. Both editors were available during the whole
length of the discussion. Each person was also provided
with a sheet of paper and a pencil for individual note-taking.
All dyads received a short technical tutorial.

Experiment
An experiment was conducted to study the effects of
information sharedness on all levels of the problem solving
process in a hidden-inference problem. In addition, three
experimental conditions (scripted collaboration, informed
planning, uninstructed control) were realized. Dyads
collaborated over a desktop-videoconferencing system with
shared applications that established controlled conditions in
which all utterances and actions could be recorded.

Instructional Support An uninstructed control condition
was compared to two instructed conditions. Individuals in
both instructed conditions were informed about typical task
difficulties in advance of their collaboration on the murder
mystery task: the existence of unshared information, the
need to recall all information from memory during
discussion, and the need to draw inferences in order to find
a good solution. During their collaboration, dyads in the
script condition were then guided by an electronic
collaboration script that structured their collaboration: They
were instructed to first pool the available information
thoroughly in their shared text editor, and then engage in a
phase of individual recall in order to complete the
information pool. Then, dyads were told to search for
interconnections between pieces of information, and to write
down inferences regarding motives, alibis, and further
evidence for all suspects. Finally, the script instructed them
to summarize their information and make a decision. Dyads
in the planning condition, on the other hand, were allowed
to collaboratively construct their own collaboration script.
Immediately after receiving the information on typical task
difficulties, dyads in this condition were given 10 minutes to
discuss how they wanted to structure their problem-solving
process. They were encouraged to write down their plans in
an additional shared text editor that stayed available for
them during the rest of their collaboration.

Method
Materials The hidden inference problem was framed as a
murder mystery task with four suspects, for whom
participants where to find motives, alibis, and pieces of
evidence. Each participant was given a booklet with
“interrogation protocols” that they had to read through
individually. In total, the interrogation protocols contained
24 solution-relevant information items (six four each of the
four suspects) that were embedded in a larger story. Of these
items, 8 were included in both sets of interrogation
protocols (i.e. shared). In addition, each person received 8
unshared pieces of information, including two complete
pairs of unshared undistributed information. All participants
were told that their sets of information would differ to some
extent, but they were not informed which pieces of
information were shared and which were unshared.
After 30 minutes of individual reading time, each
participant was asked to indicate how likely each suspect
had committed the crime on a five-point rating scale from
“very unlikely” to “very likely”, and to write down the
name of the most likely suspect. Then, all materials had to
be returned, and participants were allowed to talk to each
other over the video-conferencing system. Dyads were
given 50 minutes to discuss which of the four suspects had
most likely committed the murder. They were asked to fill
in the same questionnaire collaboratively that they had
answered before individually. This time, they also had to
provide a written justification for their decision.

Design Information sharedness (unshared distributed/
unshared undistributed/ shared) was realized as a withinsubjects factor, and instructional support (control/ script/
planning) as a between-subjects factor.

475

Participants Fifty-four female students from various
departments (except psychology) with an average age of M=
23.17 (SD= 3.32) years took part in the experiment.
Participants were recruited by flyers and posters in
university institutions. Each student was paid an honorarium
of 15 Euros (about 19 US-Dollars) for their participation.
Only students who did not know each other before
collaboration were assigned to the same dyad. Dyads were
randomly assigned to one of the three conditions. Post-hoc
analyses on questionnaire data confirmed that conditions did
not differ in participants’ age, academic grades, experience
with computer use, or prior experience with murder mystery
stories and films.

shared) as within-subjects factor and experimental condition
as between-subjects factor. There was a significant main
effect of information sharedness (F= 11.44; p< .001; partial
η2= .32), but no effect of experimental condition. Across all
conditions, 71% of the unshared distributed, 84% of the
unshared undistributed, and 93% of the shared text
information was pooled during discussion (Table 2). This
bias was most pronounced in the control condition;
however, the interaction was not significant.

Dependent Variables

Unshared distr.
Unshared undistr.
Shared

Table 2: Means and (standard deviations) for the relative
frequency of text information being pooled

Discussion Content Dyads’ collaboration on the murder
mystery task was videotaped and their discussions were
later coded for relevant pieces of text information and
inferences. Only correctly recalled information and correctly
drawn inferences were coded. The codes yielded
information on the number of discussed items and the total
number of repetitions for all three types of information and
all three types of inferences. The relative frequency with
which items in a given category were pooled was then
calculated by dividing the number of discussed items by the
number of available items in that category (i.e. 8 for each
type of text information, and 4 for each type of inference).
In addition, the average number of repetitions was
calculated by dividing the total number of repetitions for a
given category by the number of discussed items.

Controls
.69 (.21)
.81 (.11)
.97 (.06)

Planning
.71 (.26)
.82 (.19)
.86 (.17)

Total
.71 (.21)
.84 (.14)
.93 (.13)

Script
.72 (.19)
.89 (.09)
.94 (.13)

A similar result pattern emerged for the relative frequency
of inferences being pooled. An ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of information sharedness (F= 7.56;
p= .001; partial η2= .24), but no effect of experimental
condition. Across all conditions, 49% of the collaborative
inferences, 65% of the individual inferences, and 79% of the
common inferences were drawn (Table 3). Again, this bias
was most pronounced in the control condition, but the
interaction did not reach significance.
Table 3: Means and (standard deviations) for the relative
frequency of inferences being pooled
Controls
Collaborative .47 (.34)
Individual
.61 (.25)
Common
.92 (.13)

Inference Patterns To study the ways in which inferences
were actually drawn in more detail, we determined inference
patterns for each of the 12 inferences. This was done by
coding when and by whom the two interdependent pieces of
information as well as the corresponding inference were
brought into discussion.

Planning
.50 (.31)
.61 (.25)
.69 (.30)

Script
.50 (.31)
.72 (.19)
.75 (.31)

Total
.49 (.31)
.65 (.23)
.79 (.27)

ANOVAs over the average number of repetitions for the
three types of text information and the three types of
inferences, respectively, revealed no significant effects of
information sharedness or experimental condition. A direct
comparison between repetition rates for text information
and inferences, however, showed that experimental
conditions differed in their repetition rates for text
information versus inferences: While dyads in the control
condition repeated inferences less often than text
information, this tendency disappeared in the two instructed
conditions, who repeated inferences equally or even more
often than text information (Table 4). However, this
interaction did not reach the .05-level of significance (F=
3.09; p= .06; partial η2= .21).

Joint Solution The correctness of the solution, i.e. whether
a dyad agreed on the correct suspect, as well as the
probability rating given for the correct suspect served as
outcome measures.
Memory Post-Test A memory post-test was designed to
assess how much case information and how many
inferences collaborators could recognize. It contained 48
sentences which comprised the 24 pieces of relevant text
information, the 12 solution-relevant inferences, as well as
12 incorrect statements. The post-test was filled in
individually directly after collaboration. All analyses were
calculated with the mean value for each dyad and an n of 27.

Table 4: Average numbers of repetitions

Results

Controls Planning Script
Total
Information 3.28 (.61) 2.89 (.25) 2.87 (.34) 3.02 (.45)
Inferences 2.64 (.57) 3.01 (.68) 2.92 (.86) 2.86 (.70)

Discussion Content To determine the effect of information
sharedness on the relative frequency of text information
being pooled, an ANOVA was calculated with information
sharedness (unshared distributed/ unshared undistributed/

476

Inference Patterns Eight inference patterns were
distinguished (Table 5). The three numerals represent the
two interdependent pieces of information (first two
positions) and the corresponding inference (last position):
“0” signifies that the respective information or inference
was not pooled, “1” signifies that it was, and “2” signifies
that it was provided by the collaboration partner of the
person who contributed the first piece of information.

second piece of information was entered within the same
minute as the inference.
For incomplete inferences, the most frequent pattern
across all three inference types was the “incomplete
information” pattern (1-0-0), where the corresponding
second piece of information that would have allowed for the
inference to be drawn was not brought into discussion.
Overall, these observations show that, if a “matching” piece
of information was brought into discussion at all, it was
very likely to be entered together with the corresponding
inference. Furthermore, both the matching piece of
information and the inference itself were mostly brought
into the discussion by the same person, usually in close
temporal proximity.
An analysis of inference patterns according to
experimental condition revealed that the proportion of
complete inferences following a collaborative pattern (i.e.
112, 121, or 122) was higher for dyads in the two instructed
conditions as compared to dyads from the control condition
(M= .47 for script and .46 for planning vs. M= .37 for
controls). However, this difference did not reach
significance due to high variability within the conditions
(script: SD= .11; planning: SD= .27; control: SD= .19).

Table 5: Absolute frequencies of inference patterns for the
three inference types (n= max. 108 for each inference type).
Inference type

Collaborative
Individual
Common

Complete inference patterns
1-1-1
1-1-2
1-2-1
1-2-2
3*
17
31
3*
61
6
2*
1*
50
9
8
17

Collaborative
Individual
Common

Incomplete inference patterns
0-0-0
1-0-0
1-1-0
1-2-0
5
14
34
1*
6
23
9
0
2
11
6
4

Joint Solution A large majority, i.e. 24 out of 27 dyads,
identified the correct person as the guilty suspect. All three
dyads who solved the case incorrectly were from the control
condition. A Chi-Square test showed that this difference
between experimental conditions was significant (χ²= 6.75;
p= .03). Dyads in the control condition also gave lower
probability ratings (M= 4.3 on a scale from 1 to 5) for the
correct suspect than the other two conditions (M= 5.0 for the
planning and M= 4.8 for the script group; n.s.).
Experimental conditions did not differ in the number of
participants per dyad who preferred the correct solution
prior to discussion (χ²= 1.04 and p=.9), thus the difference
between experimental conditions is likely to have its origin
in the discussion itself. This interpretation is corroborated
by the fact that a dyad’s probability rating for the correct
suspect correlated with the number of inferences drawn
during discussion (r= .3; n.s.), in particular with the number
of collaborative inferences (r = .42; p= .03).
In the written justification of the solution, a pattern
similar to the one found for the discussion content emerged:
Dyads named 38% of the unshared distributed, 48% of the
unshared undistributed, and 51% of the shared pieces of
information (F= 3.36; p= .04; partial η2= .12); and 32% of
the collaborative, 42% of the individual, and 44% of the
common inferences (n.s.). Again, there were no effects of
experimental condition and no interactions.

*

These “impossible” patterns were probably miscoded due to
information being entered into the shared text editor before being
taken up in discussion.

For the complete inference patterns, i.e. cases in which
the appropriate inference was in fact stated during
discussion, two patterns clearly dominated across all
experimental conditions: the “same person” pattern (1-1-1),
where both pieces of information and the corresponding
inference were entered by the same person, and the
“completion” pattern (1-2-2), where a second person
contributed a matching piece of information together with
the appropriate inference. Individual inferences provide the
clearest picture: as one would expect, the “same person”
pattern was dominant (61 out of 70 complete inferences).
For collaborative inferences, which could not be drawn
individually without prior information exchange, the
majority (31 out of 54 complete inferences) followed the
“completion” pattern. Interestingly, it occurred nearly twice
as often as the equally possible “turn-taking” pattern (1-21). For common inferences, the “same person” pattern
clearly dominated (50 out of 84 complete inferences), with
“completion” as the second most frequent pattern (again,
about twice as frequent as the “turn-taking” pattern). Thus,
the “same-person” pattern emerged as the most frequent one
wherever it was possible, while among the collaborative
inference patterns “completion” was dominant. Closer
analyses revealed that in more than half of the cases
following the “same person” pattern (69 out of 114), both
pieces of text information as well as the inference were
introduced within the same minute; i.e. they were
introduced as a whole. Similarly, in the majority of cases
(36 out of 49) following the “completion” pattern, the

Memory Post-Test Participants’ ability to identify text
information and solution-relevant inferences in the
knowledge post-test, too, differed depending on the
sharedness and distribution of information. Across all
conditions, participants correctly recognized 79% of the
unshared distributed, 86% of the unshared undistributed,

477

and 97% of the shared text information (F= 17; p< .001;
partial η2= .42), and identified 67% of the collaborative,
71% of the individual, and 76% of the common inferences
(n.s.). There were no effects of experimental condition and
no interactions.

References
Black, A., Freeman, P., Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1986).
Plausibility and the comprehension of text. British
Journal of Psychology, 77, 51-62.
Brodbeck, F. C., Kerschreiter, R., Mojzisch, A., & SchulzHardt, S. (2007). Improving group decision making under
conditions of distributed knowledge: The information
asymmetries model. Academy of Management Review,
32, 459-479.
Collins, A., & Michalski, R. (1989). The logic of plausible
reasoning: a core theory. Cognitive Science, 13, 1-49.
Fraidin, S. N. (2004). When is one head better than two?
Interdependent information in group decision making.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
93, 102-113.
Härder, J., & Spada, H. (2004). Exchange of unshared
information and their utilization in collaborative
inferences in work via a desktop video-conferencing
system. Paper presented at the conference of the German
Society of Psychology (DGPs) 2004.
Hinsz, V. B., Tindale, R. S., & Vollrath, D. A. (1997). The
emerging conceptualization of groups as information
processors. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 43-64.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. (2006). Collaboration
scripts – a conceptual analysis. Educational Psychology
Review, 18, 159-185.
Kraut, R. (2003). Applying social psychological theory to
the problems of group work. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.) HCI
models, theories and frameworks. Towards a
multidisciplinary science (pp. 325–356). Amsterdam:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Larson, J. R., & Christensen, C. (1993). Groups as problemsolving units: Toward a new meaning of social cognition.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 5-30.
Mojzisch, A., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2006). Information
sampling in group decision making: Sampling biases and
their consequences. In K. Fiedler & P. Justin (Eds.),
Information sampling and adaptive cognition (pp. 299326). New York: Cambridge University Press.
O'Donnell, A. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction
through scripted cooperation. In A. O'Donnell & A. King
(Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 179196). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate:
An instructional approach to promoting problem-solving
in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 14, 201-241.
Stasser, G. & Titus, W. (1985). Pooling of unshared
information in group decision making: Biased information
sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 48, 1467-1478.
Stasser, G., & Titus, W. (2003). Hidden profiles: A brief
history. Psychological Inquiry, 14, 304-313.
Wittenbaum, G.M., Hollingshead, A.B., & Botero, I.C.
(2004). From cooperative to motivated information
sharing in groups: moving beyond the hidden profile
paradigm. Communication Monographs, 71, 286-310.

Discussion
Results of the experiment show substantial effects of
information sharedness and distribution on all levels of the
problem solving process: Dyads discussed more shared than
unshared, and more unshared undistributed than unshared
distributed information. They also drew more inferences
from shared information (common inferences), while
inferences from unshared distributed information
(collaborative inferences) were the hardest to draw. The
same pattern was found in the written solution produced by
the dyad, as well as in an individual memory post-test.
These effects go well beyond the existing literature on the
effects of information sharedness in “hidden profile”-like
situations on group information processing. In particular,
the drawing of collaborative inferences from unshared
distributed information emerges as an interesting topic for
future studies on group problem solving. While these
inferences were the most difficult to draw, they also proved
to be particularly indicative for the quality of the solution in
our study. However, supporting groups in drawing these
collaborative inferences is no trivial task. On the one hand,
both instructional support measures that were employed in
our study (scripted collaboration and informed planning)
succeeded to significantly improve the number of correct
solutions, probably mediated by a stronger focus on
inferences versus text information, and a more collaborative
approach towards the drawing of inferences in some dyads.
On the other hand, instructional support mitigated the bias
towards shared information only to a small degree. In
particular, the number of conclusions drawn from unshared
distributed information was mostly unaffected by
instruction. Further approaches towards supporting
collaborative inferences might profit from more detailed
analyses of the interplay between individual and group-level
information processing. For example, our analysis of
inference patterns has shown that a “matching” piece of
information is usually entered by the same person as (and in
close temporal proximity to) the corresponding inference.
Thus, the most crucial part of a collaborative inference
seems to be an individual’s realization that two pieces of
information “belong together”. Further research is needed to
explore how this aspect of individual information
processing might be supported in order to improve grouplevel problem solving.

Acknowledgments
This work is being funded by the Virtual Graduate School
“Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with
New Media” of the German Science Foundation
(www.vgk.de).

478

