UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating Visual and Verbal Knowledge During Classroom Learning with Computer Tutors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/65j4p66r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Butcher, Kirsten R.
Aleven, Vincent

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating Visual and Verbal Knowledge During Classroom Learning with
Computer Tutors
Kirsten R. Butcher (kbutcher@pitt.edu)
Learning Research & Development Center, 3939 O’Hara St
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15217 USA

Vincent Aleven (aleven@cs.cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, 5000 Forbes Ave
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

the results of two studies comparing the effects of an
(experimenter-designed) integrated version of the Geometry
Cognitive Tutor to a standard, split-source version. We
hypothesized that integrated materials would support
students’ coordination of visual and verbal information
during practice, leading deep learning and improved
performance on far transfer tasks.

Prior research in multimedia learning has demonstrated that
materials that present visual and verbal information in an
integrated, rather than split-source, format can support
successful learning outcomes. These benefits often are
attributed to reductions in cognitive load during learning;
however, linking visual and verbal sources in materials also
may support cognitive processes that coordinate visual and
verbal knowledge. We tested the effects of integrated visualverbal learning materials by implementing a diagram-based
version of an intelligent tutoring system for geometry in 10th
grade classrooms. Compared to a standard split-source
version of the tutor, students working with the integrated tutor
performed better on far transfer tasks that tested deep
understanding of connections between conceptual geometry
principles and diagram features. Findings demonstrate that
integrated materials support development of coordinated
visual-verbal knowledge during learning.
Keywords: diagrams; geometry;
representations; learning; transfer.

integration;

Visual-Verbal Integration During Learning
Studies with varied multimedia materials have found that
even relatively simple forms of coordination between visual
and verbal information can impact student learning. Studies
have shown benefits in the temporal association of visual
and verbal information, where presenting visual and verbal
sources at the same time leads to better learning than
presenting them at different times (Mayer & Anderson,
1992; Mayer, Moreno, Boire, & Vagge, 1999). Benefits
have also been found for spatial association, where learning
is supported by placing visual and verbal materials in close
physical proximity or integrating them into a single,
combined representation (Hegarty & Just, 1993; Moreno &
Mayer, 1999). One proposed rationale for these benefits is
that temporal/spatial coordination reduces cognitive load
demands associated with working memory maintenance and
visual search (Mayer, 2001). The reduction in cognitive
effort needed to find and maintain multiple sources of
information allows students to engage in deeper processing.
However, another possible interpretation of the learning
benefits found when materials integrate or coordinate visual
and verbal information is that the depiction of close, explicit
connections between visual and verbal representations
prompts the learner to consider and process connections
between visual and verbal information. Thus, integrated
representations may support construction of representations
that include connections between visual and verbal
knowledge components. Although precise specification of
these internal representations or processes is beyond the
scope of this paper, our proposal builds upon existing
models of multimedia learning that assume distinct internal
representations are formed from visual and verbal
information, and that cognitive processes operate between

visual

Introduction
Previous work in multimedia learning has shown that the
presentation format of visual and verbal learning materials
can influence student performance (Butcher, 2006; Hegarty
& Just, 1993; Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler, & Sweller, 2003;
Kalyuga, Chandler, & Sweller, 2000; Mayer, 2001; Moreno
& Mayer, 1999). One formatting issue deals with the level
of coordination between visual and verbal sources of
information. Visual and verbal information can be
integrated (e.g., where short text descriptions are embedded
in a diagram) or presented in a separate, “split-source”
format (e.g., where paragraph text is physically separate
from an unlabeled diagram). Past research has found that
integrated materials support students’ memories for and
understanding of to-be-learned information (Hegarty & Just,
1993; Moreno & Mayer, 1999).
Our work is studying the impact of integrated
representations that closely link visual and verbal
information in an intelligent geometry tutoring system on
students’ problem solving performance and deep
understanding, when students use the integrated materials
during practice in real classrooms. In this paper, we present

137

Visual-Verbal Knowledge Integration in Geometry

these representations (e.g., Mayer, 2001; Schnotz &
Bannert, 2003).
There is some evidence that supporting the active
coordination of visual and verbal information during
learning can promote students’ understanding, especially
with complex materials. A recent study found that although
integrated materials support learning better than split-source
materials, learning can be further promoted by materials that
require students to actively create an integrated, external
representation using initially split-source materials
(Bodemer, Ploetzner, Feuerlein, & Spada, 2004). Other
research has shown that mental model development can be
supported when diagrams prompt learners to generate
inferences that integrate information during learning
(Butcher, 2006). These results provide initial evidence that
learning can be supported by presenting students with
materials that promote visual-verbal integration processes.

Our goal was to evaluate the impact of integrated learning
materials on students’ domain understanding following
practice in authentic classroom settings. We chose geometry
as our domain of study for two reasons.
First, geometry makes heavy use of both visual and verbal
information for successful learning. In geometry, visual
information consists of a problem diagram and verbal
information consists of given text and conceptual,
propositional representations of geometry knowledge.
Visual information in a geometry diagram provides an
explicit representation of information that remains implicit
in verbal descriptions (Larkin & Simon, 1987).
Second, there is evidence that integrated visual-verbal
representations in geometry support successful problem
solving. Previous research has found that experts use key
diagram configurations to cue relevant geometry
knowledge, and that these diagram configurations can be
used to successfully model expert problem solving
(Koedinger & Anderson, 1990). Without coordination
between visual representations and deep conceptual
knowledge, visual cues from geometry diagrams can be
unhelpful or even misleading. Visual features from
geometry diagrams hurt performance when novices focus on
visual similarities in diagrams at the expense of meaningful,
logical differences in problems (Lovett & Anderson, 1994).
We chose to study the potential educational impact of
integrated materials using a rigorous test case: we embedded
the integrated representations in an instructional treatment
that has been shown to improve student performance
beyond typical classroom instruction and that already
includes some mechanisms to reduce cognitive load during
student problem solving: the Geometry Cognitive Tutor
(described below). Identifying an impact of integrated
representations beyond the learning achieved with the
standard tutor would suggest that these representations have
critical and powerful effects on learning in geometry.

Cognitive Load: Limitations for Classrooms
A number of studies have attributed the learning benefits
associated with integrated materials to reductions in
cognitive load during learning (e.g., Chandler & Sweller,
1991, 1992; Sweller & Chandler, 1994). A cognitive load
approach suggests that integrated materials reduce the
extraneous effort needed to map between visual and verbal
information, allowing more cognitive effort to be focused
on deeper processing. Cognitive load effects have been
shown to be powerful in laboratory studies (Chandler &
Sweller, 1991, 1992; Sweller & Chandler, 1994). However,
cognitive load effects may be most relevant for novices who
have limited exposure to learning materials. Several studies
have shown that increasing learners’ existing knowledge
reduces cognitive load effects during learning (e.g., Kalyuga
et al., 2003; Kalyuga et al., 2000). The impact of materials
that reduce cognitive load demands appears to fade with
time, as learners develop increasing skills and expertise.
Although it may not be the case that classroom learners
typically achieve expert-level performance, recent research
has demonstrated that powerful cognitive load-style effects
that have been identified in laboratory research are difficult
to produce in a classroom environment (Olina, Reiser,
Huang, Lim, & Park, 2006). Olina et al. found no significant
effects on performance or perceived mental effort when
using two laboratory-studied effective cognitive load
treatments (problem-type and presentation sequence) in a
real classroom setting. Although this study may have
suffered from poor overall student performance, it suggests
that cognitive load effects may be weak, if not absent,
following practice in classroom settings. Recent research in
intelligent tutoring (e.g., McLaren, Lim, Gagnon, Yaron, &
Koedinger, 2006) also has found that laboratory-identified
effects do not affect student performance when interventions
are used in classrooms. These results may indicate a general
reduction of laboratory effects in classrooms, as well as the
possibility that other tutoring features of intelligent tutoring
systems operate to reduce cognitive load.

Study 1
Method
Participants Sixty-four students from three 10th grade
geometry glasses in a rural Pennsylvania school participated
in the study as part of their normal classroom activities.
Data from 21 students were excluded due to absences during
one or more study activities (pretest, posttest, or computer
tutoring), leaving 43 students for final analyses.
The Geometry Cognitive Tutor The Geometry Cognitive
Tutor is one of several existing Cognitive Tutors. Cognitive
tutors are a type of intelligent tutoring system based in the
ACT-R theory of cognition and learning (Anderson &
Lebière, 1998) and have been described extensively in other
publications (e.g., Aleven & Koedinger, 2002; Anderson,
Corbett, Koedinger, & Pelletier, 1995). The Geometry
Cognitive Tutor supports students’ learning by doing; it
selects problems during practice, provides feedback on

138

student responses, provides hints, and tracks students’ skill
development during learning. For our purposes, we did not
change the underlying mechanisms of intelligent tutoring
used by the tutor but manipulated the format of visualverbal representations presented to the students by the tutor.
The Geometry Cognitive Tutor has been shown to
significantly improve students’ learning outcomes (Aleven
& Koedinger, 2002; Anderson et al., 1995), but the standard
form of the geometry tutor reflects a split-source
presentation (see Figure 1). Despite its split-source format,
the existing tutor includes several mechanisms that reduce
cognitive load demands on students: the tutor supports a
step-by-step problem-solving sequence where the steps are
laid out in advance and feedback is given at every step. We
compared this existing, split-source tutor to an integrated
tutor that we developed for this experimental work.

icon). A paper version of this integrated representation has
been used successfully in lab settings to reduce split
attention (Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988). With the exception of
these integrated features, the integrated (diagram-based)
version of the Geometry Cognitive Tutor performs exactly
as the split-source (table-based) version. Problem content,
feedback criteria and content, hint availability and content,
and the set of solutions recognized as correct were kept
constant in each version of the tutor.

Split-Source (Table-based) Tutor Format In the standard
version of the Geometry Cognitive Tutor, all interactions
take place in a table that is spatially separate from the
relevant geometry diagram (see Figure 1). Students enter
their solutions in the table and the tutor’s feedback is
displayed in the table. In addition to the numerical values
for geometric quantities (such as angle measures), students
must name a geometry rule that justifies each step.

Figure 2: The integrated form of the Geometry Cognitive
Tutor. Students interact with and see answers displayed
within the geometry diagram.
Pre- and Posttest. The pretest and posttest in this study
were given four weeks apart and were identical, except that
four versions of the tests were used that differed only in
problem order. Tests included eight geometry problems,
with multiple problem-solving items in each problem; items
covered common geometry principles taught in the Angles
unit of the Geometry Cognitive tutor. The pre- and posttest
included both solvable and unsolvable items. Solvable items
tested problem-solving performance on skills that had been
practiced using the tutor (i.e., numerical answers and
geometry rules were requested for each problem-solving
step). However, deep understanding entails not only
application of knowledge, but recognition of situations in
which learned skills or procedures are not applicable
(Bransford & Schwartz, 1999). Thus, we included far
transfer items in the form of unsolvable problems where
students needed to recognize that there was not enough
information to apply a known geometry rule. For these
items, students simply needed to state that the problem was
unsolvable to receive credit.

Figure 1: The standard form of the Geometry Cognitive
Tutor. Students work in a split-source format.
Integrated (Diagram-based) Tutor Format We developed
and implemented an integrated version of the Geometry
Cognitive Tutor (see Figure 2). In this tutor, integration is
supported in three ways: 1) Integrated Activity: Students
interact directly with the diagram representation by clicking
on the question-mark icon associated with the problem step
(i.e., geometric quantity) they want to solve; 2) Reduced
Mapping: Clicking a question mark opens a work area near
the diagram that allows students to enter answers and
receive feedback without extensive mapping to a distal
location; and 3) Integrated Representation: Accepted
numerical answers appear in the appropriate location in the
diagram (i.e., they replace the corresponding question-mark

Procedure The pretest was given approximately one week
before the students began the Angles unit in the Geometry
Cognitive Tutor. At pre- and posttest, students were given
30 minutes to complete the problems. Within each
participating classroom, grade-matched pairs of students

139

Method

were randomly assigned to the split-source (table-based) or
the integrated (diagram-based) tutor versions. Students
worked on the Angles unit using their assigned tutor
version, as part of their regular geometry instruction, during
3 computer lab sessions over a 3-week period (for a total of
approximately 3.5 hours). Posttests were given during the
first computer session following the study completion, about
one week after students last used the tutor.

The tutor versions used in Study 2 were identical to Study 1,
with the exception that the Circles unit of the Geometry
Cognitive Tutor was used since participating classrooms
had completed the Angles unit earlier in the school year. As
described below, the study included an expanded pre- and
posttest. An identical procedure was used in both studies.
Participants One hundred thirty-six students from eight
new 10th grade geometry glasses in the same rural
Pennsylvania school participated in the study during as part
of their normal classroom activities. Data from 45 students
were excluded due to absence during one or more of the
study activities (pretest, posttest, or computerized tutoring
sessions), leaving 91 students in the final analyses.

Study 1: Results and Discussion
A multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance
was conducted. The between-subjects factor was tutor
version (split-source vs. integrated) and the within-subjects
factor was test time (pretest vs. posttest); dependent
measures were performance on problem-solving items, for
both numerical answers and geometry rules, and far transfer
items that required identification of unsolvable problems.
All participants showed a significant improvement from
pre- to posttest (F(3, 39) = 32.5, p < .001), but there were no
significant differences in student performance on the
dependent measures (see Table 1).

Expanded Pre- and Posttest Pre- and posttests in this
study included six types of items in three categories. First,
problem-solving items were used as in Study 1. Problemsolving included: 1) numerical answers, and 2) geometry
rules used to justify numerical answers.
Second, far transfer items in the form of unsolvable
problems were included as in Study 1, but these items were
expanded to require explanations of the unsolvable
problems in addition to simple identification. Students had
to name a geometry rule that could be used to solve the
problem if additional information was known about the
problem diagram (e.g., the chord product rule could be used
if you knew the measure of chord AC).
Third, True/False items were developed that needed no
numerical problem solving, but instead required students to
reason about the applicability of geometry rules to elements
in a given geometry diagram. For example:

Table 1: Study 1 Posttest means and (standard deviations)
for percent correct on practiced and transfer skills.
Test Item
Numerical Ans.
Geometry Rules
Unsolvable Prob.

Split-Source
54 (31)
46 (29)
24 (32)

Integrated
46 (27)
45 (27)
28 (33)

These results may not be entirely unexpected given
potential difficulty of replicating significant materials
effects from laboratory settings in classroom environments
(cf., Olina et al., 2006). Indeed, significant learning from
pre- to posttest demonstrated that classroom use of both
versions of the tutor were effective for at least some forms
of procedural and declarative knowledge.
However, we were concerned that the relatively coarse far
transfer task (the identification of unsolvable problems) may
not have been sensitive to potential differences in
knowledge representation that could be supported by
integrated materials during classroom practice. That is,
students could draw upon a deep, integrated visual-verbal
knowledge in analyzing given information, diagram
features, and known geometry rules to conclude that a
problem was unsolvable. However, students could have
based solvability judgments simply on perceived difficulty
of a problem, failure of an existing procedural solution, or
lack of recognition for the problem situation from practice.

“You can use the exterior angle rule to find angle STF
if you know only the measures of arc CBF and arc DE.”
Students identified each statement as true or false; for
false answers, students were required to state what diagram
features would need to be known in order to use the stated
rule to find the goal feature. Valid explanations were
required to receive full credit for false answers; false
answers without valid explanations received half credit.
Explanations for both the unsolvable problems and the
false answers required students to draw upon knowledge of
conceptual geometry rules in the context of a visual diagram
representation. Neither skill had been practiced explicitly in
either tutor version, these items tested far transfer and deep
understanding of visual-verbal knowledge in geometry.

Study 2: Results and Discussion
A multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance
was conducted. The between subjects factor was tutor
version (split-source vs. integrated) and the within subjects
factor was test time (pretest vs. posttest). Dependent
measures included performance on numerical answers and
geometry rules, identification and explanation of unsolvable
problems, and performance on true and false items.

Study 2
To more thoroughly test for students’ integrated
knowledge development when using the integrated version
of the Geometry Cognitive Tutor, we conducted a second
study later in the school year using more sensitive testing
materials that included expanded far transfer items in a
larger sample of classrooms.

140

(see Table 2). However, student explanations showed a
potential, though only marginally significant, interaction of
test time and condition (F(1, 89) = 3.4, p < .07) in the
predicted direction. At posttest, students in the integrated
condition were better able to explain how to make
unsolvable problems solvable (see Figure 4).
It should be noted these far transfer items are quite
difficult since they require analysis of relationships among
diagram features as well as connections to known geometry
rules. It is not terribly surprising that overall performance
levels of performance are low, but it is noteworthy that
students using the integrated materials perform about twice
as well as students using the split-source tutor version.

Table 2: Study 2 Posttest means and (standard deviations)
for percent correct on practiced and transfer skills
Test Item
Numerical Ans.
Geometry Rules
Unsolv. Prob. Identify
Unsolv. Prob. Explain
True Items
False (+Explain) Items

Split-Source
30 (25)
20 (21)
24 (26)
06 (11)
72 (22)
17 (13)

Integrated
37 (26)
25 (25)
27 (32)
13 (19)
71 (25)
23 (17)

As in Study 1, all participants’ scores improved
significantly from pre- to posttest (F(6, 84) = 9.1, p < .001).
However, condition differences depended upon the type of
knowledge being tested. No condition effects or interactions
were found for skills practiced in the tutor (see numerical
answers and geometry rules, in Table 2).
Analyses of the varied far transfer items show an
advantage for students using the integrated tutor, especially
for student performance on true/false items. As noted
earlier, these items required students to reason about
geometry rules in the context of a visual diagram. True
answers required recognition of valid applications of rules;
false answers required students to recognize inappropriate
applications and to reason about how geometry rules could
correctly apply to a diagram. Results show no interaction
between test time and condition for true items – students are
equally able to recognize a correct application of a geometry
rule. However, a significant test time by condition effect
(F(1, 89) = 4.3, p = .04) was found for false items. As seen in
Figure 3, students in the integrated condition performed best
at identifying and explaining false items at posttest.

Figure 4: Mean (+ SE) performance on explanation of
unsolvable problems: Test time by condition.

General Discussion
These studies suggest that integrated representations can
have impact on student learning, especially when
assessments include measures of far transfer that assess
connections between conceptual knowledge and visual
representations. Our results demonstrate that students who
used the integrated (diagram-based) version of an intelligent
tutor were better able to explain how inappropriate
applications of geometry rules to diagram features could be
resolved when compared to students who used a split-source
(table-based) version of the tutor. Student using the
integrated version of the tutor also tended to better explain
how to make unsolvable problems solvable. It is notable that
an effect of integrated representations occurred even though
all learners significantly improved their knowledge from
pre- to posttest following tutor practice in class. Our results
provide preliminary evidence that integrated representations
can influence students’ development of deep connections
between visual and verbal knowledge in geometry.
The lack of condition differences in the first study
suggests the need for careful, sensitive assessment tasks that
specifically target applications of visual and verbal
knowledge. Although the effects in Study 2 replicate the
assessment results from Study 1, more sensitive far transfer
tasks indicate that integrated representations can have
potentially important effects on student learning.
It should be noted that the diagram-based interface that
we developed supported visual-verbal integration in more

Figure 3: Mean (+ SE) performance on identification and
explanation of false items: Test time by condition.
Student performance on the more difficult far transfer
items – identifying and explaining unsolvable problems –
showed a similar advantage for students using the diagrambased tutor. However, this advantage was found solely for
the combined reasoning with visual and conceptual
information. Simple identification of unsolvable problems
was consistent with Study 1: neither a significant condition
difference nor a test time by condition interaction was found

141

than one way. Students interacted directly with the
diagrams, they worked nearer the relevant diagrams when
entering answers and receiving feedback, and correct
answers appeared in the diagrams. It may be the case that
these different aspects of integration are differentially
effective in supporting deep understanding. It is also
possible that overall integration may be less important than
support in mapping between representations (i.e., the splitsource condition may benefit from implementing linked
representations where accepted answers appear in the
diagram). The current studies cannot discriminate between
these possibilities. Further research is needed to understand
what aspects of integrated learning materials promote
optimal learning and how they may be tied to integrative
cognitive processes. Using think-aloud protocols, we
currently are exploring how the integrated tutor may support
key learning processes during practice.
Overall, we need to know more about the integration
processes that operate when learning with visual and verbal
information. Future work should continue to explore how to
support these processes using educational technology and
intelligent tutors in authentic classroom settings.

Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory
and the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction,
8, 293-332.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1992). The split-attention effect
as a factor in the design of instruction. British Journal of
Educational Psychology, 62, 233-246.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing mental
models of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003).
The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist,
38(1), 23-31.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2000).
Incorporating learner experience into the design of
multimedia instruction. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 92(1), 126-136.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Abstract
planning and perceptual chunks: Elements of expertise in
geometry. Cognitive Science, 14(4), 511-550.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11(1), 65-100.
Lovett, M. C., & Anderson, J. R. (1994). Effects of solving
related proofs on memory and transfer in geometry
problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20(2), 366-378.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia Learning. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1992). The instructive
animation: Helping students build connections between
words and pictures in multimedia learning. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 84, 444-452.
Mayer, R. E., Moreno, R., Boire, M., & Vagge, S. (1999).
Maximizing constructivist learning from multimedia
communications by minimizing cognitive load. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 638-643.
McLaren, B. M., Lim, S.-J., Gagnon, F., Yaron, D., &
Koedinger, K. R. (2006). Studying the effects of
personalized language and worked examples in the
context of a web-based intelligent tutor. Paper presented
at the 8th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring
Systems, Jhongli, Taiwan, June 26-30, 2006.
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (1999). Cognitive principles of
multimedia learning: The role of modality and contiguity.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(2), 358-368.
Olina, Z., Reiser, R., Huang, X., Lim, J., & Park, S. (2006).
Problem format and presentation sequence: Effects on
learning and mental effort among U.S. high school
students Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 299-309.
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and
interference in learning from multiple representation.
Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 141-156.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is
difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 185-233.
Tarmizi, R. A., & Sweller, J. (1988). Guidance during
mathematical problem solving. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 80(4), 424-436.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Octav Popescu, Andy Tzou, Carl
Angiolillo, Thomas Bolster, and Grace Leonard for their
contributions. Special thanks to Colleen Conko, Terri
Murphy, Sabine Lynn, and Dan Lusk for their dedication to
and help with these studies. This work was supported in part
by the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center through
funding from the National Science Foundation (#SBE0354420). The opinions and conclusions presented here are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
funding agency.

References
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2002). An effective
metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing and explaining
with a computer-based Cognitive Tutor. Cognitive
Science, 26(2), 147-179.
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., &
Pelletier, R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2), 167-207.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebière, C. (1998). The Atomic
Components of Thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bodemer, D., Ploetzner, R., Feuerlein, I., & Spada, H.
(2004). The active integration of information during
learning with dynamic and interactive visualisations.
Learning and Instruction, 14, 325-341.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking
transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.
Review of Research in Education, 24, 61-100.
Butcher, K. R. (2006). Learning From Text With Diagrams:
Promoting Mental Model Development and Inference
Generation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1),
182-197.

142

