UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating Training and Transfer Effects Resulting from Recurrent CBT of X-Ray Image
Interpretation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1n4027dv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Koller, Saskia M.
Hardmeier, Diana
Michel, Stefan
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating Training and Transfer Effects Resulting
from Recurrent CBT of X-Ray Image Interpretation
Saskia M. Koller (s.koller@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland

Diana Hardmeier (d.hardmeier@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland

Stefan Michel (s.michel@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland, and
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Dept. Bülthoff, Spemannstraße 38, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Adrian Schwaninger (a.schwaninger@psychologie.unizh.ch)
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zürich, Switzerland, and
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Dept. Bülthoff, Spemannstraße 38, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
The importance of airport security has increased dramatically
in the last years. Large investments into x-ray screening
technology have been made in order to cope with the changed
terrorist threat situation. However, the most expensive
equipment is of limited value if the humans who operate it are
not trained well enough to detect threat objects in x-ray
images of passenger bags quickly and reliably. In this study
we investigated whether adaptive computer based training
(CBT) can be used to increase x-ray image interpretation
competency of airport security screeners. To this end, we
tested screeners before and after six months of weekly
recurrent CBT using X-Ray Tutor (XRT). A control group of
screeners was tested as well but this group did not receive
training with XRT. Large increases in detection performance
were found for the training group, which did also generalize
to new threat objects that were not shown during training. The
results of this study indicate that recurrent CBT can be a
powerful tool to increase the x-ray image interpretation
competency of screeners.
Keywords: Object recognition; perceptual learning; x-ray
screening; human-computer interaction; airport security
human factors.

Introduction
In recent years, x-ray screening of passenger bags has
become an essential component of airport security. Large
investments were made into state-of-the art x-ray screening
equipment. However, well trained human screeners are
needed to operate the equipment appropriately in order to
detect threat objects in passenger luggage within few
seconds of inspection time. Object shapes that are not
similar to ones stored in visual memory are difficult to
recognize (e.g., Graf, Schwaninger, Wallraven, & Bülthoff,
2002; Schwaninger, 2004, 2005). Thus, a prerequisite for
good threat detection performance is knowledge about
which objects are prohibited and what they look like in xray images. Schwaninger, Hardmeier, and Hofer (2005)
have shown that x-ray screener performance depends on
knowledge-based and image-based factors. Image-based

1181

factors refer to image difficulty resulting from viewpoint
variation of threat objects, superposition of threat objects by
other objects in a bag, and bag complexity depending on the
number and type of objects in the bag. The ability to cope
with image-based factors is related to individual visualcognitive abilities rather than a mere result of training. In
contrast, knowledge-based factors refer to knowing which
items are prohibited and what they look like in x-ray images
of passenger bags. Because objects look quite different in xray images than in reality and because many threat objects
are not known from everyday experience, computer-based
and on the job training are important determinants of x-ray
detection performance. Schwaninger et al. (2005) compared
detection performance of novices with the one of trained
aviation security screeners. A rather poor recognition of
unfamiliar object shapes (e.g. self-defense gas spray,
electric shock device etc.) in x-ray images was found for
novices. For trained aviation security personnel, a much
higher recognition performance was shown. Schwaninger
and Hofer (2004) showed that adaptive computer-based
training (CBT) can be very effective to increase the
detection of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in x-ray
images of passenger bags. McCarley, Kramer, Wickens,
Vidoni, and Boot (2004) reported a better performance after
training for the detection of knives in x-ray images.
The purpose of this study was to investigate to what
extent the previous findings can be expanded to other threat
categories (e.g., guns and other prohibited items) and to
examine transfer effects. The training group conducted
weekly recurrent CBT using X-Ray Tutor (Schwaninger,
2004). The control group did not receive this type of
training and conducted recurrent classroom training
including another CBT system. Both groups of screeners
were tested before and after 6 months using the X-Ray
Competency Assessment Test (X-Ray CAT, Koller &
Schwaninger, 2006). This test shows different kinds of
prohibited items in x-ray images of passenger bags. Half of

the threat objects in the X-Ray CAT were not presented
during the training sessions. This enabled measuring
whether a transfer of the gained knowledge about trained
objects to untrained but similar looking objects occurs.

Method
Participants
A total of 209 airport security screeners of a European
airport participated in this study and conducted the X-Ray
CAT 1.0.0 two times with an interval of six months. The
training group consisted of 97 screeners who conducted
weekly recurrent CBT of about 20 minutes using X-Ray
Tutor (XRT) CBS 2.0 Standard Edition during the 6 months
interval between the two test measurements. The control
group consisted of 112 screeners and they did not conduct
weekly recurrent CBT with XRT.

Every item is depicted from two different viewpoints. The
easy viewpoint shows the object from a canonical
perspective (Palmer, Rosch, & Chase, 1981) as judged by
two security experts who captured the stimuli. The difficult
viewpoint shows the threat item with an 85 degree
horizontal rotation or an 85 degree vertical rotation relative
to the canonical view. In each threat category half of the
prohibited items of the difficult viewpoint are rotated
vertically, the other half horizontally. Set A and B are
equalized concerning the rotations of the prohibited objects.
The effects of viewpoint are not analyzed in this study and
will be reported elsewhere.
Every threat item is combined with a bag in a manner that
the degree of superposition by other objects is similar for
both viewpoints. This was achieved using a function that
calculates the difference between the pixel intensity values
of the bag image with the threat object minus the bag image
without the threat object using the following formula:

Materials
The X-Ray CAT consists of 128 x-ray images of passenger
bags. Each of the bags is used twice, once containing a
prohibited item (threat image) and once without any threat
object (Figure 1 displays an example of the stimuli). The
threat items belong to four categories of prohibited items as
defined in Doc 30 of the European Civil Aviation
Conference (ECAC): guns, improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), knives and other prohibited items (e.g., gas,
chemicals, grenades etc.). The threat objects have been
selected and prepared by experts of Zurich State Police,
Airport division to be representative and realistic.

Figure 1: Example of an x-ray image of a passenger bag.
The image on the right contains the prohibited item depicted
separately on the bottom right.
For each threat category 16 exemplars are used (8 pairs).
Each pair consists of two prohibited items that are similar in
shape (see Figure 2). These were distributed randomly into
two sets, set A and set B.

SP =

I SN ( x, y ) − I N ( x, y )
ObjectSize

SP = Superposition; ISN = Grayscale intensity of the SN (Signal
plus Noise) image (contains a prohibited item); IN = Grayscale
intensity of the N (Noise) image (contains no prohibited item);
Object Size: Number of pixels of the prohibited item where R, G
and B are < 253

Using this equation (division by object size), the
superposition value is independent of the size of the
prohibited item. This value can be kept relatively constant
for the two views of a threat object, independent of the
degree of clutter in a bag, when combining the bag image
and the prohibited item. The bag images were visually
inspected by aviation security experts to ensure they do not
contain any other prohibited items. Harmless bags were
assigned to the different categories and viewpoints of the
threat objects in a way that their difficulty was balanced
across all categories 1 . The false alarm rate (the rate at which
screeners wrongly judged a harmless bag as containing a
threat item) for each bag image served as measure of
difficulty based on a pilot study with 192 screeners.
The X-Ray CAT is integrated in the XRT training system
and takes about 20-30 minutes to complete. Each image is
shown for a maximum of 10 seconds on the screen.
Screeners have to judge whether the bag is OK (contains no
prohibited item) or NOT OK (contains a prohibited item).
Additionally, screeners have to indicate the perceived
1

The eight categories of test images (four threat categories in
two viewpoints each) are similar in terms of the difficulty of the
harmless bags. This means, a difference of detection performance
between categories or viewpoints can not be due to differences in
the difficulty of the bag images.

Figure 2: Example of two x-ray images of similar looking
threat objects used in the test, one belonging to set A and B,
respectively.

1182

difficulty of each image on a 100 point scale (difficulty
rating). The difficulty ratings were not analyzed in study
and will be reported elsewhere. The visible appearance of
the test is the same as in training except there is no feedback
and screeners do not have to click on the image to identify
the threat object (see Figure 3). Feedback is provided only
during training and informs the screener whether the image
has been judged correctly or not. If the bag contains a threat
item, it is highlighted by flickering after the screener
responded with OK or NOT OK and the screener has the
possibility to display information about the threat item (see
Figure 3). As mentioned previously, during training,
screeners have to click on the image and mark the object
they perceive to be a threat item. This is not required during
test mode.

use, that is, test threat items (set A) and other threat items
are digitally inserted into randomly selected bag images at
random positions. For details on XRT see Schwaninger
(2004).

Results
Detection performance was calculated using the signal
detection measure d’ (Green & Swets, 1966), which takes
into account the hit rate (correctly judged threat images as
being NOT OK) and the false alarm rate (wrongly judged
harmless bags as being NOT OK).
Figure 4 shows the detection performance of the first and
second measurement for both screener groups. Performance
values are not reported due to security reasons. However,
effect sizes are reported for all relevant analyses and
interpreted based on Cohen (1988), see Table 1.
Table 1: Classification of effect sizes according to Cohen
(1988)
Effect size
small
medium
large

d
0.20
0.50
0.80

η2
0.01
0.06
0.14

An analysis of variance (ANOVA) for repeated measures
using d’ scores with the within-participant factor
measurement (first vs. second) and the between-participant
factor group (trained vs. control) revealed a large main
effect of measurement (first vs. second), η2 = .40, F(1, 207)
= 138.66, p < .001, a medium main effect of group (trained
vs. control), η2 = .13, F(1, 207) = 31.22, p < .001, and a
large interaction of measurement and group η2 = .34, F(1,
207) = 105.55, p < .001.

Figure 3: Screenshot of the XRT training system during
training. At the bottom right a feedback is provided. If a bag
contains a threat item, an information window can be
displayed (see bottom left of the screen).

Procedure

1183

First measurement
Second measurement

Detection Performance (d')

Screeners were randomly distributed into two groups. Both
groups conducted the X-Ray CAT 1.0.0 without having
trained with XRT before (baseline measurement). After test
completion, only one group received recurrent adaptive
CBT using XRT (training group). On average, each screener
of the training group conducted 20.26 min recurrent training
per week (SD = 3.65 min). After six months, both groups
conducted the X-ray CAT again. This approach allows the
comparison of the two test measurements and the
performance of the two groups prior to and after training
with XRT.
In order to measure a transfer effect, only the images of
the prohibited items of test set A were included in training.
They are part of the XRT CBS 2.0 SE training library,
which contains 100 threat items belonging to the four threat
categories (guns, IEDs, knives, other). Most of them are
depicted from six different viewpoints. No bag image of the
test appeared during training with XRT. During training,
images containing a threat object are created at the point of

XRT Training Group

Control Group

Figure 4: Detection performance with standard deviations
for the XRT training group vs. the control group comparing
first and second measurement.
Separate pairwise t-tests of detection performance d’
revealed no significant difference at the baseline

measurement between the two groups (p = .353) and no
significant difference for the control group in both
measurements (p = .108). However, there was a significant
difference for the XRT training group between the first and
the second measurement (p < .001) with a large effect size
of d = 1.39. There was also a significant difference between
the two groups at the second measurement, p < .001, with a
large effect size of d = 1.27.
Figure 5 shows the detection performance for each threat
category separately for both groups at the first and the
second measurement. A repeated-measures ANOVA with
the within-participant factors measurement (first vs. second)
and threat category (guns, IEDs, knives and other), and the
between-participant factor group (XRT training vs. control)
revealed the main effects and interactions given in Table 2a.

sets for the XRT training group (set A and B: p < .001, d >
1.25) but not for the control group.
Table 2: Results of the ANOVAs

a)

b)

Detection Performance (d') .

First measurement
Second measurement

c)

IED

Knives

Other

XRT Training Group

Guns

IEDs

Knives

Other

df

F

η2

p

1, 207

140.23

0.40

<.001

Threat Category (T)

3, 621

222.7

0.52

<.001

Group (G)

1, 207

37.57

0.15

<.001

MxG

1, 207

108.16

0.34

<.001

TxG

3, 621

29.36

0.12

<.001
<.001

MxT

3, 621

76.5

0.27

MxTxG

3, 621

74.78

0.27

<.001

Measurement (M)

1, 207

138.39

0.40

<.001
<.001

Group (G)

1, 207

32.64

0.14

Test Set (S)

--

--

--

n.s.

MxG

1, 207

104.08

0.34

<.001

MxS

1, 207

8.72

0.04

<.01

SxG

1, 207

17.31

0.08

<.001

MxSxG

1, 207

7.92

0.04

<.01

Measurement (M)

1, 207

146.15

0.41

<.001

Threat Category (T)

3, 621

219.54

0.52

<.001

Group (G)

1, 207

42.53

0.17

<.001

MxG

1, 207

108.68

0.34

<.001

TxG

3, 621

30.29

0.13

<.001
<.001

MxT

3, 621

78.18

0.27

MxS

1, 207

10.17

0.05

<.01

TxS

3, 621

58.12

0.22

<.001

MxTxG

3, 621

75.51

0.27

<.001

MxSxG

1, 207

6.67

0.02

<.05

Control Group

Figure 5: Detection performance with standard deviations
for the XRT training group vs. the control group comparing
first and second measurement for each threat category
separately.
Separate pairwise t-tests were conducted to compare
detection performance at the first and the second
measurement for both groups and each threat category
separately. The XRT training group showed a significant
increase of the detection performance at the second
measurement for each threat category (guns, IEDs and other
threat objects, all p < 001, all d > 0.60, knives, p < .05, d =
0.26). Detection performance of the control group did not
differ significantly between the two measurements (guns: p
= .358, IEDs: p = .296, knives: p = .467, and other threat
objects: p = .168).
The results of the analysis considering the two sets of the
test, set A and set B, are shown in Figures 6 and 7.
The results of the repeated measures ANOVA with the
within-participant factors measurement (first vs. second)
and test set (A vs. B) and the between-participant factor
group (XRT training group vs. control group) can be seen in
Table 2b. Pairwise t-tests showed a significant increase in
detection performance at the second measurement for both

1184

First Set A
Second Set A
First Set B
Second Set B

Detection Performance (d')

Guns

Factor
Measurement (M)

XRT Training Group

Control Group

Figure 6: Detection performance with standard deviations
for the XRT training group vs. the control group comparing
first and second measurement for set A and set B separately.
An ANOVA for repeated measures with the withinparticipant factor set showed a very small significant main
effect of set η2 = .02, F(1, 208) = 3.94, p < .05 at the first
measurement. Pairwise t-tests comparing both sets within
one group at the first measurement revealed a significant
difference of the two sets only for the control group with
only a small effect size (p < .01, d = 0.17) but not for the
XRT training group (p = .676).

An extended ANOVA with the additional within-participant
factor threat category revealed the main effects and
interactions as specified in Table 2c.
Pairwise t-tests confirmed a significant (p < 001, all d >
0.46) increase in detection performance for the XRT
training group for all threat categories per set except for
knives (set A: p < .05, d = 0.27, set B; p = .127, d = 0.19).
The control group showed no significant change in detection
performance at the second measurement for neither threat
category per set (set A: guns p = .147, IEDs p = .202, knives
p = .801, other threat objects p = .245; set B: guns p = .974,
IEDs p = .597, knives p = .235, other threat objects p =
.123).
Detection Performance (d') .

First Set A
Second Set A
First Set B
Second Set B

Guns

IEDs Knives Other Guns

XRT Training Group

IEDs Knives Other
Control Group

Figure 7: Detection performance with standard deviations
for the XRT training group vs. the control group comparing
first and second measurement for set A and set B and each
threat category separately.

Discussion
The results of this study confirmed earlier findings on x-ray
detection performance of airport security screeners showing
that adaptive CBT with X-Ray Tutor (XRT) results in
substantial increases of detection performance (e.g.,
Hardmeier, Hofer, & Schwaninger, 2006; Schwaninger &
Hofer, 2004; Schwaninger et al., 2005). In this study, the
training group showed remarkable increases in detection
performance for all types of threat objects (guns, knives,
IEDs, and other prohibited items). For the control group,
which did not conduct weekly recurrent CBT with XRT, no
significant change in detection performance was observed.
It should be noted that according to the security
organization and their appropriate authority, the control
group did recurrent training as mandated by national
regulation during the whole duration of the study. This
training was comparable in terms of the required training
hours and included x-ray image interpretation training using
another commercially available CBT. Thus, the improved
performance in the training group reflects specific effects of
training with XRT and they can not be explained by a
"Hawthorne Effect". The largest training effect was found

1185

for IEDs. It should be noted that as all other stimuli, the
IEDs were developed by police experts of Zurich State
Police, Airport Division. Especially the IEDs were quite
sophisticated threat objects using components that are often
not known to screeners without enhanced training in IED
detection. Thus it is not surprising that before training, d’
scores for IEDs were substantially smaller than for guns.
However, after training, IED detection of the training group
was very good and even slightly better than gun detection.
This shows that the detection of IEDs is not difficult per se,
but rather depending on the training of screeners.
Besides measuring training effects, the main aim of this
study was to examine whether gained knowledge about
trained threat objects can be transferred to similar looking
objects. Since the X-Ray CAT is composed of two
comparable sets (set A and set B) this can easily be tested
by including the threat objects of one set (in this case set A)
into the XRT system. A large transfer effect would mean a
similarly higher detection performance after training for
both sets. This was confirmed, as Figures 6 and 7 illustrate.
The significant increase of the detection performance for the
XRT training group was found for the trained test set A as
well as for the untrained test set B. This implies a large
transfer of the acquired knowledge about the visual
appearance of trained objects (set A) to untrained but
similar looking objects (set B). The comparison of the two
sets A and B at the baseline measurement over all screeners
showed a slightly significant difference (p < .05) indicating
that the two sets are not exactly equal in terms of image
difficulty. But this possible objection to the transfer effect
can be disapproved with two arguments: first, the effect size
is only small according to the conventions by Cohen (1988,
see also Table 1), and second, only the control group
showed a significant difference (p < .01) but not the XRT
training group (p = .676). Therefore, the transfer effect in
the results of the XRT training group can be attributed to the
training of set A only.
Transfer effects were revealed for all threat categories, i.e.
for guns, IEDs and other threat objects. For knives, a
significant training effect appeared only in the trained set A
(p < .05) but not in the untrained set B (p = .127). Thus,
there was no transfer effect for knives from set A to set B.
Either the knives of the two sets were not similar enough in
shape to allow a transfer effect, or the small training effect
for knives is due to their shape. On one hand, knives show
less diagnostic features which play an important role in
object recognition compared to objects from other
categories. On the other hand, the visual similarity of knives
to harmless everyday objects (e.g., pen) is substantial. These
factors could impede detectability and trainability and
ultimately might have resulted in small transfer effects.
Contrary to our results, Smith, Redford, Gent, and
Washburn (2005) found a large decrease in screeners’
detection performance when specific trained objects were
replaced with new images belonging to the same categories

(see also Smith, Redford, Washburn, and Taglialatela,
2005). According to these authors, improvement in
screening performance is attributable only to specific-token
familiarity that developed for the original images and not to
a category generalization. They state constraints on
categorization and the use of category-general information
when humans face visual complexity and have to identify
targets within it. Our results can be interpreted in support of
generalization of visual learning in x-ray image
interpretation. However, it might be possible that the objects
of the untrained set in our study are so similar to the trained
objects that a specific-token familiarity led to the detection
performance increase and not a true generalization effect.
The lacking transfer effect in knives would along these lines
mean that the objects in set A and set B are not similar
enough in shape to generate a specific-token familiarity.
Therefore only the learnt objects could generate a training
effect but not the unlearnt ones. For Schwaninger and
Hofer’s (2004) findings of a large increase in detection
performance of IEDs after recurrent CBT with other
members of the category than those included in the test, it
would mean, that those objects were very similar in order to
create a specific-token familiarity and therefore a training
effect.
For our future studies, it could also be interesting to
increase the interval between the end of training and the
testing of training transfer, as corresponding literature
usually tests transfer of training after a considerable period
of time in order to measure the stability of the transfer (e.g.,
Saks & Belcourt, 2006). However, most research is about
organizational training and therefore training transfer is
related to learning working skills and the generalization to
the job context (Baldwin & Ford, 1988). In contrast our
transfer refers to the transfer of visual knowledge about
objects to other objects.
In any case, our findings show that the knowledge about
the visual appearance of forbidden objects, which airport
security screeners acquire during recurrent CBT, can be
transferred to similar looking, but not previously seen
objects. Thus, adaptive CBT can be a powerful tool to
increase screeners’ x-ray image interpretation competency.

Acknowledgments
This research was financially supported by the European
Commission Leonardo da Vinci Programme (VIA Project,
DE/06/C/F/TH-80403). We thank four reviewers for
valuable comments. Many thanks to Zurich State Police,
Airport Division, for their help in creating the stimuli and
the good collaboration for conducting parts of the study.

References
Baldwin, T., & Ford, J.K. (1988). Transfer of training: A
review and directions for future research. Personnel
Psychology, 41, 63-105.

1186

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioural sciences. New York: Erlbaum, Hillsdale.
Graf, M., Schwaninger, A., Wallraven, C., & Bülthoff, H.H.
(2002). Psychophysical results from experiments on
recognition & categorisation. Information Society
Technologies (IST) programme, Cognitive Vision Systems
– CogVis (IST-2000-29375).
Green, D.M., & Swets, J.A. (1966). Signal Detection Theory
and Psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Hardmeier, D., Hofer, F., & Schwaninger, A. (2006). The
role of recurrent CBT for increasing aviation security
screeners’ visual knowledge and abilities needed in x-ray
screening. The 4th International Aviation Security
Technology Symposium, Washington, D.C., USA,
November 27 – December 1, 2006.
Koller, S., & Schwaninger, A. (2006). Assessing X-ray
image interpretation competency of airport security
screeners. Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Research in Air Transportation, ICRAT
2006 Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, June 24-28,
2006, 399-402.
McCarley, J.S., Kramer, A.F., Wickens, C.D., Vidoni, E.D.,
& Boot, W.R. (2004). Visual skills in airport screening.
Psychological Science, 15 (5), 302-306.
Palmer, S.E., Rosch, E., & Chase, P. (1981). Canonical
perspective and the perception of objects. In I. Long and
A. Baddeley (Eds.), Attention and Performance IX.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Saks, A.M, & Belcourt, M. (2006). An Investigation of
Training Activities and Transfer of Training in
Organizations. Human Resource Management, 45 (4),
629-648.
Schwaninger, A. (2004). Computer based training: a
powerful tool to the enhancement of human factors.
Aviation Security International, FEB/2004, 31-36.
Schwaninger, A. (2005). Object recognition and signal
detection. In B. Kersten (Ed.), Praxisfelder der
Wahrnehmungspsychologie. Bern: Huber.
Schwaninger, A., Hardmeier D., & Hofer F. (2005).
Aviation security screeners visual abilities & visual
knowledge measurement. IEEE Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, 20(6), 29-35.
Schwaninger, A., & Hofer, F. (2004). Evaluation of CBT
for increasing threat detection performance in x-ray
screening. In K. Morgan and M.J. Spector, The Internet
Society 2004, Advances in Learning, Commerce and
Security. Wessex: WIT Press.
Smith, J.D., Redford, J.S., Gent, L.C., & Washburn, D.A.
(2005). Visual search and the collapse of categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134 (4),
443-460.
Smith, J.D., Redford, J.S., Washburn, D.A., & Taglialatela,
L.A. (2005). Specific-token effects in screening tasks:
possible implications for aviation security. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 31 (6), 1171-1185.

