UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Labels: Category Markers or Objects Features? Or How Rocks and Stones are Different from
Bunnies and Rabbits

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00x4g4qd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Fisher, Anna V.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Labels: Category Markers or Objects Features? Or How Rocks and Stones are
Different from Bunnies and Rabbits
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, 335-I Baker Hall
Pittsburgh, 15213 USA

(Jaswal, 2004; Welder & Graham, 2001; Keil, et al, 1998;
Gelman & Coley, 1991; Gelman & Markman, 1986).
The main support for this position comes from the
innovative research by Gelman and Markman (1986). They
presented 4-year-olds with a triad task, designed to put
appearance similarity in conflict with category membership
information. Specifically, children were presented with a
Target item and two Test items, such that Test 1 belonged to
the same category as the Target but looked dissimilar from
the Target, whereas Test 2 looked similar to the Target but
belonged to a different category. Category membership in
this task was communicated by shared labels: Test 2 and the
Target were referred to by the same name (e.g., “a rabbit”)
while Test 1 had a different name (e.g., “a squirrel”).
Participants were informed that Test 1 had a particular
property (e.g., “this squirrel eats bugs”), while Test 2 had a
different property (e.g., “this rabbit eats grass”). Children
were then asked to whether the Target item was more likely
to share the property with Test 1 or Test 2. Gelman and
Markman (1986) found that children were more likely to
generalize the property of the test item that shared the
target’s category membership than the property of the test
item that shared the target’s appearance. This finding was
interpreted as evidence that children’s induction is categorybased rather than similarity-based.
According to the alternative approach, shared labels
influence generalization in young children by contributing
to the overall perceived similarity of presented entities. In
particular, under many conditions auditory input, including
labels, overshadows (or attenuates processing of)
corresponding visual input in infants and young children
(Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003; Napolitano & Sloutsky,
2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004). As a result of
attenuated visual processing in the presence of auditory
information, entities that share the same label may be
perceived as looking more similar than the same entities
presented without a label. Auditory overshadowing effects
have been demonstrated to decrease with age, therefore
labels should make no contribution to the perceived
similarity of compared entities in adults. Both of these
predictions have received empirical support (Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001; Sloutsky & Lo,
1999).
Further evidence suggesting that early in development
labels are features contributing to the overall perceived
similarity rather than markers denoting membership in a
common category stems from a series of studies on the

Abstract
The ability to generalize knowledge is crucial for humans, and
it has long been known that labels play an important role in
inductive generalization. However, the mechanism by which
labels contribute to induction remains contested. According
to one position, labels contribute to induction because even
young children understand that labels denote category
membership, and members of the same category have much in
common. Support for this position comes from the finding
that even very young children rely on semantically related
labels (such bunny and rabbit or puppy and dog) when
performing induction. However, experiments presented below
demonstrate that unlike adults, children rely on semantically
related labels during induction only when these labels are also
strongly associated in the lexicon (and label pairs such as
bunny-rabbit and puppy-dog happen to be not only
semantically related but also strongly associated lexically); in
the absence of strong lexical association, even well-known
semantically-related words do not promote generalization.
Keywords: cognitive development, inductive generalization,
language and cognition, lexical development.

Introduction
The ability to generalize from known to novel is a critical
component thinking, and even early in development, words
influence the way people perform inductive generalizations.
For example, when two entities are referred to as “a rabbit”
and one of the entities is described as having a particular
property (e.g., “it eats grass”), even young children are more
likely to generalize this property to other entities with the
same name than to entities referred to by a different name
(Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004;
Welder & Graham, 2001). Why do people rely on words
when performing induction? There are several theoretical
explanations of this phenomenon.
One possibility is that people, including children as young
as 2,5 years of age, treat linguistic labels presented as count
nouns as special properties that differ from other properties
of objects: even young children realize that count nouns
denote categories, communicating what things are. Based
on (1) the knowledge of what categories objects belong to
(communicated by shared labels), and (2) the assumption
that things belonging to the same category share many
important properties, people conclude that objects referred
to by the same name have many properties in common

989

dog, rabbit, and snake in response is 71%, 74%, and 83%
respectively), whereas other words are associated only
weakly or not at all (for example, when presented with the
word child only 4% of adults will produce the word kid in
response). Therefore, it is possible that semantic similarity
in Gelman and Markman’s 1986 study was confounded with
lexical association strength, and observed effects could be
driven primarily by the strength of lexical association rather
than by semantic similarity.
It has been demonstrated that children experience
considerable difficulty when initially acquiring synonyms,
but these difficulties diminish by 24 months of age
(Liittschwager & Markman, 1994). However, it is unclear
whether this behavioral change corresponds to the change in
the mechanisms by which words are learned and ways in
which words are represented in memory. One possibility is
that this behavioral change is indicative of the development
of the insight into symbolic nature of language and a change
in the learning mechanism; another possibility is that this
behavioral change arises from the same associative learning
mechanisms responsible for jump-starting word learning
(Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996; for discussion see Regier,
in press). If by four years of age children realize that labels
are symbolic in nature and treat labels as category markers,
then removing high association strength from the task (by
presenting children with familiar semantically similar labels
that are not strongly associated in the lexicon) should
produce results consistent with those obtained by Gelman
and Markman (1986). However, if four year-olds have not
yet fully mastered the symbolic nature of labels, then high
degree of association within a pair of semantically similar
labels may be necessary to promote generalization.
These hypotheses were tested with adults and four yearold children in two experiments using a label extension task.
Label extension task is a generalization task in which
instead of generalizing a hidden property participants are
asked to generalize object labels. In the Experiments
described below participants were presented with a set of
novel objects consisting of a Target and several Test items
varying in the degree of similarity to the Target.
Participants were then presented with a pair of labels
(consisting of either strongly or weakly associated
semantically similar labels), told that the first label in a pair
refers to the Target, and asked to which Test item the
second label in a pair was most likely to refer. In essence,
participants were asked to select a test item that is of the
same kind as the Target item. If participants treat labels as
symbols denoting category membership, then they should be
likely to generalize semantically similar labels to
perceptually similar items regardless of the strength of
lexical association within a pair of labels.

flexibility of reliance on labeling and appearance attributes.
It has been argued that even young children realize that
category labels are theoretically central for induction while
appearances are peripheral (Jaswal, 2004; Keil, Smith,
Simons, & Levin, 1998; Gelman & Coley, 1991). In this
case, however, it should be difficult if not impossible to
change the pattern of reliance on labels and appearances
unless there is a theoretical shift. However, it has been
demonstrated that reliance on labels and appearances in the
course of induction can be flexibly changed by changing
predictiveness of labels and appearances in the course of
associative training, such that children’s reliance on the
attributes predictive during training increases, whereas
reliance on non-predictive attribute decreases (Fisher &
Sloutsky, 2006; Sloutsky & Spino, 2004). Furthermore,
these training effects can be obtained only in the course of
associative training but not explicit instructions to respond
based on a single attribute. Finally, there is evidence
suggesting that young children perceive labels as
subjectively continuous properties rather than symbols. In
particular, it has been demonstrated that inductive
generalization is promoted not only by identical but also by
phonologically similar labels (Fisher & Sloutsky, 2004;
Sloutsky & Fisher, under review), which should not be the
case if labels are treated as symbols denoting category
membership.
However, one of the findings obtained in the modified
version of the triad task has remained a challenge for the
researchers arguing that early in development labels are not
category markers, but features contributing to the perceived
similarity of objects. In particular, in one of their studies
Gelman and Markman (1986) substituted identical labels
with semantically related labels, such bunny-rabbit and
puppy-dog. They reasoned that if children treat linguistic
labels as markers of category membership, then not only
identical labels, but also semantically related labels should
promote induction, and this prediction was confirmed
empirically.
However, examples of synonyms provided in Gelamn and
Markman’s 1986 paper, consist mostly of pairs of labels that
are not only semantically related, but also have a strong
lexical association to each other (e.g., bunny-rabbit, puppydog, or cobra-snake). The strength of association for a pair
of words is typically estimated using a free association task
in which people are presented with a word and asked to
generate the first word that comes to mind in response
(Jenkins & Palermo, 1964). The strength of association
between a pair of words is measured in terms of the
probability of the second word in a pair being produced in
response to the first word in a pair. Word association
strength has not been extensively studied in pre-school age
children, however several databases have been created to
document lexical association strength in adults (Nelson,
McEvoy, & Schreiber, 1998; Wilson, 1988). According to
these databases, some words in English are strongly
associated (for example, when presented with words puppy,
bunny, and cobra, the probability of obtaining the words

Experiment 1A
It is commonly believed that adults appreciate the symbolic
nature of language and treat labels as markers of category
membership (Yamauchi & Markman, 2000; Osherson et. al.,
1990; Gelman & Markman, 1986). Therefore, performance
990

of adult participants in the Label Extension task should be
guided by semantic similarity of word pairs, regardless of
the association strength between the words in a pair.

experimenter. Participants were told they would be asked a
set of questions about objects from “far away places”. The
experimenter then informed participants, for example, that
“in a far away place” the Target object is called a “bunny”,
and asked which of the Test items would be called a
“rabbit” in the far away place.

Method
Participants Participants in Experiment 1A were 27
undergraduate students (M = 19.85, SD = 1.05; 13 women
and 14 men) recruited from the introductory psychology
courses at Carnegie Mellon University.

(A)

Materials Materials in Experiment 1A consisted of eight
picture sets and sixteen label pairs. The picture sets were
comprised of four novel objects, one of which was
designated to be a Target and the rest were Test items, such
that Test 1 was highly similar to the Target, Test 2 was less
similar, and Test 3 was dissimilar from the Target. Half of
the picture sets were comprised of novel artificial objects
and the other half of novel natural kind-like stimuli (see
Figure 1 for examples of picture sets). The position of the
Test items relative to the Target item (directly below, below
and to the left, or below and to the right) was randomized
for each trial.
Label pairs used in Experiment 1A consisted of eight
pairs of semantically similar labels with mean association
strength of 0.41 (in the Associated Semantically Similar
Labels condition) and eight pairs with mean association
strength of 0.03 (in the Non-associated Semantically Similar
Labels condition). The list of synonym pairs used in the
experiment is presented in Table 1.

(B)

Table 1: Label pairs used in Experiment 1A.
Associated
Semantically
Similar Labels

Association
Strength

Non-Associated
Semantically
Similar Labels

Association
Strength

Bunny-Rabbit
Puppy-Dog
Street-Road
Toad-Frog
Pony-Horse
Kitty-Cat
Jacket-Coat
Ship-Boat

0.74
0.71
0.35
0.34
0.32
0.31
0.30
0.20

Couch-Sofa
Child-Kid
Father-Dad
Rock-Stone
Hat-Cap
Cup-Mug
Jelly-Jam
Cake-Pie

0.08
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01

Figure 1: Examples of object sets used in Experiment 1: (A)
novel artifacts and (B) novel natural kind-like items.

Results
Proportion of choices of each Test item was calculated for
each participant and averaged across participants. Data
presented in Figure 2 indicate that in both labeling
conditions participants were highly likely to generalize
semantically related labels to the most similar Test item in
the set, Test 1 (91% and 81% of generalizations in the
Associated and Non-Associated Synonyms conditions,
respectively, above chance, both one-sample ts > 7.4,
Bonferroni adjusted ps < .001), and unlikely to generalize
semantically related labels to either Test 2 (8% and 15%
respectively, below chance, both one-sample ts > 3.9,

Design and Procedure There were two between-subject
conditions in Experiment 1: Associated Semantically
Similar Labels and Non-Associated Semantically Similar
Labels conditions. Participants were randomly assigned to
these conditions and label pairs were randomly assigned to
the pictures sets. The order of trials was randomized for
each participant.
Participants were interviewed individually in a laboratory
on campus. Picture sets were presented on a computer
screen and labels were supplied verbally by the
991

dramatically. In particular, in Experiment 1B adults were
unlikely to generalize unrelated labels to similar items
(averaging 9% of generalizations to Test 1, below chance,
one-sample t (15) > 7.5, Bonferroni adjusted p < .001), not
different from chance in generalizing unrelated items to less
similar items (averaging 39% of generalizations to Test 2, p
> .18), and likely to generalize unrelated labels to dissimilar
items (averaging 51% of generalizations to Test 3, above
chance, one-sample t (15) > 4.09, Bonferroni adjusted p <
.001).

Bonferroni adjusted ps < .001) or Test 3 (1% and 4%
respectively, below chance, both one-sample ts > 7.5,
Bonferroni adjusted ps < .001). There was no difference in
the proportion of Test 1 choices for novel artifacts and novel
natural kind-like items (both types of stimuli averaged 91%
and 81% of Test 1 choices respectively in the Associated
and Non-Associated Semantically Similar labels conditions,
both paired-samples ts < 1).
1

Non-Associated Semantically
Similar Labels

Proportion of Responses

0.9
0.8

Table 2: Label pairs used in Experiment 1B.

Associated Semantically
Similar Labels

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Test 1

Test 2

Test 3

Figure 2: Proportion of responses in Experiment 1A by test
item type and labeling condition. The dashed line represents
the chance level.

Label Pair

Association Strength

Horse-Sky
House-Shark
Key-Skirt
Lamp-Cup
Purse-Ship
Rug-Baby
Bag-Bird
Spoon-Cat

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

These results indicate that performance of adults in
Experiment 1A was driven by the semantic relatedness of
labels rather than by a tendency to merely match similar
pictures. Overall, results of Experiment 1A and 1B indicate
that label generalization in adults is influenced by the
semantic similarity of labels, with lexical association
strength having no effect on performance.

It is possible however, that adult participants failed to take
the task seriously and simply matched the Target to the most
similar test item in the test set regardless of the semantic
similarity of labels. This possibility was addressed in
Experiment 1B.

Experiment 2

Experiment 1B
To control for this possibility that in Experiment 1A adults
matched similar pictures regardless of presented labels, in
Experiment 1B participants were presented with the same
Label Extension task as in Experiment 1A, however
semantically related label pairs were substituted for the pairs
of labels that were not related either lexically or
semantically (mean association strength between labels used
in Experiment 1B was 0.01; the list of labels used in this
experiment is presented in Table 2).

In Experiment 2, 4-year-old children were presented with
the same task of Label Extension as adults in Experiment
1A1. If by four years of age children have appreciation of
the symbolic nature of labels, then their pattern of
performance should be similar to that of adults: in this case
children should be likely to generalize semantically related
labels to perceptually similar items regardless of the lexical
association strength within a pair of labels. Alternatively,
semantic relatedness alone may be insufficient and a strong
lexical association within a pair of labels may be necessary
to promote generalization of semantically similar items.

Method

Method
Participants Participants in Experiment 2 were 34 4- to 5year-old children (M = 4.6, SD = .44; 13 girls and 21 boys)
recruited from day care centers in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Participants Participants in Experiment 1B were 16
undergraduate students (M = 19.8, SD = .9) recruited from
the introductory psychology courses at Carnegie Mellon
University.

1

Experiment 2 used stimuli selected from adult databases.
Collecting lexical association strength data from young children
and basing stimuli selection on these data rather than adult
databases, will likely improve precision of the reported findings.

Results
When semantically similar labels were substituted with
unrelated labels, the pattern of performance changed

992

labels are not only semantically related but also strongly
associated in the lexicon; however, when lexical association
strength within a pair of synonyms is low, generalization of
semantically similar labels to perceptually similar objects
does not exceed chance level (Experiment 2). These results
suggest that the pattern of performance observed by Gelman
and Markman (1986) may have been driven to a large
degree by high association strength of used label pairs,
rather than by semantic similarity alone.

Materials, Design, and Procedure Materials, design, and
procedure of Experiment 2 were identical to those of
Experiment 1A. A calibration experiment with a separate
group of 20 4-year-old children established that all words
used in Experiments 1 and 2 were familiar to children in this
age group. In particular, results of a test analogous to the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997)
indicated that words used as stimuli in the current
experiments were correctly identified by children with the
mean accuracy of 97%.
Children were randomly assigned to Associated
Semantically
Similar
Labels
or
Non-Associated
Semantically Similar Labels condition and presented with
the Label Extension task. Participants were interviewed
individually in a quiet room in their day care centers by
hypothesis-blind experimenters.

Non-Associated Semantically
Similar Labels

Proportion of Response

0.9

Results
Results of Experiment 2 are presented in Figure 3. As can
be seen in the Figure, in the Non-Associated Semantically
Similar Labels condition children were equally likely to
generalize labels to any item in the test set (41%, 28%, and
30% of generalizations to Test 1, Test 2, and Test 3
respectively, not different from chance, all one-tailed ts <
1.3, ps > .233). However, the pattern of responses was
different in the Associated Semantically Similar Labels
condition. In particular, 4 year-old children were likely to
generalize semantically related associated labels to Test 1
(65%, above chance, one-sample t (15) > 4.5, Bonferroni
adjusted p < .001), and unlikely to generalize these labels to
either Test 2 or Test 3 (17% and 18% respectively, below
chance, both one-sample ts > 3.9, Bonferroni adjusted ps <
.01). The difference in proportion of Test 1 choices for
novel artifacts and novel natural kind-like items was not
statistically reliable (37% vs. 47% in the Non-Associated
Semantically Similar Labels condition, and 67% vs. 63% in
the Associated Semantically Similar Labels condition
respectively, both paired-sample ts < 1.5, ps > .16).
Overall, the pattern of label extensions observed in
children in Experiment 2 is dramatically different from that
of adults in Experiment 1A. In particular, adult participants
were equally likely to generalize semantically similar labels
to perceptually similar items regardless of the lexical
association strength within label pairs. Unlike adults, 4year-old children were likely to generalize semantically
similar labels to perceptually similar items only if the labels
were also strongly associated in the lexicon. Therefore, it
appears that appreciation of the symbolic nature of labels
continues to develop beyond the four years of age.

0.8

Associated Semantically
Similar Labels

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Test 1

Test 2

Test 3

Figure 3: Proportion of responses in Experiment 2 by test
item type and labeling condition. The dashed line represents
the chance level.
Recall that several mechanisms have been proposed to
account for the effects of labels on generalization processes.
One possibility is that labels influence generalization by
communicating semantic information, such as category
membership
(e.g., Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman &
Markman, 1986, Gelman, 2003, Waxman, 2003).
According to this proposal semantically similar labels
promote generalization because children as well as adults
realize the symbolic nature of labels. Alternatively, early in
development linguistic labels may be perceived as object
features rather than symbols denoting category membership
information (Fisher & Sloutsky, 2004; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher 2001). According to this
proposal semantic similarity alone may be insufficient to
promote generalization early in development. Results of the
two experiments reported above are inconsistent with the
former proposal, however they lend further support to the
view that insight into the symbolic nature of language is a
product of learning rather than a developmental default.
Traditionally, it has been argued that word knowledge
resides in a mental lexicon which, akin to a dictionary,
contains information about word meaning (as well as other
properties, such as pronunciation). However, more recently
it has been suggested that rather than having meaning words
provide cues to meaning, since word meaning is often
context-dependent in ways that can not be easily explained
by homonymy (Elman, 2004). For example, it is difficult to
articulate a context-free meaning of the word “baking”,

General Discussion
Overall, results presented above indicate that adults
overwhelmingly generalize semantically similar labels to
perceptually similar objects regardless of the lexical
association strength (Experiment 1). Unlike adults, 4- to 5year-old children are unlikely to generalize semantically
similar labels to perceptually similar labels unless these
993

Liittschwager, J. and Markman, E. (1994). Sixteen and24month-olds’ use of mutual exclusivity as a de-fault
assumption in second label learning. Developmental
Psychology, 30, 955–968.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Flexible attention in young
children. Child Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998).
The University of South Florida word association, rhyme,
and word fragment norms.
http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O, Lopez, A, &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
Dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Regier, T. (in press). Emergence of words. Cognitive
Science.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (under review). Linguistic
Labels: Conceptual Markers or Object Features?
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo Y-F. (1999). How much does a
shared name make things similar? Part 1. Linguistic labels
and the development of similarity judgment.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 1478-1492.
Sloutsky, V. & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth a
thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Spino, M. (2004). Naive theory and
transfer of learning: When less is more and more is less.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 528-535.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In
Rakison, D., & Oakes, L. M. (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming,
buzzing confusion (pp. 213-241). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.
Wilson, M.D. (1988) The MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine
Readable
Dictionary,
Version
2.
http://www.psych.rl.ac.uk/
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A.B. (2000). Inference using
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 776-795.

since “baking a potato” means inducing a change of state to
an existing entity by means of heating, whereas “baking a
cake” means creating a completely new entity by means of
heating (Elman, 2004).
Therefore, word knowledge,
particularly in the early stages of language acquisition,
maybe influenced by the context in which words are used,
and words that are used in the same context may become
strongly associated. Thus, it is possible that early in
development the strength of lexical association between
words rather than semantic similarity is primarily
responsible for promoting generalization. If this is the case,
then words that are used in the same context and become
strongly associated even though they do not share meaning
(i.e., bread-butter, thread-needle, doctor-hospital, etc.)
should promote generalization in young children (who are
yet to develop an understanding of the symbolic nature of
language) but not in adults (who have already developed
this understanding). In other words, unlike adults, young
children may judge that bread shares more in common with
butter than with bagels. Therefore, while reported results
demonstrate that strong lexical association is necessary, it
may be the case that it is sufficient to promote generalization
early in development. This possibility remains to be
addressed in future research.

References
Dunn, L.M., & Dunn, L.M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test - Third Edition. American Guidance
Services Publishing.
Elman, J. L. (2004). An alternative view of the mental
lexicon. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 301-306.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2006). Flexible Attention
to Labels and Appearances in Early Induction. In R. Sun
and N. Miyake (Eds.) Proceedings of the XXVIII Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). When mats meow:
Phonological similarity of labels and induction in young
children. Proceedings of the XXVI Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child. Oxford:
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In S.
Gelman, Susan, E. Byrnes, and P. James (Eds.)
Perspectives on language and thought: Interrelations in
development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jaswal, V. K. (2004). Don’t believe everything you hear:
Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category
induction. Child Development, 3, 279-300.
Jenkins, J. J., & Palermo, D. S. (1964). Word Association
Norms. Minn.:University of Minnesota Press.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998). Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.

994

