UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning to Understand Figurative Language: From Similes to Metaphors to Irony

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38n6h9zv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Veale, Tony
Hao, Yanfen

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning to Understand Figurative Language:
From Similes to Metaphors to Irony
Tony Veale (TONY.VEALE@UCD.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland

Yanfen Hao (YANFEN.HAO@UCD.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland
equivalent categorization. Indeed, Roncero et al. (2006)
note that similes found on the internet are far more likely
than the equivalent metaphors to be accompanied by an
explicit explanation, which suggests that similes are less
constrained by norms of category structure, and thus less
likely than metaphors to be implicitly explained by these
norms. Hanks (2004) goes as far as to argue that this nonreliance on category norms makes simile a freer and more
creative form of expression than metaphor, since similes can
serve as dynamic “triggers for the imagination” without
having to appeal either to linguistic conventions or
experiential gestalts. Chiappe et al. (2003) demonstrate that
metaphoric expressions of a relationship are preferred when
the relationship is an apt one, which suggests that it should
follow more obviously from the corresponding
categorization. These authors also find that aptness
correlates strongly with ease of comprehension, and indeed,
similes can enhance both their aptness and their
comprehensibility by opting for explicit self-explanation:
when one says “my left tire is as bald as a bowling ball”,
there is no ambiguity whatsoever as to the property that is
shared by topic and vehicle, even if baldness is not a
literally sensible property of artifacts. Bowdle and Gentner
(2005) argue, in a hypothesis they call the career of
metaphor,
that
as
metaphors
become
more
conventionalized, they are more likely to be processed as
categorizations than as comparisons. This suggests that
increased familiarity with a particular metaphoric vehicle
allows for greater competence in how the vehicle category is
applied and extended to include new members (following
Glucksberg, 2001).
If, as the career of metaphor hypothesis suggests, there is
an “evolutionary path …from comparison to categorization”,
it is consistent to also argue for an evolutionary path
between simile and metaphor. Certainly, explicit similes of
the form “X is as P as Y” indicate that P is a highly salient
property of Y, salient enough that Y can be used to
exemplify P-ness. If exposed to enough similes of this form,
or similes with accompanying explanations (like those
reported by Roncero et al., 2006), a cognitive agent can
build a detailed conceptual picture of the features Pi that
define a category Y. Since these will be the most salient and
diagnostic features of Y, they can be used to build a
category representation of Y that can subsequently be used

Abstract
Simile is widely viewed as a less sophisticated conceptual
device than metaphor, not least because similes are explicitly
marked and are frequently more obvious about the meanings
they carry. Nonetheless, this lack of sophistication makes
simile an ideal basis for acquiring the category-specific
knowledge required to understand metaphor. In this paper we
describe a computational approach to simile and metaphor
that takes the career-of-metaphor hypothesis of Bowdle and
Gentner (2005) as its starting point. We describe how the
category-defining knowledge required by metaphor can be
acquired from exposure to explicit similes, and demonstrate
that this knowledge offers a richer and more diagnostic
picture of category structure than that acquired from alternate
sources.
Keywords: metaphor; simile; irony; salient property;
category representation.

Introduction
Figurative language can range from the sublime and the
enigmatic to the banal and the obvious. Metaphor, for
instance, is widely considered to be the epitome of creative
expression, for metaphors often transcend the merely
descriptive to yield profoundly enlightening insights;
metaphors can be richly allusive, playful and challenging,
and open to constant re-interpretation by new readers in new
contexts (e.g., see Gibbs, 1994). Because metaphor allows
us to view one concept through the prism of another, it is an
inherently asymmetric device in which the meaning of a
juxtaposition depends crucially on the direction of the
information flow (Ortony, 1979). Similes, in contrast, seem
an altogether more humble form of expression. The use of
the hedge words “like” or “as” marks simile as a diffident
figure of speech, which (unlike metaphor) stops short of
ascribing category membership to merely draw attention to
certain shared properties. So while the metaphor “drug
dealers are vampires” challenges our conception of
vampires and the criteria needed for membership in this
category (see Glucksberg, 2001), the corresponding simile,
“drug dealers are like vampires” merely enjoins us to look
for common properties which in themselves may be
insufficient to support category inclusion. This reluctance to
categorize marks simile as a symmetric form of comparison.
The hedging and diffident nature of similes might also be
said to signal a lack of confidence in the aptness of the

683

lain beyond the 200-snippet horizon of the original search,
or that hinge on adjectives not included in the original list.
Together, both phases collect a wide-ranging series of core
samples (of 200 hits each) from across the web, yielding a
set of 74,704 simile instances (of 42,618 unique types)
relating 3769 different adjectives to 9286 different nouns.

to understand figurative uses of Y as categorizations rather
than as comparisons. Put another way, the less sophisticated
and often more explicit nature of simile means that simile is
an excellent knowledge-acquisition device through which an
agent can learn enough about category structure to become
competent in the metaphoric uses of those structures.
Rather than viewing simile as a lesser cousin of metaphor,
this view would make simile a crucial progenitor to
metaphoric awareness. Though the development of
figurative competence in humans is undoubtedly more
complex and non-linear than this simple view presupposes,
this hypothesis provides an ideal basis for training a
computational agent to understand and appreciate metaphor,
and in the process enrich its internal category organization.
In this paper we describe a super-charged implementation of
this approach, in which a computational agent is
automatically exposed to a very large quantity of selfexplanatory similes from the web. We describe how these
similes are collected and then sense-disambiguated with
respect to the lexical ontology WordNet (see Fellbaum,
1998). We then describe how these descriptions can be
translated into robust computational membership functions
that can be used to understand metaphors in terms of
category inclusion. To demonstrate the descriptive adequacy
of the conceptual picture painted by these similes, we
evaluate how well each simile-derived category description
predicts the overall affective rating of a category. We
conclude with a consideration of irony, and offer some
empirical observations from our large-scale analysis of
simile.

Simile Annotation

Acquiring a Large Case-Base of Similes
As in the study reported in Roncero et al. (2006), we
employ the Google search engine as a retrieval mechanism
for accessing relevant web content. However, the scale of
the current exploration requires that retrieval of similes be
fully automated, and this automation is facilitated both by
the Google API and its support for the wildcard term *. In
essence, we consider here only partial explicit similes
conforming to the pattern “as ADJ as a|an NOUN”, in an
attempt to collect all of the salient values of ADJ for a given
value of NOUN. We do not expect to identify and retrieve
all similes mentioned on the world-wide-web, but to gather
a large, representative sample of the most commonly used.
To do this, we first extract a list of antonymous adjectives,
such as “hot” or “cold”, from the lexical database WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998); the intuition here is that explicit similes
will tend to exploit properties that occupy an exemplary
point on a scale. For every adjective ADJ on this list, we
send the query “as ADJ as *” to Google and scan the first
200 snippets returned for different noun values for the
wildcard *. From each set of snippets we can ascertain the
relative frequencies of different noun values for ADJ. The
complete set of nouns extracted in this way is then used to
drive a second phase of the search. In this phase, the query
“as * as a NOUN” is used to collect similes that may have

684

Many of these similes are not sufficiently well-formed for
our purposes. In some cases, the noun value forms part of a
larger noun phrase: it may be the modifier of a compound
noun (as in “bread lover”), or the head of complex noun
phrase (such as “gang of thieves”). In the former case, the
compound is used if it corresponds to a compound term in
WordNet and thus constitutes a single lexical unit; if not, or
if the latter case, the simile is rejected. Other similes are
simply too contextual or under-specified to function well in
a null context, so if one must read the original document to
make sense of the simile, it is rejected. More surprisingly,
perhaps, a substantial number of the retrieved similes are
ironic, in which the literal meaning of the simile is contrary
to the meaning dictated by common sense. For instance, “as
hairy as a bowling ball” (found once) is an ironic way of
saying “as hairless as a bowling ball” (also found just once).
Many ironies can only be recognized using world (as
opposed to word) knowledge, such as “as sober as a
Kennedy” and “as tanned as an Irishman”. In addition, some
similes hinge on a new, humorous sense of the adjective, as
in “as fruitless as a butcher-shop” (since the latter contains
no fruits) and “as pointless as a beach-ball” (since the latter
has no points).
Given the creativity involved in these constructions, one
cannot imagine a reliable automatic filter to safely identify
bona-fide similes. For this reason, the filtering task was
performed by a human judge, who annotated 30,991 of
these simile instances (for 12,259 unique adjective/noun
pairings) as bona-fide (i.e., non-ironic and meaningful in a
null context; these similes relate a set of 2635 adjectives to a
set of 4061 different nouns. In addition, the judge also
annotated 4685 simile instances (of 2798 types) as ironic;
these similes relate a set of 936 adjectives to a set of 1417
nouns. Perhaps surprisingly, ironic pairings account for over
13% of all annotated simile instances and over 20% of all
annotated simile types.

Word-Sense Disambiguation
It is important to know which sense of a noun is described
by a simile if an accurate conceptual picture is to be
constructed. For instance, “as stiff as a zombie” might refer
either to a reanimated corpse or to an alcoholic cocktail
(both are senses of “zombie” in WordNet, and drinks can be
“stiff” too). Sense disambiguation is especially important if
we hope to derive meaningful correlations from property cooccurrences; for instance, zombies are described in web
similes as exemplars of not just stiffness, but of coldness,
slowness and emotionlessness. If such co-occurrences are

Bowdle and Gentner (2005), the vehicle “snowflake” can
mean different things in different metaphors: in some it
stands as a symbol of purity, in others as a symbol of
uniqueness, and in others still a symbol of delicacy. Either a
variety of different structures should be automatically
constructed from this data, or a single flexible category
structure that can foreground different properties in different
metaphors.
We opt for the second course, by describing each category
structure with a single mathematical membership function
that converts the available property-based evidence for
category inclusion into a score in the range 0 … 1. Consider
the function of Figure 1:

observed often enough, a cognitive agent might usefully
infer a causal relationship among pairs of properties (e.g.,
that coldness implies emotionless).
Disambiguation is trivial for nouns with just a single
sense in WordNet. For nouns with two or more fine-grained
senses that are all taxonomically close, such as “gladiator”
(two senses: a boxer and a combatant), we consider each
sense to be a suitable target. In some cases, the WordNet
gloss for as particular sense will actually mention the
adjective of the simile, and so this sense is chosen. In all
other cases, we employ a strategy of mutual disambiguation
to relate the noun vehicle in each simile to a specific sense
in WordNet. Two similes “as A as N1” and “as A as N2” are
mutually disambiguating if N1and N2 are synonyms in
WordNet, or if some sense of N1is a hypernym or hyponym
of some sense of N2 in WordNet. For instance, the adjective
“scary” is used to describe both the noun “rattler” and the
noun “rattlesnake” in bona-fide (non-ironic) similes; since
these nouns share a sense, we can assume that the intended
sense of “rattler” is that of a dangerous snake rather than a
child’s toy. Similarly, the adjective “brittle” is used to
describe both saltines and crackers, suggesting that it is the
bread sense of “cracker” rather than the hacker, firework or
hillbilly senses (all in WordNet) that is intended.
These heuristics allow us to automatically disambiguate
10,378 bona-fide simile types (85% of those annotated),
yielding a mapping of 2124 adjectives to 3778 different
WordNet senses. Likewise, 77% (or 2164) of the simile
types annotated as ironic are disambiguated automatically.
A remarkable stability is observed in the alignment of noun
vehicles to WordNet senses: 100% of the ironic vehicles
always denote the same sense, no matter the adjective
involved, while 96% of bona-fide vehicles always denote
the same sense. This stability suggests two conclusions: the
disambiguation process is consistent and accurate; but more
intriguingly, only one coarse-grained sense of any word is
likely to be sufficiently exemplary of some property to be
useful as a simile vehicle.

(define Snowflake.0 (arg0)
(*

(%sim arg0 Snowflake.0)
(combine
(attr pure arg0)
(attr unique arg0)
(attr delicate arg0)
…
)

)
)
Figure 1: A partial view of the membership function the
category Snowflake.0
Note that the function is named Snowflake.0 to represent a
particular WordNet sense of the word “snowflake”, while
the single argument arg0 is bound to any candidate entity we
wish to consider for membership. The function %sim
returns a WordNet-based measure (in the range 0…1) of
taxonomic similarity between two terms, e.g., as determined
by link distance to a common hypernym. The function attr
measures the salience (also in the 0…1 range) of a property
to an entity; this association can be based on their relative
frequency of co-occurrence in the annotated simile database,
or on their relative frequency of co-occurrence in a large
text corpus, or on a mixture of both these factors. For
instance, attr can be implemented using either the Jacquard
coefficient or the Dice coefficient (see Cimiano et al., 2005).
Finally, the function combine implements a simple
probabilistic or, in which different pieces of evidence are
naïvely assumed to be statistically independent.

Robust Category Representation
Each bona-fide simile contributes a different salient
property to the representation of a vehicle category. In our
data, one half (49%) of all bona-fide vehicle nouns occur in
two or more similes, while one third occur in three or more
and one fifth occur in four or more. The most frequently
used figurative vehicles can have many more; “snowflake”,
for instance, is ascribed over 30 in our database, including:
white, pure, fresh, beautiful, natural, delicate, intricate,
delicate, identifiable, fragile, light, dainty, frail, weak,
sweet, precious, quiet, cold, soft, clean, detailed, fleeting,
unique, singular, distinctive and lacy. This is a finding
compatible with the career-of-metaphor hypothesis, for as
“snowflake” becomes conventionalized as a highly
evocative metaphoric vehicle, its category structure should
become richer and more nuanced to support figurative
categorizations. But as noted in Glucksberg (2001) and

(combine e0 e1)
(combine e0 e1 … en)

= e0 + e1 (1- e0)
= (combine e0 (combine e1 … en))

The more evidence that can be combined for a particular
member arg0, the higher its assigned membership score. In
effect, each function represents a radially structured
category (see Lakoff, 1987) in which the most prototypical
members are assigned a score closer to 1.0 and the least
typical members are assigned scores closer to 0.
For a category as property-rich as Snowflake, only a few
properties need be adduced to obtain a reasonable

685

predict the affective rating of each vehicle via a weighted
average of the affective ratings of the adjectival properties
ascribed to these vehicles (i.e., where the affect of each
adjective contributes to the estimated affect of a noun in
proportion to its frequency of co-occurrence with that noun
in our simile data). More specifically, we should expect that
ratings estimated via these simile-derived properties should
correlate well with the independent ratings contained in
Whissell’s dictionary.
To determine whether similes do offer the clearest
perspective on a category’s most salient properties, we
calculate and compare this correlation using the following
data sets:

membership score. As such, the category can mean different
things in different figurative contexts, depending on the
features that are known about arg0. Indeed, if we use a text
corpus to represent a particular context or domain of
discourse, the syntagmatic use of a term in this corpus will
determine its membership scores. For instance, the function
of Figure 2 is automatically constructed for Gladiator:
(define Gladiator.0 (arg0)
(*
(%sim arg0 Gladiator.0)
(combine (attr manly arg0)
(attr violent arg0)
(attr competitive arg0)
)
)
)
Figure 2: An automatically generated membership function
for Gladiator.0
Now consider the category Athlete.0, to which the property
competitive is also ascribed in the simile database. This in
itself is sufficient evidence for an instance of Athlete.0 to
also be considered a member of the category Gladiator.0,
and since Athlete.0 and Gladiator.0 are taxonomically
similar in WordNet, this single property yields a middling
membership score. However, if in a corpus the term
“athlete” is repeatedly modified by the adjectives “violent”
or “manly” or both, this categorization of athletes as
gladiators will become all the more appropriate, to produce
an altogether higher membership score.

A.

Adjectives derived from annotated bona-fide (nonironic) similes only.

B.

Adjectives derived from all annotated similes (both
ironic and non-ironic).

C.

Adjectives derived from ironic similes only.

D.

All adjectives used to modify the given vehicle
noun in a large corpus. We use over 2-gigabytes of
text from the online encyclopaedia Wikipedia as
our corpus.

E.

All adjectives used to describe the given vehicle
noun in any of the WordNet text glosses for that
noun. For instance, WordNet defines Espresso as
“strong black coffee made …” so this gloss yields
the properties strong and black for Espresso.

Predictions of affective rating were made from each of these
data sources and then correlated with the ratings reported in
Whissell’s dictionary of affect using a two-tailed Pearson
test (p < 0.01). As expected, property sets derived from
bona-fide similes only (A) yielded the best correlation
(+0.514) while properties derived from ironic similes only
(C) yielded the worst (-0.243); a middling correlation
coefficient of 0.347 was found for all similes together,
demonstrating the fact that bona-fide similes outnumber
ironic similes by a ratio of 4 to 1. A weaker correlation of
0.15 was found using the corpus-derived adjectival
modifiers for each noun (D); while this data provides far
richer property sets for each noun vehicle (e.g., far richer
than those offered by the simile database), these properties
merely reflect potential rather than intrinsic properties of
each noun and so do not reveal what is most salient about a
vehicle category. More surprisingly, perhaps, property sets
derived from WordNet glosses (E) are also poorly predictive,
yielding a correlation with Whissell’s affect ratings of just
0.278.
While it is true that these WordNet-derived properties are
not sense-specific, so that properties from all senses of a
noun are conflated into a single property set for that noun,
this should not have dramatic effects on predictions of
affective rating. If one sense of a word acquires a negative
connotation, it is generally believed that “bad meanings

Empirical Evaluation
A membership function like that of Figures 1 and 2 is
automatically generated for each of the 3778 disambiguated
WordNet senses in our simile database. But how accurate
are these simile-derived functions? Furthermore, how we
can be sure that similes are the most insightful source of the
world knowledge needed to compose these functions?
If similes are indeed a good place to mine the most salient
properties of categories, we should expect the set of
properties for each category to accurately predict how the
category is perceived as a whole. For instance, humans –
unlike computers – do not generally adopt a dispassionate
view of ideas, but rather tend to associate certain positive or
negative feelings, or affective values, with particular ideas.
Unsavoury activities, people and substances generally
possess a negative affect, while pleasant activities and
people possess a positive affect. Whissell (1989) reduces the
notion of affect to a single numeric dimension, to produce a
dictionary of affect that associates a numeric value in the
range 1.0 (most unpleasant) to 3.0 (most pleasant) with over
8000 words in a range of syntactic categories (including
adjectives, verbs and nouns). So to the extent that the
adjectival properties yielded by processing similes paint an
accurate picture of each noun vehicle, we should be able to

686

In “A Christmas Carol”, Dickens asks a similar question
before concluding that “… the wisdom of our ancestors is in
the simile”. Similes do not always convey truths that are
universally true, or indeed, even literally true (e.g., bowling
balls are not literally bald). Rather, similes hinge on
properties that are possessed by prototypical or stereotypical
members of a category, even if most members of the
category do not also possess them. As a source of
knowledge, similes combine received wisdom, prejudice
and over-simplifying idealism in equal measure. As such,
similes reveal knowledge that is pragmatically useful but of
a kind that one is unlikely to ever acquire from a dictionary
(or from WordNet). Furthermore, while similes are, in
principle, reversible (at least from a conceptual perspective),
it is rarely pragmatically sensible to do so. If a simile is to
be a useful descriptive device, the vehicle category should
be better understood than the topic. So although a simpler
rhetorical device than metaphor, we have much to learn
about language and its underlying conceptual space by a
comprehensive study of real similes in the wild, not least
about the recurring vehicle categories that signpost this
space.
The knowledge acquired from basic similes allows a
cognitive agent to gradually develop a more sophisticated
understanding of irony. For instance, if the agent knows that
P is a salient property of V, then the simile “as not-P as V”
must be ironic. Likewise, if the agent learns from
overlapping simile descriptions that P1 often implies P2 (e.g.,
that dead implies cold, or that cold implies stiff), then the
simile “as not-P2 as V” is also likely to be seen as ironic
(though more subtly so) if the agent knows that P1 is a
property of V. We expect the sense-disambiguated and
annotated database of similes described here to prove
especially helpful in developing a model of ironic
implicature. For readers who wish to see this simile data for
themselves, it can be viewed at http://afflatus.ucd.ie/
sardonicus/tree.jsp.

drive out the good” so that the word as a whole becomes
tainted. Rather, it may be that the adjectival properties used
to form noun definitions in WordNet are simply not the
most salient properties of those nouns. To test this
hypothesis, we conducted a second experiment wherein we
automatically generated similes for each of the 63,935
unique adjective-noun associations extracted from WordNet
glosses, e.g., “as strong as espresso”, “as Swiss as
Emmenthal” and “as lively as a Tarantella”, and counted
how many of these manufactured similes can be found on
the web, again using Google’s API
We find that only 3.6% of these artificial similes have
attested uses on the web. From this meagre result we can
conclude that: a) few nouns are considered sufficiently
exemplary of some property to serve as a meaningful
vehicle in a figure of speech; b) the properties used to define
categories in general purpose resources like WordNet are
not always the properties that best reflect how humans think
of, and use, these categories.
In fact, the properties ascribed to noun concepts in
WordNet glosses are, overall, no more diagnostic of these
concepts than adjectival properties used to modify the
corresponding nouns in free text. To see this, consider again
data set D, the set of all adjective:noun collocations in the
text of Wikipedia. For each unique collocation type (such as
"timeless myth"), we generated the corresponding simile
(e.g., "as timeless as a myth"), and used to Google to search
for all 568,400 of these similes on the web. Interestingly, we
find that 5% (or 28,400) have attested uses in webaccessible documents. Of course, since Wikipedia is a
reasonably authoritative encyclopedia, we should expect
that the properties one can glean from it will paint a
somewhat accurate picture of each noun concept. The result
of the affect prediction task (a correlation coefficient of just
0.15 for data set D) means that these more salient properties
are more heavily disguised by a large body of unsalient
properties than is the case in WordNet glosses. Nonetheless,
the simile-generation task (5% versus 3%) suggest that
Wikipedia is as good a source of property knowledge for
figurative processing as WordNet.

References
Bowdle, B. F. and Gentner, D. (2005). The Career of
Metaphor. Psychological Review, 112, 193-216.
Chiappe, D., Kennedy, J. M. and Smykowski, T. (2003).
Reversibility, aptness, and the conventionality of
metaphors and similes. Metaphor & Symbol, 18, 85-105.
Cimiano, P., Hotho, A., and Staab, S. (2005). Learning
Concept Hierarchies from Text Corpora using Formal
Concept Analysis. Journal of AI Research, 24: 305-339
Fellbaum, C. (ed.). (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language:
From metaphors to idioms. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Concluding Remarks
Of course, the truth is most likely to lie somewhere between
these two alternatives. The space of potential similes is
doubtless much larger than that currently found on the web,
and many of the similes generated from WordNet are
probably quite meaningful and apt. However, even the
WordNet-based similes that can be found on the web are of
a different character to those that populate our database of
annotated web-similes, and only 9% of the web-attested
WordNet similes (or 0.32% overall) also reside in this
database. Thus, most (> 90%) of the web-attested WordNet
similes must lie outside the 200-hit horizon of the
acquisition process described in section 2, and so are less
frequent (or used in less authoritative web pages) than our
acquired similes. What then makes for a good simile?

687

Hanks, P. (2004). The syntagmatics of metaphor. Int.
Journal of Lexicography, 17(3).
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things.
Chicago University Press.
Ortony, A. (1979). Beyond literal similarity. Psychological
Review, 86, 161-180.

Roncero, C., Kennedy, J. M., and Smyth, R. (2006). Similes
on the internet have explanations. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 13(1), 74-77.
Whissell, C. (1989). The dictionary of affect in language. In
R. Plutchnik & H. Kellerman (Eds.) Emotion: Theory
and research. New York, Harcourt Brace, 113-131.

688

