UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory Biases for Television Advertisements and Female Dietary Restraint

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9r3560q1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Coulon, Sandra M.
Bourgeois, Rebecca A.
Martin, Corby K.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory Biases for Television Advertisements and Female Dietary Restraint
Sandra M. Coulon (Sandra.Coulon@pbrc.edu)
Department of Health Psychology, Pennington Biomedical Research Center
6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, La 70808-4124 USA

Rebecca A. Bourgeois (Rebecca.Bourgeois@pbrc.edu)
Department of Health Psychology, Pennington Biomedical Research Center
6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, La 70808-4124 USA

Corby K. Martin (Corby.Martin@pbrc.edu)
Department of Health Psychology, Pennington Biomedical Research Center
6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, La 70808-4124 USA

Keywords: Dietary restraint; memory bias; television; advertising

Conclusions

Introduction
Female attitudes for eating and body size/shape have been
associated with information processing biases for food and
body size/shape-related information (Green & Rogers,
1993). Computer-based response tasks, such as Stroop
color-naming, are the primary measures for detecting these
associations. Still, responses to common environmental cues
(i.e. television advertisements) may also expose these biases
and provide additional insights which are applicable to
everyday activities. The aim of this study was to test the
relation between dietary restraint, a cognitive construct that
affects eating behavior and body weight, and the ability to
recall a set of television advertisements (ads) which included
ads for foods.

This study demonstrates that females who are unrestrained,
or who score low on dietary restraint, recall more
advertisements than restrained females. Hence, dietary
restraint is associated with a possible memory bias that could
result in unrestrained females recalling more information
about food. These females may be more susceptible to the
influence of television ads, especially those which are foodrelated.
Therefore, this memory bias could produce
unhealthy dietary behaviors such as frequent fast-food
consumption or hyperphagia, resulting in negative health
consequences.
Recent studies suggest that cognitive
constructs for dietary restraint may function independently
of those for dietary disinhibition (Neale, Mazzeo, & Bulik,
2003). This may account for the lack of significant findings
between dietary disinhibition and ad recognition.

Method
Female participants (n=24) were asked to complete a
questionnaire assessing cognitive constructs for dietary
restraint and disinhibition (Stunkard & Messick, 1988).
They were also asked to watch a television program that
included ads for foods, while consuming an ad libitum meal
in the laboratory. Later, participants were given a list of ads
and were asked to recall those that were or were not viewed
during the television program. These responses were scored
and participants were given points for correct ad
recognitions.

Results
Correlation analyses indicated that dietary restraint
negatively correlated with ad recognition (r= -.43, p=.04).
When weight was controlled with partial correlation, this
relationship remained significant (r= -.42, p=.05).
Correlation analyses for dietary disinhibition were not
significant (r=.02, p=.94).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Clinical Nutrition
Research Unit, Pennington Biomedical Research Center.

References
Green, M.W., Rogers, P.J. (1993). Selective attention to
food and body shape words in dieters and restrained
nondieters. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
14(4), 515-7.
Neale, B.M., Mazzeo, S.E., & Bulik, C.M. (2003). A twin
study of dietary restraint, disinhibition, and hunger:an
examination of the eating inventory. Twin Research, 6(6),
471-8.
Stunkard, A.J., Messick, S. (1988). The three-factor eating
questionnaire to measure dietary restraint, disinhibition,
and hunger. Journal of Psychosom Research, 29, 71-83.

1729

