UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory Retrieval Effects on Filler-Gap Procession

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36j9d6xq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Hofmeister, Philip

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory Retrieval Effects on Filler-Gap Processing
Philip Hofmeister (philiph@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
Abstract

higher chances of successful recall. Also, various theoretical works in linguistics (Pesetsky, 1987, 2000; Deane, 1991;
Kluender, 1992; Frazier & Clifton, 2002) have noticed that
the nature of the filler-phrase impacts acceptability in a significant way for certain extraction types. For instance, Pesetsky (1987) observes that, in multiple wh-questions when the
object wh-phrase is extracted over the subject wh-phrase (also
known as “Superiority-violations” (Chomsky, 1973)), acceptability improves when informationally richer which-phrases
are used (2a), as opposed to bare wh-items like who and what
(2b):

In this paper, I argue that the retrieval of filler-phrases in syntactic filler-gap dependencies is facilitated by encoding more
information in the filler-phrase. Three self-paced reading experiments provide the evidence for this memory facilitation
hypothesis: reading times decrease when more explicit whphrases and indefinites occur as fillers in three different syntactic constructions. Crucially, the decrease in reading times
becomes visible only at the point of memory retrieval, i.e. the
gap site. There is no effect of the amount of information encoded in the filler-phrase prior to the retrieval site.
Keywords:filler-gap dependencies; memory retrieval; sentence processing; syntactic islands

(2)

Introduction
The processing of so-called filler-gap dependencies, as in (1),
is known to be affected by a variety of factors. In these
constructions, a linguistic constituent (the filler) is displaced
from its typical position, leaving an empty syntactic position
(the gap). As Hawkins (1999) points out, there are difficulties
in identifying the correct gap site, since it has no overt manifestation, and while trying to identify the gap site, the filler
must be held in working memory while other linguistic constituents are processed along the path from filler to gap. The
difficulty of processing these constructions further increases
with distance (Gibson, 1998), interference effects (Gordon,
Hendrick, & Johnson, 2004; Van Dyke & McElree, 2006), as
well as processing load imposed by other referential entities
along the filler-gap path (Warren & Gibson, 2002).
(1)

[Which cup] did you drink from
feeling ill?

before you started

Here, I investigate how the amount of information encoded in
a filler-phrase affects filler-gap dependency processing. On
the extreme view that storing more material always incurs
more processing costs, a more complex and informative filler
should impair dependency processing. I propose, however, a
type of memory facilitation hypothesis that says that linguistic elements that encode more information (including syntactic, semantic, and lexical information) facilitate their own retrieval later. In other words, richer linguistic descriptions of
discourse entities make recall of these entities easier (all else
being equal).
Previous work in psychology, psycholinguistics, and pragmatics is suggestive of the effect that informativity can have
on memory and discourse. For instance, Bradshaw and Anderson (1982) provide evidence that sentence recall improves
when presentation of a sentence occurs along with other
causally-related propositions. To explain these results, Bradshaw and Anderson suggest that elaborating on a given topic
increases the number of possible retrieval paths to a given
memory trace. Having more retrieval paths, in turn, implies

a. Which treatment did which patient receive? >
b. What did who receive?

Pesetsky explains this contrast as the result of a distinct
grammatical mechanism that he terms ’D(iscourse)-linking’.1
Similarly, Kluender (1992) discusses how increased “referential specificity” facilitates “long wh-movement.” For the most
part, however, these accounts are purely theoretical without any supporting empirical evidence obtained through controlled experimentation and concentrate exclusively on acceptability (cf. Frazier and Clifton (2002)). More importantly, this literature offers few explanations for why informationally richer fillers should improve filler-gap dependencies.
In this paper, I present the results of three self-paced reading studies that all provide positive evidence for the hypothesis that more informative linguistic descriptions lead to faster
recall. In each experiment, the results indicate that reading
times are significantly reduced at the key point of memory
retrieval in a filler-gap dependency (as well as in the spillover
region) 2 when a more explicit filler phrase is used.
The first study considers the effect of wh-phrase informativity on the processing of so-called syntactic islands. These
constructions involve the extraction or dislocation of a linguistic element across a syntactic boundary which supposedly
blocks the extraction of the element (Ross, 1967). One particular constraint, the wh-island constraint, says that a wh-phrase
cannot be extracted out of an embedded clause with another

1091

1 I avoid the use of the term “D-linked” in this paper to characterize certain wh-phrases. No precise formulation of or motivation for the D-linking analysis has ever been offered, and there is
no reliable method for ascertaining whether a given phrase should
be D-linked or not. Indeed, Pesetsky himself notes that the division
between scope-taking and D-linked wh-expressions is not absolute,
admitting that D-linking (as measured by the ability to participate in
superiority-violations) can occur even with the less informative bare
wh-items like who and what.
2 Spill-over results from continued processing of a particular lexical item or region into subsequent regions. Since most language
processing tasks typically are followed by another, the completion
of one task (especially complex and challenging processing tasks)
often overlaps with the processing of one or more subsequent tasks.

wh-phrase in complementizer position. Such a constraint acts
as an explanation for the markedness of the questions below:
(3)

Sawyer said who committed this atrocity.
What did Sawyer say [S who committed ] ?
(4) The journalist wondered whether the president
planned the attack.
What did the journalist wonder [S whether the president planned
]?
While traditional syntactic accounts label them as ungrammatical, a number of sources trace the acceptability of structures involving islands to the processing complexity of these
constructions (Alexopoulou & Keller, 2003; Kluender, 1998;
Hofmeister, Jaeger, Sag, Arnon, & Snider, 2007). Given
the high processing costs associated with these constructions,
therefore, they constitute an optimal setting for testing the
predictions of the memory facilitation hypothesis. That is,
simple, unary wh-questions are presumably processed without much difficulty and thus memory retrieval processes may
be operating at optimal efficiency. In a given environment,
if retrieval can take place in the minimum amount of time
that the cognitive architecture will allow, then any strategy
meant to facilitate retrieval will not be able to lower retrieval
times any further. In contrast, wh-islands present a suitably
challenging setting for language processing, making it more
likely that advantages for sentence processing will be visible.
To allay concerns that the observed effect in wh-island
constructions ultimately is artefactual, a second study is
reported here that involves nested dependencies. These
constructions, involving one filler-gap dependency nested inside a larger dependency, also impose significant processing
difficulties on the comprehender; however, no one seriously
questions the grammaticality of these constructions. Lastly, I
describe here the results of an experiment that evaluates how
informativity affects the processing of clefted indefinites, e.g.
It was a neurosurgeon he consulted on Friday. This study
complements the other studies by showing that the observed
effects are not limited to wh-dependencies. I conclude this
paper with some observations on how this data accords with
other findings about the choice of NP form and the potential
underlying causes of this facilitation.

Experiment 1: Wh-Islands
Methodology In self-paced reading time experiments,
subjects read sentences at their own pace. Initially, they
are presented with a screen of dashes separated by spaces,
representing the words for that experimental item. With
each press of a predefined key, a new word appears on the
screen and the previous word disappears. Following the
initial sentence, the subjects’ comprehension is tested with a
follow-up question. Subjects are informed beforehand that
they are participating in a reading comprehension survey and
that their ability to understand small passages of English
is being tested. Reading times for each word are recorded,
collected, and analyzed as a measure of processing difficulty,
with higher reading times representing more processing
difficulty. Reaction times and question-answer accuracy
were also recorded.

Materials All experimental items consisted of wh-islands,
presented as main clause interrogatives, as in (5). Subjects
initially saw a declarative sentence, after which a comprehension question was presented. In this experiment and
the next, the real stimuli were the comprehension questions
themselves; the initial context sentences merely justified
the presence of these questions which would be entirely
unnatural without any background. The wh-phrase always
corresponded to the animate object of the embedded verb.
The stimuli varied in terms of whether the sentence-initial
wh-phrase was the bare wh-item who (BARE) or the more
complex and informative which-phrase (WHICH). Additionally, a third condition was included to serve as a baseline
against which the results could be compared. This condition
differed only in terms of the complementizer and because
this complementizer was always that, these questions do not
represent instances of syntactic islands.
Twenty-four experimental items and forty-eight fillers
were included in this study. Twelve of the fillers were whislands, such that half of the overall items were wh-islands
and the other half were not syntactic islands. Furthermore,
an equal number of questions began with who, what, and
which-phrases.
(5)

Albert learned that the managers dismissed the employee with poor sales after the annual performance
review.
BARE : Who did Albert learn whether they dismissed after the annual performance review?
WHICH : Which employee did Albert learn whether
they dismissed after the annual performance review?
BASELINE : Who did Albert learn that they dismissed
after the annual performance review?

After reading the question, subjects answered the question
by selecting from multiple choices. Of the three possible
answers presented to them, one was correct, another was
lexically and syntactically similar, and the third option
differed drastically. Only correctly answered stimuli are
considered here.
Eight practice examples preceded the real experimental
items. Each participant saw each item in exactly one condition (Latin-square design). Residual reading times were
derived for each word on the basis of a linear regression
equation that computes reading time for each individual as
a function of word length. This method effectively reduces
variability due to individual differences in reading times.
Where I report results, only the residual reading times are
considered, rather than the raw reading times. The results
from all experiments covered here were analyzed with
repeated measures ANOVAs.
Participants Twenty subjects participated in this readingtime experiment. All participants were Stanford University
undergraduates who received course credit for their participation. The experiment was run immediately before or after
another reading time experiment on multiple wh-questions.
On average, each experimental session lasted about 45
minutes.

1092

for the WHICH condition over the BARE condition (F1(1,19)
= 13.664, p = .002, F2(1,23) = 10.778, p = .003). The main
effect of wh-phrase type on reaction times, however, is confounded by the fact that two of the multiple choice answers
contained the noun appearing in the which-phrase. This leads
to the possibility that the reaction time results underlyingly
stem from a priming or word recognition effect. Questionanswer accuracy did not differ significantly across conditions.

Residual Reading Times (ms)

bare
which
base

0

Experiment 2: Nested Dependencies

-100

...|

they|

dismissed|

after|

the|

annual|

performance|

review|

Region

Figure 1: Residual reading times in experiment 1. The first
region corresponds to the averaged reading times for the four
words between the end of the wh-phrase, and up to the embedded subject, e.g. did Albert learn whether.

Results The results verify that more explicit wh-phrases
lead to faster reading times at the subcategorizing verb
(F1(1,19) = 3.909, p = .063, F2(1,23) = 5.583, p <.05).
When spillover regions are considered, the effect of phrase
informativity is even more observable and statistically significant. Considering the verb and the subsequent modifying
material together, the difference between which-N’ phrases
and who is significant by both subjects and items (F1(1,19)
= 7.919, p <.01, F2(1, 23) = 10.504, p <.01). Reading
times on the word immediately following the verb (where the
presence of the gap is confirmed) alone reflect significantly
faster reading times for the WHICH condition (F1(1,19) =
7.00, p = .016, F2(1,23) = 5.412, p = .029) . Indeed, this
trend continues for three words after the verb, as pictured in
Figure 1, such that reading times in the bare-wh condition
remain slower until sentence-final wrap-up effects obscure
the difference between conditions. This suggests that at least
some (if not a large proportion) of the difficulty associated
with retrieving the wh-object continues after the verb is processed. The processing facilitation associated with the more
informative which-N’ phrases also eliminated any substantial
difference between the island-violating which-condition and
the baseline condition, which does not violate any supposed
constraints on extraction.
Crucially, the effect of informativity first emerges at the
retrieval site, i.e. the subcategorizing verb. In the regions
preceding the verb that includes the matrix subject and verb,
as well as the complementizer and embedded subject, there
is no significant difference across conditions. In other words,
the processing advantage due to increased informativity of
a stored constituent appears at the retrieval and integration
site and not during the storage interim. Hence, this evidence argues in favor of the hypothesis that encoding more
information about a discourse entity can facilitate memory
retrieval of that entity.
Reaction times to the question showed a strong advantage
1093

In order to counter any objections that the above results
merely reflect an atypical processing pattern associated with
the comprehension of island constructions, it is necessary to
consider the same effect in another complex, but unquestionably grammatical context. This experiment expands upon the
previous study by considering another challenging filler-gap
dependency, but one which has not been previously labeled
ungrammatical.
Materials The twenty experimental items in this study
were all nested dependency interrogatives of the sort illustrated in (6). The interrogatives varied in terms of whether the
fronted, inanimate wh-phrase was a bare wh-item (SIMPLE),
a which-N’ phrase (WHICH), or a which-N’ phrase with an
additional adjective (COMPLEX). These interrogatives acted
as the comprehension questions for preceding sentences, as
in the previously described study.
(6)

Scooter hid from the reporter who talked about the
recent ABC political poll on a recent evening news
segment.
SIMPLE:
What did the reporter that Scooter
avoided discuss during an evening news segment?
WHICH : Which poll did the reporter that Scooter
avoided discuss during an evening news segment?
COMPLEX : Which political poll did the reporter that
Scooter avoided discuss during an evening news
segment?

Eighty-eight fillers were included in the item list, including
an equal number of subject relatives. Across each experimental list, subjects saw an equal number of questions beginning
with who, what, and which.
Participants Thirty-five native English-speaking Stanford University undergraduates participated in this study
to fulfill a course requirement in a linguistics class. The
subjects had not participated in the previous experiment on
wh-islands.
Results As predicted, the more informative wh-expressions
led to faster reading times at the subcategorizing verb. The
“complex” which-phrase containing an adjective produced
faster reading times at the verb than the bare wh-phrase
(F1(1,34) = 5.158, p <.05; F2(1,19) = 5.260, p <.05).
Similarly, the use of the “simple” which-phrase without the
adjective also resulted in faster reading times at the critical
region of the verb (F1(1,34) = 7.684, p <.01; F2(1,19) =

Figure 2: Residual reading times at matrix verb (e.g. discussed) in experiment 2

Figure 3: Residual reading times at first word after matrix
verb (spillover) in experiment 2

7.81, p = .012). This effect intensifies during the immediately following spillover region (COMPLEX vs. SIMPLE:
F1(1,34) = 15.520, p <.001, F2(1,19) = 4.914, p <.05;
WHICH vs. SIMPLE: F1(1,34) = 5.562, p <.05, F2(1,19)
= 5.229, p <.05). As is evident from Figure 2, however,
there is no significant difference between the WHICH and
COMPLEX conditions. Presumably, the addition of one extra
adjective was insufficient to create a noticeable difference
in retrievability. Reaction times reflect a speed-up for the
COMPLEX condition as compared to the SIMPLE condition
(F1(1,34) = 6.44, p = .016, F2(1,19) = 12.26, p <.01).
There was also a non-significant trend for faster reaction
times in the COMPLEX condition as compared to the WHICH
condition (F1(1,34) = 3.42, p<.1, F2(1,19) = 2.35, p>.1).
As in the previous experiment, the reaction time results are
confounded by the fact that the which-N’ phrases contained
the same head noun as the correct answer. There were no
significant differences in question-answer accuracy across
conditions.
The factor of informativity once again does not significantly impact reading times until retrieval of the stored
filler-phrase is necessary, in line with the predictions of a
retrieval-based account. Reading times prior to the two verbs
show no effect of the amount of information encoded in the
wh-phrases.3 Interestingly, however, at the verb (avoided in
(6) above) immediately preceding the actual subcategorizing
verb, this effect is evident: the WHICH and COMPLEX
conditions result in faster reading times than SIMPLE. This
result, though, is unsurprising given a memory retrieval
account, since processing of this verb also requires retrieval
and a wh-phrase is still being held in memory, potentially
interfering with retrieval of the subject NP.

The preceding two experiments concentrate exclusively on
filler-gap dependencies involving wh-phrases. The proposal
made here, however, should cover other types of filler-gap
dependencies as well. In other words, the more information
encoded in any type of filler-phrase, the faster memory
retrieval should happen (again, all else being equal). To test
this prediction, I consider filler-gap dependencies involving
indefinite NPs of varying levels of informativity.

Experiment 3: Clefted Indefinites

Materials Sixteen clefted indefinites constituted the experimental data set, as depicted in (7). Conditions varied in
terms of how many adjectives preceded the head noun: zero
(SIMPLE), one (MID), or two (COMPLEX). In all items, the
clefted indefinite was followed by a relative clause containing
a five-word subject NP and then a transitive verb with an
object gap, requiring the retrieval of the clefted indefinite
phrase. In contrast to the other two experiments, these
stimuli were followed by comprehension questions, rather
than acting as the comprehension questions themselves. The
comprehension questions for these sixteen items always
asked about the identity of the individual referred to with
the clefted indefinite. Other experimental fillers, however,
involved clefts and comprehension questions asking about
various other aspects of the sentence meaning besides the
clefted phrase. Three multiple choice answers were provided
after displaying the subsequent comprehension question.
(7)

SIMPLE: It was a communist who the members of
the club banned from ever entering the premises.
MID : It was an alleged communist who the members
of the club banned from ever entering the premises.
COMPLEX : It was an alleged Venezuelan communist
who the members of the club banned from ever
entering the premises.

3 This

absence of an effect prior to the verb or retrieval sites also
argues against any alternative explanation of the facts that subjects
read the which-conditions faster strictly due to an early anticipation
of the correct answer.

1094

These experimental items were included as fillers in the
aforementioned nested dependency experiment. Hence,

Figure 4: Residual reading times at subcategorizing verb in
experiment 3

ninety-two other items acted as fillers for this data set.
Participants The same thirty-five native English speakers from experiment 2 participated in this experiment.
Results Following the results from the previous experiments, the most informative indefinites induced faster
reading times at the verb than the least informative indefinites. This effect was nearly significant by subjects and
significant by items (F1(1,34) = 5.351, p = .063, F2(1,15) =
3.690, p <.05). On the other hand, the comparisons between
the SIMPLE and MID conditions and between the MID and
COMPLEX conditions were not significant. The difference
between these conditions is the presence or absence of one
adjective, as was the case with the which-phrases in the
preceding experiment. Hence, not just any single addition of
information necessarily improves retrieval. Note, however,
that this does not contradict the predictions of the memory
facilitation hypothesis. This hypothesis does not claim
or speculate about how much additional information is
necessary in order to significantly improve memory retrieval.
As in the other experiments, the different levels of informativity in the filler phrase did not result in significantly
different reading times prior to the verb where retrieval of
the filler occurs. Spillover effects were not observed in this
study, undoubtedly due to the relative processing ease of
the sentences. Overall, the duplication of the facilitation
in dependencies involving indefinites provides evidence,
albeit limited, that the advantage of using more explicit
filler-phrases is not restricted to wh-dependencies.

Discussion
Cumulatively, the three reading-time studies reflect reduced
processing costs when more explicit fillers are used. It was
found that which-phrases consistently led to faster processing times than bare-wh-phrases. Furthermore, indefinites encoded along with multiple adjectives facilitated processing,

as compared to indefinites with no accompanying adjectives.
Other experimental results extend the findings discussed here
to other kinds of syntactic constructions, such as multiple
wh-questions and so-called complex noun phrase violations
(Hofmeister et al., 2007).
The lack of a significant difference between the two whichphrases in experiment 2 and between the MID indefinite condition and the other conditions likely stems from an insufficient difference in informativity. Notice that, while the difference between a which-N’ phrase and who is also only one
word, the former specifies much that the latter does not: in
addition to specifying number information, the which-phrase
further identifies the type of relevant individual or object.
This goes beyond the specification of a mere attribute, as in
the difference between communist and alleged communist.
Theoretically, additional information should also inhibit
similarity effects of the sort that Gordon et al. (2004) observe. If interference effects are determined on the basis of
various dimensions of similarity, e.g. definiteness, syntactic
category, thematic role assignment, etc., additional lexicalsemantic features should reduce the impact of interference
from other candidates in memory. Indeed, the underlying
cause for this facilitation may reside in the fact that adding
or linking information to a mental representation causes it to
be more distinctive from other potential competitors in memory. There are, of course, other possible explanations for this
facilitation: the additional study time provided by extra morphophonemic material may allow more accurate and redundant encoding. Also, the addition of information to the representation of a discourse entity may increase the number of
available retrieval paths in the sense of Bradshaw and Anderson (1982). In fact, these factors are not mutually exclusively
and may additively contribute to the overall memory retrieval
facilitation. In this sense, increased informativity may reflect
an aggregate of dynamic factors. Future experimental work
consequently seeks to identify the source of this sentence processing facilitation.
Several points suggest why the observed data should be regarded as a reflection of memory retrieval differences, instead
of some other processing-based factor. As pointed out for all
three experimental studies here, the effect of informativity appears only at the retrieval site. While integration also occurs
at this point in sentence processing, there is little motivation
for assuming that the integration of longer and more informative constituents is expedited. Furthermore, any explanation
based on storage conflicts with the facts: a storage-based account predicts that an effect should be immediately observable after the wh-phrase and would have to say that storing a
less informative representation is more difficult. The other
potential candidate explanations, therefore, ultimately lack
motivation and require ad hoc or even illogical assumptions.
These results should be balanced against other clear evidence that suggests that the use of shorter and less informative linguistic expressions is often times more efficient and
preferable in discourse and writing (Ariel, 1990, 2001). Discourse entities are not perpetually referred to with the same
degree of detail. After establishing the identity of individuals
and objects in a discourse, shorter and less precise forms are
adopted. I suggest that, as with many linguistic processes,
there is an on-line competition for using more or less infor-

1095

Chomsky, N., & Miller, G. (1963). Introduction to the formal analysis of natural languages. In R. Luce, R. Bush, &
E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology
(p. 269-321). New York: Wiley.
Deane, P. (1991). Limits to attention: a cognitive theory of
island phenomena. Cognitive Linguistics, 2(1), 1-63.
Fanselow, G., & Frisch, S. (2004). Effects of processing
difficulty on judgments of acceptability. In G. Fanselow,
C. Fery, M. Schlesewsky, & R. Vogel (Eds.), Gradience in
grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C. (2002). Processing ’d-linked’
phrases. Journal of Psycholinguistics, 31, 633-659.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68(1), 1-76.
Gordon, P., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2004). Effects
of noun phrase type on sentence complexity. Journal of
Memory and Language, 51, 97-114.
Hawkins, J. (1999). Processing complexity and filler-gap
dependencies across grammars. Language, 75, 244-285.
Hofmeister, P., Jaeger, T., Sag, I., Arnon, I., & Snider, N.
(2007). Locality and accessibility in wh-questions. In Linguistic evidence: Empirical, computational, and theoretical perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kluender, R. (1992). Deriving islands constraints from principles of predication. In H. Goodluck & M. Rochemont
(Eds.), Island constraints: Theory, acquisition and processing (p. 223-258). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kluender, R. (1998). On the distinction between strong and
weak islands: a processing perspective. In P. Culicover &
L. McNally (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 29: The limits of
syntax (p. 241-279). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Pesetsky, D. (1987). Wh-in-situ: movement and unselective
binding. In E. Reuland & A. ter Meulen (Eds.), The representation of (in)definiteness. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pesetsky, D. (2000). Phrasal movement and its kin. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Ross, J. R. (1967). Constraints on variables in syntax. PhD
Thesis. MIT.
Van Dyke, J., & McElree, B. (2006). Retrieval interference
in sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 157-166.
Warren, T., & Gibson, E. (2002). The influence of referential
processing on sentence complexity. Cognition, 85, 79-112.

mative expressions. Shorter and less informative expressions
are licensed when their intended referents are highly salient
and, hence, easy to retrieve from memory. At other times,
longer and more informative expressions are called for to introduce discourse entities, to establish or change discourse
topics, and identify the most significant discourse entities.
The longer and more distinctive linguistic expressions effectively boost the activation of the associated discourse representations, meaning that future references to those representations can be more economical. These two claims reduce to
saying that linguistic form both reflects and attenuates retrievability from memory. Hence, adding an account of memory
facilitation to our knowledge about discourse salience creates
a more complete picture of how the ”accessibility” of discourse entities fluctuates throughout discourse.
The evidence presented here also constitutes at least a potential explanation for the acceptability paradigms raised in
linguistic research such as Pesetsky (1987, 2000) and Kluender (1992), where differences in extracted elements create contrasts in acceptability. As processing difficulty can
significantly impact acceptability (Chomsky & Miller, 1963;
Fanselow & Frisch, 2004), the pattern of more informative
fillers increasing the acceptability of certain filler-gap dependencies may partly derive from the decreased processing difficulty, due to easier retrieval. Indeed, other experimental data
(Hofmeister et al., 2007) confirm that acceptability and processing difficulty measures converge on the same preference
for more informative wh-phrases in multiple wh-questions,
i.e. evidence of easier processing at the retrieval site correlates with higher acceptability ratings.
In sum, the ideas developed here stem from the consideration that some kinds of mental representations are more
easily recalled than others. While many factors dynamically
contribute to retrievability, I claim that the quantity of information in a linguistic phrase plays a significant role. This
research consequently seeks to establish a systematic relationship between how information is encoded and how well
that information is remembered later for purposes of natural
language comprehension. The implications of this theory extend to any inquiry that examines the choice between more
or less complicated locutions and how this affects subsequent
language processing.

References
Alexopoulou, T., & Keller, F. (2003). Linguistic complexity, locality, and resumption. In Proceedings of WCCFL22.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents. London: Routledge.
Ariel, M. (2001). Accessibility theory: an overview. In
T. Sanders, J. Schilperoord, & W. Spooren (Eds.), Text representation: Linguistic and psycholinguistic aspects. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bradshaw, G., & Anderson, J. (1982). Elaborative encoding
as an explanation of levels of processing. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 165-174.
Chomsky, N. (1973). Conditions on transformations. In
S. Anderson & P. Kiparsky (Eds.), A festschrift for Morris
Halle (p. 232-86). New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston.
1096

