UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental Time-Lines Follow Writing Direction: Comparing English and Hebrew Speakers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/68k986hb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Fuhrman, Orly
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental Time-Lines Follow Writing Direction:
Comparing English and Hebrew Speakers
Orly Fuhrman (orlyfu@psych.stanford.edu)

Lera Boroditsky (lera@psych.stanford.edu)

Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, Stanford, CA 94043
Abstract
Across cultures people construct spatial representations of
time. However, the particular spatial layout created to
represent time differs across cultures. Previous work suggests
that writing direction (e.g., left to right as in English, or right
to left as in Arabic) can have an effect on how people mentally
lay out time. The purpose of this paper is twofold: 1. Our
study examines whether people automatically access spatial
representations when they reason about temporal order, and 2.
whether culturo-linguistic artifacts such as writing direction
affect which spatial representations are likely to be
automatically accessed.
We asked Hebrew and English
speakers to make temporal order judgments about pairs of
pictures (i.e., to decide whether a picture represented an event
‘earlier’ or ‘later’ than the one depicted in another picture).
Subjects made a response using two adjacent keyboard keys.
English speakers were faster to make “earlier” judgments
when the “earlier” response needed to be made with the left
response key than with the right response key. Hebrew
speakers (who read from right to left) showed exactly the
reverse pattern. It appears that people do automatically access
spatial information when making temporal order judgments,
and the kind of spatial layout people mentally create for time
differs depending on culturo-linguistic artifacts.
Keywords: reading directionality, space, time, SNARC.

Introduction
Spatial representations of time are ubiquitous around the
world. People use graphs and spatial time-lines, clocks,
sundials, hourglasses, and calendars to represent time. In
language, time is also heavily related to space, with spatial
terms often used to describe the order and duration of events
(Clark, 1973; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Lehrer, 1990;
Traugott, 1978). In English, for example, we might move a
meeting forward, push a deadline back, attend a long
concert or go on a short break. Further, people also
represent time spatially in spontaneous co-speech gesture
(e.g., Casasanto & Lozano, 2006; Núñez & Sweetser, 2006).
Further, people appear to access spatial representations
when processing temporal language (e.g., Boroditsky, 2000;
Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002; Torralbo, Santiago , et al.,
2006; Núñez, R., Motz, B., & U. Teuscher, U., 2006). Even
simple temporal judgments like reproducing short durations
are affected by spatial information (e.g., Casasanto and
Boroditsky, 2007).
While it may be a universal that spatial representations
are used for time, languages and cultures differ in terms of
how time is laid out in space. For example, Núñez &

Sweetser (2006) observed that the Aymara talk about the
future as being behind them and the past as being ahead of
them, and gesture accordingly. English and Mandarin differ
in terms of how often they talk about time vertically, with
Mandarin speakers being much more likely to use vertical
metaphors for time than do English speakers (Chun, 1997a;
Chun, 1997b; Scott, 1989).
Another way in which languages and cultures differ is in
terms of writing direction. Previous studies have found that
writing direction affects the way people graphically lay out
time (Tversky, Kugelmass, and Winter, 1991). English
speaking participants (who read from left to right)
spontaneously mapped a sequence of events (such as the
meals of the day) onto a horizontal line directed rightward,
placing earlier events to the left and later events to the right.
In contrast, Arabic speakers (who read from right to left)
showed the reverse pattern, placing earlier events further to
the right, and later events further to the left.
Recently, Casasanto & Lozano (2006) have shown that
even when not confined to a two-dimensional surface like a
computer screen or a tabletop, English speakers use the
horizontal left to right axis when they tell stories, by
spontaneously gesturing to the left when referring to the
past, and to the right when talking about the future.
Beyond reasoning about time, people show a directional
bias congruent with the writing direction of their language
in perceptual exploration, drawing, and aesthetic
preferences (e.g., Nachshon, 1985; Nachshon, Argaman, &
Luria, 1999; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991).
Imagery and sentence representation also seem to be
modulated by writing direction; For example, Maass and
Russo (2003), showed that while Italian speakers represent
sentences in drawing from left-to-write, positioning the
subject of the sentence to the left of the object, Arabic
speakers show a reversal of this directional bias,
representing the subject of the sentence to the right of the
object.
Writing direction has also been found to affect numerical
reasoning. Speakers of languages like English and French
that are written from left to right have been shown to
represent numbers spatially on a ‘mental number line’ along
which numbers are positioned from left to right according to
their increasing magnitude (Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux,
1993). Accordingly, speakers of languages written left-right
show spatial compatibility effects when responding to
numbers, with faster reaction times to small numbers using
the left hand and faster reaction times to large numbers
using the right hand (Dehaene et al., 1993; Bachtold,
Baumuller, & Brugger, 1998).

1007

Dehaene and his colleagues termed this phenomenon the
SNARC effect (Spatial Numerical Association of Response
Codes), and it has since been replicated across a wide range
of experimental manipulations and participant groups, as
well as with non-numerical ordinal sequences like the
alphabet and names of the months (Gevers, Reynoveot , &
Fias, 2003). Since the effect is observed even when number
magnitude is irrelevant to the task, as in parity judgments
(Dehaene et al., 1993) or without semantic processing of the
numbers at all (Fias, Lauwereyns, & Lammertyn, 2001), it
was attributed to an automatic access to spatial codes.
Handedness and hemispheric specialization do not
account for directional bias presented in the SNARC
experiments; the effect does not reverse for left handed
participants, or when participants perform the task with the
hands crossed (Dehaene et al., 1995). On the other hand,
spatial scanning habits formed during learning how to read
and write may account for the SNARC effect. For example,
Berch, Foley, Hill, & Ryan (1999) showed that the SNARC
effect as found in parity judgments does not appear in
children before the third grade (although this may be due to
the specific task demands, for discussion see Fias & Fischer,
2005).
Moreover, cross-cultural evidence suggests that
directionality of different writing systems influences the
properties of the mental number line: Dahaene found a
change in the left-to-right SNARC effect in Farsi speaking
French participants, who use the right-to-left writing system
(1993), and Zebian has recently demonstrated a reverseSNARC effect with right-left directionality in Arabic
speaking monoliterates, a weakened reverse-SNARC effect
in Arabic-English biliterates and no effect in illiterate
Arabic speakers (Zebian, 2005). In addition, Ito and Hatta
(2004) have replicated the SNARC effect (left-to-right) in
Japanese participants, but have also observed a vertical
SNARC effect in the same participants; subjects responded
faster to large numbers with the top choice than with the
bottom choice, whereas the reverse pattern was found for
small numbers.
The aim of the present study is twofold. First, we
investigate the hypothesis that people use spatial
coordinates when they reason about temporal order, in a
similar way to the automatic stimulus-response
compatibility effects observed in numerical reasoning (the
SNARC effect). We predict a systematic compatibility
effect between response side (left or right) and temporal
order (earlier or later), one that could be named the STARC
effect (Spatial-temporal association of response codes).
According to this prediction, English speakers will
consistently react faster to earlier events when using the left
response-side, and to later events when using the right
response-side.
Previous studies have extended the SNARC effect found
in numerical reasoning to other ordinal sequences, such as

letters of the alphabet and months of the year (Gevers,
Reynoveot , & Fias, 2003). In our study, the stimuli were
pictures showing different temporal stages of everyday
actions and events (see Table 1). We were interested in
whether people would automatically access spatial
information even when making on-the-fly judgments about
these novel and purely non-linguistic stimuli. Ordinal
sequences like numbers, letters of the alphabet, and months
of the year are overlearned sequences in our culture and are
often presented in left-to-right orders in graphs, time-lines,
and other diagrams. Would participants automatically form
left-to-right representations even for these new sequences of
events that they have not necessarily seen laid out from left
to right?
Second, and maybe more importantly, we explore the
possibility that this effect is influenced by the cultural
artifact of writing direction. Hebrew, as other Semitic
languages, is written from right to left. Thus, we predict a
reverse-STARC effect for native Hebrew speakers, with
consistently faster temporal order judgments when the
response to an earlier event is made with the right side key
than when it is made with the left side key.

Methods
Participants 38 Stanford University undergraduate students
participated in the experiment in exchange for course credit
or payment (20 Males, Mage= 21.03, SDage=1.16). They were
all native English speakers, and none of them were
proficient in a language with a right to left writing direction
(according to self report in a language experience
questionnaire). 37 Tel-Aviv University students were paid
to participate in the experiment (18 Males, Mage= 24.95,
SDage=2.58). They were all native Hebrew speakers, though
they all reported a proficiency level in English of above 3
on a 1-5 scale. However, none of the participants in the
Hebrew speaking group learned English before the age of 8,
or lived in a foreign country before that age. All the
participants were right handed.

1008

Materials and Design Materials used in this study
consisted of 18 triplets of pictures depicting an object,
person, animal or plant in three stages in time: ‘early’,
‘middle’ and ‘late’. For example, one triplet represented a
banana being eaten, such that the ‘early’ picture depicted a
whole banana, the ‘middle’ picture a half-peeled banana,
and the ‘late’ picture – just the peel. The pictures were
chosen to represent a range of temporal intervals: 9 of the 18
picture triplets depicted short intervals, i.e actions that take a
short time to complete, and the other 9 picture triplets
represented actions that take a number of hours, days,
months or even years to complete (see Table 1 for examples
of the two categories).

Data Analysis and Results

Table 1: Stimuli examples
Short intervals

Long intervals

Early

middle

Late

Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
experiment room, where they were seated in front of an
IBM ThinkPad T43 laptop computer (15″). Both English
and Hebrew speakers completed the same experimental
task, but read instructions in their native language at the
beginning of each block.
Participants were presented with 2 testing blocks, each
consisting of 72 trials. Overall, each of the ‘earlier’ and
‘later’ pictures appeared twice in every block. Each block
started with 10 randomized practice trials; the participants
received feedback about their performance during the
practice block, but not during the rest of the experiment.
The items used in the practice trials were not used
subsequently in the testing blocks.
At the beginning of each experimental test trial, the
reference (midpoint) picture of each triplet appeared at the
center of the screen for 2 seconds, and was then replaced by
one of the target pictures (either the ‘earlier’ or the ‘later’
picture). Participants were instructed to decide as quickly
and as accurately as possible whether the event depicted in
the second picture happened earlier or later than the event in
the first picture. Participants made their responses by
pressing one of two adjacent keys that were labeled with
stickers marked as ‘earlier’ and ‘later’. The target picture
remained on the screen until a response was made. In one
block, the left key was marked as “earlier” and the right key
as “later”, and in another block this mapping was reversed.
Each subject completed both blocks, and the order in which
the blocks appeared was counterbalanced across subjects.

The main results of interest are shown in Figure 1.
The responses of 7 participants (4 from the English speaking
group and 3 from the Hebrew speaking group) were
discarded from analysis due to an exceptionally high error
rate (over 40 percent). Error rate in the responses of the
remaining 68 participants was 4.2%. The top and bottom
2% of all correct responses were then removed from
analysis.
The remaining correct responses were submitted to a
2X2X2 mixed ANOVA, with Language (English/Hebrew)
and Block order (‘Left is earlier’ first/’Right is earlier’ first)
as between subjects factors, and Key Mapping (‘Left is
earlier’/Right is earlier) as a within subjects factor. Both
English and Hebrew speakers were faster in the keymapping block congruent with the writing directionality of
their native language, as was revealed by a significant
Language by Key Mapping interaction: F1(1, 64)=8.74,
p<0.01, two-tailed. Planned paired t-tests showed that
English speakers were faster to respond when the ‘earlier’
response was mapped to the left side and the ‘later’ response
to the right side, relative to the opposite key-mapping; M left
t(33)=1.73,
is ‘earlier’=1183,45, M right is ‘earlier’ =1281.92,
p<0.05 (one-tailed).
The opposite pattern was observed in the Hebrew
speaking group, with significantly shorter reaction times in
the ‘right is earlier, left is later’ key mapping (M left is
‘earlier’=1202.2, MSE = 67.75, M right is ‘earlier’ =1109.15,
MSE=67.75, t(33)=2.14, p<0.02 (one- tailed). None of the
other main effects or interactions were found to be
significant.
The Analysis of variance also revealed a key mapping by
order of blocks interaction, F1(1,64)=13.72, P<0.01, twotailed. Participants were always overall slower in the first
key-mapping block they were presented with, regardless of
congruency with writing directionality. Post-hoc paired ttests revealed, that across language groups this training
effect was significant both when the first block was the
‘right is early’ block (M left is ‘earlier’=1111.172, MSE=46.5, M
right is ‘earlier’ =1240.61, MSE=58.79), t(33)=2.82, p<0.05, and
when the first block was the ‘left is early’ block (M left is
‘earlier’=1274.48, MSE=74.78, M right is ‘earlier’=1156.475,
MSE=63.8), t(33)=2.12, p<0.05. None of the other main
effects or interactions were found to be significant.
Note that for the by-items ANOVA there were 18 stimuli
triplets, that produced 36 comparisons (midpoint-earlier,
midpoint-later). The by-items ANOVA confirmed the
language by key mapping interaction effect found in the bysubjects analysis; (F2(1, 34)=141.98, P<0.0001). As in the
by-subjects analysis, in the English group RT’s were shorter
in the ‘left is earlier’ block (M left is ‘earlier’=1178.364,
MSE=13.85), M right is ‘earlier’ =1287.71, MSE=17.32),
t(35)=7.74, p<0.001, one-tailed), whereas Hebrew speakers
were faster in the ‘right is earlier’ block (M left is
‘earlier’=1190.73, MSE=15.24), M right is ‘earlier’ =1104.41,
MSE=14.995, t(35)=6.169, p<0.001, one-tailed).

1009

An order by Key Mapping interaction effect was also
found to be significant (F2(1, 34)=79.285, p<0.001).
Planned paired t-tests revealed that reaction-times were
always shorter in the first block to be administered; when
the ‘left is earlier’ block was administered first, items in this
block were responded to slower than items in the ‘right is
earlier’ block (M left is earlier=1264.021, MSE=15.33, , M right is
earlier =1153.378, MSE=14.01, t(35)=6.27, p<0.001, onetailed). When the ‘right is earlier’ block was administered
first, the pattern was reversed, with shorter reaction times to
the ‘left is earlier’ block (M left is earlier=1102.85, SD=92.01,
MSE , M right is earlier =1234.624, MSE=16.25, t(35)=8.191,
p<0.001). Again, none of the other main effects or
interactions were found to be significant.

1400

Mean RTs

1300

1200

Left is earlier
Right is earlier

1100

1000

900

800

English

Hebrew

In this case, the association was observed even when
spatial schemas were not used explicitly to represent time,
as in graphs, tables, or ordering tasks. This was true even
though the spatial location of the response was irrelevant to
the task. Further, it appears that spatial association between
temporal order and response is not restricted to highly
familiar ordinal sequences (like numbers, letters of the
alphabet or months of the year). Because we found an
STARC effect even with novel (to the subject) sets of
pictures it appears that spatial representations for temporal
order are created automatically on the fly,
This study also provides additional cross-linguistic
evidence in support of the role of language related
experience (i.e., reading and writing) in modulating other
cognitive processes. Not only does literacy affect
performance in space-related tasks, such as picture scanning
and causality judgments, it also seem to modulate abstract,
temporal reasoning. Repeated, daily, experience with the
perceptual-motor schemes of a language seem to provide the
speaker with automatic access to the spatial codes conveyed
by its writing direction, directing their attention in a vector
going from the location where the alphabet usually begins,
and in the direction where it usually follows.
In the two language conditions, participants were
consistently faster to respond to ‘earlier’ events when the
response was mapped to the side of space where the
alphabet sequence in their languages begins. This finding is
consistent with Dehaene’s suggestion, that the SNARC
effect may be accounted for by writing habits (Dehaene, et
al., 1993), and with previous findings revealing congruency
between language directionality and the directionality of the
mental number line found in stimulus-response congruency
effects.

Figure 1: Language by Key Mapping Interaction (By
Subjects)

Acknowledgments
Discussion
In this study we found evidence for a mental time-line that
follows writing direction. We found that people
automatically created spatial representations for temporal
sequences that were shown to them in pictures. Further, the
particular layout of the spatial representation for time varied
across languages. It appears that the mental time-line
extends from left to right for English speakers and from
right to left for Hebrew speakers, in both cases following the
direction of writing and reading in the two languages.
The present investigation extends findings from numerical
reasoning studies to the domain of time. A stimulusresponse compatibility effect, the Spatial-Temporal
Association of Response Codes (‘STARC’) was observed,
suggesting that participants consistently associated the
location of a response-key with the ‘location’ of an event in
time, relative to other events. In other words, people seem to
represent time spatially, placing events along a ‘mental
time-line’.

We thank Naama Friedman (Tel-Aviv University) for
helpful collaboration. We also thank Shai Zamir for help in
programming and technical support, and Daniel Casasanto
for helpful discussions.

References
Bachtold, D., Baumuller, M. & Brugger, P. (1998).
Stimulus-response compatibility in representational space.
Neuropsychologia, 36(8), 731-735.
Berch, D.B., Foley, E.J., Hill, R.J. & Ryan, P.M. (1999).
Extracting parity and magnitude from Arabic numerals:
Developmental changes in number processing and mental
representation. Journal of Experimental Child
psychology, 74, 286-308.
Boroditsky, L. (2000).
Metaphoric Structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors.
Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body

1010

and mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13,
185–189.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Time in the Mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition. DOI:
0.1016/j.cognition.2007.03.004.
Casasanto, D.J, & Lozano, S.C. (2006). Metaphor in the
Mind and Hands. Proceedings of 28th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Vancouver, BC.
Chun, L. (1997a). A cognitive approach to UP metaphors in
English and Chinese: What do they reveal about the
English mind and the Chinese mind? Research degree
progress report for Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
pp.125-140.
Chun, L. (1997b). Conceptualizing the world through
spatial metaphors: An analysis of UP/DOWN vs.
SHANG/XIA metaphors. Proceeding of the 19th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Mahwa, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Clark, H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child. In
T.E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive Development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Fias, W. & Fischer, M.H. (2005). Spatial representation of
number. In J.I.D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of
Mathematical Cognition. New-York: Psychology Press.
43-54.
Fias, W., Lauwereyns, J. & Lammertyn, J. (2001). Irrelevant
digit affect feature-based attention depending on the
overlap of neural circuits. Cognitive Brain Research,
12(3), 415-423.
Gevers, W., Reynvoet, B. & Fias, W. (2003). The mental
representation of ordinal sequences is spatially organized.
Cognition, 87, B87-B95.
Ito, Y. & Hatta, T. (2004). Spatial structure of quantitative
representation of numbers: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Memory & Cognition. 32 (4), 662-673.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lehrer, A. (1990). Polysemy, conventionality, and the
structure of the lexicon. Cognitive Linguistics, 1, 207246.
Maas, A. & Russo, A, (2003). Directional bias in the mental
representation of spatial events. Psychological Science, 14,
296-301.
Nachshon, I. (1985). Directional preferences in perception
of visual stimuli. International Journal of Neuroscience, 25,
161–174.
Nachshon, I., Argaman, E., & Luria, A. (1999). Effects of
directional habits and handedness on aesthetic preference
for left and right profiles. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 30, 106–114.
Núñez, R., Motz, B., & U. Teuscher, U. (2006). Time after
time: The psychological reality of the Ego- and TimeReference-Point distinction in metaphorical construals of
time. Metaphor and Symbol, 21, 133-146.
Núñez, R.E., & Sweeser, E. (2006). With the Future Behind
Them: Convergent Evidence From Aymara Language and
Gesture in the Crosslinguistic Comparison of Spatial
Construals of Time, Cognitive Science, 30(3), 401-450.
Scott, A. (1989). The vertical dimension and time in
Mandarin. Australian Journal of Linguistics, 9, 295-314.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupianez, Juan (2006).
Flexible Conceptual Projection of Time Onto Spatial
Frames of Reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 745–757
Traugott, E. (1978). On the expression of spatiotemporal
relations in language.
In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.),
Universals of human language: Vol. 3. Word structure.
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 369-400.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental-trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts,
spatial thinking and directionality of writing: the SNARC
effect and the REVERSE SNARC effect in English and in
Arabic monoliterates, biliterates and illiterate Arabic
speakers. Journal of Cognition and Culture. Special
Issue: on Psychological and Cognitive Foundations of
Religiosity. 5(1-2), 165-190.

1011

