UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Normative Representation of Objects: Evidence for an Ecological Bias in Object Perception
and Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rr2h7c1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Konkle, Talia
Olivia, Aude

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Normative Representation of Objects:
Evidence for an Ecological Bias in Object Perception and Memory
Talia Konkle (tkonkle@mit.edu)
Aude Oliva (oliva@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract

1998; Palmer, Rosch, & Chase, 1981), which has shown
that the ¾ view is preferred in object identification.
However, the role of visual angle in object representation
has largely been ignored, as much research has suggested
that object representation is size-invariant (e.g. Biederman
& Cooper, 1992). Here, we explore the possibility that each
object has a perceptually privileged visual size, which we
term the normative size.
Our hypothesis that there is a normative size has two
motivations. First, resolution limits across the visual field
might enforce this: something too big or too small in your
visual field will be hard to see. Second, our experience with
an object is statistically constrained: a fork is typically
interacted with in a particular range of distances which
exposes the visual system to a particular distribution of
visual angles for forks (Figure 1).

An apple can be held in your hand if you are eating it, or be
perceived in a fruit bowl from a few meters away. While the
apple’s real-world size is constant, the visual angle it subtends
in your visual field varies based on your distance to the apple.
Given the range of visual angles that an object can subtend in
the visual field, is there a visual angle that is preferred? The
current experiments show evidence supporting the idea of a
privileged visual size for object representation, termed the
normative size. In Experiment 1, observers adjusted the visual
size of objects on a monitor, selecting the subjectively ‘right’
size to see the object. Inter-observer selections were strikingly
consistent, and showed a correlation between the size selected
on the screen and the actual physical size of the objects in the
real world. These size selections were taken as estimates of
the normative size for each object. In Experiments 2 and 3,
using a size memory task and a change detection task, we
found evidence that both long-term and short-term memory
for the visual size of objects is biased towards the normative
size. Altogether the results support the claims that perception
of objects is sensitive to a normative size and that object
memory is biased toward this perceptual norm.
Keywords: Object representation; perception; memory; size.

Introduction

Figure 1: Hypothetical distribution of visual experience with
sample real-world objects.

“For each object, as for each picture in an art gallery,
there is an optimum distance from which it requires to be
seen, a direction viewed from which it vouchsafes most of
itself: at a shorter or greater distance we have merely a
perception blurred through excess or deficiency.”
- Merleau-Ponty

In the current studies, we examined the role of visual
angle by varying the presented size on a monitor, as a way
to simulate viewing distance. Specifically, observers could
simulate moving closer or farther from objects by making
them larger or smaller on the screen. In Experiment 1,
observers were presented with a picture of an isolated object
and adjusted the visual angle of the object until the object
was the “right size” on the screen. Despite the subjectivity
of the task, the selected size for each object was remarkably
consistent across observers.
Additionally, we explored the possibility that, if
perception is sensitive to a normative size, then memory for
that object might also be biased toward a normative size. In
Experiment 2, observers were presented with pictures of
objects subtending a range of visual angles. Afterwards,
participants adjusted the visual angle of the object to match
the presented size. The remembered objects showed
systematic errors biased towards the normative sizes from

We see each object in the world from a variety of viewing
distances, and this distance changes as we move or as the
objects move. Consequently, objects can appear at almost
any size in the visual field depending on how close or far
you stand in relation to them. For example, when crossing
the road, a car in the distance will initially appear quite
small in your visual field, but as the car approaches it will
fill increasingly more of the visual field. In general, the
physical size of an object and your viewing distance to that
object determine the angle it subtends in your visual field.
Given the range of visual angles that an object can
subtend in our visual field, is there a visual angle that is
preferred? Research on perceptually privileged or canonical
object views has traditionally looked at viewpoint (Tarr,

407

Experiment 1. Experiment 3 measured observer’s sensitivity
to detect when an object changed in visual size. The object
could either change to be slightly larger or slightly smaller.
Results show that when an object changed size in a direction
towards the normative size, this change was more difficult
to detect then when the object changed size away from the
normative size. Experiments 2 and 3 both reveal predictable
biases in memory for an object’s presented size, biased
toward the normative size for that object.

Object Norming Experiment B: We repeated the norming
task using a sliding-mouse method of adjustment instead of
the key press method. Six observers with normal or
corrected vision (18-35 years old) participated. 100 objects
were used in this experiment, including the 40 objects from
Object Norming Experiment A. To adjust the visual angle of
the object, participants moved the mouse up and down, and
clicked to select the intuitively right size. All other
procedures and instructions were the same.

Experiment 1: Existence of a statistically
constrained perceptual norm

Size Sorting Experiment: The purpose of this experiment
was to obtain estimates on the real-world size of objects.
This allows us to examine if there is a relationship between
the visual angle of the normative size and the real-world
size. Six observers gave ground truth rankings on the realworld size of 100 objects using a hierarchical sorting
method. Thumbnails of the 100 objects were put on a 30”
monitor and participants iteratively divided the images into
two groups by dragging and dropping the thumbnails, until
there were 8 groups of objects, ranked by real-world size.
The number of objects per rank was not constrained to be
equal.

The first experiment examined if there is a perceptually
privileged size to view an object. Specifically, if you are
viewing an object on the screen, is there a visual size at
which you prefer to view it? The aim was to determine how
consistent people are when they choose an intuitively “best
size” to view a real-world object on a monitor.
Based on visual acuity constraints we might expect
observers to set all objects to the same size. One prediction,
motivated from a perceptual stance, is that observers will
show a foveal bias, resizing each object to fill the fovea or
parafovea, so that each object will have the same selected
normative size (e.g. 3 degrees). Another prediction,
motivated from a conceptual stance, is that observers will
select a size that is correlated with the real-world size of the
object. So, objects that are larger in the world might be
preferably viewed as larger on the screen.
For clarity, the term “visual size” will refer to the visual
angle of the object on the screen, and the term “real-world
size” will refer to the physical size of the object in the world
(e.g. airplanes have a large real-world size, paperclips have
a small real-world size, but both these objects can be any
visual size on the screen).

Figure 2: 100 objects were sorted into 8 groups by their
real-world size. Example objects are shown for each group.

Method

Results

Object Norming Experiment A: Seven observers with
normal or corrected vision (18-35 years old) were presented
with 40 norming trials, each consisting of one object shown
on a blank background. Observers could freely increase and
decrease the visual angle of the object by pressing the up
and down arrow keys. The following instructions were
given: “For each object, select the best size to see it.
Intuitively, when the object is at the smallest extreme, this is
too small. When the object is at the largest extreme, this is
too big. Use the keys to adjust the object’s size and then
press enter when the size of the object is not too big or too
small, but just right. There is no right answer, so select the
size that is best for you.” Observers were seated
approximately 57 cm from a 20 inch monitor, and the range
of visual angles each object could subtend was 0 to 30
degrees. The objects were all color photographs of real
world objects and were selected from a commercial
database (Hemera Photo-Objects, Vol. I & II) to span the
range of real-world sizes from small objects (e.g. paper clip)
to large objects (e.g. statue). The order of objects was
randomized across observers.

In object norming Experiment A, the selected visual angle
of the height dimension for each object ranged on average
from 4 degrees (e.g. peanut, thumbtack) to 14 degrees (e.g.
Arc de Triumph, crane). We refer to the average selected
size for each object as the normative size. Inter-rater
reliability was calculated based on an adaptation of the
Spearman-Brown formula (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1987).
Interestingly, despite the subjectivity of the task, inter-rater
reliability for each object across observers was remarkably
consistent, (R=.9, p<0.05). This correlation indicates
consistency in which objects observers set the smallest and
which objects they set the largest. However, two observers
appeared to use more of the total range, making several very
large or very small settings. For the purposes of
Experiments 2 and 3, we set the normative size of each
object equal to the average size selected, excluding these
two of the seven subjects. This was done solely to select a
normative size for each object that would be representative
of most observers in the absolute value of the normative

408

sizes. In fact, without the two observers included the interreliability measure was slightly lower (R=0.88, p<0.05).
In the object norming Experiment B with 100 objects,
inter subject reliability was again very high (R=.7, p<0.05).
This study was repeated to confirm the reliability of the
normative size selections with a new method of response,
and to obtain a normative size for a larger number of
objects. For the 40 objects that were tested in both
experiments, the average selected sizes were within 3
degrees for all items, with no significant bias to be either
smaller or larger.
With the normative sizes for 100 objects, we examined if
there was a relationship between the visual angle of the
normative size and the object’s real-world size. To do so,
we used the rankings from the Size Sorting Experiment.
Across all ranks there was a minimum of 7 and a maximum
of 23 objects. An object’s size-rank was taken to be the
mode rank across observers. A rank of 1 is the smallest realworld size and a rank of 8 is the largest (see Figure 2).
Using the selected visual angles from the norming
experiment with all 100 objects, we averaged the normative
size for the objects in each rank group, and plotted it against
the rank size. As shown in Figure 3, the normative size of
the object was highly correlated with the real-world size
rank of the object (r2=0.96, p<0.05).

size is influenced by knowledge or experience of these
objects in the world. Interestingly, the normative sizes were
relatively small on the screen (4 – 14 visual degrees); thus
participants were not using the whole range of the monitor,
even for the largest objects. This is suggestive that some
acuity factors of the visual field may be also playing a role.
Thus, the normative size may reflect a balance between
conceptual and perceptual factors.
Experiment 1 gives a perceptual norm for each object,
corresponding to the average size that observers selected as
the best size to see it. If this size is indeed privileged in
perception, then it might also be privileged in memory.
Experiment 2 tests this hypothesis directly, and predicts that
long-term memory for an object’s visual size will be biased
towards the normative size found in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2: Bias of Long-Term Memory
towards the Normative Size
Previous work has shown a systematic bias in memory for
objects and scenes called boundary extension: people tend
to remember a picture of an object or scene as farther away
than it was originally viewed (Intraub & Richardson 1989).
We hypothesize that memory for an object’s size is biased
toward the normative size, and that boundary extension is
only one possible result of this memory bias. On this view,
when an object is presented larger than the norm, memory
for that object will be biased toward its smaller normative
size. Thus, at test, the object will be remembered as smaller
than it actually was presented, which is consistent with the
classic boundary extension effect. However, the normative
view also predicts that, if the object is presented smaller
than the norm, memory for that object will be biased toward
its larger normative size. Thus, at test, the object will be
remembered as larger than it actually was. This effect in the
opposite direction from boundary extension has not been
observed, and would not be predicted given standard
interpretations of boundary extension (Gottesman & Intraub,
2003). However, it could be accounted for naturally within
the normative representation framework.
Experiment 2 used a classical boundary extension
paradigm in which a stream of objects were presented and
observers were told that that they were going to be tested on
their memory for these objects, without explicit instruction
about the kind of memory test. Afterwards, subjects had to
report the visual size of the object that was presented. In the
current experiment, objects were presented either “too big”
or “too small” relative to each object’s normative size from
Experiment 1.

Figure 3. Correlation of visual angle of the normative size
and real-world size ranking.

Discussion
The results show striking reliability for normative sizes
across observers and across reporting methods, despite the
subjectivity of the task to select the “intuitively right size”
to see the object. This provides initial evidence for the
existence of a preferred or normative size for each object.
Critically, these normative sizes across observers cannot be
explained solely by visual acuity constraints, which predict
that all objects would be set to fill the fovea or parafovea.
Moreover, the normative size was significantly correlated
with real-world size (i.e. the larger the real-world size of the
object, the larger the selected visual angle). This suggests
that observers’ conceptual representation of the object’s
real-world size influenced the intuitively right size to see the
object on the screen. This demonstrates that the normative

Method
Twenty categorically unique objects from the set of 40 used
in Experiment 1 were selected, uniformly across the eight
real-world size groups. For each of the 24 participants, ten
objects were randomly selected for the too-big condition
and ten were randomly selected for the too-small condition.
The experiment consisted of two phases. During the
learning phase, each object was presented on the screen for

409

5 seconds with a 1 second inter-stimulus-interval.
Participants were informed that after a learning phase of 20
objects, they would be “tested on their memory of the
objects.” As with the classic boundary extension paradigm,
observers were not informed that the memory test was
specifically going to be for the object’s size on the screen.
Following the learning phase, participants were presented
with each of the 20 objects, one at a time in randomized
order, and used the up and down arrows on the keyboard to
resize the object to match the size they saw during the
learning phase.
Object ‘step-sizes’ were linear steps in visual angle of the
height dimension corresponding to approximately 1 visual
degree in height increase per step. In the learning phase,
each object was presented 5 steps larger or 5 steps smaller
than its normative size. Key presses advanced the object
size one step. For each object there were 40 possible step
sizes. During the memory test, the object was initially
presented jittered around the middle step position.

and objects presented too small. The data show that when an
object is seen larger than its normative size, it is
remembered as smaller (closer to the norm), whereas when
an object is seen smaller than its normative size, it is
remembered as bigger (again, closer to the norm).
Importantly, the normative size was taken from
Experiment 1, which showed a range of visual angles. So,
the large real-world size objects (airplane, crane), when
presented in the too-small condition are in fact comparable
to the small real-world size objects (button, tack) when
presented in the too-big condition. Despite the roughly
equivalent presentation size on the monitor for stimuli in
these conditions, the large and small real-world size objects
show memory errors in opposite and predictable directions,
based on the normative size found from Experiment 1.
The normative hypothesis poses an alternate explanation
for the current interpretation of the boundary extension
phenomenon. In the boundary extension effect, close-up
scenes are remembered as farther away than they were
actually perceived (Intraub & Richardson, 1989). While
classically this effect is thought to be a phenomenon about
the visual information at the edges of the scene, more recent
evidence suggests this effect is driven by the central object
(Bertamini et al, 2005). Our results suggest that boundary
extension actually reflects a memory bias towards the
normative size of the central object.

Experiment 3: Bias of Short-Term Memory
towards the Normative Size
In Experiment 2, observers were not explicitly informed that
they would be tested on memory for the objects visual-size.
Further, observers were required to remember 20 objects
before being tested. This shows that long-term memory for
object size is biased toward the normative size, in the
absence of explicit encoding of the size of the object. The
aim of Experiment 3 was to generalize the effects of the
normative size to a situation where memory is tested
immediately after the presentation, and where observers
explicitly know they are being test on memory for size. A
change detection paradigm is suitable to evaluate short-term
memory of a single event (Luck & Vogel, 1997).
Suppose an object is initially presented at a larger visual
angle than its normative size. We hypothesize that memory
for this object will be shifted slightly smaller, toward the
direction of the normative size. Thus, we predicted that if
the object is presented again at a slightly smaller visual
angle than the first, this change should be more difficult to
detect than if the object is presented again at a slightly larger
visual angle. Similarly, suppose your first view of an object
is smaller than its norm; again, the normative theory
predicts that your memory of that object’s visual size will be
larger. Thus, if the object reappears slightly larger, this
change should be more difficult to detect than if the object
appears slightly smaller.
Put succinctly, we hypothesized that a change in size
toward the normative size should be more difficult to detect
than a change of visual-size away from the normative size. If

Figure 4. Deviation between presented visual size and
selected visual size. Error bars are 1 S.E.M.

Results
Memory performance was quantified by calculating the
number of steps between the object size selected during the
testing phase and the object size presented during the
learning phase. Negative numbers indicate that the object
was reported as smaller than at learning (object
contraction); positive numbers indicate that the object was
reported as larger than at learning (object expansion).
Participants showed significant contraction (remembering
a smaller object) for the objects presented larger than the
normative size (too-big condition: t(23)=2.45, p<0.05). This
is consistent with the known boundary-extension effect.
Critically, participants also showed significant expansion
(remembering the object bigger) for objects presented
smaller than the normative size (too-small condition:
t(23)=2.80, p<0.05, Figure 4). None of the 24 subjects
showed memory errors with the opposite trend. In an item
analysis, 15 of the 20 objects presented “too big” during
learning showed significant compression and 18/20 objects
presented “too small” showed significant expansion.

Discussion
Long-term memory for objects showed a systematic bias
toward the normative size, both for objects presented too big

410

there is no systematic bias in the memory of the first
stimulus, then there should be no difference in detection if
the object changes toward or away from the normative size.

probed immediately afterwards, with only 1 second delay
and no intervening stimuli except for a brief mask.
The too-big condition, in which the stimuli were
presented larger than the normative size, was significantly
more difficult than the too-small condition. Why might this
be the case? Here, the comparison images were 3 steps on
either side of the too-big or too-small condition. However, a
change of 3 degrees on a small starting size of, for example
5 degrees visual angle is quite different than that same
change of 3 degrees on a large starting size of 20 degrees
visual angle, according to Weber’s law. Thus, it is not
surprising that the too-big condition was more difficult than
the too-small condition (see Figure 5a). If we assume that
this difficulty reflects more noise in all the size estimates,
then the lack of significance in the too-big paired t-test
could be due to insufficient power.

Method
Twelve observers participated in the change detection task.
On each trial, an object was presented for one second,
masked for 200ms, followed by a blank screen for one
second, and then re-appeared at the same or a different size.
The object remained on the screen until participants pressed
a key indicating whether the size of the object was the same
or different. Forty objects were used in the experiment. Each
object was repeated in 12 trials: on six trials the object was
presented as too-big relative to its norm, and on six trials the
object was presented as too-small. In two of the six trials,
the object changed toward the norm, in two of the six trials,
the object changed away from the norm, and in the
remaining two trials, the object was presented at the same
size. The first image of the object was presented at 5 steps
smaller or larger than its normative size from Experiment 1.
The second image could change by 3 steps toward or away
from the norm. Figure 5a shows an example object and the
size of the changes.

Results
A measure of sensitivity (d-prime) was calculated for each
type of change (change toward the norm, change away from
the norm), by taking the z-score of the percent hits minus
the z-score of the percent false alarms. An ANOVA was
computed on d-prime with change type (toward vs. away)
and starting size (too-big vs. too-small) as factors. There
was a significant effect of change type (F(1,11)=34.94,
p<0.05). Paired t-tests show the change toward the norm
condition was more difficult than the change away from the
norm condition (t(11)=2.80, p<0.05, Figure 5b).
Additionally, there was a significant effect of starting size
(F(1,11)=15.31, p<0.05). Paired t-tests reveal that the toobig condition was more difficult overall than the too-small
condition (t(11)=8.50, p<0.05). There was no significant
interaction between change type and starting size
(F(1,11)<1). When the starting size was too small, a change
toward the norm was significantly more difficult than a
change away from the norm (t(11)=2.20, p<0.05); however,
when the starting size was too big, the post-hoc paired t-test
did not reach significant (t(11)=1.36, p =0.2).

Figure 5. (a) Visual-angle changes are shown for a sample
object. The first stimulus is presented 5 steps larger or
smaller than its normative size (middle column). The second
stimulus changed towards the normative size (left column)
or away from the normative size (right column). (b) Dprime measures are plotted for the change-toward condition
and the change-away condition.

General Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that for each object, there is a
particular visual-angle, termed the normative size, which is
perceptually privileged across observers. Experiments 2 and
3 demonstrated that memory for an object’s visual size is
biased in a systematic direction that is predicted by the
normative size found in Experiment 1. Experiment 2
showed that long-term incidental memory for object size is
biased toward the normative size: objects that were
presented larger than their normative size tended to be
remembered as smaller, and objects that were presented
smaller than their normative size tended to be remembered

Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 indicate that a change toward
the normative size was significantly harder to detect than a
change away from the normative size (Figure 5b). This
suggests that short-term memory for the initially presented
object is also biased toward the normative size. This is in
some sense a stronger demonstration of this effect, because
unlike the surprise memory task (Experiment 2), here the
observers were explicitly aware that the visual size of the
object was the dimension of interest for the task, and were

411

Acknowledgments

as larger. Experiment 3 showed that short-term explicit
memory for object size is also biased toward the norm: a
change in object size toward the normative size was harder
to detect than a change away from the norm. Taken together
these experiments provide support for the following claims:
(1) Perception of objects is implicitly sensitive to a
normative size. (2) The normative size is influenced by the
real-world size of objects. (3) Memory for object size is
biased towards the normative size.
What are the possible reasons why there is a normative
size in perception and memory? One account is a perceptual
account: we move around in the world to place the visual
information of interest in the proper place in our visual field
to do some task. So, if we need to judge the ripeness of an
apple on a branch, we may move in close to bring the color
and shape into the foveal representation of our visual field.
If we need to judge how low the apple is hanging on the
branch, we may move farther back. Thus one hypothesis is
that our visual-motor perception is implicitly sensitive to
this visual size in order to optimally extract information
from the world.
However, another account is one from memory of
accumulated visual experiences acting on objects in the real
world. We interact with a bow-tie pasta in the range of, say,
1 cm to a 1 meter; we interact with cars on the range of 3
meters to 30 meters. These viewing distance distributions
vary based on the size of the object, and lead to
corresponding distributions of experienced visual angles.
Thus, the normative size might correspond to the mode of
our active visual experience with an object, and is
influenced by the natural statistics of the world (Gibson,
1979). One broad hypothesis is that the default
representation of an object is the statistical mode of visual
experience with that object along any relevant dimension.
While this work demonstrates a normative concept for an
object’s visual size, this could be extended to other
properties of real world objects, such as elevation, shape, or
state. Indeed, research on canonical viewpoints (Tarr et al.,
1998; Blanz, Tarr, & Buelthoff, 1999) and color (Tanaka &
Presnell, 1999), suggests that there are privileged perceptual
views along other spatial and featural dimensions.
Systematic memory errors towards a norm have
implications for the nature of object representation. For
instance, one account of object memory suggests that when
recall the size of a previously presented object, we combine
our perceptual estimate with our conceptual normative
estimate. Further, objects could be represented as a sum of
their parts (Biederman, 1987), or as implied here, as
deviations from their statistical mode. Some theories of
efficient coding (Barlow, 2001) and prototypes (Rosch,
1981), are suggestive and consistent with this theory of
object representation.
In the current experiments, visual size on a monitor was
used as a proxy for viewing distance in the real world.
Future work will be necessary to determine how this
normative concept operates in an embodied context, where
people walk towards physical objects in a natural setting.

The authors wish to thank G. Alvarez, M. Greene, and B.
Hidalgo-Sotelo and three reviewers for comments on the
manuscript. This research is supported by a NDSEG
fellowship awarded to T.K. and a NSF Career Award
#0546262 to A.O.

References
Barlow, H. (2001). Redundancy reduction revisited.
Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 12, 241-253.
Bertamini, M., Jones, L.A., Spooner, A., & Hecht, H.
(2005). Boundary extension: the role of magnification,
object size, context and binocular information. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 31, 1288-1307.
Biederman, I. & Cooper, E.E. (1987). Recognition-bycomponents: a theory of human image understanding.
Psychological Review, 94, 115-147.
Biederman, I. & Cooper, E.E. (1992). Size invariance in
visual object priming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18,
121-133.
Blanz, V., Tarr, M.J., & Buelthoff, H.H. (1999) What object
attributes determine canonical views? Perception, 28,
575-599.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Gottesman, C.V. & Intraub, H. (2003). Constraints on
spatial extrapolation in the mental representation of
scenes. View-boundaries versus object boundaries.
Visual Cognition, 10, 875-893.
Intraub, H., and Richardson, M. (1989). Wide-angle
memories of close-up scenes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 15,
179-187.
Luck, S.J., & Vogel, E.K. (1997). The capacity of visual
working memory for features and conjunctions. Nature,
390, 279:281.
Palmer, S.E., Rosch, E. & Chase, P. (1981). Canonical
perspective and the perception of objects. In J. Long
and A. Baddeley (Eds.), Attention and Performance IX.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Rosch, E. (1981). Principles of Categorization. In A. Collins
& E. E. Smith, Readings in Cognitive Science, a
Perspective from Psychology and Artificial Intelligence.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers (pp. 312-322).
Rosenthal, R. & Rosnow, R.L. (1984). Essentials of
Behavioral Research: Methods and Data Analysis
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Tanaka, J.W., & Presnell, L.M. (1999). Color diagnosticity
in object recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 61,
1140-1153.
Tarr, M.J., Williams, P., Hayward, W.G., & Gauthier, I.
(1998). Three-dimensional object recognition is
viewpoint dependent. Nature Neuroscience, 1(4), 275277.

412

