UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Online Discussion Processes: Effects of the Previous Messages' Evaluations, Knowledge
Content, Social Cues, and Personal Information on the Current Message

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vt6z4bx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Chen, Gaowei
Chiu, Ming Ming

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Online Discussion Processes:
Effects of the Previous Messages' Evaluations, Knowledge Content, Social Cues
and Personal Information on the Current Message
Gaowei Chen (GAOWEICHEN@Gmail.Com)
Department of Educational Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong

Ming Ming Chiu (MINGMINGCHIU@Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Department of Educational Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong
independent academic forum. Second, we explicate a new
methodology for analyzing these relationships, a modified
version of Chiu and Khoo's (2005) dynamic multilevel
analyses. Lastly, we apply this revised method to test how
earlier messages' evaluations, knowledge content, social
cues, and personal information affected the properties of
each message in a mathematics forum on a Univeristy
Bulletin Board System (BBS) Website.

Abstract
This study of the flow of online discussions examined how
previous messages affected the current message along five
dimensions: (1) evaluations (agreement, disagreement, or
unresponsive actions); (2) knowledge content (contribution,
repetition, or null content); (3) social cues (positive, negative,
or none); (4) personal information (number of visits); and (5)
elicitation (eliciting response or not). Using dynamic
multilevel analysis (DMA) and a structural equation model
(SEM), this study analyzed 131 messages of 47 participants
across seven topics in the mathematics forum of a university
Bulletin Board System (BBS) Website. Results showed that a
disagreement or contribution in the previous message yielded
more disagreements and social cue displays in the current
message. Unlike face-to-face discussions, online discussion
messages that disagreed with a previous message elicited
more responses. Together, these results suggest that teachers
can use and manage online discussions to promote critical
thinking, facilitate discussion of controversial topics, and
reduce status effects.

Five dimensions characterizing online
discussion messages
Building on past studies of FTF and online discussions
(Chiu, 2000; Chiu & Khoo 2003; Henri, 1992; Garrison et
al., 2000), we introduce a framework for characterizing
messages in online academic discussion forums along five
dimensions. The detailed dimensions and their possible
consequences in FTF and online discussion processes are
shown in table 1. We define "e-poster" as a person who has
posted a message on the online discussion board.

Keywords: Online discussion processes; computer mediated
discussion

Evaluations

Introduction

Evaluations characterize how the current speaker or e-poster
assesses the previous action. By linking messages together,
evaluations increase the coherence of interactions (Goodwin
& Goodwin, 1987). Evaluations can be agreements,
disagreements, or unresponsive actions.
As online discussions tend to be less personalized
compared to FTF discussions, online discussion participants
tend to be less concerned about one another's feelings
(Brown & Levinson, 1987) and hence more likely to express
their disagreements (Chen, 2004). These disagreement
messages often include new information used to support its
opposition. This new content, in turn, is more likely to elicit
a response (often disagreement). In contrast, agreement
messages that support the previous message need not add
much content, thereby providing less added information for
others to reference. Hence, a disagreement message is more
likely to elicit response than an agreement message in
online forums.

Studies on FTF discussions have shown that the actions of
earlier speakers can affect those of the current speaker. For
example, a person is more likely to agree if the previous
speaker agreed (Chiu & Khoo, 2003). Hence, earlier
messages might also affect later messages in online forums.
By understanding how online discussions evolve message
by message, educators can improve their quality and
facilitate student learning.
Most previous studies on online discussions examined the
individual properties of each message (Tallent-Runnels et
al., 2006; Hara, Bonk, & Angeli, 2000; Garrison, Anderson,
& Archer, 2001; Schellens & Valcke, 2005). Their results
showed that many students processed course information at
high cognitive levels and used more critical thinking during
online discussions (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2000).
Using data on 131 messages by 47 respondents on seven
topics, we extend this line of research in three ways. First,
we propose a framework consisted of five dimensions for
examining the relationships among messages in an online

863

Table 1: Five dimensions for characterizing online messages and their possible consequences in FTF and online discussions.
("+" indicates more likely; "–": less likely; "?": unknown.)
Messages
Dimension
Evaluations

Knowledge content

Social cues

Personal information

Elicitation

Possible consequences during a discussion
Category
Agreement
Disagreement
Unresponsive / new topic
Contribution

Repetition
Null content
Positive
Negative
None
Nickname (Name)
Personal statement (Appearance)
Visits (Past achievement)
Eliciting response
No response

In sum, agreements tend to promote positive feelings
while disagreements tend to elicit negative feelings in FTF
discussions. Disagreements tend to elicit disagreements in
both FTF and online discussions. Also, online
disagreements are more likely to elicit responses compared
to online agreements.

FTF discussion
Positive feeling (+)
Disagreement (+)
Negative feeling (+)
Negative feeling (+)
?

Online discussion
?
Disagreement (+)
Elicit response (+)
?
Disagreement (+)
Social cue (+)
Elicit response (+)

?
?
Positive feeling (+)
Negative feeling (+)
Contribution (–)
?
?
?
Agreement (+)
Positive feeling (+)
?
?

?
?
Positive feeling (+)
Negative feeling (+)
Contribution (–)
?
?
?
Agreement (+)
?
?

social cues can be positive, negative, or none. The effects of
social cues on later messages in FTF and online discussions
are likely similar, though the intensities might differ. In both
FTF and online discussions, positive social cues tend to
elicit positive social cues while negative social cues elicit
negative ones. While excessive social cues might distract
from focus on the task (Walther, 1996) and reduce the
number of subsequent contributions, negative social cues
might show a stronger negative effect than positive social
cues.

Knowledge content
The knowledge content dimension characterizes the
information displayed regarding the focal topic: new
contributions, old repetitions, null content (Chiu, 2000).
During online discussions, contributions provide new
information which might elicit more responses than
repetitions or null content, especially if the participants are
focused on the content. Contributions are also more likely to
elicit disagreements than agreements in online discussions.
As e-posters' concerns about threats to face tend to be lower,
they might express their disagreement more directly and
explicitly (Dubrovsky, Kiesler, & Sethna, 1991). Finally,
contributions are also more likely to attract emotional
concern and involvement during online discussions
(Patwardhan, 2004).
In sum, contributions during online discussions might
elicit more responses, more disagreements, and more
emotional responses compared to repetitions or null content
messages.

Personal information
Personal information describes perceived characteristics of a
person that exist prior to the FTF or online discussion. In
online discussions, e-posters often portray a public image by
choice of electronic name, possibly other personal
information, and past activity on the specific website.
Personal information typically has more surface validity in
FTF discussions than in online discussions (Walther, 1996).
Status effects are likely smaller in online discussions
compared to FTF discussions (Dubrovsky et al., 1991).

Elicitation
Elicitation indicates whether or not other e-posters
responded to a specific message. As the mirror image of
evaluations (which link backwards to earlier turns),
elicitations link forward to later turns to increase the
coherence of the discussion. As e-posters can respond to any
message at any time, some messages receive many
responses, others receive none. In Thomas's (2002) study on

Social cues
The social cues of a message differ from the formal content
of subject matter (Henri, 1992). During online discussions,
864

window. For example, message 9 quoted message 7 under
it, with message 7 in a lighter color.

69 undergraduate students' online discussion, he showed
that over half students’ contributions received no response,
making the discussion incoherent and inefficient. So, an eposter who asked a question but didn't get response might
feel frustrated during the discussion. Hence, elicitation
reflects the importance of a message and its impact on the
subsequent discussion.

Variables
The set of variables for a single message included number
of visits by each e-poster and the following binary variables:
agreement, disagreement, contribution, repetition, social
cue, negative social cue, and elicitation. Values of zero for
Agreement and Disagreement indicate an unresponsive
action. Likewise, values of zero for Contribution and
Repetition indicate Null content. Also, values of one for
Social cue and zero for Negative social cue indicate Positive
social cue.
This analysis uses three sets of variables: properties of the
current message (0), properties of earlier messages variables
in the same thread (-n, where n = 1, 2, 3, …), and properties
of the next message (+1) in the same thread. For example,
contribution (0) indicates whether the current message
includes a new idea. Likewise, repetition (-1) indicates
whether the previous message in the thread repeated an
earlier message. Lastly, elicitation (+1) indicates whether or
not a message responded to the current message.

Method
Data
In this data set, 47 participants posted 131 reply messages
across seven mathematics problems. Messages on the seven
topics ranged from 11 to 33. The discussion durations
ranged from 14 hours to 106 hours. Most participants are 18
to 30 years old (undergraduate to postgraduate). Gender
information was unknown.
See figure 1 for the relationship of messages in one of the
seven topics. "0" in the circle indicates the initial topic
message; "1" to "12" indicate 12 reply messages in order of
posting time.
0

1

2

Current Variables (0) Current variables (0) were the
variables that measured the property displayed in the current
message, e.g. contribution (0). The current variables (0) in
this study are shown in table 2. Number of visits (0) was an
integer.

3

8

Table 2: Message properties to be examined in the study.

5

4

10

6

11

7

Message properties
Example
Agreement
"Good answer. Can you say more?"
Disagreement
"I don't think so."; "That's partially right, but, …"
Unresponsive / new topic
"This reminds of an interesting story …"
Contribution
"we can multiply rate times time"
Repetition
"Yes, you're right. Two times six is twelve, not ten."
Null content
"Yes"; "Thank you"; "I don't understand"
Positive social cue
"Excellent!"
Negative social cue
"That's ridiculous!"
Non-personal social cue
"Two times three equals six"
Visits
E-poster's visits on the BBS website, e.g., 791.

12

Msg. 9
Msg. 7

9

Figure 1: Relationship of messages in one of the seven
topics.
Multiple threads. The topic message and 12 reply
messages occur along five threads: (a) 0→1→2, (b)
0→1→8→10→11, (c) 0→3→4, (d) 0→3→5→6→7→9, (e)
0→3→5→12. Messages in each thread are ordered by time,
but they were not necessarily consecutive.
Single connections. All messages in the topic were linked
together by single connections. The forum's interface design
constrained each of them to respond to only one earlier
message.
Quotes of the previous message. Along each thread, every
reply message quoted the previous message to which it
responded. Both messages can be read in the same computer

Lag Variables (-n) Past variables (-n) or lag variables (-n)
(where n = 1, 2, 3,…) measured the properties of messages
posted before the current message (except the topic
865

is determined by the expected value of the outcome variable
and the Logit link function.
For the outcome variable disagreement (0), we first added
a vector (X) of x lag variables (-1) at the message level:
visits (-1), agree (-1), disagree (-1), contribute (-1), repeat (1), social cue (-1), and negative social cue (-1).

message) in the same thread. Respectively, lag variables (-1)
measured the property of previous message; lag variables (2) measured the property of message two turns prior (to
which the previous message responded); and so on. This
study examined variables up to lag (-4) of each message as
shown in table 2.

πij = F(β0 + βxjX(i-1)j + f0j)

Next Message Variable (+1) This study examined only one
next message variable (+1), elicitation (+1). It measured
whether the current message elicited a later response or not
and thus is a binary variable. A message eliciting no
response shuts down a thread.

We tested whether this set of predictors was significant
with a nested hypothesis test (χ2 log likelihood, Cohen &
Cohen, 1983). Then, we tested for interaction effects among
pairs of significant variables. Non-significant variables and
interactions were removed from the specification. Next, we
tested if the regression coefficients differed significantly
(Goldstein, 1995) at the topic level. If yes, we kept these
additional parameters in the model. Otherwise, we removed
them.
Then, we entered variables measuring the property of
earlier messages and repeated the above procedure for them,
first lag variables (-2), then lag variables (-3), and lastly, lag
variables (-4).

Analyses
To statistically analyze interactions among online messages,
we must address three major concerns. First, e-posters'
behaviors and effects differ across topics, yielding nested
data. Second, most variables in this study are discrete, not
continuous. Third, messages are often similar to recent
events in time-series data.
We address these difficulties by using an extension of
dynamic multilevel analysis (Chiu & Khoo, 2003, 2005) and
a structural equation model. We test for topic differences,
build an explanatory model, test for serial correlation, and
model direct and indirect effects.
To test if the outcome variables significantly varied across
topics, we create a multi-level Logit variance components
model (Goldstein, 1995). Consider a two-level model with
an outcome variable, Yij (e.g., disagreement) at message i of
topic j and a Logit link function:
Yij = β0 + eij + f0j
1
πij = p (yij = 1) = F (β0 + f0j) =
− (β + f )
1+ e 0 0j
The level-2 variation parameter f0j represents the deviation
of topic j from the overall mean. The probability (πij ) that
an event (e.g. a disagreement) occurs at message i of topic j

πij = F(β0 + βxjX(i-1)j +φxjX(i-2)j +γxjX(i-3)j +ηxjX(i-4)j + f0j)
We used Wald tests (Goldstein, 1995) and only retained
significant variables for subsequent regressions. An alpha
level of .05 were used for all statistical tests. Doing many
tests on one set of data can yield spurious correlations. To
address this issue, we used Hochberg's (1988) variation on
Holm's (1979) method. We also used Ljung & Box (1979)
Q-statistics to test for serial correlation (up to order 4) in the
residuals for all topics.
We repeated the above procedure for three more outcome
variables: contribution (0), social cue (0) and elicitation
(+1). These regression results served as an initial candidate
for the multilevel structural equation model that estimates
all predictor effects at the same time.

Table 3: Significant, unstandardized parameter coefficients of sequential set binary Logit regressions predicting
disagreement, contribution, social cue and elicitation (with standard errors in parentheses).
Predictor

Regressions predicting…
Disagreement (0)
1

2

1.552***
(0.415)

1.383**
(0.434)
1.379**
(0.472)

Contribution (0)
1

2

Social cue (0)
1

2

Disagreement (0)
Disagreement (-1)
Contribution (-1)
Visits (-1)

Elicitation (+1)
1
0.924*
(0.400)

1.104*
0.910*
(0.439) (0.455)
1.063*
(0.436)
0.448*
(0.190)

0.441*
(0.195)
Social cue (-2)
-0.941*
(0.470)
0.172
0.267
0.092
0.151
0.083
Nagelkerke R2
Note: significant constant term is omitted. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

866

0.153

0.066

Predicting disagreement, social cue and elicitation
in an SEM

Results
The multi-level variance components analysis showed that
topics did not differ significantly (variance at the topic level
was not significant), so single-level analyses were adequate.
See table 3 for regression results. Aside from the predictors
discussed below, all other predictors showed non-significant
effects.

Based on the above results, we used an SEM to test the
direct and indirect effects of the earlier messages. Nonsignificant effects in the SEM were removed. The final
model is shown in figure 2. The SEM showed a good fit (χ2
[df = 5, N = 109] = 8.19, incremental fit index (IFI) = 0.97,
comparative fit index (CFI) = 0.97, non-normed fit index
(NNFI) = 0.95, root mean squared error of approximation
(RMSEA) = 0.07, standardized root mean residual [SRMR]
= 0.04; Hu & Bentler, 1999). As expected, the SEM effects
were consistent with the regression results. Disagreement (1) and contribution (-1) in previous message had direct
positive effects on disagreement and social cue in current
message. Disagreement and contribution in a message were
also significantly correlated in the model (r [109] = 0.37, p
< 0.05). Only disagreement in the current message showed a
direct effect on elicitation (+1).

Predicting disagreement
If the previous message was a disagreement (-1) or a
contribution (-1), the current message was more likely to
include a disagreement. Disagreement in the previous
message explained at most 17% of the disagreement
variance in the current message. Contribution in the
previous message accounted for about 10%.

Predicting contribution
Visits (-1) and social cue (-2) significantly predicted a
contribution in the current message. If the previous message
was posted by an e-poster with many visits (visits[-1]), the
current message was more likely to have a contribution.
Meanwhile, a social cue (-2) ago reduced the likelihood of a
contribution in the current message. Previous e-poster's
visits (-1) explained at most 9% of the contribution
variance. Social cue (-2) accounted for about 6%.

Discussion
In this study, a message that disagrees with an earlier
message yielded further disagreements, consistent with Chiu
and Khoo's (2003) FTF interaction result. Unlike FTF
interactions however, disagreements did not seem to
threaten the continuation of the discussion, as disagreements
raised the likelihood of later e-posters' responses. Also, the
SEM showed that disagreement and contribution in the
previous message were significantly correlated when
predicting current disagreement. It implies that if an eposter is about to disagree, he or she often anticipates a
disagreement and thus often elaborates with more
information. Together, these results are consistent with the
claim that online discussion forums can promote critical
thinking (Garrison et al., 2000, 2001).
Both disagreement and contribution in the previous
message positively predicted a social cue in the current
message. This result suggests that in online discussions,
disagreements and new ideas tend to cause stronger
emotional responses and engagement compared to other
types of messages. Also, disagreements and contributions
elicited more responses, suggesting that messages are more
provocative and engaged students to respond. Furthermore,
these results supports the claim that online discussion forum
can promote critical thinking (Garrison et al., 2000, 2001).

Predicting social cue
Disagreement (-1) and contribution (-1) in the previous
message positively predicted a social cue in the current
message. These two predictors explained about 15% of the
social cue variance at the message turn level. Disagreement
in previous message explained at most 8% of the social cue
variance. Contribution in previous message accounted for
about 7%.

Predicting elicitation
Fifty-five percent of the messages received responses, while
forty-five percent did not. Disagreement and contribution in
the current message entered alone into the regression were
significant, but together, only disagreement was significant.
Disagreement and contribution in a message were
significantly correlated (r [131] = 0.37, p < 0.01).
Disagreement in the current message explained at most 7%
of the elicitation variance.

Disagreement (-1)

0.40**
0.27*

Disagreement (0)

0.35**

Elicitation (+1)

0.37*
Contribution (-1)

0.39**

Social cue (0)

0.34*
Figure 2: Structural equation model for predictors of disagreement, social cue and elicitation with significant standardized
parameter estimates (χ2 [df = 5, N = 109] = 8.19, p = .146).
867

Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral
sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dubrovsky, V. J., Kiesler, S. B., & Sethna, B. N. (1991).
The equalization phenomenon: Status effects in computermediated and face-to-face decision-making groups.
Human-Computer Interaction, 6, 119-146.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical
inquiry in a text-based environment: Computer
conferencing in higher education. The Internet and
Higher Education, 2(2–3), 87–105.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical
thinking, cognitive presence, and computer conferencing
in distance education. American Journal of Distance
Education, 15(1), 7–23.
Goldstein, H. (1995). Multilevel statistical models. Sydney:
Edward Arnold.
Goodwin, C., & Goodwin, M. H. (1987). Concurrent
operations on talk: Notes on the interactive organization
of assessments. IPRA Papers in Pragmatics, 1(1), 1-54.
Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C. (2000). Content analysis
of online discussion in an applied educational psychology
course. Instructional Science, 28, 115-152.
Henri, F. (1992). Computer conferencing and content
analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative learning
through computer conferencing: The Najaden papers (pp.
115-136). New York: Springer.
Hochberg, Y. (1988). A sharper Bonferroni procedure for
multiple tests of significance. Biometrika, 75, 800-802.
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple
test procedure. Scandanavian Journal of Statistics, 6, 6570.
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit
indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventional
criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation
Modeling, 6(1), 1-55.
Ljung, G., & Box, G. (1979). On a measure of lack of fit in
time series models. Biometrika, 66, 265-270.
Patwardhan, P. (2004). Exposure, involvement and
satisfaction with online activities. Gazette: International
Journal for Communication Studies, 66(5), 411-436.
Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2005). Collaborative learning
in asynchronous discussion groups: What about the
impact on cognitive processing? Computers in Human
Behavior, 21, 957-975.
Tallent-Runnels, M. K., Thomas, J. A., Lan, W. Y., Cooper,
S., Ahern, T. C., Shaw, S. M., & Liu, X. (2006). Teaching
courses online: A review of the research. Review of
Educational Research, 76(1), 93-135.
Thomas, M. J. W. (2002). Learning within incoherent
structures: The space of online discussion forums. Journal
of Computer Assisted Learning, 18(3), 351-366.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication:
Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal interaction.
Communication Research, 23(1), 3-43.

There were also several notable non-significant results.
Contrary to Walter's (1996) and Henri's (1992) arguments,
social cues did not substantially affect the behaviors studied.
Also, agreements or disagreements did not occur more often
or less likely after messages by e-posters with more visits.
Together, these results support our hypothesis that status
effects are weaker in online discussions than in FTF
discussions.

Implications
This study suggested that teachers and researchers might use
online academic discussion in three ways.
Developing controversial discussions. As participants
were likely to engage in and sustain online discussion on
topics that involved many disagreements, teachers might
help students learn and think critically by using online
forums for discussion of controversial topics, e.g., new
hypotheses or problems with contested answers.
Reducing status effects. As experience status effects are
much weaker in online discussions than in FTF discussions.
If status effects are a serious problem in classroom
interactions, online discussions among multiple classes (or
schools) or perhaps with pseudonyms might mitigate these
status effects.
Managing online discussions at message level. In addition
to encouraging student to participate, teachers may also
manage the online academic discussions for specific
purposes at message level. For example, teachers can post
anonymous messages containing disagreements and
contributions to elicit more student responses.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from the Research
Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special 471
Administrative Region, China (Project No. CUHK
4622/05H). We appreciate the comments on earlier drafts by
Lei Chang, Yik-Ting Choi, Kit-Tai Hau, Jie Li, Yu-Jing Ni,
Zhan Wang, and Xihua Zeng.

References
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some
universals in language usage. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Chen, G. (2004). Online discussion in an independent
academic BBS forum: Two case studies. Educational
Research Journal, 19(2), 281-305.
Chiu, M. M. (2000). Group problem solving processes:
Social interactions and individual actions. Journal for the
Theory of Social Behavior, 30(1), 27-50.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2003). Rudeness and status
effects during group problem solving: Do they bias
evaluations and reduce the likelihood of correct solutions?
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 506-523.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2005). A new method for
analyzing sequential processes: Dynamic multi-level
analysis. Small Group Research, 36, 1-32.
868

