UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prosody, Context, and Thematic Fit Meet "Gapping": The Interaction of Multiple Constraints
in Spoken Sentence Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7c00t5kj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Hoeks, John C.J.
Hendriks, Petra
Redeker, Gisela

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prosody, Context, and Thematic Fit meet “Gapping”:
The Interaction of Multiple Constraints in Spoken Sentence Comprehension
John C. J. Hoeks (j.c.j.hoeks@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Petra Hendriks (p.hendriks@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Gisela Redeker (g.redeker@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.
Abstract

In this sentence it is impossible to uniquely identify which
elements were left out; the sentence is ambiguous between
reading (1b), where first John greets Paul, and then Ben
greets Paul, and reading (1c), where John greeted both Paul
and Ben. We will follow linguistic convention and call the
first form of ellipsis, where verb and grammatical object are
elided 'gapping' (1b) and the second one 'conjunction
reduction', or 'nongapping' (1c).

Two studies investigated the effects of prosody, context and
thematic fit on off-line and on-line processing of sentences
like John greeted Paul yesterday and Ben today. Such
sentences are ambiguous between the so-called 'nongapping'
reading, where John greeted Ben, and the highly unpreferred
'gapping' reading, where Ben greeted Paul. Participants listen
to dialogues and give a speeded response as to which reading
of an ambiguous target sentence first comes to mind. In
addition, they respond to a visual probe that is presented
during the presentation of the ambiguous target. The results
show that context and prosody have independent and strong
effects on both on-line processing and off-line interpretation,
even if they are countered by thematic fit information.

Why is Gapping so Hard?

Keywords: Psycholinguistics; Cross-Modal Gender Decision;
Prosody; Pragmatics; Thematic Fit; Gapping.

Introduction
The language faculty is one of the most complex cognitive
systems that we know of. This complexity arises from the
stunning number of sources of information - that also are
very different in nature - that have to be dealt with.
Language production and comprehension require the
integration of information about structure (syntax), about
meaning and meaning combination (semantics), about the
order (and sometimes morphology) of sentence elements in
a sentence (information structure), about how the sentence
fits into the linguistic and nonlinguistic context
(pragmatics), not to mention factors such as prosody and
visual scene information. Information coming from all of
these sources has to be analyzed and integrated in order to
succesfully utter a sentence or comprehend a message.
The linguistic phenomenon of gapping is - par excellence
- an instance where many of these constraints are involved.
Gapping is actually a form of ellipsis, where words or
phrases are left out of an utterance without changing its
formal meaning. Most of the time, ellipsis is associated with
ease of processing, but gapping appears to be a special case
in this respect. Consider, for instance, sentence (1a).
1a. John greeted Paul yesterday and Ben today.
1b. John greeted Paul yesterday and Ben greeted Paul today.
1c. John greeted Paul yesterday and John greeted Ben today.

In earlier studies it has been noted that it can be very hard
for listeners to arrive at the gapping interpretation of an
ambiguous sentence; indeed, the nongapping version seems
to be highly preferred. For instance, Carlson (2001) showed
in a written questionnaire study that in ambiguous sentences
very similar to (1a), gapping interpretations are chosen only
4% of the time. Manipulation of the semantic parallelism
between the entities in the sentence did lead to an increase in
the number of gapping interpretations in sentences such as
"John visited the office yesterday and Ben today", but only
to 40%. Carlson (2001) suggested that the major force
resisting gapping was the well-known Minimal Attachment
Principle: choose the simplest syntactic structure in terms of
nodes of the respective syntactic trees (Frazier, 1987).
Because nongapping is syntactically less complex (i.e., its
syntactic description contains fewer nodes), it should for
that reason be the preferred option in case of ambiguity.
Gapping only becomes the option of choice when thematic
fit information is brought into play, as in "John baked
cookies for his parents and Ben for his grandparents", where
the nongapping interpretation is practically excluded. Here,
81% of instances received a gapping response, because the
nongapping interpretation (i.e., John baked Ben) is highly
implausible (Carlson, 2001).

Gapping and Prosody
In a follow-up experiment using auditory stimuli, Carlson
(2001) manipulated the prosody of the ambiguous sentences,
to either bias towards the gapping or towards the
nongapping interpretation. Bias was accomplished by
making use of the fact that placement of pitch accent
correlates strongly with the presence of new or contrastive

1085

information (e.g., Lambrecht, 1994). Let us take a closer
look at sentence (1a). In both the gapping and the
nongapping interpretation there are two pairs of elements in
each conjunct that are contrasted. In the gapping reading
(e.g., 1b), John and Ben make up the first pair of contrasted
elements, and yesterday and today constitute the second pair
of elements that is contrasted, as in "JOHN greeted Paul
YESTERDAY and BEN greeted Paul TODAY"
(capitalization here indicates the presence of pitch accent).
In the nongapping condition (e.g., 1c), however, the first
pair of contrastive elements is different: it is formed by Paul
and Ben (i.e., John sees Paul on one day, and John sees Ben
on another), as in "John greeted PAUL YESTERDAY and
John greeted BEN TODAY". Here, John is clearly deaccented. Thus, the gapping and the nongapping reading of
an ambiguous sentence seem to have distinct prosodic
realizations by which the listener can tell them apart. But
does the listener use this information?
The answer is yes, according to Carlson’s results, the
listener does use these prosodic cues, but not to the extent
that gapping can become the preferred interpretation;
nongapping is always preferred, no matter how strong the
prosodic bias might be. Gapping promoting prosody raised
the percentage of gapping responses to 44%, still leaving a
majority of nongapping responses. Carlson concludes that
prosody is indeed an important factor in the processing of
gapping structures, but the very strong preference for
nongapping structures is created by a structural factor,
namely syntactic simplicity.

given utterance (as in nongapping), unless contextual or
prosodic cues suggest there is more than one.
This preference for a single topic is predicted to lead to
processing difficulty when a sentence has not one but two
topics, as is, for instance, the case in Sentence Coordinations
(e.g., John [topic1] greeted Paul and Ben [topic2] laughed).
Presenting these sentences in a context promoting two topics
(e.g,. “What did John and Ben do?”), instead of the usual
single topic, effectively eliminated this processing difficulty.
This suggests that S-coordinations are difficult not because
they are possibly more complex syntactically, but because
they are more complex in terms of topic structure. This is an
important finding, because gapping, much like Sentence
Coordination, involves having two contrastive topics (e.g.,
John [topic1] greeted Paul yesterday and Ben [topic2]
greeted Paul today). If the preceding context prepares the
way for two topics, processing difficulty will decrease.
The second important feature of the context question is
that it determines what will be the focus of the anwer, with
focus being the new information that is provided by the
anwer. In the gapping interpretation of the ambiguous
sentence (1a), there are contrastive foci set up by the
question word ‘Where’, suggesting that the answer will
contain (prepositional) phrases indicating locations, one
location for John’s action, and one location for Ben’s action.
Finally, the question context makes unambiguously clear
that the fact that “Paul was greeted” is given information.
This is important, because only information that is given,
can be ‘gapped’, i.e., left out of the sentence (Kuno, 1976).

Gapping and Context

Thematic Fit, Context, and Prosody

Keller (2001) conducted off-line acceptability studies to
investigate whether, instead, contextual factors may be
responsible for the unpreferredness of gapping, and whether
providing the right context could indeed increase the
acceptability of gapping sentences (see also Kuno, 1976).
He found that gapping sentences made unambiguous by
case marking (such as, e.g., She accompanied the boy to
school and he to university) were significantly less
acceptable than nongapping sentences (such as, e.g., She
accompanied the boy to school and the girl to university,
which, by the way, is still ambiguous). Only by using a
specific context (e.g., Where did Hanna and Michael
accompany the boy to?) could these unambiguous sentences
be made as acceptable as their nongapping counterparts.
Why would context have this effect?
Question contexts such as those used by Keller set up a
complex expectation regarding the information structure of
the answer, making the gapping interpretation of the
subsequent sentence acceptable and perhaps even natural.
This complex expectation concerns at least three different
aspects of information structure: First of all, the context for
a large part determines what will be the most likely topic of
the following sentence, where a topic can be roughly
defined as the thing the utterance provides information
about (which most of the time is the grammatical subject of
a sentence). Hoeks, Vonk & Schriefers (2002) provide offline and on-line evidence for their view that readers, and
listeners alike, prefer to have one and only one topic in any

Recently, Hoeks, Hendriks, and Zijlstra (2006) investigated
the interaction of the three factors that seem most critical to
processing gapping, namely thematic fit, pragmatic context,
and prosody. They used a so-called ‘auditory decision’
paradigm, in which participants are presented with spoken
mini-dialogues: one speaker asks a question, and another
speaker answers that question. Pragmatic expectation was
manipulated via the question, and prosodic structure of the
answer was varied to either conform to the gapping or to the
nongapping interpretation. Immediately after the offset of
the answer, participants had to react to a spoken statement
that was either consistent with the gapping or with the
nongapping interpretation of the answer.
With respect to sentences without thematic fit
manipulation such as (1a), Hoeks et al. found that, with the
right context and the right prosody, gapping could indeed
the preferred interpretation: over 60% of all cases were
interpreted as gapping. Responses in this condition were
also faster than in the other conditions, suggesting that the
gapping option was wholeheartedly accepted by the listener.
Recall that until this experiment no manipulation produced
more than 44% gapping responses (Carlson, 2001). In a
second experiment using sentences that were strongly biased
towards gapping by means of thematic fit of the ambiguous
NP with the matrix verb (e.g., John baked cookies for his
parents and Ben for his grandparents), context and prosody
still significantly influenced processing: gapping responses
decreased from 83% to 63% when context and prosody
biased against gapping, which is quite an accomplishment

1086

given the strong pressure in general to choose plausible
interpretations. This means that context and prosody were
able to cause an increase of about 20% in choosing the
implausible nongapping interpretation (i.e., where John
baked Ben) of an ambiguous sentence.
Nevertheless, despite the evidence for the strong
(combined) effects of context and prosody, and despite the
fact that it was possible to make gapping the structure of
choice in ambiguous sentences, these results were obtained
via an off-line task. This makes it difficult to draw hard and
fast conclusions about what is going on during the actual online processing of the ambiguous sentence. In other words,
because the task measured off-line interpretation it does not
permit us to choose between two options: 1) the preference
for nongapping did not go away, and did lead to processing
difficulty during on-line processing, but due to the available
contextual and prosodic information, reanalysis was
completed before the end of the sentence, and 2) the
preference for nongapping was overruled by context and
prosody from the start, so there was no processing difficulty
whatsoever. To address this issue, two experiments were
designed that basically used the same materials as the Hoeks
et al. study, but this time an extra task was added in order to
probe on-line processing: cross-modal gender decision.

Experiment 1
In both experiments that are reported here, we used a
speeded auditory decision task in which participants had to
indicate as fast as possible what reading (i.e., gapping or
nongapping) first came to mind after hearing the ambiguous
target sentence (for more details, see Hoeks et al., 2006).
However, we also employed an additional task involving the
presentation of a visual probe while participants listened to
the target sentence, to find out whether there are differences
in on-line processing between gapping and nongapping.
Two kinds of visual probes, in both cases proper nouns,
were presented near the end of the sentence to estimate the
processing difficulty associated with gapping, and
participants had to decide both quickly and accurately
whether a probe was a girl's name or a boy's name, hence
the term 'gender decision'. How does it work?
Suppose we have a sentence with gapping interpretation,
such as "Nathan helped Wilma with painting and Tessa
helped Wilma with wallpapering". The first kind of probe is
identical to the proper noun contained in the gapped
constituent ('helped Wilma'), which in this example is the
name 'Wilma'. The idea behind this is that when listeners
compute the gapping interpretation, which we assume will
happen in the vicinity of the second preposition (i.e., the
'with' of 'with wallpapering'), the concept denoted by
'Wilma' will be activated in some way or the other, or will at
least be consistent with the representation that is being built
right then. In contrast, when listeners process the
nongapping interpretation, "Nathan helped Wilma with
painting and Nathan helped Tessa with wallpapering", there
is no reason to assume that the concept associated with
'Wilma' is activated at the second preposition, at least not to
the same degree as in the gapping interpretation. So with
respect to this identity probe, we expect faster recognition in
conditions with a predominant gapping response as

compared to conditions where nongapping is the prepotent
response.
The other type of probe, the control probe, bears some
superficial phonological resemblance with the identity
probe, but is not identical to any of the names used in the
experiment; in the example at hand this control probe would
be something like 'William'. The recognition of the control
probe does not depend on the level of activation of the
concept belonging to 'Wilma', we assume instead that
recognizing this control probe is mainly sensitive to the
amount of processing difficulty occurring in the sentence
where the probe is placed. In other words, control probes
measure processing load.
To try and avoid floor effects for recognizing the identity
probes, the probes were visually 'degraded' by using a
different font size and font style for every character of the
name (also mixing capitals and normal letters).
Furthermore, we reduced visual contrast by presenting the
probes in lightgray on a white screen. The rationale is that
by making the process of recognition longer and more
difficult, effects of priming should become more visible.
The same reasoning underlies our choice for control probes
that are to some extent phonologically similar to the identity
probes: having partially similar probes should encourage our
participants to make a decision only when the probe is fully
identified, and not to give a reaction based on partial
identification (for instance, to infer that the probe is 'Wilma',
when they've only seen 'Wil'). To avoid memory related
strategies we did not ask participants to say whether or not
they think the probe occurred in the sentence they just heard,
but merely to decide whether the name was typically a boy's
or a girl's name.

Method
Participants Thirty-six native speakers of Dutch were paid
for participating in this experiment (24 female; mean age 21
years, age range 19-27). The imbalance in gender should not
cause problems with respect to the processing of prosody,
because the sexes seem to be equally proficient when it
comes to understanding linguistic prosody, which is of
concern here (Raithel & Hielscher-Fastabend, 2004).
Materials & Design For this experiment, 48 sets of minidialogues were used, each set consisting of three versions of
a given dialogue. Since we had three gapping conditions
(see 2a-c below) and two probe conditions (identical vs.
control), six experimental lists were constructed, to make
Condition and Probe Type within-participants variables.
Each of the six lists had 8 experimental dialogues per
condition, and no list contained more than one version of a
given item. Added to these 48 dialogues were another 32
dialogues, which will be discussed as Experiment 2 (see
below).
The order in which experimental and filler items appeared
was determined semi-randomly and was the same for each
list. Each list was presented to an equal number of
participants and each participant saw only one list. The
experimental items for the first experiment appeared in three
versions as exemplified below (2a-c). Note that English
translations are given of the original Dutch stimuli (target

1087

Context: Wilma has bought a new house. With what did Nathan
and Tessa help her ?
Target: NATHAN helped Wilma with PAINTING and TESSA
with <Wilma / Willem> WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

At the off-set of the second preposition in the ambiguous
target sentence (e.g., the 'with' of the phrase 'with
wallpapering' in 2a-c), either an identical or a control probe
was presented which remained on screen until a decision
was made. For this task, participants also used the SHIFT
keys: right SHIFT for "boy's name" and LEFT shift key for
"girl's name". To avoid confusion, the SHIFT keys were
labeled, and A5-sized pieces of paper were placed to the
right and to the left of the keyboard with "yes - boy's name"
and "no - girl's name", respectively.

2b. (GN) Gapping Context, Nongapping Prosody

Results

Context: Wilma has bought a new house. With what did Nathan
and Tessa help her ?
Target: Nathan helped WILMA with PAINTING and TESSA with
<Wilma / Willem> WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

Analysis Proportions "YES" to the statements were
calculated for each participant and each item. In this
experiment, a “YES” response is always a choice for the
gapping reading; “NO” responses are choices for
nongapping. In addition, response times to the probes were
calculated, but only for correct responses (i.e., where the
chosen gender matched the gender of the probe). For all
dependent measures, we performed ANOVA's on
participant and item means. The factors Condition (see 2a-c:
"GG", "GN", and "NN") and Probe Type (identical vs.
control) were treated as within-participants and within-items
factors. Mean proportions gapping response are presented in
Table 1, together with the data from the Hoeks et al. (2006)
experiment, to show that the patterns of results are very
similar. The gender decision times are presented in Figure 1.

sentences are structurally identical between languages).
Please note also that CAPITALS indicate the presence of a
pitch accent. Probes are signaled using brackets: < Wilma>.
2a. (GG) Gapping Context, Gapping Prosody

2c. (NN) Nongapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: Wilma and Tessa have each bought a new house. With
what did Nathan help them ?
Target: Nathan helped WILMA with PAINTING and TESSA with
<Wilma / Willem> WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

All propositions at the end of the dialogues in Experiment 1
represented the gapping reading of the ambiguous target
sentence. The propositions belonging to Experiment 2,
however, all stated the nongapping reading. As to the
probes: control probes were chosen such that they matched
the identical probes as closely as possible in terms of
number of characters and Google frequency. The practice
session that preceded the actual experiment consisted of
three parts. In the first part the gender decision task was
practiced without any auditory input, then the auditory
decision taks with the statements was practiced without the
gender decision task, and then the tasks were combined.
Procedure Participants were seated behind a computer
screen in a sound-proof booth. The dialogues were presented
to them aurally via two speakers. Each dialogue was
preceded by a range of three asterisks appearing in the
center of the screen ("***"). After 1060 ms, the context
sentence, spoken by a male speaker, was played, followed
by the target sentence, spoken by a female speaker. The
proposition (male speaker again) was played subsequently,
together with a visual presentation of three question marks
("???"), indicating that the participants should make a
response.
Participants were instructed to indicate whether the
proposition corresponded with the statement made by the
female speaker (i.e., the target sentence), even if they
thought the proposition sounded a little odd sometimes (this
part was included with Experiment 2 in mind, see below).
They could use the right SHIFT key on a keyboard for
“YES” and the left SHIFT key for “NO”. Participants were
encouraged to respond as fast as they could and to follow
their first impression; it was stressed that there were no
'correct' or 'incorrect' answers.

Table 1: Mean Proportions of Gapping (SE)
Condition
GapCont-GapPros
GapCont-NongapPros
NongapCont-NongapPros

Hoeks et al.
0.61 (.05)
0.37 (.05)
0.09 (.03)

Exp 1
0.62 (.05)
0.45 (.04)
0.16 (.03)

Proportion Gapping Responses The main effect of
Condition was highly significant on both participant- and
item-analyses (F1(2,60)=58.69, p<.001; F2(2,84)=168.61,
p<.001). All conditions differed significantly, and the
highest proportion of gapping responses, 62%, was found in
the “GapCont-GapPros” condition, where both context and
prosody promoted gapping.

1088

RT Gender Decision
Experim ent 1
1550
1450
1350
1250
1150
GG

GN

NN

Figure 1. “GG”=Gapping context, Gapping prosody, etc.
black bars = identical probe; white bars = control probe.

Gender Decision Times Participants were surprisingly good at
the dual task: on average they were correct 96% of the time.
Statistical analysis of the gender decision times produced a
significant main effect of Probe Type (F1(1,30)=11.02, p<.01;
F2(1,42)=4.12, p<.05), indicating that the decisions to the
identical probes (1346 ms; SE=83) were faster than to the
control probes (1419 ms; SE=80). We had expected this
priming effect to be different for the different conditions, but
there was no statistically reliable interaction of Condition and
Probe Type (both p-values > .25). Instead, the main effect of
Condition
was
significant
(F1(2,60)=6.67,
p<.01;
F2(2,84)=5.45, p<.01), indicating that decision times to probes,
whether or not they were identical, were slowest in the GN
condition, but did not differ between GG and NN. This pattern
was supported by post-hoc tests.

Discussion
First of all, the results of the responses to the statements
constituted an almost perfect replication of the pattern of the
off-line results found by Hoeks et al. (2006). When gapping
context and gapping prosody conspired, participants chose the
gapping interpretation for over 60% of the time, whereas when
context and prosody biased towards nongapping, gapping
clearly remained unpreferred, and was chosen only 16% of the
time (with the mismatch condition somewhere in between).
Taken together with the very few mistakes that were made in
the gender decision task, this result shows that participants were
able to handle this dual task paradigm extremely well.
With respect to on-line processing, we found a significant
identity priming effect, but we did not find the expected
difference in priming between the three conditions. Recall that
we assumed the gapped elements (e.g., 'helped Wilma' in the
example) would be (re-)activated during the processing of the
gapping interpretation, which should have made it easier to
process the identity probe (e.g., 'Wilma'). This null-effect could
mean that, despite our efforts to circumvent it, we did get a
floor-effect for the identity probes, meaning that although there
may have been a difference in reactivation between the
conditions, there is an upper limit as to the speed of gender
decision times.
An alternative view is that there actually was no difference in
reactivation between the conditions. If the elided material is not
reactivated in its surface form, but only in some kind of
interpreted form, it may not yield the differential priming effect
we were looking for. If these assumptions are true, than the
probes will measure processing load rather than activation. The
results then become rather clear: computing the gapping
interpretation is as easy as computing the highly preferred
nongapping interpretation, if the right context and prosody are
applied. The only processing difficulty is found in the
mismatch condition, where context and prosody point to
different directions.

end up with a representation of the sentence reflecting that
“some plasterer filled some painter”, which of course does
not correspond to the usual state of affairs in the world. So
what we are interested to see in this experiment is whether
the context and the prosody manipulations promoting
nongapping responses are as strong as when they encourage
gapping responses. In addition, we present visual probes
while participants listen to those target sentences, to look at
what is happening during on-line processing of the
ambiguous sentences where the preference for nongapping
collides head on with the preferred thematic structure. In
this experiment we are not looking for reactivation patterns
(the materials contain no proper nouns); the probes are
solely used to measure processing load.

Method
Participants & Materials & Design The participants of
Experiment 1 also took part in this experiment. The
materials are dialogues appearing in four versions (e.g., 3ad). Probes are represented as follows: <Walter>.
3a. (GG) Gapping Context, Gapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes. What did the plasterer and the
painter do?
Target: The PLASTERER filled the wall with a SPATULA and
the PAINTER with <Walter> a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

3b. (GN) Gapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes. What did the plasterer and the
painter do?
Target: The plasterer filled the WALL with a SPATULA and the
PAINTER with <Walter> a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

3c. (NG) Nongapping Context, Gapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes, said the painter. What did the
plasterer do?
Target: The PLASTERER filled the wall with a SPATULA and
the PAINTER with <Walter> a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

3d. (NN) Nongapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes, said the painter. What did the
plasterer do?
Target: The plasterer filled the WALL with a SPATULA and the
PAINTER with <Walter> a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

Results
See Table 2 for mean proportions nongapping and Figure 2
for a graphical presentation of gender decision times.
Table 2: Mean Proportions of Nongapping (SE).

Experiment 2
This second experiment uses a different logic than the first.
To start with, because of the thematic fit manipulation, the
gapping response is the preferred off-line response, because
choosing the normally prevailing nongapping reading results
in semantic anomaly. Consider, for instance, dialogue (3a).
If listeners choose the default nongapping reading, they will
1089

Condition
GapCont-GapPros
GapCont-NongapPros
NongapCont-GapPros
NongapCont-NongapPros

Hoeks et al.
0.17 (.06)
0.25 (.06)
0.24 (.06)
0.37 (.06)

Exp 2
0.17 (.05)
0.26 (.06)
0.30 (.06)
0.38 (.06)

Proportion Nongapping Responses The results of this
experiment are virtually identical to those of Hoeks et al.
(2006). Again, there were main effects of Context and of
Prosody (Context: F1(1,32)=12.94, p<.001; F2(1,28)=53.54,
p<.001; Prosody: (F1(1,32)=9.62, p<.01; F2(1,28)=24.08,
p<.001)). Participants accepted the implausible nongapping
reading significantly more often (34% of the time) when the
context indeed promoted nongapping than when it promoted
the gapping reading (22% of the time). The effect of
prosody entailed that the nongapping interpretation was
chosen significantly more often when the target sentence
was pronounced with a nongapping prosody (32% of the
time) as compared to when it had a gapping prosody (23%
of the time). There was no interaction of Context and
Prosody.
RT Gender Decision
Experim ent 2
1550
1450
1350
1250
1150
GG

GN

NG

NN

for an advantage in the easiest condition (i.e., "GG" as in (3a)),
where all three factors: thematic fit, context, and prosody argue
for gapping. This may mean that there is only very little
processing difficulty in all but the "NN" condition, which is
solved extremely rapidly, before the probe is encountered. On
the other hand, it may be the case that processing difficulty is
present for each of the three 'faster' conditions, irrespective of
the strength of the different factors. We are currently planning
an experiment with structurally unambiguous sentences (using
'while' instead of 'and') to settle this issue.

Conclusion
The present experiments show that nonstructural factors such as
context and prosody have strong effects on both on-line
processing and off-line preferences of gapping sentences. In
good thematic fit sentences, context and prosody seem to
eliminate all processing difficulty associated with gapping, and
make it the structure of choice. In case of poor thematic fit,
context and prosody have a significant effect only when both
go against the gapping bias induced by thematic fit. What is
unclear at present is why the mismatch conditions are as easy
(or as difficult) as the condition where all factors are fully in
line with thematic fit. More research is clearly needed to fill this
gap.

Acknowledgements
Figure 2. “GG”=Gapping context, Gapping Prosody etc.
Gender Decision Times As in Experiment 1, participants were
really good at the task: on average 96% of the reponses were
correct. Statistical analysis of gender decision times revealed
that there was no effect of Prosody. There was a main effect of
Context which was significant by participants and marginally
significant by items (F1(1,32)=4.66, p<.05; F2(1,28)=3.71,
p=.06) showing that participants are slower to respond to the
probe in conditions where the context goes against gapping
(1425 ms, SE=87) than when it promotes it (1363 ms, SE=80).
This main effect was qualified by a trend towards an interaction
(but only in the analysis by items) between Context and
Prosody (F1(1,32)=1,33, p=.26; F2(1,28)=3.88, p=.06): the
most difficult condition, where both context and prosody
worked against the plausible gapping interpretation, showed the
longest decision times; the other three conditions did not differ
significantly.

Discussion
The data regarding the final interpretation of the ambiguous
sentences (the off-line auditory decision data) are very similar
to those reported by Hoeks et al. (2006). In line with these
earlier results, the present experiment showed clear main
effects of both Context and Prosody, indicating that both
factors contribute significantly and independently to the
interpretation of ambiguous sentences if strong thematic fit
information is present. However, the gender decision data are
rather surprising. As could have been expected, there is a
significant disadvantage for the most difficult condition (i.e.,
"NN", as in (3d)), where both context and prosody argue
against the gapping preference induced by thematic fit.
However, quite unexpectedly, there is no evidence whatsoever

This research was funded by grant # 015.001.103 from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research, awarded to
Petra Hendriks. We are very grateful to Louisa Zijlstra, Tim
Bosselaar, Erik-Jan Smits, and Maartje Schreuder for their
invaluable help with creating the stimuli and running the
experiments.

References
Carlson, K. (2001). The effects of parallelism and prosody in the
processing of gapping structures. Language and Speech, 44, 126.
Frazier, L. (1987). Sentence processing: A tutorial review. In: M.
Coltheart (Ed.), Attention & Performance XII (pp. 601-681).
Hove, UK: Lawrence Earlbaum.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Hendriks, P., & Zijlstra, L.J. (2006). The
predominance of nonstructural factors in the processing of
gapping sentences. In: R. Sun (Ed.), Proceedings of CogSci
2006 (pp. 1511-1516).
Hoeks, J.C.J., Vonk, W., & Schriefers, H. (2002). Processing
coordinated structures in context. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46, 99-119.
Keller, F. (2001). Experimental evidence for constraint competition
in gapping constructions. In: G. Müller & W. Sternefeld (Eds.),
Competition in syntax (pp. 211-248).
Kuno, S. (1976). Gapping. A functional analysis. Linguistic
Inquiry, 7, 300-318.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence form.
Cambridge, MA: University Press.
Raithel, V., & Hielscher-Fastabend, M. (2004). Emotional and
linguistic perception of prosody. Folia Phoniatrica et
Logopedica, 56, 7-13.

1090

