UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Re-representation Using Labels: Comparison or Replacement?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3zv9169r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Son, Ji Y.
Smith, Linda B.
Goldstone, Robert L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Re-representation Using Labels: Comparison or Replacement?
Ji Y. Son (jys@indiana.edu)
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10 th Street
Bloomington, IN 47401
Abstract

internally represented forms) that can be perceived (and
mentally manipulated) to benefit cognitive processes.
Labels could directly promote re-representation by acting as
stand-ins for internal computation (Bruner, 1990; Clark,
1997). The argument for label replacement runs as follows:
1) objects are generally easier to process than relations, 2) if
a relation is associated with an object-like label (words or
other symbolic tokens), then processing relations becomes
essentially equivalent to processing new objects.
A
compelling example of this concerns judgments of
same/different relations by chimpanzees (Thompson, Oden,
& Boysen, 1997). In these studies, the chimpanzees are
taught to label a relation with an arbitrary physical token,
such as a heart-token for same (e.g., ♥  AA) and another
token for different (e.g., #  AB). Having learned this,
chimpanzees can make second-order matches, judging AA
to be related to BB. Chimpanzees could potentially do this
task, not by abstracting the relation of sameness across
instances, but by knowing that AA  ♥ and BB  ♥.
Then they can simply respond to the sameness of ♥ and ♥.
That is, the second-order relation (that “same” and “same”
are the same relation) might result from direct computations
over the labels standing in for relations. Thompson and
colleagues theorized that by mentally replacing AA with a
heart-token and BB with a heart-token, these chimpanzees
were able to re-represent this relational matching problem as
an object-matching problem.
It seems likely, that linguistic labels work in both ways –
through comparison processes that highlight relations and
lead to more abstract representations and through
replacement that leads more directly to easily manipulated
representations.
Nonetheless, in the experiments that
follow, we attempt to disentangle these two hypotheses
about the role of labeling in children’s relational reasoning.

The practice of labeling seems to allow children to make difficult relational similarity matches. Two experiments explore
the cognitive processes of comparison and replacement that
have been implicated in the beneficial effects of linguistic
labeling. Since linguistic labels may be implicated in a
number of these processes, our experiments used traditional
non-linguistic labels (post-its) to promote either the process of
comparison or replacement. Results from two relational
matching tasks suggest that comparison is more influential
than replacement.
Keywords: relational reasoning, transfer, symbols, labels,
comparison, re-representation.

Introduction
Any story about development and learning must address
the shift from dependence on concrete and physical similarity to behavior based on more abstract and derived sorts of
similarities (Piaget, 1952; Quine, 1960). There are many
empirical demonstrations of a shift showing that children
and novices use superficial object-based similarities while
mature learners can respond according to more subtle
relational similarities (see Gentner & Rattermann, 1991 for
a review). The broad goal of the experiments reported here
is to develop a greater understanding of how this relational
shift occurs.
The acquisition of linguistic labels that refer to relations is
consistently identified as playing a large role in augmenting
cognitive abilities (Clark, 1997; Gentner, 2003).
Contemporary discussions of how labels may promote
relational reasoning involve several steps. First, labeling a
relation (e.g., AA as “same” and BB as “same”) may foster
comparison, a process which has been shown to direct
attention to higher order relational similarities (Goldstone,
Medin, & Gentner, 1991; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001).
Comparison and the subsequent highlighting of relations
also serve as an important gateway to re-representation,
altering the description of a situation in terms of these newly
salient relations (Gentner, 2003). This process of rerepresentation is not just a convenient byproduct of
experience, but rather has even been proposed as a
fundamental part of human development (Karmiloff-Smith,
1992).
This multi-step process has several components that may
be separable. One of these is the “re-representation”
process itself. Labels of all kinds, word forms as well as
physical tokens, are themselves physical stimuli (and

LABELING
⇓
COMPARISON
⇓
HIGHLIGHTS RELATIONS
⇓
RE-REPRESENTATION

LABELING
⇓
REPLACEMENT
⇓
RE-REPRESENTATION

Figure 1: Two hypotheses of how the practice of labeling
with symbolic tags facilitates relational generalization.

1515

notes that could be stuck onto the cards – either below the
iconically corresponding figures on the card, thus (perhaps)
promoting comparison, or directly on top of the figures (also
shown in Figure 2), thus perceptually replacing the original
instances and in this way promoting a more direct form of
redescription. In this way, post-its act as a proxy for
symbolic tokens providing a convenient means for rerepresentation. However, post-its, being objects themselves,
can also be compared to other objects.
We used a modified form of Kotovsky and Gentner’s
(1996) match-to-sample paradigm for preschoolers as the
test for noticing relations, but preceded it with two training
conditions with physical labels designed to induce
comparison or redescription of salient object information.
Children were shown cards with objects such as animals,
vehicles, and colored shapes on them. These objects are
arrayed in an “even” relation like ABA (small-big-small;
obj1-obj2-obj1) or a “leading” relation such as BAA (bigsmall-small; obj2-obj1-obj1). Four-year-olds are trained to
label small objects with small post-its and large objects with
large post-its (see Figure 2). In the comparison condition,
children are trained to place the post-its below the object,
which allows for side-by-side perceptual comparison. In the
replacement condition, children are trained to place the postits over the object. In this condition, the post-its play the
redescriptive role of labels, providing new computational
units that replace initially salient object information; and
there is not as much opportunity for perceptual comparison
because the original objects are no longer perceptually
available.
Notice, in addition, that another way to
conceptualize the two conditions is whether learners see the
instance and iconically related form simultaneously (comparison condition) or successively (replacement condition).
A control condition did not receive any label training.
These three groups were then asked to generalize their
training to new examples of the learned relations.

Kotovsky and Gentner (1996) offer an interesting series
of experiments that provide a useful basis for exploring the
benefits of each of these processes in a relational match-tosample task. They presented four-year-old children with a
triad of cards, a standard and two answer choices consisting
of a relational match and a non-relational foil. Children
were introduced to two relations, symmetry and monotonic
increase. The symmetry would be displayed, for example,
on a card with three elements (small-big-small squares or
light-dark-light colored squares). Monotonic increase would
be on a card with three squares increasing in size or color.
The elements in the answer choices were similar to each
other (i.e. xXx and xxX) but differed from the standard (i.e.
oOo) to ensure that only the relational answer shared
similarities with the standard. When the standard and
relational match instantiated the critical relation on the same
dimension (i.e. size symmetry, oOo and xXx), they found
that 4-year-olds succeeded in responding to relations such as
symmetry.
However when the relational dimension
changed (i.e. oOo and light blue-dark blue-light blue) or the
relational polarity changed (i.e. oOo and XxX), their
performance went down to chance.
In order to help these children respond relationally
particularly in the more difficult cross-dimensional and
cross-polarity triads, Kotovsky and Gentner introduced
linguistic labels (i.e. “even” to indicate symmetry) such that
multiple training instances showed the same relation being
labeled with the same name. As in previous research (e.g.,
Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001), this labeling facilitated
relational responding at transfer. Why did the label work?
One possibility is that labeling two instances with the same
name may have caused children to compare them.
Alternatively, children may – by associating the instances
with the label – be able to recognize (and match) instances
without any comparison or abstraction of the higher order
relation. That is, labeling opportunities that may result in
comparison may also promote re-representation by way of
replacement. It is conceivable that children were able to
recode the standard as “even” and the relational match as
“even” and make an object level match through replacement
and re-representation.

Rationale for the Present Study
The goal of the present experiments is to provide additional
evidence on the role of labels in promoting comparison
and/or redescription in children’s relational learning. To do
this, we did not use linguistic labels since they may
implicate both comparison and replacement. Instead we
sought a form of “label” that could be manipulated in ways
to directly promote comparison versus redescription. In this
effort, we invented symbols that are iconically related to the
relation. For example, as illustrated in Figure 2, if the
instance of the symmetry relation was a card with a cross,
penguin, and cross, the associated “label” was a series of
squares arranged symmetrically. In order to implement a
condition that promoted comparison and one that promoted
redescription, these squares were actually colored post-it

Figure 2: Training conditions for Experiments 1 and 2. The
control condition did not see these training cards at all.

Experiment 1
If comparison is more important for directing attention to
relevant relational information, we expect children who put
post-its beneath the objects, having had a perceptual
opportunity to compare instances, to generalize to novel
1516

Procedure and Design. There were three between-subject
conditions: Comparison, Replacement, and a no-training
Control. Children in the control condition did not see the
training cards nor did they have experience with post-its.
In the training phase, the experimenter showed the child
how to place post-its appropriately onto a training card.
Immediately afterward, the child was given an identical
training card and their own set of post-its (e.g., large pink
and 2 small blue ones) and instructed to do the same. This
occurred four times, one for each training card. The training
was always done in the same order (bear, penguin, car, boat)
such that the children saw two ABA cards in a row and then
BAA cards in a row. Children were given corrective feedback if they placed post-its incorrectly. Experimenters were
instructed to provide children with opportunities to place
post-its until they were able to do it correctly on their own.
However, every child placed post-its correctly.
Next, children were trained to do the match-to-sample
task with the two task-training triads. These easy triads were
repeated until the child got both triads correct without feedback. This was followed by 6 match-to-sample triads, half
with the ABA post-its as the standard and half with BAA.
Each triad was repeated for a total of 12 test trials. The
spatial location of the relational match alternated between
trials. There were an additional four filler trials that were
interspersed with the test trials. These 16 trials were presented in a semi-random order and children were given
neutral feedback (e.g., “Okay! Thanks!”).
On each test trial, the experimenter would attach the postit standards onto a box with a slot cut out on top. The experimenter would then place two answer choices in front of
the child and ask, “Which card is like this one (pointing to
standard)? Pick the card like this one (pointing to standard)!
Put that one in the box!”

exemplars of the learned relations.
However, if rerepresentation really mediates such generalization, we
would expect children who replaced the objects with the
post-its to do equally well or outperform those in the
comparison condition.
Additionally, these learning
opportunities should facilitate relational matching over no
learning opportunities at all.

Method
Participants. Forty-four children, mean age of 56 months
(51-68 months) participated from local daycares. One child
did not complete the experiment and was excluded from the
analysis.
Materials. Children were trained on two examples of two
relations presented on laminated cards, each depicting an
array of three objects. The ABA relation was presented
with a triangle-bear-triangle card and a cross-penguin-cross
card. The BAA relation was taught with a car-diamonddiamond card and a boat-rectangle-rectangle card. Large
pink post-its and small blue ones were used for the ABA
relation cards while large purple post-its and small yellow
ones were used for the BAA relation cards.
Generalization tests were match-to-sample triads with a
standard made out of post-its (i.e. large pink-blue-blue postit array) and two answer choices which were novel instantiations of ABA and BAA (see Figure 3). The novel cards
instantiated these relations in the dimensions of shape (e.g.,
circle-diamond-circle), color (e.g., purple-lavender-purple),
or opposite size polarity (e.g., big-small-big). The standard
was shown on a box and children placed their answer choice
inside it.
Additional stimuli included task-training triads used to
train children on the match-to-sample task. These triads had
a novel standard (i.e., pentagon) and an exact match and an
unmatching foil (i.e., pentagon versus circle). There were
also easy filler triads made up of a novel standard (i.e., two
orange triangles) and two easy answer choices (i.e., two
orange triangles versus one yellow triangle). These triads
were designed to help encourage children during the
experiment while also serving as a measure of their
engagement in the task.

Results and Discussion
Children in all three conditions did not differ on their performance on the easy filler trials, F(2, 43) = 1.678. Only 6
children made errors at all on these trials. Their ceiling performance (M=.95, SD=.12) suggests that they were engaged
in the task. However, an ANOVA revealed that correct test
trial performance was significantly different between the
groups, F(2, 43) = 6.043, p<.01 (see Figure 4).
Children who had comparison training made significantly
more relational matches to the post-it standards than children in both the control condition, t(28) = 12.629, p<.01,
and replacement training conditions, t(30) = 4.615, p<.05.
Replacement condition performance did not significantly
differ from control responses, t(27) = .236. However, it was
not the case that replacement training made no impact at all.
While control children chose relational matches .57 of the
time (SD=.18) a rate consistent with performance at chance,
t(12) = 1.391, children in the replacement condition did not
made relational matches at random. Average replacement
performance was .67 correct relational matches (SD=.23),
significantly different from chance, t(14) = 2.815, p<.05.
Predictably, comparison performance (M=.84, SD=.21) was

Figure 3: Test trials from Experiment 1
1517

post-its as the new representations, the absence of post-its
should also reduce the number of correct relational
responses made by children in the replacement condition.

also significantly different from chance, t(15) = 6.264,
p<.001.
Although replacement training may have had some effect
on children’s ability to make relational matches, it seems
that comparison provided a more powerful opportunity to
learn about relations in a way that generalized beyond the
four training cards. Theories about comparison often
include re-representation as part of the process (e.g.,
Gentner, 2003) so it may be that comparison not only
shifted attention to relevant relational information but also
gave children the time and opportunity to reinterpret the
crosses and penguins in more general terms. Covering up
the objects did not allow children to do this on their own.
This first experiment examined children’s ability to make
near transfer of trained post-its to new relationally similar
instances. But comparison in past literature is proposed to
affect behavior in far transfer. Multiple instances viewed
simultaneously afford a side-by-side comparison where
similarities can be highlighted (Namy, Smith, & GershkoffStowe, 1997). Since the post-its and penguins/crosses do
not have many properties in common besides their relational
similarities, these similarities may have been attentionally
boosted during comparison training. If so, this perceptual
experience can potentially help children find the relational
similarities in match-to-sample triads even without the
presence of mediating post-its. The generalization test in
Experiment 2 is more like Kotovsky and Gentner’s (1996)
original study where the standards are no longer the familiar
post-its but are themselves novel cards.

Method
Participants. Thirty-eight children, average age 53.8
months (range 45 to 62), participated in this experiment.
Five children were taken out of the analysis (three who did
not finish the experiment and two who only chose cards
presented on their right side).
Materials. Training materials were identical to those used
in Experiment 1. Generalization tests were match-to-sample
triads with a novel size standard (e.g., an array of three
crosses, big-small-small) and two answer choices which
were novel instantiations of ABA and BAA (see Figure 5).
The novel standards were all size relations while answer
choices differed on shape (e.g., star-square-square), color
(e.g., purple-lavender-lavender), or opposite size polarity
(e.g., small-big-big).
Procedure and Design. The procedure and design was
almost identical to that of Experiment 1. Children in the
comparison and replacement conditions got post-it training
first. Then children in all three conditions were given tasktraining trials before moving onto the test and easy filler
trials. Pilot testing on the novel standard triads revealed that
this test was considerably difficult and easily frustrating for
children so the number of unique match-to-sample triads
was reduced to 4, half with the ABA pattern as the standard
and half with BAA. Each triad was repeated for a total of 8
trials. The spatial location of the relational match alternated
between trials. There were 4 additional easy filler triads.

Results and Discussion
An analysis of the easy filler trials revealed no difference
among the three conditions, F(2, 37) = .052. Average
performance was .89 correct (SD=.18). However, 12
children faltered on these filler trials, almost twice as many
as in Experiment 1. This is reasonable considering that this
task was considerably harder for children.
Initial summary statistics revealed that children’s
performance on the test trials were overall poor in this
experiment. Even the best performance, shown by children
in the comparison condition, was only an average of .61
relational matches (SD=.22). Replacement performance
was .57 (SD=.23) and control performance averaged at .51
(SD=.16). These averages are all statistically equivalent to
chance. According to an ANOVA, there was no difference
in the novel standard test performance between groups, F(2,
37) = .085.
Because this task was difficult, more children seemed to
lose interest partway through the experiment. To account
for children who may have stopped paying attention or
given up during the test, we analyzed the performance of
children who got all four easy filler trials correct (see Figure
5).
The only group who achieved above chance

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, comparison training was found to have a
significant benefit on relational generalization. Replacement training also showed limited benefits when the test
trials included post-its to mediate their relational generalization. In Experiment 2, we will test whether these training
programs can result in relational matches between novel
answer cards and novel standards. Children are presented
with the same two forms of post-it training (or no training if
they are in the control condition), only the tests of
generalization have changed. If comparison directs attention to relational information, we should still see benefits of
comparison training. Additionally, if re-representation uses
1518

performance on this test was the comparison group (M =
.68, SD = .17), t(6) = 2.705, p<.05. Even for children who
presumably paid attention through the testing, replacement
training did not allow performance to be better than chance
(M=.54, SD=.17), t(11) = .670. As expected, even alert
control participants were unable to exceed chance
performance (M=.57, .SD=14), t(6) = 1.333.
As in Experiment 1, providing a perceptual experience
that allowed for comparison promoted some relational
generalization where as replacement training and no training
did not. Although these results are more muted, partly due
to task difficulty, the slight advantage of comparison even at
this stringent level of difficulty indicates that it is indeed a
powerful experience. Relational tasks require that children
attend to less salient information than object properties and
comparison seems to help direct them to this subtle
regularity.

Figure 5: An example of a test trial with a novel standard
card. There were size-to-shape, size-to-color, and size-toopposite-polarity triads.

and same post-its were used with the same generalization
tests. However, the resulting experience from juxtaposing or
covering with the labels is very different. It seems likely
that these two different “labeling” conditions initiated different cascades of processes resulting in different perceptions of similarity and patterns of relational generalization.

Comparison that Entails Re-representation
The results reported here indicate a particular importance of
comparison during training, in directing attention to critical
relational information. Experiments 1 and 2 showed consistent advantages of comparison in highlighting learned relations. Placing the iconically related labels in view and in
one-to-one correspondence with the objects in the relational
display gives children an opportunity to compare their locally matched label-object pairs to highlight a more global
pattern of similarity. Once attentionally highlighted, most
theories of comparison include re-representation and although our results do not directly address this question, it
might seem tempting to interpret our positive comparison
results to mean re-representation is not necessary.
However, this may be premature because we should
consider a case where there is comparison that does not lead
to re-representation: children are given training cards and
labels that look identical to the objects (see Figure 7).
Although there is a side-by-side opportunity for comparison,
and the original crosses and penguins are perceptually
available for reinterpretation, there is no impetus for such
cognitive work. We have preliminary data suggesting that
such an instance of comparison without opportunity for
redescription is not sufficient to produce transfer.
So, how do comparison opportunities foster
redescription? (1) Comparison allows local similarity and
differences to suggest a recoding in terms of global structure
(Markman & Gentner, 1993) or (2) comparison allows
children to ignore specific information for a more
abstracted/simplified recoding. We are currently running a
version of our experiment testing these types of comparison.

Figure 6: Novel standard test performance of children who
completed all four filler trials correctly.
Figure 7: Training stimuli from currently running experiment in this series.

General Discussion
The preschool aged children in our experiment find it difficult to make relational matches across sets of objects. Our
experiments provided children with a short training sequence, putting post-its on only four cards, but this experience helps them find subtle relational similarities and ignore
salient object differences. One of the most surprising
aspects of the results is the impact on children’s learning
made by a slight difference in training between the
comparison and replacement conditions. The same cards

Similarity and Simplicity in Redescription
The provision of labels could support relational encoding on
two levels: by fostering comparison among instances or by
simplifying learning instances. Effectively utilizing simpler
alignments to bring about higher-level reorganization
echoes the purpose of re-representation (Karmiloff-Smith,
1992) and more specifically progressive alignment
(Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Markman & Gentner, 1993).
1519

According to progressive alignment (and its larger
framework, Structure Mapping Theory, Gentner, 1983),
local matches make global relations more salient. This has
been shown in several relational domains including number
(Mix, 2002) and map use (Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001).
However, labeling also provides simpler, less
contextualized representations of embedded situationspecific information. These simpler representations are the
labels themselves. Simpler representations such as symbols
can encapsulate a wide variety of instances. The advantages
of simplicity for the purposes of generalization has been
widely documented from young children’s symbol use
(Uttal, Liu, & DeLoache, 1991) and object categorization
(Son, Smith, & Goldstone, under review) to adult transfer in
mathematics (Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005) and
physics (Bassok & Holyoak, 1989). Additionally, concrete
details can potentially compete for attentional resources,
distracting young children (Rattermann & Gentner, 1998)
and novices (Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003) from relational
redescriptions, and creating object-inclusive descriptions
instead. In sum, labels that draw on the combined forces of
similarity and simplicity may be most beneficial for
relational redescription.

Conclusions
What does is take for learners to generalize to dissimilar
new situations? How do we foster abstract descriptions?
How do we get problem solvers to attend to newly relevant
information? These questions are important for educators
and theorists alike. The processes of comparison,
replacement, and redescription have been implicated in
theories of higher cognition such as language, abstraction,
similarity, and categorization. Systematic understanding of
these simple processes may shed light on how they foster
such sophisticated changes in thinking. Labeling in and of
itself may not be a particularly special activity – but because
it works together with comparison and redescription, it
exerts great influence. Although labeling has been linked
with high-level abstract descriptions and generalizations that
characterize human cognition, these benefits may really be a
product of the ongoing interaction of simpler processes.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by NIH grants (HD007475 and
HD28675) and a Department of Education (IES) grant
(R305H050116).

References
Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K.J. (1989). Interdomain transfer
between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 15, 153-166.
Bruner, J.S. (1990). Acts of M
eaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting brain, body, and
word together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1520

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J.P. Byrnes (Eds.),
Perspectives on language and thought: Interrelations in
development, (pp. 225-277). Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner & S.
Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in
the study of language and thought (pp.195-235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldstone, R.L., Medin, D.L., & Gentner, D. (1991). Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features in
similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 222-262.
Goldstone, R.L., & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principeles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46, 414-466.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A
developmental perspective on cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers: Close comparisons facilitate far mappings.
Journal of Cognition & Development, 2, 189-219.
Markman, A.B., & Gentner, D.
(1993).
Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons.
Cognitive
Psychology, 23, 431-467.
Mix, K.S. (2002). The construction of number concepts.
Cognitive Development, 17, 1345-1363.
Namy, L., Smith L.B., & Gershkoff-Stowe, L. (1997)
Young children's discovery of spatial classification.
Cognitive Development, 12, 163-184.
Piaget, J. (1952). The Origins of Intelligence. New York,
NY: International Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1977). Natural kinds. In S.P. Schwartz
(Ed.), Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Sloutsky, V.M., Kaminski, J.A., & Heckler, A.F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Son, J.Y., Smith, L.B., & Goldstone, R.L. (under review).
Simplicity and generalization: The role of abstraction in
children’s object categorizations.
Thompson, R.K.R., Oden, D.L., & Boysen, S.T. (1997).
Language-naïve chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) judge
between relations in a conceptual matching-to-sample
task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
behavior processes, 23, 31-43.
Uttal, D.H., Liu, L.L., & DeLoache, J.S. (1999). Taking a
hard look at concreteness. In L. Balter & C. TamisLeMonda (Eds.), Child psychology: A handbook of
contemporary issues (pp. 177-192). Psychology Press.

