UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Retelling Narratives as Fiction or Nonfiction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0k14871d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Hendersen, Deborah J.O.
Clark, Herb

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Retelling Narratives as Fiction or Nonfiction
Deborah J. O. Hendersen (djoh@stanford.edu)
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, 450 Serra Mall.
Stanford, CA 94305

Herb Clark (herb@psych.stanford.edu)
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, 450 Serra Mall.
Stanford, CA 94305

The question this paper asks is does it matter whether a
narrative is fiction or nonfiction? While readers of fiction
must look within a narrative to understand what is
informative or relevant about a particular action, looking
within a narrative is hardly unique to fiction. Narratives are
narratives (rather than say lists of actions) because the
actions included are related to one another. Indeed, much
research has focused on how readers understand the internal
structure of narratives, and it is now generally accepted that
in order to understand narratives readers must be able to
understand the cause-and-effect relations that exist between
events (e.g., O’Brien & Myers, 1987; Trabasso, Secco, &
van den Broek, 1984; Trabasso & van den Broek, 1985;
Varnhagen & Goldman, 1986). To do this, readers track
characters through time and space and monitor their
concerns (Graesser, Millis, & Zwaan, 1997; Zwaan &
Radvansky, 1998). In light of this, the question becomes if
we hold all of the characters, their actions, the cause-andeffect relations in a given narrative constant, will
participants think about the narrative differently simply
because they believe it to be fiction or nonfiction?
The labels “fiction” and “nonfiction” are external to
narratives, so it is important to recognize that people trying
to understand narratives are influenced by background
knowledge (e.g., Gerrig & McKoon, 1998; Graesser, Singer,
& Trabasso, 1994) and these influences are at many levels
including both the lexical and the script levels (e.g. Kambe,
Rayner, & Duffy, 2001; Cook & Myers, 2004).
Not only does outside information help readers to
understand narratives, but outside influences can alter how a
reader approaches a narrative. Lorch, Lorch, and Klusewitz
(1993) asked readers about the different kinds of reading
tasks they experienced and participants distinguished two
types of reading tasks: reading for study purposes and
reading for entertainment purposes. Consistent with this
division, Navaez, van den Broek, Ruiz (1999) found that
readers with a study purpose were more likely to engage in
repeating and evaluating the text than were readers with an
entertainment purpose. Indeed, Zwann (1994) found that
when readers believe they are reading a newspaper article
they are concerned about what is true about the world,
however they attend to more of the wording and stylistic
devices when they read literature.
To see how construing a narrative as fiction or nonfiction
would alter the way participants thought about it, we

Abstract
Participants read and then retold narratives that were labeled
either fiction or nonfiction. They showed a robust fiction
superiority effect, recalling 20 to 50% more words and details
when a narrative was labeled fiction. Fiction narratives also
contained more of the language found in the original
narrative. The fiction superiority effect held whether the
retellings were oral or typed, and with and without an
audience. This effect was found for recall but not recognition
memory.
Keywords: fiction; nonfiction; narrative understanding;
recall; recognition

Introduction
On October 30th, 1938 the War of the Worlds radio
production scared families into fleeing their homes because
they could not tell that the production was a fiction. The
next day the New York Tribune highlighted the problem by
saying “Hitler managed to scare all of Europe to its knees a
month ago, but he at least had an army and an air force to
back up his shrieking words…But Mr. Welles scared
thousands into demoralization with nothing at all.” The
reason Welles’s production could be described as “nothing
at all” is because it fails to follow one of Grice’s (1975)
conversational maxims, the Maxim of Quality. The Maxim
of Quality says: Do not say what you believe to be false; do
no say that for which you lack adequate evidence. Fiction
openly flouts this maxim, and in doing so raises the question
of how we are to understand it.
Having abandoned the Maxim of Quality, it becomes
somewhat unclear how two of Grice’s other maxims are to
be applied to fiction. First, the Maxim of Quantity which
states: Make your contribution as informative as is required
for the current purposes of the exchange; do not make your
contribution more informative than is required. And
Secondly, the Maxim of Relation: Be relevant. But how do
you judge a piece of information informative or relevant
when you know that it is false? When reading nonfiction,
information is deemed informative or relevant at least in
part because the reader understands it to be historical or
present-day fact outside of the narrative. The reader of
fiction, however, must look within the narrative to
understand why a piece of information is informative or
relevant.

353

The passages had been edited (by the Gig editors) to remove
the question and answer format and contained only the
words of the interviewee. Participants read a passage,
completed a filler task for five minutes, and then retold the
passage to a partner.
The four passages were interviews that had been edited by
Gig to read like spontaneous narratives. They covered four
professions (a flight attendant, a medicine woman, a laborsupport doula, and a traveling salesman), averaging 1625
words in length. The narratives were picked to be as
different as possible, evoking emotions that varied widely.
Half the pairs of participants were assigned at random to the
fiction condition, and the other half to the nonfiction
condition; the order of the four passages was
counterbalanced. The retellings were video-taped and
transcribed, and the transcripts checked by independent
listeners. The original passages were each divided into the
smallest possible units of information, or details. For
instance, “I never thought I’d be a flight attendant. I was
bartending in Denver because, basically, I didn’t know what
else I wanted to do” was divided into these four details:
1. did not think she’d be a flight attendant
2. was a bartender
3. in Denver
4. because she didn’t know what else to do.
Two raters blind to condition independently coded the
details for each transcript, agreeing over 95% of the time.
They met to reconcile the remaining differences.
The language of the each of retellings was also compared
to the original passage using an ngram calculator. This
generates a frequency count of all the sets of words (n in
length) in each file, and calculates how many of the words
occur in both passages by returning the dot product of each
file’s distribution normalized by their respective
magnitudes.

harkened back to a method used first to great effect by
Bartlett (1932). We asked participants to retell the
narratives that they had just read, and we made particular
effort to put participants in a situation where they either had
an audience or anticipated an audience to encourage them to
retell the narrative as a narrative, rather than as a memory
exam. By examining the retellings, Bartlett was able to
demonstrate that participants understand narratives in light
of their preexisting knowledge. In this paper, we present
evidence for what we will call the fiction superiority effect:
people recall more information from narratives that are
fictional than from narratives that are nonfictional.

Experiment 1
The idea behind Experiment 1 was to test how participants
would retell the same narratives when they were construed
as fiction and as nonfiction.

Method
The participants in all the experiments reported here were
Stanford University undergraduates fulfilling a course
requirement. There were 23 pairs of participants in this
experiment. Each member of the pairs read and retold two
of the passages and listened to their partner retell the other
two.
We found four narratives that could sensibly be labeled
either fiction or nonfiction. These were interviews and
presented them to participants under one of two framings:
Fiction:
You will be reading an interview drawn from a contest
on NPR where people were asked to imagine and makebelieve about a variety of professions they had never
held before. These people were then interviewed about
their imagined profession, and you are going to be
reading one of these interviews. Because these are just
people talking you will periodically see things like
‘laughs’ in brackets, because these are just transcripts
of people making up information as they go along, so
please don’t be thrown by that.
Nonfiction (which represents the true nature of the
narratives):
You will be reading an interview drawn from a book
called Gig, which is a sort of modern-day version of
Stud Turkel’s Working. Basically, the editors hopped in
a van, drove across America, and interviewed real
people about their jobs. You are going to be reading
one of these interviews. Because these are just people
talking you will periodically see things like ‘laughs’ in
brackets, because these are just transcripts of real
people talking about their lives, so please don’t be
thrown by that.

Results and Discussion
Labeling the passages as fiction led to longer, more
elaborate retellings than labeling them as nonfiction. The
fiction retellings contained 1.5 times as many words as the
nonfiction retellings. The difference averaged 648 to 434
words per retelling (t(90) = 4.50, p < 0.0001, effect size
0.95, all tests throughout were 2-tailed), and was consistent
across passages (flight attendant, 851 to 564; medicine
woman, 543 to 307; doula, 638 to 455; and salesman, 561 to
411), see figure one. This difference is the fiction
superiority effect. The fiction retellings also had 1.5 times as
many details as the nonfictional retellings, an average
difference of 27.9 to 18 (t(90) = 3.28, p < 0.01, effect size
0.68). This difference, too, was consistent across passages
(respectively; 48 to 29, 23 to 14, 21 to 15, and 21 to 14 for
the four passages).

354

behalf of the fiction participants or it could indicate that
fiction participants have a lower criterion for what they
include in their retellings. Nonfiction participants may feel
an obligation to include only the information that they are
certain of in order to preserve Grice’s Maxim of Quality,
while participants in the fiction condition do not feel so
constrained.
Or the fiction group might have retained
more information in order to preserve the feel of the
narrative, while the nonfiction group, with equally good
memory for the narrative, may simply have summarized the
important points based on a higher criterion for reporting.
Experiment 2 used recognition memory and signal detection
to determine if there was a true memory advantage (d’ in
signal-detection terms) for the fiction participants, or merely
a lowered criterion (c) for including information.

Number of words

1200
fiction

1000

non

800
600
400
200
0
flight
attendant

doula

traveling
salesman

medicine
woman

all
narratives

Figure 1: Average number of words retold, error
bars indicated 1 SE.

Experiment 2

We wondered if the increase in words was because
participants in the fiction condition were including
extraneous information that not included in the original
passage. To check this, we asked whether the increase in
details was proportionate to the increase in words in each of
the retellings. Indeed, there was no difference in number of
words per detail for the fiction vs. nonfiction retellings, 29.4
to 27.3 (t(90) = 0.701, p = 0.49, effect size 0.15). So the
fiction superiority effect was reflected not just in the
number of words used, but in the amount of information
recalled.
We also wondered if there was a pattern to the details
included in fiction that were not included in nonfiction.
Were, for instance, participants equally much including the
causally relevant details, but the fiction condition
participants were fleshing out their retellings? To test this
possibility we ran Fisher’s exact test on all of the details.
Of the 557 details we coded for across all retellings, 32
differed significantly by condition (30 appeared more
frequently in fiction than non, 2 appeared more frequently in
nonfiction). Unfortunately, we are unable to conclude
anything from these details as they make up 5.7% of the
details we coded for, and as we used a 5% significance cutoff we are faced with the problem repeated measures and we
must assume that these differences are due to chance.
The language used in the fiction retellings contained
significantly more of the original narrative’s language.
After excluding outliers more than 2 standard deviations
away, the fiction dot-products were significantly longer than
nonfiction for single words (Fiction = 0.76, Non = 0.70,
t(89) = 3.56, p<0.001), word dyads (Fiction = 0.32, Non =
0.26, t(84)=3.26, p=0.005) and word triads (Fiction = 0.10,
Non = 0.07, t(83)=2.23, p<0.05).
This difference
complements the Zwaan (1994) finding that readers of
fiction pay attention to more of the surface details of a
narrative than readers of nonfiction.
The most interesting and surprising finding of Experiment
1 is the fiction superiority effect. As the increase in length
is proportionate to the increase in information included, this
effect could reflect either a true increase in memory on

The goal of Experiment 2 was to compare the recognition of
the details originally coded for in Experiment 1 in passages
labeled fiction or nonfiction.

Method
We created 50 true and 50 false statements for each of the
four passages from Experiment 1 using the original list of
details. Participants were brought into the lab and randomly
assigned to one of the four narratives. Half at random were
given the fiction or the nonfiction frames used in
Experiment 1. Participants read the narrative, completed a
five-minute distracter task (standardizing stimuli for a map
experiment), and were tested with a true-false test, using a
button-box that collected reaction times as well. There were
96 participants, 24 for each passage.

Results and Discussion
There were no differences in recognition between fiction
and nonfiction passages. The average number of correct
answers was almost identical for two conditions, fiction
79.3 vs. nonfiction 80.3 (t(94) = -0.71, p = 0.48, ; effect size
-0.14). The average number of correct answers ranged from
75 to 85% for the four passages, so the scores were certainly
not at ceiling. The mean reaction times to answer were also
nearly identical for the two conditions, fiction 3112 ms vs.
nonfiction 3121 ms (t(94) = -0.058, p = 0.95, ; effect size 0.012). So the time needed to verify details also did not
differ for fiction and nonfiction, suggesting that participants
found the task equally easy.
The crucial evidence comes from the signal detection
analysis. There was no reliable difference in d’ between
fiction (1.74) and nonfiction (1.86) (t(94) = -1.11, p = 0.27, ;
effect size -0.23). Nor was there a reliable criterion shift (c)
from fiction (0.21) to nonfiction (0.23) (t(94) = -0.30, p =
0.765, effect size -0.06).
So recognition was very different from recall. Framing a
passage as fiction vs. nonfiction had a large influence on
recall (the fiction superiority effect), but no influence on
recognition—even though the true/false questions in
Experiment 2 were a subset of the details counted in

355

what I would like you to do for the rest of the time is
retell this passage, just as you would to a friend you
thought was interested, so I can give that retelling to
another participant and have them do something else
with it.
Participants were given as much time as they needed to
retell the narrative using a keyboard to enter it in the text
editor.
Thirteen participants were eliminated for exceeding an a
priori standard of two standard deviations from the mean of
their condition, leaving 71, and 76 in the typed recall, and
post recall conditions.

Experiment 1. The point is made clear in the effect sizes. In
Experiment 1, the effect size was a respectable 0.95,
whereas in Experiment 2, the combined effect sizes of d’
and c totaled a much smaller -0.29 in the wrong direction.
The fiction superiority effect cannot be attributed either to a
greater accessibility (in recognition) of details in passages
labeled fiction or to a criterion shift in this accessibility.
Recognition, of course, is not the same as recall (Tversky,
1973; Bower & Winzenz, 1970). The details of a narrative
may be equally well encoded in fiction and nonfiction (as
seen in recognition memory), and yet recall could differ
because of the connections among those details (Bower,
Clark, Lesgold, & Winzenz, 1969; Mandler, 1967; Puff,
1970; Underwood, 1964). The fiction participants may
apply retrieval strategies that exploit these connections more
effectively than the nonfiction participants (e.g. Hacker,
Dunlosky, & Graesser, 1998). If this is the case, then
participants should show the fiction superiority effect even
when they are told that a narrative is fiction or nonfiction
after they have read it.

Results and Discussion
Switching from oral retellings to typed retellings reduced
but did not eliminate the fiction superiority effect. The
fiction retellings had more words by a factor of 1.3, 449 to
359, (F(1, 70) = 7.89, effect size 0.66). This pattern was
seen within each of the narratives. The traveling salesman
fiction retellings had 1.4 times as many words on average as
the nonfiction retellings, 462 to 342 (F(1, 34) = 5.071, p <
0.005, effect size 0.75). The medicine woman fiction
retellings were 1.2 times longer than nonfiction retellings,
435 to 356 (F(1, 33) = 4.70, p < 0.05, effect size 0.74). The
fiction superiority effect is clearly not dependent upon either
oral retellings, or having a responsive audience. Even when
given time to review and edit their retellings, participants in
the fiction condition retold longer narratives than
participants in the nonfiction condition.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was designed to address two questions about
recall strategies.
(1) Would the fiction superiority effect remain when the
retellings were written instead of oral? The effect might
disappear if fiction narrators were more deliberate in their
retelling, or if they were less interested in entertaining a
responsive partner.
And (2) would the fiction superiority effect remain when
participants were told that the narrative was fiction or
nonfiction only after they had read it? The effect should
disappear if it depends on the original encoding of the
narratives as fiction or nonfiction. It should remain if it is a
result of retrieval and retelling strategies.

Fiction

Number of Words

Nonfiction

Method
One hundred and sixty Stanford students participated in this
study.
The participants were assigned to one of four conditions
in a two-by-two design. In the typed recall conditions they
were told the narrative was fiction, or nonfiction, before
they read it (as in Studies 1 and 2). In the post recall
condition, participants were told that the narrative (referred
to as “a passage”) was fiction or nonfiction only after they
had read it (using the framings from Experiment 1).
Otherwise, their instructions were identical to those in the
typed recall condition.
Participants read either the salesman or the medicine
woman passage from Experiments 1 and 2 and were then
directed to a text editor and asked to retell it. They were
told:
We are interested in how narratives are understood,
discussed and communicated, and so what we’re doing
is bringing participants into the lab and giving half the
participants an original passage and half the participants
a retelling. You were given the original passage, and so

500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Typed Recall

Post Recall

Figure 2: Average number of words retold, error bars show
1 SE.
The fiction superiority effect was eliminated in the post
recall condition where participants were told the narrative
was fiction or nonfiction after they had read the narrative.
The fiction retellings were not significantly longer than the
nonfiction retellings (fiction: 393, nonfiction: 385, F(1,
74)=0.057, p= 0.81). There was not even a consistent
pattern between the two passages. For the traveling
salesman, the fiction superiority effect was reduced to 1.15,
fiction 477 and nonfiction 417. This effect is not reliably
larger than 1.0 (477 to 416, F(1, 38) = 1.62, p = 0.21, effect
size 0.20). For the medicine woman passage nonfiction

356

Films are labeled as fiction or documentaries.
Conversationalists mark some of their stories as ones that
“really happened to me” and others as not. The fiction
superiority effect is evidence that the fictional status of a
narrative affects the recall of its content. Thus, such labels
not only indicate whether the reported events are invented or
real, but also trigger different processing strategies on the
part of the reader.

retellings were longer than fiction ones, 351 to 293 (F(1, 34)
= 2.95, p = 0.095). Across both passages the fiction
superiority effect was larger for the typed recall condition
than the post recall condition 1.3 to 1.02 (F(1, 143) = 3.85, p
= 0.05), see figure two. These findings argue that the fiction
superiority effect is not a product of retrieval or retelling
strategies. Instead, this effect appears to occur when
participants are encoding the narrative.

General Discussion

Acknowledgments

The fiction superiority effect is an advantage in recall for
narratives that are construed to be fiction rather than
nonfiction. The effect occurred whether the retellings were
oral and with a responsive audience or written and without
an audience. The effect occurred in recall, but not in
recognition, and appears to be a product of how participants
encode the narrative.
These finding suggest that not only do we approach
narratives differently depending on the task at hand (i.e.
study or entertainment) but that we approach narratives
differently based on their genre. Readers of fiction are not
only more sensitive to surface level features, such as the
language used by the author, but they retain more of the
content of the passage as well. This retention advantage is
seen only recall, not recognition, which implies that the
difference in fiction and nonfiction resides in how the reader
structures the information in memory. Structure, of course,
is a key component to narratives, with causal structure being
vital to the reader’s understanding of a narrative.
One possible basis for the fiction superiority effect is that
details serve different functions in fiction and nonfiction.
Authors of nonfiction are constrained by the Maxim of
Quality and the historical facts they are relating. When
readers of nonfiction are faced with a detail, they understand
why it is informative and relevant: because it was true
historically. If the author says it was raining, then it must in
fact have been raining. Authors of fiction, in contrast, have
abandoned the Maxim of Quality and are free to invent,
manipulate, and elaborate details in ways that promote their
narrative. When readers of fiction are told it was raining,
they must ask why the author thought rain was informative
or relevant, and they may assume that this detail motivates
other features of the narrative. In The Great Gatsby, almost
every major event is highlighted with details of the weather
that signal the emotional state of the characters. Similarly,
in Romeo and Juliet, the fight between Tybalt and Mercutio
takes place on a spectacularly hot day. That is, readers of
fiction may look for relevance by expecting to find thematic
connections among the details, whereas readers of
nonfiction are less pressed for explanations of relevance and
should not. If readers of fiction are creating these
interconnections between details to create relevance, then
the fiction superiority effect would only appear in recall,
where thematic connections would facilitate retrieval, but
not in recognition, where they would not.
People regularly label fiction differently from nonfiction.
Libraries contain separate sections on fiction and nonfiction.

We would like to acknowledge the very helpful comments
of Michael Ramscar, Dan Yarlett , Elsie Wang, and all of
the members of SLUGS.

References
Bartlett, F. C. Remembering: a study in experimental and
social psychology. (1932). 317 pp. Oxford, England:
Macmillan.
Bower, G.H., Clark, M. C., Lesgold, A. M., & Winzenze, D.
(1969). Hierarchical retrieval schemes in recall of
categorized world lists. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 8, 323-343.
Bower, G. H., & Winzenz, D. (1970). Comparison of
associative learning strategies. Psychonomic Science,
20(2), 119-120.
Cook, A. E., & Myers, J. L. (2004). Processing discourse
roles in scripted narratives: The influences of context and
world knowledge. Journal of Memory & Language, 50(3),
268-288.
Gerrig, R. J., & McKoon, G. (1998). The readiness is all:
The functionality of memory-based text processing.
Discourse Processes, 26(2-3), 67-86.
Graesser, A. C., Millis, K. K., & Zwaan, R. A. (1997).
Discourse comprehension. Annual Review of Psychology,
48, 163-189.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological review, 101(3), 371-395.
Grice, H. P. 1975. "Logic and conversation." in Cole, Peter,
and J. L. Morgan (Eds). 1975. Syntax and semantics:
Speech acts. Volume 3. New York: Academic.
Hacker, D. J., Dunlosky, J., & Graesser, A. C. (1998).
Metacognition in educational theory and practice
(Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum), 1998.
Kambe, G., Rayner, K., & Duffy, S. A. (2001). Global
context effects on processing lexically ambiguous words:
Evidence from eye fixations. Memory & Cognition, 29(2),
363-372.
Lorch, R. F., Lorch, E. P., & Klusewitz, M. A. (1993).
College students' conditional knowledge about reading.
Journal of educational psychology, 85(2), 239-252.
Mandler, G. (1967). Organization and memory. In K. W.
Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning
and motivation (Vol. 1, pp. 327-372). New York:
Academic Press.

357

Tversky, B. (1973). Encoding processes in recognition and
recall. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 275-287.
Underwood. B. J. (1964). The representativeness of rote
verbal learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of
human learning (pp. 47-78). New York: Academic Press.
Varnhagen, Connie K; Goldman, Susan R. Improving
comprehension: Causal relations instruction for learning
handicapped learners. Reading Teacher. Vol 39(9) May
1986, 896-904.
Zwaan, R. A. (1994). Effect of genre expectations on text
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 20(4), 920-933.
Zwaan, Rolf A; Radvansky, Gabriel A. Situation models in
language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin. Vol 123(2) Mar 1998, 162-185.

Narvaez, D., van den Broek, P., & Ruiz, A. B. (1999). The
influence of reading purpose on inference generation and
comprehension in reading. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 91(3), 488-496
O'Brien, E. J., & Myers, J. L. (1987). The role of causal
connections in the retrieval of text. Memory & Cognition,
15(5), 419-427.
Puff, C. R. (1970). Role of clustering in free recall. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 86, 384-386.
Trabasso, T., Secco, T., & van den Broek, P. (1984). Causal
cohesion and story coherence. In H. Mandle, N. L. Stein,
& T. Trabasso (Eds.), Learning and comprehension of
text (pp. 83-111). Hillsdale, NJ; Erlbaum.
Trabasso, T., van den Broek, P. (1985). Causal thinking and
the representation of narrative events. Journal of Memory
and Language, 24, 610-630.

358

