UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Salience Based Hierarchical Spatial Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2qw3d27s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Wang, Hongbin
Sun, Yanlong

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Salience Based Hierarchical Spatial Representations
Hongbin Wang (Hongbin.Wang@uth.tmc.edu)
Yanlong Sun (Yanlong.Sun@uth.tmc.edu)
School of Health Information Sciences, University of Texas at Houston
7000 Fannin Suite 600, Houston, TX 77030

Abstract

Unfortunately, different opinions exist about how a
psychological space is encoded. In this article, we briefly
outline an integrated theory of human spatial representations
that is built on solid neuropsychological evidence and is
able to accommodate several seemingly contradictory
previous findings. The theory essentially states that a
psychological space consists of multiple representations,
each with a distinctive frame of reference and each being a
partial selection (anchor-based) of all possible spatial
information. The theory lays out a set of principles about
what information is readily encoded in each representation
and how different representations interact to solve spatial
problems, which often lead to tested predictions in spatial
performance.
This article consists of three parts. In the first part, we
will briefly review several key concepts and claims of the
theory, including frame of reference and salience. Several
major theoretical debates in the field are highlighted. In the
second part, we report an experiment that was designed to
test theory's claim on salience based hierarchical spatial
representations. In the final part, the implications of the
theory are discussed in the broad context of modeling
human spatial cognition.

How people represent space is a central issue in spatial
cognition research and has profound implications on human
performance in spatial tasks. In this article, we describe a
theory of human spatial representations, which claims that
space is represented in the brain and in the mind not once but
multiple times, each being a map of salience with a distinctive
frame of reference, and that human performance is
determined by the interaction among multiple such
representations. An experiment is reported to test the theory's
claim on salience based hierarchical spatial representations.

Introduction
People live in a 3D world and perform various spatial tasks
in every waking minute of their lives. Searching for an
object in a visual scene, walking to your office from the
parking lot, navigating in a new city, and surfing Google
Earth, to name a few, all involve spatial information
processing. Some tasks are easy while others are quite
challenging. How and why is this so?
Decades of interdisciplinary research on human spatial
cognition has resulted in a range of theories, with each
focusing on distinctive aspects (Freksa, Habel, & Wender,
1998; Golledge, 1999; Newcombe, 2002; O'Keefe & Nadel,
1978; Tolman, 1948). However, the role of spatial
representations on human spatial performance has been
almost universally emphasized (Klatzky, 1998; H. Wang,
Johnson, Sun, & Zhang, 2005; R. F. Wang & Spelke, 2002).
While it is generally accepted that any physical space has to
be somehow digested and encoded in a psychological space
in order to be cognitively useful, a large body of evidence
has convincingly shown that a psychological space is not an
exact copy of the corresponding physical space. On the one
hand, a physical space appears perfectly three-dimensional,
absolute, unified, continuous, and Euclidean. On the other
hand, it is well documented that the psychological space is
often segmented, relative, partial, distorted, and nonEuclidean (e.g., Halligan, Fink, Marshall, & Vallar, 2003;
Hunt & Waller, 1999; McDonald & Pellegrino, 1993;
Newcombe & Huttenlocher, 2000; Tversky, 2000). Because
of this, if a spatial task requires a certain piece of
information and if that piece of information is represented in
a form that is not suitable for the task or not represented at
all, then the task becomes more difficult. In contrast, if a
task requires a piece of information that is properly
represented and readily available, then the task often
becomes easier.

A Theory of Spatial Representations
Any theory describing the representation of space has to
solve at least two critical problems – how to represent and
what to represent. The how problem has to do with the
concept of frame of reference (FOR). In a certain sense, to
represent a space is to encode the space in a frame of
reference (FOR). Though different taxonomies exist (e.g.,
Brewer & Pears, 1993; Garnham, 1989; Klatzky, 1998;
Levinson, 1996; Logan & Sadler, 1996; Palmer, 2002;
Talmy, 1983), three classes of frame of reference can be
generally distinguished – egocentric (where the FOR is
centered on the observer or her body parts), allocentric
(where the FOR is centered on an object external to the
observer), and intrinsic. An intrinsic FOR is a blend of an
egocentric frame and an allocentric frame in that in an
intrinsic FOR, while spatial information is centered on a
specific object other than the observer (similar to an
allocentric frame of reference), it is coded in egocentric
terms as if the observer is located at the same place and with
the same heading as the object at the origin. An example is
“John is sitting on Mary’s right”.
Although different reference systems are theoretically
equivalent in locating objects in a space, psychologically
people acquire and utilize frames of reference quite
differently. In which frame of reference psychological space

1635

in general is represented is the holy grail of the field.
Following the seminal work of Tolman (1948) and O'Keefe
& Nadel (1978), it seems to some researchers that people
represent space in terms of allocentric based cognitive maps.
However, others have argued that people maintain
egocentric based spatial representations (e.g., Tarr,
Williams, Hayward, & Gauthier, 1998; R. F. Wang &
Spelke, 2000, 2002). This latter view has gained much
support from neuropsychological studies, especially in
hemispatial neglect patients. These patients typically lose
the perception of some part of space, and this part of space
is often defined in an egocentric frame of reference (e.g.,
one patient may not be able to see things on their left side of
the body; see (Halligan, Fink, Marshall, & Vallar, 2003;
Vallar, 1998)). More recently, the importance of spatial
representations in intrinsic reference systems in human
spatial behavior has been emphasized (e.g., McNamara,
2003; Mou & McNamara, 2002; H. Wang, Sun, Johnson, &
Yuan, 2005).
While the debate continues (R. F. Wang & Spelke, 2002),
it is becoming increasingly clear that people often maintain
and use different types of frames of reference
simultaneously. One set of evidence comes from studies on
child development and human evolution. The key idea is
that while the egocentric representations are acquired before
the allocentric representations in both phylogeny and
ontogeny, they tend to co-exist in normal human cognition.
For example, Piaget and Inhelder (1956) suggest that there
are three stages in children’s development of frames of
reference, from egocentric, to fixed relative to external
objects, and to absolute coordinates. Another set of evidence
comes from cognitive neuroscience research on how the
brain represents space. At least two brain systems, the
parietal cortex and the hippocampal system, are found to be
especially critical for spatial representations, with the
parietal cortex representing space in multiple egocentric
FORs, and the hippocampal system, via place cells (in rats)
or spatial view cells (in primates), for the construction of
allocentric representations of space. Therefore, it seems that
the issue at stake is not which one frame of reference
humans adopt, but how different available representations
work together to produce spatial performance (e.g., Burgess,
Jeffery, & O'Keefe, 1999; Colby & Goldberg, 1999;
McNamara, 2003; H. Wang, Johnson, & Zhang, 2001).
The what problem of spatial representations has to do
with spatial selection. A natural space is typically crowded
by objects and events. The large amount of spatial
information presented by these entities, including their
locations and spatial relationships, either egocentric or
allocentric, either static or dynamic, seriously challenges the
limited human cognitive capacity. Apparently, not all
possible spatial information in the physical environment can
be explicitly represented in the psychological space and a
selection is necessary.
A large body of evidence has shown that salience, a
quality of "standing-out" that is determined by both the
behavioral significance and bottom-up perceptual
distinctiveness of relevant information, plays an important
role in spatial selection (Colby & Goldberg, 1999; Itti &
Koch, 2001; Li, 2002). That is, while all possible spatial

1636

information is available physically only a subset of salient
spatial information is selected by spatial cognition for
further processing and consequently explicitly represented
in psychological space. In a certain sense, a psychological
space is a partial selection of the corresponding physical
space, and this selection process is guided by the salience of
relevant stimuli.
For example, Gottlieb and colleagues (1998) investigated
the firing patterns of neurons in monkey’s lateral
intraparietal area. They found that neurons show strong
responses to stimuli appearing abruptly in their receptive
fields. However, these neurons show little or no response to
stimuli brought into their receptive field by saccades, unless
the stimuli were made behaviorally significant. The authors
suggest that the entire visual space is only weakly
represented, with the most salient or behaviorally relevant
objects being strongly represented. Similarly, Li (2002)
proposed that there is a salience map in primary visual
cortex such that "firing rates of V1’s output neurons
increase monotonically with the salience [scalar] values of
the visual input..." (p. 9).
One interesting notion about salient spatial information is
that a spatial location can become salient, or behaviorally
significant, without being occupied by an object. A location
where an interesting object is going to appear or has
appeared before can be salient and needs to be represented.
Corbetta et al (2000), using normal subjects and eventrelated fMRI, show that the intraparietal area becomes
active as soon as a location is made relevant (salient) and
attended before the presentation of stimuli. Similarly,
Duhamel et al (1992) asked their patient, who suffered right
frontoparietal damage, to visually track a sequence of
quickly appearing-then-disappearing targets. The patient’s
systematic failure in this simple task indicated that she
could not maintain an updated (salience) map induced by
previously-presented stimuli.
These results support the notion that that a psychological
space, instead of a genuine copy of the corresponding
physical space, is a map of salience. In such a map, only a
few salient locations/relations, defined by a combination of
perceptual distinction and behavioral significance, are
strongly represented, and all other locations/relations are
only weakly represented or "do not exist" (i.e., not
represented at all). While this claim readily explains why
psychological space is a distorted and segmented
representation of physical space, it is important to note that
salience is an empirically defined subjective variable and
that there may not be a universally accepted formula to
define salience. This is especially the case for the goalrelated aspect of salience, where the determination of
salience has to be task specific and context specific.

Experiment
In this section, we report an experiment we have conducted
to examine the salience aspect of spatial representations.
Our investigation is particularly related to a long-standing
suggestion that spatial knowledge is organized
hierarchically. Huttenlocher, Hedges, and Duncan (1991)
showed the participants on a piece of paper a circle with a
dot in it. They then asked the participants to reproduce the

dot position based on memory. They found that the
reproduced positions systematically deviate from their
original positions. Specifically, if the circle is divided into
horizontal-vertical and radial slices, the reproduced dots
were often displaced toward the center of the slices in which
they fall. This result suggests that a psychological space
might be hierarchically represented and there is a central
tendency at each hierarchical level (e.g., the slice) which all
other spatial information is anchored upon. As a result of
this hierarchical organization, the anchors become salient,
and the distance between an anchor and the locations around
the anchor is distorted and becomes smaller (see also Hirtle
& Jonides, 1985). As yet another example of the
hierarchical organization of spatial knowledge, consider the
encoding of the United States, Texas, Houston, and Houston
Medical Center. Psychologically each space is a
representation of map with a central tendency towards its
anchors (e.g., the capital, the downtown, or other significant
landmarks). Together they form a hierarchy. As we go
deeper in the hierarchy, the anchoring effect at the higher
levels diminishes and new anchors (and more details) at the
lower levels become available. In other words, it appears
some spatial information does not exist (or is not
represented explicitly) at the higher levels of hierarchy due
to the central tendency (or anchoring) effect.
Our theory predicts that people organize spatial
knowledge in various hierarchical structures, each of which
is anchored around some salient objects and encoded in a
distinctive frame of reference. One implication of this

prediction is that if we present to subjects an environment,
in which some objects are made salient, either through topdown instructions (e.g., emphasizing their importance) or
bottom-up distinction (e.g., perceptually standing out from
other objects), and ask subjects to remember layout of the
environment, then we would expect the encoding of the
environment would be anchored around these salient
objects. As a result, if we measure the time it takes to
retrieve the spatial relations from the memory, the reaction
times might show a symmetrical pattern surrounding the
anchoring object (hence referred to as “landmark”). Thus,
reaction time is not always proportional to the
corresponding physical distance. Rather, it is determined by
the psychological distance in the hierarchical spatial
representation.
Design and Procedure. To test this hypothesis, we
presented to subjects an array of objects on a computer
screen. In one condition, one object in the array was
perceptually distinct from all others (Figure 1A), and in
another condition, a non-distinctive object was used instead
(Figure 1B). Subjects were asked to remember the spatial
layout of these objects (self-paced). After the encoding, we
tested subjects' memory by presenting pairs of objects on
the screen and asking subjects to decide if the pair was in its
originally studied spatial relations. The reaction time data
were recorded.
Subjects. 14 graduate students in the Texas Medical
Center area were paid to participate in the experiment.

Figure 1. The object layout in the experiment. One key difference lies in the center object in each layout. The center object (a
cross) in layout A is in blue color, which is different from other objects (including the center object in layout B, a circle),
which are all in black-and-white. All objects (except the center objects) are selected, with controlled familiarity and
frequency, from the database developed by Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) and randomly assigned to each location.

1637

Results. Among the 28 total number of possible object
pairs in each array, we classified them into 7 groups based
on two variables (see Table 1). One was whether the pair
involved any landmark, which could be a landmark-object
relation (e.g., the chicken and the blue landmark in Figure
1A) or a landmark-linked relation (e.g., the chicken and
the violin in Figure 1A). The other one was the distance,
which could be 1, 1.414, 2, and 2.818 (arbitrary unit).
The average accuracy was 95.6%, with a standard
deviation of 5.27%. The subjects' reaction time data are
shown in Figure 2, separated based on the salience
conditions and the group number. The overall statistical
analyses showed that both the salience effect (mean
difference = 150.3 ms, F(1, 13) = 14.45, p < .01,
estimated effect size = .526) and the group effect (F(6, 78)
= 17.66, p < .01, estimated effect size = .576) were
significant, as well as their interaction (F (6, 78) = 3.20, p
< .01). Further analyses showed that while a subset of pair
groups (1, 3, 5, and 6) showed the salience effect (with a
minimal mean difference of 142.4 ms and standard error
of 53.7 ms), the other groups (2, 4, and 7) did not. This
was in general consistent with our predictions in that
those pairs in those significant groups (except for group
6) all involved the landmark, suggesting that the spatial
representations might be organized around the salient
landmarks in a hierarchical fashion. This result was
especially significant given that we did not emphasize to
the subjects the importance of the central landmark in the
encoding and subjects were free to choose their own
encoding strategy.

Table 1. The classification of object pairs
Group # of Landmark- Landmark- Distance Example
pairs Linked
Object
(see
Fig1A)
1
4
no
yes
1
landmarkcarrot
2

8

no

no

1

chickencarrot

3

4

no

yes

1.414 landmarkchiken

4

4

no

no

1.414

crocodilecarrot

5

2

yes

no

2

carrot-hand

6

4

no

no

2

chickenanchor

7

2

yes

no

2.818

chickenviolin

Figure 2. The reaction time .data based on salience and group variables. The error bars are standard errors.
important objects and their relations, is crucial for our
everyday life. Decades of studies in the broad area of
psychology and neuroscience have produced large amount
of data and theoretical hypotheses. Unfortunately, some
fundamental issues related to spatial representations remain

Discussions
People live in a 3D world containing objects that are either
stationary or moving. Being able to maintain oriented in the
space around us, including knowing the location of

1638

controversial. In this article, we present a theory of human
spatial representations. It claims that space is represented in
the brain and in the mind not once but multiple times, each
being a map of salience with a distinctive frame of
reference.
Multiple
such
representations
exist
simultaneously and interactively determine spatial
performance. Theoretical analyses suggest that the theory is
consistent with various previous proposals that only
emphasize a single type of representations and is able to
make novel and testable predictions.
The theory has been empirically evaluated in a series of
psychological experiments FORMS (H. Wang, Johnson, &
Bao, 2005; H. Wang, Johnson, Sun, & Zhang, 2005; H.
Wang, Sun, Johnson, & Yuan, 2005). These experiments
have provided a systematic examination of the spatial
representations and operations underlying typical spatial
tasks, including the relationship between visual features and
spatial locations, how multiple maps of salience interact,
and how spatial updating works with multiple
representations. The experiment reported here represents yet
another test on the theory. It supports the idea that spatial
representations are maps of salience, which typically consist
of only a set of salient spatial information and is often
organized around salient objects in hierarchical structures.
However, we recognize that to fully test the theory, studies
involving more complex spatial environments that go
beyond the simple laboratory setting are necessary.
We have attempted to extend the finding of the current
study through more experiments. For example, in one
experiment we presented multiple salient landmarks in a
more complex environment (e.g., align two Figure 1A
horizontally in a single environment, with the two
landmarks are in different colors: blue and red). In this
setup, a hierarchical organization was more clearly present
in the sense that some landmarks' salience effect became
apparent only when we went deep into the lower levels of
the hierarchy. We have found similar results, supporting the
idea that salience-based spatial organization in spatial
representations.
Yet another way to evaluate the theory is through
computational modeling. The theory has been implemented
in the ACT-R cognitive architecture (Anderson et al., 2004;
Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) as an extension module (H.
Wang, 2005). By doing so, we not only show that the theory
is computationally feasible but also are able to explore its
capacity and limitations in a more rigid way. Similar to
other ACT-R modules, the spatial module basically acts as
an interface between ACT-R and the external environment
that specializes in spatial information processing. Multiple
maps of salience are implemented through multiple ACT-R
buffer structures. These buffers allow the spatial module to
communicate with ACT-R and its other modules, such as
vision and motor. In addition, because these buffers provide
different representations for the same environment, it is
possible that some information is readily available in one
representation but not available at all in another, thus
leading to testable predictions.

1639

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by grants from the Office of Naval
Research Cognitive Science Program (Grant Nos. N0001401-1-0074 & N00014-04-1-0132). We thank Drs. Todd R.
Johnson and Jiajie Zhang for their assistance in this work.

References
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036-1060.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Press.
Brewer, B., & Pears, J. (1993). Frames of reference. In R.
Eilan, R. McCarthy & B. Brewer (Eds.), Spatial
representation: Problems in philosophy and psychology
(pp. 25-30). Oxford: Blackwell.
Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1999). Space and attention
in parietal cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 22,
319-349.
Corbetta, M., Kincade, J. M., Ollinger, J. M., McAvoy, M.
P., & Shulman, G. L. (2000). Voluntary orienting is
dissociated from target detection in human posterior
parietal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 3(3), 292-297.
Duhamel, D. R., Goldberg, M. E., FitzGibbon, E. J., Sirigu,
A., & Grafman, J. (1992). Saccadic dysmetria in a patient
with a right frontoparietal lesion: The important of
corollary discharge for accurate spatial behavior. Brain,
115, 1387-1402.
Freksa, C., Habel, C., & Wender, K. F. (Eds.). (1998).
Spatial cognition: An interdisciplinary approach to
representing and processing spatial knowledge. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Garnham, A. (1989). A unified theory of the meaning of
some spatial relational terms. Cognition, 31(1), 45-60.
Golledge, R. G. (Ed.). (1999). Wayfinding behavior:
Cognitive mapping and other spatial processes.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gottlieb, J. P., Kusunoki, M., & Goldberg, M. E. (1998).
The representation of visual salience in monkey parietal
cortex. Nature, 391, 481-484.
Halligan, P. W., Fink, G. R., Marshall, J. C., & Vallar, G.
(2003). Spatial cognition: evidence from visual neglect.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 125-133.
Hirtle, S. C., & Jonides, J. (1985). Evidence of hierarchies
in cognitive maps. Memory & Cognition, 13, 208-217.
Hunt, E., & Waller, D. (1999). Orientation and wayfinding:
A review: Technical Report to ONR.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98, 352-376.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modeling of
visual attention. Nature Reviews, 2, 194-203.
Klatzky, R. L. (1998). Allocentric and egocentric spatial
representations:
Definitions,
distinctions,
and
interconnections. In C. Freksa, C. Habel & K. F. Wender
(Eds.), Spatial cognition: An interdisciplinary approach

to representing and processing spatial knowledge. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux's
question: Crosslinguistic evidence. In P. Bloom, M. A.
Peterson, L. Nadel & M. Garrett (Eds.), Language and
space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Li, Z. (2002). A saliency map in primary visual cortex.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 9-16.
Logan, G. D., & Sadler, D. D. (1996). A computational
analysis of the apprehension of spatial relations. In P.
Bloom, A. Peterson, L. Nadel & M. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McDonald, T. P., & Pellegrino, J. W. (1993). Psychological
perspectives on spatial cognition. In T. Garling & R. G.
Golledge
(Eds.),
Behavior
and
environment:
Psychological and geographic perspectives. NorthHolland: Elsevier.
McNamara, T. P. (2003). How are the locations of objects in
the environment represented in memory? In C. Freksa, W.
Brauer, C. Habel & K. Wender (Eds.), Spatial cognition
III: Routes and navigation, human memory and learning,
spatial representation and spatial reasoning (pp. 174191). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Mou, W., & McNamara, T. P. (2002). Intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(1),
162-170.
Newcombe, N. S. (2002). Spatial cognition. In Steven's
Handbook of Experimental Psychology, Vol 2: Memory
and Cognitive Processes (3rd ed., pp. 113-163). New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Newcombe, N. S., & Huttenlocher, J. (2000). Making space:
The development of spatial representation and reasoning.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
O'Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a
cognitive map. New York: Oxford University Press.
Palmer, B. (2002). Linguistic frame of reference
reconsidered. In Proceedings of the 2002 Conference of
the Australian Linguistics Society.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1956). The child’s conception of
space. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning & Memory,
6, 174-215.
Talmy, L. (1983). How languages structure space. In H.
Pick & L. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: theory,
research and application. New York: Plenum Press.
Tarr, M. J., Williams, P., Hayward, W. G., & Gauthier, I.
(1998). Three-dimensional object recognition is viewpoint
dependent. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 275-277.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208.
Tversky, B. (2000). Remembering spaces. In E. Tulving &
F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of memory.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Vallar, G. (1998). Spatial hemineglect in humans. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2, 87-97.
Wang, H. (2005). Modeling spatial cognition: Technical
Report to ONR.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Bao, R. (2005). What vs
where: Which direction Is faster? In B. G. Bara, L.
Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-seventh Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2337-2341). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., Sun, Y., & Zhang, J. (2005).
Object-location memory: The interplay of multiple
representations. Memory & Cognition, 33(7), 1147-1159.
Wang, H., Sun, Y., Johnson, T. R., & Yuan, Y. (2005).
Prioritized spatial updating in intrinsic frame of reference.
Spatial Cognition and Computation, 5(1), 89-113.
Wang, R. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Updating egocentric
representations in human navigation. Cognition, 77, 215250.
Wang, R. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2002). Huamn spatial
representation: Insights from animals. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6(9), 376-382.

1640

