UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Signs and Maps – Cognitive Economy in the Use of External Aids for Indoor Navigation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1z3190s6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Holscher, Christoph
Buchner, Simon J.
Brosamle, Martin
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Signs and Maps – Cognitive Economy
in the Use of External Aids for Indoor Navigation
Christoph Hölscher (hoelsch@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Simon J. Büchner (buechner@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Martin Brösamle (martinb@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Tobias Meilinger (tobias.meilinger@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Gerhard Strube (strube@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Center for Cognitive Science,
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Wayfinding in public buildings often proves to be a challenge
especially for first time visitors. The experiment investigates
the relative effectiveness and efficiency of external aids for
navigation in a complex multi-level, multi-building ensemble.
A previous experiment provided the performance baseline for
the re-design and prototype evaluation of the information
system. Navigation aids were tested in three conditions: maps,
signs, and the combination of both. With respect of usage a
preference for signs over maps was identified. Also, signage
had the largest impact on wayfinding performance, while
maps alone showed the smallest level of support and the
combination provided yet further improvement. Analysis of
individual tasks identifies limitations of each type of external
aid. A comparative task analyses reveals higher cognitive
costs of maps relative to signs. The results are discussed in a
framework of cognitive economics and agent rationality,
explaining both usage preference & performance differences.

performance differences between first-time visitors and
experienced users of the building were identified. In this
previous study, we systematically varied access to the
standard fire escape plans mandatory for public buildings in
Germany. First-time visitors were found to use these maps
extensively. However, no significant performance increase
was observed: Users of the fire plans lost time reading the
maps, but without substantial wayfinding benefit.
Collaboration with the Freiburg Graphics Design School
provided the opportunity for a structured re-designing of the
deficient information system in this building complex. The
decision was made to combine consistent, highly salient
signage at each potential decision point (Arthur & Passini,
1992) with wall-mounted maps at key locations. The main
objective of this intervention was to enable even first-time
visitors to easily navigate in the complex building ensemble.

Keywords: spatial cognition, wayfinding, map, sign.

Maps and Signs as External Representations

Abstract

Gärling, Lindberg & Mäntylä (1983) presented evidence
that showing a floor map to participants immediately prior
to testing reduced the effects of familiarity with the building
and improved wayfinding performance. Learning from a
map can be equally effective as being a long-term user of a
building as long as it concerns configurational knowledge
(e.g., Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1982).
When it comes to real life wayfinding performance, it is
not unequivocally clear that access to floor maps does
indeed have a positive impact. Wayfinders interacting with
wall-mounted ‘You-Are-Here’ (YAH) maps may lose time
without gaining any navigational advantage (Butler,
Acquino, Hissong & Scott , 1993; Hölscher et al., in press).
It is also well-documented that using a map that is
misaligned with one’s current orientation can be detrimental
(e.g. Levine, Jankovic & Palij, 1982), a feature of many
standard floor maps in office buildings. However, this
problem could be excluded in the study by Hölscher et al.
(in press) as well as the present one. Several studies have
shown that signs can improve wayfinding performance
(O’Neill, 1991), apparently outperforming maps (Butler et
al., 1993). But these studies have been limited to signs that
only include information about a single or a rather small
number of destinations. It is likely that this is not
generalizable to more complex settings (Butler et al., 1993,

Introduction: Indoor Wayfinding
Entering an unfamiliar building and searching for a
particular room is a common, but sometimes difficult task in
everyday life. Without the support of external navigation
aids people have to rely on common knowledge about the
structure of buildings in general, their experience with
similar buildings and, mainly, on the visual input they
encounter when moving through the building. An additional
difficulty is imposed in multi-level buildings. People often
have trouble remaining oriented when changing floors
regardless of whether they use elevators or stairs (Soeda,
Kushiyama & Ohno, 1997). Weisman (1981) identified four
major variables that influence wayfinding: (a) visual access,
(b) architectural differentiation, (c) floor plan complexity,
and (d) signage and room numbers.
The present study is concerned with the latter issue and
investigates the effect of signs in contrast to wall-mounted
maps in a complex multi-level building. It is based on an
earlier study conducted in the same setting (Hölscher,
Büchner, Meilinger & Strube, in press), where we
investigated wayfinding performance and navigation
strategy in a building setting that combines vertical and
horizontal complexity. While navigating this building
proved quite difficult for all participants, substantial

377

p. 163). The present study tests the potential of both maps
and signs alone and their mutual combination for complex
navigation tasks with numerous potential task destinations
in a realistic setting.

Method
The study was conducted in the main building complex of
the University of Freiburg. One section (KG I) is an Art
Nouveau building from 1911, the other part (KG III) was
built in the 1960s and is directly connected to the old
building. The floor levels do not match between buildings:
KG I level 4 is on the same height as KG III level 5, and on
one level there is no direct connection. This, and the fact
that the room numbering scheme is rather uncommon (first
digit denotes the building, not the floor level) makes it
particularly difficult to navigate through the building.

Cognitive Economy of Navigation Aids
Assessing the quality of an information system for
wayfinding requires looking at the effectiveness of task
performance as well as taking into account the efficiency of
its usage. Whether or not an external navigation aid is
accepted by potential users will largely depend on the
cognitive cost structure associated with using it, both in
terms of time and cognitive demands, especially attention
and working memory loads. A principle of rational behavior
(Anderson, 1993) implies that cognitive agents will choose
task strategies with an optimal cost-benefit structure (see
also McFarland & Bösser, 1993). Numerous examples in the
‘external cognition’ literature highlight the role of
‘computational offloading’ as a motivation to use external
aids (cf. Scaife & Rogers, 1996). Recently, Gray, Sims, Fu
& Schoelles (2006) have shown that the costs of usage are
essential, because even a very small change in cost can lead
to a radical change of problem solving strategies applied.
From this perspective the use of external aids like maps
and signs in wayfinding appears to be a search for the most
efficient behaviour – after all, people normally do not want
to lose time by taking unnecessary detours.
Signs clearly support ‘computational offloading’:
navigating from sign to sign requires virtually no route
planning and no memorizing of multiple route segments. It
does require a two-fold visual search task, however,
searching (a) for the sign itself in the environment and (b)
for the crucial information on the sign. The subsequent route
decision process is primarily based on matching the room
number of the target destination with the number range of
each direction alternative on the sign (cf. Fig. 1).
Maps provide much more information than a single
signpost. They allow for planning the route almost
completely in advance. For navigation the user needs to (a)
select information pertinent to the task at hand, (b) plan a
route or identify the goal to approach it directly (c) translate
the information from a birds-eye view to an ego-centric
reference frame (cf. Shelton & McNamara, 2004). The
specific route or the location of the goal must be (d)
memorized, and progress must be (e) verified from time to
time, often by consulting the map again.
The comparison of the cognitive costs required by using
either signs or maps in wayfinding, is clearly shifted in
favor of signs. Therefore, we expect people to use signs
more frequently than maps. Because of the memory load
incurred with planning from maps, we also expect signs to
be not only more efficient, but more effective as well. The
question remains whether maps provide an additional
advantage if both maps and signs are present. You-are-here
maps might, potentially, serve to aid self-localization and
monitoring of one’s progress towards the goal. The
following experiment aims at testing these expectations.

Materials: Signage & Maps
As the building originally contained only very sparse and
incomplete signage and no graphical aids besides the fire
escape maps, a full re-designing of the information system
was necessary. The signs and maps were designed by the
Freiburg Graphics and Design School in a iterative designevaluation-re-design cycle with the authors. The goal was to
create a clear signage system communicating the uncommon
properties of the building. One criterion was to avoid visual
clutter and informational overload while providing all
relevant information with an emphasis on supporting errorfree navigation for tasks requiring travel between building
parts and between floors.

Figure 1: Example of the signs used in the study. (1.OG
= second floor). The four digit numbers denote individual
rooms, “KG III” denotes the adjacent building section. Note
that original colors were blue (here black) and red (gray).
The signage system consists of a three-level hierarchy:
main information boards near the main entrances, main
distributor signs (cf. Fig. 1) and supplement distributor
signs. Each level refines the resolution of information when
the visitor moves further into the building. The signs had a
width of about 60cm and were mounted on the wall at eyelevel. They were intended to provide flexible navigation
support: a) within a single floor, b) between floors, and c)
between building sections. On both the signs and maps, the
two buildings were color-coded (red and blue with
maximum contrast). The distributor signs were placed at key
decision points which were identified during the evaluation
process. The information boards and the main distributor

378

signs included a map in addition to the signs. The maps (for
an example see Fig. 2) contained a 2D bird’s eye view as
well as a cross section view in order to communicate the
non-matching floor levels as well as vertical connections to
the user. Both, the bird’s eye view and the cross section
view were aligned with the environment so that the top of
the map corresponded to “ahead” in the environment
(Levine et al., 1982). In addition the information boards
contained an explanation of the uncommon room numbering
scheme. Pseudo-Isometric 3D maps (Fontaine, 2001) were
considered not feasible, as detailed room number
information needed to be included, leading to too much
visual clutter. Similarly, room numbers for destinations in
the other building section were only provided on the current
floor and when a hallway directly linked to the other
section.

verbalize their thoughts and considerations; performance
was videotaped by a second experimenter, following the
participant with a distance of about 2 meters. Usage and
performance measures were coded from the video which
allowed a thorough analysis of the participants’ trajectory,
the time required, detours and additional measures.

Participants & Experimental Design
36 participants (16 of them female) between the ages of 19
and 53 years (M= 24.1, SD= 5.9) were recruited through
postings on campus and e-mailing lists. Most of them were
students from a variety of subjects. None of them knew the
building before the study. Participants were paid or received
course credit for participation.
Access to the external aids was varied as a betweensubjects factor: In the ‘maps-and-signs’ condition both, the
re-designed signs and maps were available to the
participant. In the ‘signs-only’ condition only signage, and
in the ‘maps-only’ condition only maps were available.

Figure 2: Example of maps used in the study; including
plan & section view. KG III section on the left, KG I with
mezzanine on the right (map edited for printing).

Procedure

Results

The experimenters met the participants in a building close to
the experimental building. The participants’ main task was
to subsequently find six locations in the building. All
participants received the tasks in the same order, and the
tasks were linked so that one task’s goal location was the
next task’s starting point. There was no time limit for
completing the task.
Tasks were designed to cover a realistic range of
difficulty with respect to the number of floor changes and
the requirement to change the buildings. They were also
selected in a way that there was more than one path between
start and goal (except task 1). Two tasks from Hölscher et
al. (in press) were omitted because they included
destinations that were not covered by the prototype of the
new signage used for the current study.
In order to provide a fairly realistic situation, the
experimenter gave oral instructions by providing the room
number, for example, “Find room number 1019”1. This type
of instruction provides the same information as students
might have when they get it from their timetable.
Participants were instructed to think aloud and thus

Aid usage and performance measures were compared
among experimental conditions. The data from Hölscher et
al. (in press) served as comparative data (light gray bars in
Fig. 3 and 4). Since map accessibility influenced neither aid
usage nor wayfinding performance the data of the map and
the no-map condition from Hölscher et al. (in press) were
merged. We only differentiate between first-time visitors to
the building (inexperienced) and regular visitors
(experienced). The two conditions can be considered a
baseline and a benchmark since the goal of the design
intervention was to enable first-time visitors to perform as
well as regular visitors.
The experimental conditions were compared in separate
ANOVAs for each dependent variable with planned
contrasts between them. For comparison the performance
data of experienced and inexperienced participants from the
earlier study were included resulting in a total number of
participants of 68. For mean values refer to Table 1.

Usage
The frequency of map access per task, the average time per
stop, and frequency of sign usage per task were measured.
Frequency of map access varied across experimental

1

In either task no. 4 or 5 the target was shown by marking the
target room with an “X” in the window. These trials were not
included in the analysis and will be presented elsewhere since the
results go beyond the scope of this paper.

379

conditions [F(3,54) = 8.701, p < .001]. Figure 32 shows that
participants in the maps-and-signs condition stopped at
maps less frequently than those in the maps-only condition
[t(24) = 2.698, p < .013], indicating that the presence of
signs caused participants to neglect the maps. In addition it
shows that they stopped at maps as rarely as the participants
in Hölscher et al. (in press) who were not familiar with the
building and only had the inefficient fire plans available
[t(24) = .013, p = .73].

additional distance walked compared to the shortest possible
path), number of stops (not including the stops at maps).
Stops are considered as a measure of processing load during
navigation (O’Neill, 1991).

Table 1: Usage and performance measures (means).
previous study
current study
inexexmaps signs maps
perienced perienced only only &signs
M
M
M
M
M
Usage
map access
per task [n]
time/stop
at maps [sec]
sign usage
per task [n]
Performance
distance
per task [m]
time per
task [sec]
PAO* [%]
stops/task [n]

Figure 3: Mean number of stops at maps and SE.
0.68

0.27

1.83

--

0.62

23

20

21

--

25

0.43

0.29

--

3.02

3.13

198

161

188

176

158

208

141

204

179

156

81
3.28

36
1.28

64
2.13

62
1.18

36
0.80

*

Figure 4 shows that the distance participants covered in
order to find the goal differed between experimental groups
[F(4,63) = 3.156, p < .020]. In the maps-only condition and
the signs-only condition participants walked slightly but not
significantly shorter distances than inexperienced
participants in Hölscher et al. (in press). Providing both,
maps and signs, decreased the distance by over 20%
[t(22.275) = 3.451, p < .002] in contrast to the distance
covered by inexperienced participants with old aids. In fact
it approached the distance experienced participants covered
in the earlier study. PAO yielded a similar pattern of data
[F(4,63) = 2.923, p < .028]. Providing both navigation aids
helped inexperienced participants avoid redundant trips and
perform like experienced participants [t(24) = .007, p = .99].

percentage above optimal

The time spent at the maps per stop did not vary across
the four map conditions [F(3,33) = .342, p = .80]. There was
no frequency-accuracy trade off and the improved quality of
the maps did not cause participants to spend more or less
time at them. Sign usage was different across all conditions
[F(3,48) = 54.620, p < .001]. This time, however, we found
no difference between the signs-only and the maps-andsigns groups [t(18) = .222, p = .83]. Thus, the availability of
maps did not decrease sign usage. In both the maps-andsigns condition and the signs-only condition, participants
looked at the signs much more frequently than in the two
conditions from Hölscher et al. (in press) [all t(24) > 6.252,
p < .001; for means refer to Table 1]. The results suggest
that the signs were salient and were consulted frequently,
even when maps were available.

Figure 4: Mean distance covered and SE.
The time participants required to complete the task
showed a similar pattern as well. The overall ANOVA
showed significant differences between experimental groups
[F(4,63) = 6.500, p < .001]. Participants in the maps-only
condition and the signs-only condition required slightly less
time than inexperienced participants in the earlier study.
Providing both, maps and signs, reduced the required time
by 25% [t(24) = 2.64, p < .014] in contrast to the time
inexperienced participants required with the old navigation
aids. They also approached the time experienced
participants required in the earlier study. The number of
stops also differed between experimental conditions

Performance
The following performance measures were recorded: mean
distance covered [m], mean time to complete the task [sec],
PAO (“percentage above optimal”, i.e. the proportionate
2
Note that the figure shows all five conditions. The ANOVA
analyses of each usage measure included only those conditions in
which the participants had access to that particular navigation aid.
e.g., for map usage the ‘signs-only’ condition was excluded.

380

less information, often allowing the navigator to read most
of it without having to stop. The designer of the signage
system has already planned the proper decision sequences
(routes) between destinations. In this sense the navigator can
‘outsource’ the route planning almost completely,
maximizing the amount of ‘computational offloading’.
Navigating with wall-mounted maps and no signs in a
complex building shows a remarkably distinct task
structure. Reading a wall-mounted map requires standing in
front of it for the duration of the map interaction. You need
to identify your own position as well as the location of the
target destination on the map. Then you must find routes on
the map that connect to the target location, possibly
deciding between several options. If the route consists of
several segments, a sequence of actions needs to be
memorized. The survey image of the map must be translated
into route information (turning decisions). The computation
of these turning decisions requires a perspective switch to a
route perspective.3 If the target room is on a different floor,
map based route planning becomes even more complex.
Vertical connections must be identified, ideally, with the
help of the supplemental cross-section. In theory, the maps
provided in the present study would allow for near-perfect
route planning. But it appears that the cognitive costs
involved kept people from even trying to perform such
complete planning in the absence of signs, as the average
duration of map interactions was constant.
Downs & Stea (1973) identify four basic operations of
wayfinding: orienting oneself in the environment, planning
the correct route, monitoring this route, and recognizing that
the destination has been reached. Following signs eliminates
most of the cognitive effort by translating the steps of
orienting, planning and monitoring into a simple matching
of numbers, while the user of a wall-mounted map faces
inferences and memory load, increasing with the complexity
of the route. In this light, it is easy to understand why users
who have access only to maps need more time to complete
the task. Also, the frequent stops en route can be tied to the
fact that map users had to spend cognitive resources on
route monitoring and possibly rehearsal of route segments.
The cognitive load of map interaction is further illustrated
by the fact that map users (irrespective of signage presence)
more often forgot the target room number, hinting at
working memory load. Processing costs of reading signs are
extremely low compared to maps. This explains why their
usage rate is independent of map availability.

[F(4,63) = 9.248, p < .001]. Here, participants in the mapsonly condition stopped less frequently than unfamiliar
participants with old aids [t(30) = 2.227, p < .034], so maps
alone allowed participants to move more fluently with fewer
stops. Participants in the signs-only condition stopped even
less frequently than in the maps-only condition [t(24) =
2.148, p < .042]. Providing both maps and signs reduced the
number of stops even further, though not significantly.

Discussion
The re-design of the information system in this complex
building was a success, especially in comparison to the
originally sparse signage and non-helpful fire escape plans.
Combining new signs and maps allows first-time visitors of
the building to exhibit wayfinding performance on the level
of our benchmark group, users with substantial experience
in the building. We found a clear, yet asymmetric trade-off
in the usage of maps and signs. When the maps were
presented without the signs, the maps were a highly popular
navigation aid. In the co-presence of signs, map usage
dropped by 66%. By contrast, the new signs were not only
used more often than the maps (probably because there are
more signs than maps available across the building), but
whether or not maps were available had no impact on sign
usage. In the presence of good signage, maps are used as a
supplement, not as a replacement for signs. Interestingly, we
found virtually no differences between any of the map
conditions for the average duration of a map inspection: The
fire escape plans in the old study were inspected for the
same amount of time as the re- designed maps with their
integrated section views and co-presence of signs had no
effect either. It appears as if wayfinders in this setting have
a constant upper limit of time they are willing to invest in
any map interaction before trying their luck elsewhere.
Regarding performance, the combination of signs and maps
was more successful than each type of external information
by itself. Yet some distinct differences are apparent: Maps
alone provided the smallest improvement over the baseline
performance from the previous study. Signs did better than
maps alone, especially regarding stops and time. Finally,
combining the two had the strongest impact on distance and
PAO measures, i.e. avoiding detours and redundant paths.

Comparing the task structure for maps and signs
While reading a map is generally considered a complex
skill, navigating by signs is ideally very straight-forward,
especially for locating a room by its number: Having no
further source of information, the navigator approaches a
sign and reads the text on it. He needs to parse the options
provided by the sign and choose the direction that matches
the target room number most closely. In our case, this
means comparing the room number ranges under each arrow
with a single stored 4-digit target number. After that the user
starts walking and proceeds until he encounters the next
sign. As long as all upcoming decision points bear complete
signage, no further information has to be memorized.
Compared to floor plans most individual signs carry much

Limitations & Future work
Naturally, the task analysis above is based on the very
strong assumption that adequate signage is made available
at each decision point. But providing complete coverage in
the signage system has its practical limitations.
Consequently, the apparent disadvantage of maps in terms
3
While the map design in our study eliminates the alignment
problem for the immediate surroundings of a map’s location
(Levine et al., 1982), subsequent turning actions are still subject to
alignment mismatch of map orientation and ego perspective.

381

of cognitive economy can turn into an advantage. If there is
no sign at a decision point, or the range of options covered
by that sign does not include the desired target, wayfinding
support will break down. Planning and memorizing a route
with a map can avoid this limitation. With signs alone,
participants performed less well than participants who could
combine map and sign usage. This raises the question of
what the additional benefit of the maps is, when sign usage
is so dominant. Here maps provide an extra level of security
and independence. Should a subsequent sign be missing or
incomplete with respect to the target location, one can fallback on map-based information. If a rational agent takes this
into account, supplemental map usage is a rational
behavioural strategy. In fact, the relative usage of maps in
the maps-and-signs condition is declining over the course of
the experiment: Although the last task (task 6) requires both
a change of floors and building sections, none of the users
refer to the maps. This may be due to general spatial
learning, but it is likely that it also reflects increased trust
that useful signs will always be available en route.
Further analysis of individual wayfinding tasks reveals
additional limitations of each modality, map, and signs. For
the simple, local task 1, signs alone performed even better
than in combination with maps and for task 2 signs helped
overcome the navigation challenge provided by arbitrariness
in the numbering scheme for the mezzanine floors. By
contrast, in task 3 – the first task to involve a change of
building section from KG I to KG III – map usage provided
the clearest performance boost (distance, PAO). We believe
that the map most successfully communicates the general
layout of the site and prepares the user for a potential move
to the adjacent building.
Overall, the highly salient and omnipresent signage
constitutes the central feature in this re-design project. The
presence of such strong signage changes the wayfinding
task almost entirely from an originally spatial, geometric
task of navigating in a multi-level environment to following
distinct propositional information. In a metaphorical sense,
the signs serve as a skeleton of connections in the building,
along which the users travel. They do not need to process
the building’s geometry (unlike with maps), since the spatial
problem is translated into numbers and signs. If these signs
actually capture most of the navigator’s attention and avoid
spatial processing, an unplanned side effect might be
reduced spatial learning. Such effects have recently been
reported for mobile digital navigation tools (Münzer,
Zimmer, Schwalm, Baus & Aslan, in press). Therefore it is
a priority for future work to investigate whether spatial
learning is differentially supported by signs or maps in real
world conditions.

References
Anderson, J.R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum.
Arthur, P., & Passini, R. (1992). Wayfinding: People, signs,
and architecture. Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson.
Butler, D. L., Acquino, A. L., Hissong, A. A., & Scott, P. A.
(1993). Wayfinding by newcomers in a complex building.
Human Factors, 35(1), 159-173.
Downs, R. & Stea, D. (1973). Cognitive Representations. in
Downs, R. & Stea, D (eds.), Image and Environment,
Chicago: Aldine (79-86).
Fontaine, S. (2001). Spatial Cognition and the Processing of
Verticality in Underground Environments. COSIT 2001:
387-399.
Gärling, T., Lindberg, E., & Mäntylä, T. (1983). Orientation
in buildings: Effects of familiarity, visual access, and
orientation aids. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68(1),
177-186.
Gray, W. D., Sims, C. R., Fu, W.-T., & Schoelles, M. J.
(2006). The soft constraints hypothesis: A rational
analysis approach to resource allocation for interactive
behavior. Psychological Review, 113(3), 461-482.
Hölscher, C., Büchner, S., Meilinger, T., & Strube, G. (in
press). Map Use and Wayfinding Strategies in a MultiBuilding
Ensemble.
Proceedings
International
Conference Spatial Cognition, 2006, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (LNCS). Heidelberg: Springer.
Levine, M., Jankovic, I., and Palij, M. (1982). Principles of
spatial problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 11, 157-175.
McFarland, D., & Bösser, T. (1993). Intelligent Behavior in
Animals & Robots Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Münzer, S., Zimmer, H., Schwalm, M., Baus, J., & Aslan, I.
(in press) Computer Assisted Navigation and the
Aquisition of Route and Survey Knowledge. Journal of
Environmental Psychology.
O'Neill, M. J. (1991). Effects of signage and floor plan
configuration on wayfinding accuracy. Environment and
Behavior, 23(5), 553-574.
Scaife, M. & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: how do
graphical representations work? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Shelton, A.L. & McNamara, T.P. (2004). Orientation and
Perspective Dependance in Route and Survey Learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 30, 158-170.
Soeda, M., Kushiyama, N., & Ohno, R. (1997). Wayfinding
in cases with vertical motion. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of MERA 97: International Conference on
Environment-Behavior Studies for 21st Century, Tokyo.
Thorndyke, P. W., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation.
Cognitive Psychology, 14(4), 560-589.
Weisman, J. (1981). Evaluating architectural legibility:
Way-finding in the built environment. Environment and
Behavior, 13(2), 189-204.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge funding received from the
German Research Council (DFG) in the SFB/TR 8 Spatial
Cognition, seed-funding project ArchWay. We thank Ulrich
Falk and his team of student designers at Freiburg Design
School for this fruitful collaboration.

382

