UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sketching Musical Compositions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kc0t66r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Healy, Patrick G.T.
Thiebaut, Jean-Baptiste

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sketching Musical Compositions
Patrick G. T. Healey (ph@dcs.qmul.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science, Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road, E1 4NS London, United Kingdom

Jean-Baptiste Thiebaut (jbt@dcs.qmul.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science, Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road, E1 4NS London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Sketches form an integral part of activities ranging from
games through explanatory dialogues to doodles. They are
also known to be important in the creative stages of design.
This paper explores the role of sketching in musical
composition. We discuss the historical correlation between
changes in graphical notations for music and compositional
practice. Contemporary music technologies provide powerful
graphical notations that double as control interfaces.
Nonetheless we present survey evidence that sketching still
plays a key role in the creative process even amongst
technically literate contemporary composers. A detailed case
study illustrates how sketching supports a dynamic interplay
between drawing spaces, semantic frames and compositional
frames that aids revision and re-interpretation of musical
ideas.
Keywords: creativity; sketching; music; composition;

Introduction
Informal drawing or ‘sketching’ forms an integral part of a
variety of everyday activities. For example van Sommers
(1984) found that sketches play an important role in e.g.
games, maps and route directions, developing explanations,
and designing kitchens and clothes. Drawings in these
contexts can serve a range of cognitive and computational
functions (Scaife and Rogers, 1996). For example they can
provide a useful way to articulate multiple, parallel
constraints that are difficult to express in natural language,
such as the relative position and orientation of groups of
objects. More generally they can help to reduce memory
load and provide external representations that simplify the
computational and cognitive demands by distributing the
information processing (Hutchins, 1995; Norman, 1993).
In some specialized contexts graphics have developed
into full diagrammatic systems, such as Euler circles, with
rules of well-formedness and a clearly defined semantics
(see e.g.; Stenning and Oberlander, 1996). These properties
are especially important where the graphical representations
also function as a programming language. For example,
contemporary
music
applications
use
graphical
representations, including standard musical notation, as a
control interface for the music (see Figure 2).
Although a well behaved syntax and semantics are
essential for computational applications there is evidence
that some of the benefits of sketching derive specifically
from their relative ambiguity and vagueness (Goldsmidt,
1991; Purcell and Gero, 1998). For example, Neilson and

1079

Lee (1994) showed that the relatively underspecified
semantics of architectural design sketches is integral to the
way they are used. In their analysis of kitchen design
dialogues they found no consistent mapping between the
dimensions of the page and the represented domain. A table
might be drawn with width and depth and beside it a chair
represented by a single ‘one-dimensional’ line. Moreover, a
line that initially indicates the position of an object could
subsequently be reinterpreted as a representation of a line of
sight or a trajectory through the space.
Goldschmidt (1991) describes this dynamic interplay
between design ideas and sketches as a ‘dialectic’ and
argues that it is a characteristic and key part of the creative
phase of design (cf., Purcell and Gero, 1998; Suwa and
Tversky, 1996). There is evidence that one reason for this is
that sketches, as external representations, are more readily
reinterpreted than mental images thus facilitating the
exploration of design ideas (e.g., Chambers and Riesberg,
1985).
Empirical studies of design sketching, like those cited
above, are striking partly because they focus on domains
(such as architecture or product design) in which there
appears to be a relatively straightforward mapping between
the sketch space and the world. Here we focus on a more
abstract domain, music, in which key dimensions – such as
aesthetic or temporal structure – have a more obscure
relationship to the sketch space.
We begin by considering how the form and function of
music notations have evolved over time. We then focus
more specifically on the use of sketches in the early phases
of composition. Using evidence from a small survey and a
case study we explore the interaction between the
development of musical ideas and the properties of the
media used to represent them.

The Emergence of Musical Notations
Conventional music notations evolved primarily to support
teaching and documentation not composition. The first
neumatic notation, which emerged in monasteries in the 9th
century, consisted of a free form line, usually above a text,
which represented pitch (see figure 1).
The first lattice-based representation of music, combining
neumes with a 4 line stave, is attributed to Guido d'Arezzo
in the 10th century. D'Arezzo invented this notation as a
mnemonic aid for teaching chant to his students. These

notations were designed to reduce the introduction of
accidental changes due to oral transmission of pieces.
However, they also altered the task of composition. They
provided composers with an abstract representation of music
that could substitute for the music itself.

Abrams et al. 2001; Eaglestone et al. 2001; Dahan 2005).
An obvious hypothesis that follows from the work on
sketching in design is that this is because they require too
much commitment, too soon, to the precise form of a piece
(cf. Green, 1989).
In order to get a better understanding of the use of visual
representations during musical composition we carried out a
short survey of compositional practices among technically
literate contemporary composers.

Figure 1: Example of early neumes
A number of historical changes in musical form correlate
with innovations in notational systems. For example,
musical ideas such as polyphony and counterpoint coevolved with the changes spatial arrangement of notes
vertically (polyphony), or the specification of note durations
(counterpoint) (see e.g., Burkholder, Grout and Palisca,
2006 for an overview). There are also many anecdotal
examples of musical ideas that developed as a result of
experimentation with different notational formats. For
example, the geometric character of the symmetric or
reverse process used by J.S. Bach, A. Schoenberg's
serialism or the formalized music of Iannis Xenakis (1992).

Figure 2: The Rosegarden User Interface

Practices in Contemporary Composition
The aim of the survey was to get a better overview of the
typical first steps in composition, the role of technology,
instruments and other artifacts and to assess the importance
of sketching for music composition.
A short online questionnaire was prepared and calls for
participation were distributed to mailing lists that target
computer literate composers (Canadian Electroacoustic
Community, Max/MSP, Arsonora and MySpace). These
fora were targeted to ensure that respondents had high levels
of technical competence.
Composers were invited to answer the online
questionnaire1 and to submit copies of any drawings or
images they produced during composition, where available.
A total of 32 composers responded over two months.
Across the sample, the most common media used for
initial composition were pen and paper. 24 composers
(75%) reported using pen and paper in the first stages of
composition; 16 (50%) reported using pen and paper
exclusively. 5 composers reported (15.6%) using a computer
at this stage and only one composer started by interacting
with an instrument.
The most commonly reported initial representation of a
piece was a drawing (50%). Six participants reported
starting from an idea or mental representation and the
remainder used either a textual description (3) text plus
visuals (3) or nothing (6).
The general pattern suggested by these responses is that
the initial stages of composition involve the manipulation

Notations as Control Interfaces.
Notations have gradually evolved to include instructions for
performance. For example, representations of dynamics and
also playing modes (such as flatterzunge, a way of blowing
in a flute) and improvisation. The notation of playing
modes specifies abstract gestures rather than concrete
sounds. This is significant because it treats aspects of the
performance of a piece as parameters that can be controlled.
Some scores explicitly locate musicians in a concert hall,
notate the sounds to be played by a tape, or even include
schematic representations of electronic devices used to
transform sound.
The potential of computers to enhance control of musical
structure was appreciated early on. Max Matthews’ Music I,
an influential program for sound generation was developed
at Bell labs in 1957. Contemporary technologies employ a
rich variety of graphical user interfaces for editing and
mixing sounds and instruments. For example Rosegarden
(Figure 2), a free music program similar to Cubase and
Nuendo uses a time line paradigm inherited from d'Arezzo
to represent sounds and symbolic data. Part of the interface
represents sequences (shown in the upper right). Another
part supports editing.
Despite the increasing control these user interfaces offer
over musical form studies have shown that they provide
little effective support for creativity (e.g., Dannenberg 1993;

1

1080

See http://www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk/research/imc/sketches/

higher level concepts or representations of music, not the
concrete particulars of the sounds. Most of the composers in
the sample begin with an abstract idea or concept of the
composition. For 13 (40%) of the sample this corresponds to
a concept of coarse grain musical structure or states, for 8
(25%) it corresponds to temporal patterns or dynamics. In
most cases these concepts are rendered in a visual
representation of some kind. In contrast to this only 5
people in the sample develop the first stages of composition
using specific sound parameters. 20 participants (63%)
reported beginning with only vague details of the final
piece.
Overall, the results suggest that the initial stages of
composition involve processes similar to those described for
other forms of creative design (e.g. Purcell and Gero, 1998).
Participants start with a vague conception of what they want
to do and, in the majority of cases, develop them through an
iterative ‘dialectical’ processes of sketching and revision
(cf. Goldschmit, 1991).

or auditory qualities. The middle line in sketch 1, produced
next, represents a possible translation of the initial spatial
arrangement into a sequence of pairings that could be
rendered on a stereo channel. The final to sketches represent
a mapping of the four pairings into a three dimensional
auditory display.
The starting point for Freeman’s composition is thus an
exploration of possible spatial configurations for displaying
8 channels of audio. This occurs prior to any consideration
of what will be rendered in the different channels.

Case Study: Sketching a Composition.
In order to get a deeper understanding of what sketches can
contribute to the composition process we carried out a
detailed case study of the drawings produced by one
questionnaire respondent: Samuel Freeman, a contemporary
composer. His work was used because he had retained all
the sketches produced for a single commission.
The data reported below come from Freeman’s own
notebooks and from two interviews exploring how the
drawings evolved as the composition developed.

Figure 4: Freeman Sketch 2
In sketch 2 the circular speaker array recurs but Freeman’s
primary concern here is with the numerical relationships
that can be constructed from the geometry. The circle is
drawn with a diameter of 8 cm on graph paper. The speakers
are treated as geometric points. Some of the angles are
bisected, chords drawn across the circle and extended into
secants to find points of intersection. The distances between
some of these lines are noted in pencil. This sketch is
focused on finding a set of interrelated numbers, indirectly
anchored in the original concept of 8 channels, that can be
used as numerical parameters in the composition.

Figure 3: Freeman sketch 1
The commission was to produce a composition for 8
channels of audio. A total sequence of fourteen pen and
paper sketches were produced in the course of this
composition. Here we consider the developments across the
first six of these sketches
The circle at the top of sketch 1 represents a spatial
arrangement for eight numbered speakers. The lines
between them represent possible pairings of the speakers.
The form of the lines - solid, dashed, undulating – are used
only to distinguish the identity of the pairings not their form

Figure 5: Freeman sketch 3
The next sketch in the sequence returns to the pairings of
speakers (Figure 5). The lines have now evolved from being

1081

‘graphical labels’ for pairings of speakers to become maps
of possible locations between speakers where sounds will be
projected. The four panels in sketch 3 indicate how different
configurations of these spatial arrangements will be
simultaneously overlayed. This drawing emerged in part
from the need to consider how this display could be
implemented in Max/MSP. Although ostensibly spatial this
sketch thus doubles as the architecture for a proposed 3D
panner.

frequencies to co-ordinates. This sketch also doubles as an
architectural drawing in the sense that the pairs of values it
specifies it became a look-up table in the protoype
Max/MSP program.
The next drawing (Figure 8) was produced as part of a
process of reflecting on the overall architecture of the
composition up to this point. Here Freeman abstracts away
from the details of the mappings he has created to consider
the overall structure. The speaker positions are now
represented by the double lines. Interestingly a ‘figureground’ reversal has occurred with the segments between
the speakers - not the lines between them - highlighted as
shaded areas.

Figure 8: Freeman sketch 6

Figure 6: Freeman sketch 4

At this point in the development of the composition a
prototype Max/MSP system was built and tested. This
revealed that, although sounds could be effectively rendered
at positions on the circumference of the circle, it was
difficult to discriminate between locations of sounds within
the circle. As a result of these problems with the rendering
the focus of the composition switched to mapping possible
sequences of channels.

In sketch 4 (Figure 6) two innovations occur. For the first
time a musical space, consisting of frequency intervals, is
drawn. In addition a spiral structure is introduced. Here
Freeman is calculating the pattern of intervals needed to
construct ‘nontaves’ (as opposed to octaves) in which eight
stepwise increases in frequency lead to a doubling – i.e. a
repetition of the same note on the ninth step. The radii
represent eight notes that get higher as we move outwards
along the spiral. Notably, the circular pattern is retained
from the previous sketches but used to depict the evolution
of the sound rather than its location.

Figure 9: Freeman sketch 6
Figure 7: Freeman sketch 5

Sketch 6 (Figure 9) shows a series of drawings that explore
variations in sequences of channels (speakers). The lines
across the circular array of speakers now indicate order of
playing. In some cases these patterns are annotated by
numbers of ‘steps’ around the circle that will generate each

In sketch 5 (Figure 7) the frequency space is
superimposed onto the spatial array created by the speakers.
Graph paper is used to ensure an accurate mapping of

1082

pattern (e.g., 1,2,1,2 in the centre of the page). This
eventually led to the development of patterns that repeated
after 8 or 16 steps and which became lists of integers used
by the program.
It is useful to consider one further sketch produced for
this composition (Figure 10). It is not clear exactly when it
was produced and it is not an integrated part of the sequence
described so far. Rather it was produced “in parallel” when
the problems with the prototype were identified. This
drawing resulted in part from frustration at being too “hung
up on the numbers” and a desire to for some “less concrete”
representation of the piece.
At this point the composer had produced a complex Max/
MSP system that was, in his opinion, musically
uninteresting. In response to this Figure 10 was produced in
an attempt to sketch the aesthetic abstractions, textures and
transitions over time that the composer was seeking to
create. This drawing was subsequently used to guide the
structure of the composition for the rest of the piece.

First, the sketches produced by Freeman involve a variety
of different semantic frames. Although initially concerned
with spatial relationships the successive sketches explore:
the structure of the audio display space; the space of
geometric-numerical possibilities; the frequency or
‘nontave’ space; the temporal space and, in Figure 10, the
aesthetic space of the composition. In all but the last of
these variations the pictorial devices of circles and chords
between points recur but with different interpretations. For
example, the lines between points on the circle begin as
markers of identity, then change to encode numerical
relationships, then spatial vectors, then musical vectors, then
temporal sequences (cf. Neilson and Lee, 1996).
This reuse of the circle and line arrangement highlights
the influence of medium on the form of the sketches (cf.
Tversky, 1995). The 2D structure of the page naturally
affords planar shapes and it is interesting that the 3D shapes
considered in sketch 1 do not recur. It seems likely that the
affordances of pen and paper themselves constrain the kinds
of creative solution that emerge. In this respect it is
interesting to note that observations of architectural design
dialogues have found that people work to create complex
hybrid sketching spaces. These combine multiple pieces of
paper, iconic and integrative gestures and verbal
descriptions in order to construct ‘virtual’ three dimensional
sketches suited to the domain (Healey and Peters, 2007).
A third point highlighted by the case study is the way the
sketches switch back and forth between these different
semantic frames as the composition proceeds. In fact,
individual drawings sometimes combine aspects of different
semantic frames in a single sketch (e.g., sketch 2, sketch 5).
This entails that, for example, the x and y axis cannot be
given a consistent interpretation.
In addition to switching between semantic frames the
drawings also switch between different levels of detail.
Sometimes dealing with specific sets of parameters,
sometimes providing an overview (e.g. sketch 1, sketch 5
and Figure 10). This movement between semantic frames
and levels of resolution suggests a simple ‘monotonic’ view
of progression from underspecified sketches to
progressively greater levels of detail is incorrect.
A final point highlighted by the case study is the
significant practical work done by the composer to reconcile
the representations of the basic concepts and ideas in the
sketches with the kind of input formats suitable for
programming Max/MSP (e.g., sketch 3 and sketch 5).
Although the initial concern with numeric spaces originates
from the brief in the commission to compose for eight
channels, it evolves into an exploration of possible
parameters for the program (e.g., sketch 2, sketch 6). In the
case study the need to interface with the Max/MSP program
acts as a constant and sometimes frustratingly restrictive
influence on the process of composition. Leading at one
point to a switch to an abstract aesthetic space (Figure 10).

Figure 10: Freeman textures and transitions sketch
Each musical event is represented with a specific color, a
form and a text. The text refers to the composer's personal
musical references with adjectives such as “small
mysterious” or “large complex”. Colors –which were added
later in photoshop- code the spectral progression and, in
conjunction with the letters, provide a cross-reference
between the forms and the text.

Discussion
The survey and case study both suggest that, as in other
forms of creative design, sketching plays an important role
in facilitating the development of ideas in musical
composition. It appears that this is partly because people
start out with relatively underspecified concepts of what
they wish to achieve and partly because of the way sketches
facilitate reinterpretation of ideas. It seems that sketches
provide a suitably underspecified representation that helps
composers to avoid premature commitment to the concrete
details of a piece (cf. Green, 1989). Analysis of the case
study highlights several aspects of the sketching process that
go beyond the generic advantages of an underspecified
representation.

1083

Conclusion

Burkholder, P., Grout, D. and Palisca, C. (2006) A History
of Western Music, 7th ed. New York: WW Norton & Co.
Chambers, D and Reisberg, D. (1985) ‘Can mental images
be ambiguous?’ Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance. 11, 317–328.
Eaglestone, B., Ford, N., Nuhn, R., Moore, A., Brown, G. J.,
(2001) Compositions Systems Requirements for
Creativity: What Research Methodology?, Proceedings of
Mosart Workshop on Current Research Directions in
Computer Music, Barcelona, Spain.
Dahan, K., (2005). Domaines Formels et Représentations
dans la Composition et l'Analyse des Musiques
Electroacoustiques. PhD thesis, Paris.
Dannenberg, R. B., (1993). A Brief Survey of Music
Representation Issues, Techniques and Systems.
Computer Music Journal.
Goel, V. (1995) Sketches of Thought. MIT Press,
Cambridge MA.
Goldschmidt, G (1991) The dialectics of sketching.
Creativity Research Journal 4 (2) pp.123–143
Green, T.R.G. (1989) Cognitive dimensions of notations. In
People and Computers V, A. Sutcliffe and L. Macaulay
(Ed.) Cambridge University Press: Cambridge., pp. 443460
Healey, P.G.T., Peters, C. R. (2007) “The Conversational
Organisation of Drawing” PLT2007 International
Workshop on Pen Based Learning Technologies. Catania,
Italy, May 24th-25th.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild, Cambridge, MA:
MIT.
Neilson, I. and Lee, J., 1994, Conversations with graphics:
implications for the design of natural language/graphics
interfaces, International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, vol. 40, pp 509 -541.
Norman, D. (1993). Things that make us smart. AddisonWesley.
Purcell, A.T. and Gero, J. (1998) “Drawings and the Design
Process”. Design Studies 19 (1998) 389–430.
van Sommers, P. (1984) Drawing and cognition descriptive and experimental studies of graphic
production processes. Cambridge, England, Cambridge
University Press.
Scaife, M. and Rogers, Y., 1996, "External cognition: How
do graphical representations work?" in International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 45, pp 185-213.
Stenning, K and Oberlander, J. (1995) A cognitive theory of
graphical and linguistic reasoning: logic and
implementation. Cognitive Science, vol. 19, 97-140.
Suwa and Tversky, 1996: What architects see in their
sketches: implications for design tools, Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada , pp 191 – 192.
Tversky, B. (1995). Cognitive origins of conventions. In F.
T. Marchese (Ed.), Understanding images (pp. 29-53).
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Xenakis, I., 1992, Formalized Music, Thought and
Mathematics in Music, Pendragon Press, revised edition.

These observations underline the key role that sketching has
in creative activity. They show that even for technically
literate composers, who use relatively sophisticated
computer music and digital signal processing tools, it is an
important, although not essential, part of composition.
Part of the interest in this finding is because, unlike
studies of sketching in other forms of creative design, this is
not an inherently visual domain. It is also arguably more
complex in terms of the dimensions of the solution space.
Graphic design sketches are concerned with producing
something that is typically two or sometime three
dimensional. Architectural sketches work towards the
representation of a three dimensional domain. Music by
contrast has a range of relevant non-spatial dimensions e.g.,
pitch, timbre, intensity, tempo, rhythm and, intuitively at
least, seems less well suited to sketching on a piece of
paper. It is also interesting to note that sketching of this kind
is not normally taught in composition studies.
Nonetheless, it is clear that contemporary composers
make significant use of sketching. In our case study the
composer’s desire to explore a variety of spatial, geometric,
‘nontave’, temporal and, ultimately, aesthetic ideas was
most effectively supported by pen and paper. Moreover, the
software tools available to him appear to have compromised
the process of composition through the need to convert the
sketches into the particular syntax and semantics required
by the software.
Sketching supports a degree of vagueness and ambiguity
that facilitates the creative processes involved in the early
stages of design (Purcell and Gero, 1998). It allows a
dynamic interplay between drawing spaces, semantic frames
and compositional frames that supports revision and reinterpretation of ideas. Contemporary computer music tools
do not support this process and, we propose, it is for this
reason that they do not provide effective support for creative
composition (Dannenberg 1993; Abrams et al. 2001;
Eaglestone et al. 2001; Dahan 2005).
This is not to claim that the ideal situation for creative
composition is one in which there are no constraints (contra
Dahan 2005). It is also not to claim that pen and paper are
the ideal creative medium. As noted above, pen and paper
are better suited to some forms of representation than others.
Our claim is that sketching fulfills a characteristic need of
the first stage of a composition to design the global structure
of a piece. We need a better understanding of how this
process works. A good test of this understanding will be
whether we can use it to build tools that provide more
effective support for creative composition.

References
Abrams, S., Bellofatto, R., Fuhrer, R., Oppenheim, D.,
Wright, J., Boulanger, R., Leonard N., Mash D., Rendish,
M., Smith, J., (2002). QSketcher: An Environment for
Composing Music for Film, in Proceedings of the 4th
Conference on Creativity & Cognition, London, UK.

1084

