UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Influence and Bounded Rationality: Heuristic Decision Making in Complex Networks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1cm2z0sf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Schwenk, Gero
Reimer, Torsten

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Influence and Bounded Rationality:
Heuristic Decision Making in Complex Networks
Gero Schwenk (gero.schwenk@sowi.uni-giessen.de)
DFG Research School on Group Focused Enmity, Universität Marburg, Wilhelm Röpke Str. 6B, EG
D-35039 Marburg, Germany

Torsten Reimer (treimer@umd.edu)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany, and Department of Communication, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-7635, USA

depended on the strategies they applied and on features of
the information environment. Specifically, in environments
in which validities were linearly distributed, groups using a
compensatory strategy achieved the highest accuracy.
Conversely, when the distribution of cue validities was
skewed, groups using a simple lexicographic heuristic
performed best.
In these prior studies, we considered only static
environments, in which each group member formed his or
her decision separately, without influencing any other
member. Here, we extend this approach to a dynamic
context, in which group members are assumed to
communicate with and to influence each other prior to the
group decision process.

Abstract
The concept of heuristic decision making is adapted to
dynamic influence processes in social networks. We report
results of a set of simulations, in which we systematically
varied: a) the members’ strategies for contacting fellow group
members and integrating collected information, b) the
steepness of status distributions in a network, and c) the
clustering structure of the members’ communication network.
The results indicate that the contact and decision rules used
by the members of the network affect group level outcomes
and furthermore interact with both steepness of the group’s
status distribution and clustering of its communication
network.
Keywords: Decision making; fast and frugal heuristics;
social networks; small world networks; social influence;
simulation; bounded rationality; dynamics.

Overview

Introduction
Research on group decision making indicates that group
decisions often strongly depend on the distribution of
individual group members’ preferences (Davis, 1973; Kerr
& Tindale, 2004). For example, a popular decision rule that
is widely used when committees and teams do not reach
unanimity is the majority rule (Hastie & Kameda, 2005;
Sorkin, West, & Robinson, 1998). When groups integrate
their members’ opinions on the basis of a majority rule, the
group decision is determined by the distribution of
individual votes. In the present paper, we address the
question of how the distribution of individual group
members’ preferences as a central input to group processes
develop in a dynamic social environment.
Prior studies revealed that the preference distribution in
groups depends on how the individual group members
process their information when working on a choice task
(Reimer & Hoffrage, 2006, 2003). For example, in one set
of simulation studies, we compared the performance of
groups whose members used either a compensatory decision
strategy (a weighted additive model or a unit-weight model)
or a non-compensatory heuristic (Take The Best or the
Minimalist heuristic; see Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC
Research Group, 1999). All groups integrated the individual
members’ decisions on the basis of a majority rule. The
fraction of members who preferred the correct decision
alternative and, consequently, improved group performance

1479

A major purpose of our simulation study was to investigate
which impact group members’ status and different
communication networks have on social influence
processes. We conceptualized social influence as the rate
with which high status members in a network change their
initial preferences. Analogous to research on cue-based
group decision-making, we modeled member opinions as
cue variables for individual decision making: Instead of
processing information on cues, the agents in the network
integrated opinions of other agents into an individual
decision. While this framework departs from the prominent
understanding of social influence, which sees social
influence as an activity of “social forces” (cf. French 1956,
Latané 1981, and Turner 1996) rather than as an instance of
information processing, to us, it seems to be a very plausible
approach to conceptualize social influence processes within
an information-processing framework.
In addition to status hierarchies, we considered different
network structures as an environmental feature that can
affect and moderate social influence processes (see
Festinger et al, 1950; French, 1956; Friedkin, 1998; Latané,
1996; and Latané & L’Herrou 1996). We considered
networks of stable contacts, as it is common in the field of
social network analysis (compare Wasserman & Faust
1994). While one could combine the facets of status and
network structure, we are concentrating on a different
aspect, namely network clustering. Previous research
(Latané, 1996, Latané & L’Herrou, 1996) has shown that

the way a communication network is clustered is a major
predictor for the persistence of minority groups and,
therefore, also a factor that may determine the extent to
which high status members may be influenced by social
interactions.
In consequence, we focused on the following questions
regarding global outcomes of social influence processes: Do
members’ preferences converge? Does the manipulation of
decision strategies, status distributions in a network, and
network structures affect faction sizes? And finally, under
which conditions do high status group members change
their initial decision?

Scenario: Partners in a Firm
Our simulation model can be exemplified by the following
scenario, which we adapted from Lazega (2001): Consider a
group of lawyers who are partners in a law firm. In regular
intervals, these partners gather in a partnership meeting in
order to decide about topics concerning the firm, for
instance, the branch of business in which the firm should
further expand. In the time between those meetings the
partners communicate among each other, of course with a
pattern aligned to their formal work demands and informal
preferences. At times, they also communicate about the
forthcoming meeting. During the course of their
communication, the partners may possibly alter their views
and opinions on the topic to be discussed, therefore
changing the communication environment of their fellow
partners. Eventually, this repeated process either converges
to unanimous views on the mentioned topics or leads to
entrenchment of factions in the forthcoming partnership
meeting.

Model Structure
In our thought experiment, we implemented this scenario in
the following way: The lawyers of our example were
represented by a set of 21 agents, each having a certain
preference for a branch of business into which the firm
should expand (say corporate law, litigation, or public law).
Each lawyer was assigned a certain status value, which
determined whether this agent was considered a high or a
low status member of the network, which neighbors were
contacted by the lawyer, and how much influence the
lawyer had on the preferences of other lawyers who might
contact him/her. Furthermore, a directed network connected
the agents and represented their persistent communication
channels. Every agent was assumed to update his/her
preference according to some decision strategy. This
decision strategy consisted of a contact rule, which selected
communication partners from the agents’ local network
neighborhood, and a decision rule, which integrated the
absorbed information. The decision strategies we
implemented differed to the extent to which they considered
the preferences and status values of the agent and his/her
neighbors in the network. Note that this environment is
dynamic in that the simulation proceeds by repeated updates
of all individual agents’ preferences.
1480

More formally, the model structure can be declared as
follows: Let the lawyers be represented by a set L of Nl=21
agents. Each agent li is associated with both a value di of a
decision variable D, which contains three discrete values
D=:{corporate law, litigation, public law} and a value si of
an individual status variable S having continuous values in
the range of (0.5,…, 1.0). Furthermore, a directed graph G,
describes a network of directed communication channels cji
between the agents L: G:={L,C}. Finally, each agent li is
assigned a decision strategy f out of a set of decision
strategies F. This function f consists of a contact rule rc and
a decision rule cd and maps an agent’s actual decision state
dj_n onto his/her subsequent state di_n+1. Iterated and
sequential call of this decision rule f for all agents results in
a dynamic evolution of the model.
In the next paragraph, we describe the three central
features of our model in more detail: a) the contact and
decision rules used by the individual agents, b) how the
members’ status was distributed in a network, and c) the
clustering structure of the communication network.

Contact Rules and Decision Rules
Decision strategies can be conceptualized on the basis of the
following building blocks (Gigerenzer et al., 1999): a) a
search rule, b) a stopping rule, and c) a decision rule. In
order to tailor the decision strategies to our task of decision
making in a dynamic network including ongoing
interactions between agents, we added an additional
building block by including a contact rule. According to a
variation of the stopping criterion, decision strategies may
be classified as compensatory or non-compensatory.
Compensatory strategies utilize all available information:
Any cue value can therefore be compensated by another
one. This is not the case for the non-compensatory (or fastand-frugal) strategies: here absorption of information is
stopped according to a certain criterion. Empirical research
indicates that decision makers use non-compensatory
strategies in particular under time pressure or when
information search is costly (Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999).
We modeled the aspect of compensation in two ways: (1)
Whether or not an agent contacted all possible neighbors or
only a subset of neighbors; (2) and whether the opinions of
the contacted neighbors were integrated on the basis of a
compensatory or a non-compensatory decision rule.
In our simulation, we included two contact and four
decision rules. According to the first contact rule, agents
contact every direct neighbor in their network, regardless of
their status. We call this rule the “contact all” or ALL rule.
According to the second rule, agents contact only those
neighbors, which have at least the same (or a higher) status
value as the agents themselves. We name this rule the
“higher equal” or HE rule. Its inclusion is based on
observations in research on collective choice, which indicate
that group members who have high expertise are at times
more influential in the group decision process than members
who have low expertise (e.g., Bonner, Baumann, Lehn,

Pierce, & Wheeler, 2006). Note that both rules include the
searching agent himself/herself as information source.
For the case of the decision component, we modeled an
ensemble of four decision strategies (see Reimer &
Hoffrage, 2006, 2003). The first strategy, the “weighted
additive model” or WADD-rule, is a compensatory rule that
integrates all available information. WADD chooses the
alternative with the highest weighted sum, the weight being
the cue’s respective validity. The alternative with the
highest weighted sum is then chosen. In the present
application, WADD decides in favor of that alternative for
which most contacted neighbors vote, each member’s vote
being weighted with his/her status value. The second rule is
the “unit weight model” or UWM-rule, which is also
compensatory and analogous to the WADD-rule with one
significant difference: Status values are generally treated as
being in unity, thus information on individual status is
ignored. The UWM strategy therefore determines the
number of neighbors who favor a specific alternative and
adopts the one which is held most frequently. Consequently,
it can be interpreted as a local majority vote over the
different decision alternatives (Reimer & Hoffrage, in
press). The third rule is a heuristic decision rule called the
“minimalist” or MIN-rule. Here one of the decision values,
which have been gathered during the contact phase, is
chosen at random with uniform probability. Plainly spoken,
the MIN-rule follows the opinion of a randomly chosen
neighbor who has been contacted. The last decision rule
employed, the “follow the leader” or FTL-rule, is also a
non-compensatory one. The strategy follows the decision of
the “leader”—the neighbor with the highest status among all
contacted neighbors. The rule has been modeled in analogy
to the “take the best” heuristic for cue-based decision
making (Gigerenzer et al., 1999).
As can be seen in Table 1, we considered all possible
combinations of contact and decision rules. The “follow the
leader”-rule is listed only once, because it makes no
difference, whether the “leader” is selected among all
neighbors or only among the subset of higher status
neighbors.
Table 1: Contact and Decision Rules Considered.
Contact Rule
HE (higher equal)
HE (higher equal)
HE (higher equal)
HE (higher equal)
ALL (all neighbors)
ALL (all neighbors)
ALL (all neighbors)

Decision Rule
UWM (unit weight model)
WADD (weighted additive)
MIN
(minimalist)
FTL
(follow the leader)
UWM (unit weight model)
WADD (weighted additive)
MIN
(minimalist)

Decision Environments
As further features in our simulation, we varied two
dimensions of the decision environment: The distribution of

1481

the agents’ status in a network, and the structure of the
communication network.
Status Distributions The first element of the decision
environment (resp. the input variables of the set of agents´
decision rules) is the distribution DS of status values sj.
We considered three shapes of status distributions, each
with increasing steepness. The first is a linear distribution,
which contains equal proportions of values over its entire
range. The second is a flat J-shaped distribution, which
contains considerably more high than medium or low
values. The last status distribution is a steep J-shaped one,
which contains only few high status values and a majority of
low status values (see Reimer & Hoffrage, 2006, for
respective distributions of cue validities).
The status values of the respective distributions were
randomly assigned to the agents because, in our model, we
had no external criterion with which status was correlated.
For the same reason, the absolute range of the distributions
was effectively arbitrary.1 We chose a range of (0.5,..,1.0),
in line with prior studies in which we considered validities
(Reimer & Hoffrage, 2006).
Network Structures The second feature of the decision
environment is the structure of the communication network.
Research on social influence processes in networks shows
the eminence of the degree of clustering of a communication
network. For example, Latané and L’Herrou (1996) found
that high local clustering contributes to the emergence of
stable clusters of opinions because it allows members to
shield each other against external influence.
Contrary to the analyses of Latané and L’Herrou, who
considered regular grid structures and regular grids of
irregular (and highly clustered) substructures, we
implemented random graphs, which allow for variation of
clustering properties of a network in a more controlled
manner.
Specifically, we concentrated on random graphs from the
family of so called “small world networks” (compare Albert
& Barábasi 2001, Newman 2003, and Watts 1999). This
type of network has attracted considerable interest, because
it plausibly captures characteristics of real-world social
networks, namely the joint occurrence of both high local
clustering coefficients and short average path lengths. This
is also known as the small-world effect. Both the model as
well as its name have their roots in the observation that
seemingly unrelated persons often have mutual
acquaintances and are therefore reachable via only a few
intermediaries.
An intuitive illustration of the small world model can be
given as follows: Suppose individuals are situated in spatial
units, such as an office hall in a company building or a
neighborhood of a town. Then it should be plausible to
expect strong connectivity within such a unit. Furthermore,
1

Originally, we employed both a high and a low valued linear
status distribution. As expected, both induced exactly the same
process behavior.

one could expect that some member of a unit also knows
some members of another, different unit, who are also
strongly connected locally. Related to our example, the
spatial units could correspond to different office halls in the
law firm’s building.
We modeled this idea of clustering as follows. First, a
regular ring network was created, in which each of the n
nodes was connected to k neighbors on each side. This
structure is called cyclic substrate, and as a regular grid it
has the feature of high local clustering, thus representing a
characteristic of spatial organization. Then, individual edges
of the grid were rewired with a certain probability pr with
randomly chosen nodes. Introduction of these shortcuts,
with a rewiring probability ranging approximately within
the interval of pr = (0.001,…0.2), leads to creation of a
network with the mentioned small world effect: strong
clustering, but no isolated highly clustered regions. A
graphic example of a small world net is displayed in Figure
1.

distribution of decision values dj over the agents were
assumed to be uniform, so that every alternative was
assigned to exactly seven agents. Thus, we assumed no
correlation of status values sj and initial decision values dj..
Table 2: Employed Variations of the Small-World Model
(n=21, k=2).
Rewiring Probability

Characteristic

pr=0
pr=0.1
pr=1

Regular, high clustering
Small-world
Random
regular,
no
clustering

Every combination of decision rule, status distribution, and
network structure was simulated 1000 times, each with a
newly sampled network and a process length of 50 cycles.

Simulation Results
The simulations revealed that the decision rules, network
topology, and status distribution affected global outcomes.
The reported effects were tested with Hotelling’s T2-tests
and were significant at α=0.01 level.

Equilibrium, Faction Size, and Scaling

Figure 1: Small world network (n=21, k=2, p=0.1).
Note: The network has been created by introducing
shortcut ties to a regular ring network, where every node is
connected to two neighbors on each side.
Of special interest for our question is the fact that by
varying the rewiring probability pr, we are able to produce
an array of differently clustered networks. A parameter of
pr=0 results in a completely regular and highly clustered
network, a parameter of pr=0.1 results in a small-world
network, and a parameter of pr=1 results in a random and
unclustered network, the so called random regular graph
(see Table 2.) We employed these three parameter settings
as variations of the agents’ network environments, thus
controlling for the effects of clustering and average path
length, which jointly could be termed isolated clustering.
Furthermore, we set the number of neighbors of the agents
to approx. four (k=2) over all three variations.
In addition, we considered a completely connected
network as a control condition in order to observe model
behavior in the absence of structural effects. Furthermore,
we assumed the network to have loops, which means that
every agent was connected to himself/herself and, thus, had
access to his/her own decision.
Initial Values and Setup Generally, initial values were set
according to certain criteria. First, status values were
randomly assigned to agents. Furthermore, the initial
1482

Equilibrium has been achieved in all variations of the
model. While it took the groups employing a MIN decision
rule an average of approximately 25 cycles to reach
equilibrium, the remaining rules converged within two to
seven cycles. The reached equilibrium was usually one of
entrenched factions with unanimity only being present in the
case of the complete network.
In cyclic regular networks, different faction sizes were
observed for compensatory and non-compensatory rules.
Figure 2 shows the mean sizes of the three possible
factions. Each faction refers to one of the three decision
alternatives: The smallest faction refers to the alternative
that was favored by the smallest number of members in a
network and the largest faction refers to the alternative that
was favored by most members in a network.

Figure 2: Mean faction sizes in a cyclic regular network
(majority is reached at a count of eleven)

Non-compensatory rules accentuated contrasts in faction
size, as can be seen from their steeper slope in Figure 2.
These differences were smaller in small world and random
regular networks, which typically yielded identical profiles
for non-compensatory but a larger majority and smaller
minorities for compensatory rules. For the case of
compensatory rules, this finding is in coherence with the
assumption that clustering stabilizes minority positions.
Simulations, in which we included networks containing 9
and 31 agents revealed similar results.

Decision Change of High Status Partners
There is substantial variation of the propensity of the
different decision rules to induce an opinion change of high
status members, which we defined as the subset of agents
with above average status. The manipulation of network
structures and status distributions had an effect on opinion
changes in high status members.
Network Structure Focusing on an aggregated view of
network structures averaged across status distributions, as
depicted in Figure 3, we identified the following results.
If status is important for contact behavior (as it is in case
of the HE-rule), there is only a constantly low probability of
a decision change in high status members, regardless of the
decision rule employed.

The results for the different network types can be
summarized as follows: Contrary to a completely connected
network, the effectiveness of the rules varies considerably
across the networks of the small world family. The rules
which are status-sensitive with respect to their contact
behavior (i.e. the HE contact rule) are insensitive to changes
in the networks’ clustering structure. In contrast, the statusinsensitive rules, which consider all locally available
information, regardless of status values, are sensitive to
changes in the networks’ clustering structure. The
probability of high status initial decision change in this
latter case increases with a decrease of isolated clustering.
Highest probabilities can be found for the case of complete
ignorance of status and of decision distributions, which is
represented by the ALL-MIN rule. The latter finding is
robust across all networks and status distributions.
Under a HE contact rule, the decision strategies yielded
almost identical results. We checked whether the HEcontact rule yields insensitivity to network structure only
because it eliminates all individual decision scenarios
except the trivial one, where only a single alternative is left.
This had been considered possible because every agent in
the non-complete networks had, on average, only five
neighbors (including himself/herself). Therefore, we also
simulated large networks with 31 agents and a structure
with steeply varying connectivity from one to 15 neighbors,
where elimination of all decision alternatives is implausible.
However, we observed the same leveling effect of the HEcontact rule, concluding that this effect is not due to
triviality of local decision environments.
Status Distributions Another interesting finding regarding
the decision rules can be seen in Figure 4, which shows the
results for the case of the small-world network; the same
pattern was also observed in the other networks considered.

Figure 3: Probability of decision change of high status
members over networks with decreasing isolated clustering
(cyclic regular, small world, random regular)
If all neighbors are contacted, regardless of their status (as
is the case for the ALL-rule), the clustering structure
becomes important for the compensatory UWM and WADD
decision rules. The lesser the degree of isolated clustering,
the higher the probability of decision change of high status
members, which increases in parallel by .15 for both
decision rules. However, the status insensitive UWM-rule
shows a respective probability which is constantly approx.
0.10 higher than for the WADD-rule. The MIN rule shows a
maximal probability of decision change of high status
members, which remains constant over all considered
networks. In a completely connected network, the examined
strategies showed only minor differences with regard to the
probability of a change in the high status members’
opinions. It ranges from 0.54 to 0.67.
1483

Figure 4: Probability of decision change of high status
members in a small world network over status distributions
of increasing steepness
Again, strategies with the hierarchy-oriented HE-contact
rule showed virtually identical behavior. Furthermore, the
HE-decision strategies are sensitive to variation of the shape
of the status distribution. An increase of the steepness of
hierarchy leads to a decrease of opinion changes in high
status members.

To a smaller extent, this sensitivity is also true for the
compensatory ALL-WADD strategy, which reacts to
hierarchy in terms of information weighting. Because of
their complete ignorance of the status distribution, ALLUWM and ALL-MIN are insensitive to respective changes.

Conclusion
In summary, we were able to identify the following
behavior of our virtual law firm: Although the influence
process settles quickly, unanimity is unlikely and faction
sizes are governed both by decision rules and by clustering
of the network. Non-compensatory rules accentuate contrast
in faction sizes, while decrease of clustering leads to
marginalization of minority factions.
Furthermore, the change of high status partners’ initial
decisions is most probable under the following conditions:
First, the status hierarchy is not relevant for the contact
behavior of the partners. As soon as status becomes
important for information search, the probabilities to exert
influence on high status partners drops to minimum values,
regardless of the network’s clustering structure. Second, the
status hierarchies are flat. Steep status distributions are
especially hampering if partners consider status not only for
information weighting but also for information search.
Third, in the case of status insensitive (ALL-UWM) and
weighted local majority (ALL-WADD) decisions, higher
probabilities are obtained with decreasing isolated
clustering. Finally, if individual partners decide at random,
with complete ignorance of status distributions, high
probabilities are obtained.
Altogether, our results show that the concept of heuristic
decision making can be fruitfully applied to complex group
processes. Under the model’s premise that individual
decisions are based on the status of fellow group members,
we found an array of interesting results. In the present
analysis, the interaction of group members’ decision
strategies and environment structures seems most important
to us. We are able to show that a non-compensatory contact
rule results in insensitivity of the influence process towards
the network’s degree of clustering.

References
Albert, R., & Barábasi A. (2002). Statistical mechanics of
complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics, 74, 47–
97.
Bonner, B., Baumann, M., Lehn, A., Pierce, D., & Wheeler
E. (2006). Modeling collective choice: Decision-making
on complex intellective tasks. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 36, 617–633
Davis, J. H. (1973). Group decision and social interaction:
A theory of social decision schemes. Psychological
Review, 80, 97–125.
Festinger, L., Schachter, S., & Back, K. (1950). Social
pressures in informal groups. New York: Harper and
Row.
French, J.R. P. (1956). A formal theory of social power.
Psychological Review , 63(3),181–194.

Friedkin, N. (1998). A structural theory of social influence.
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hastie, R., & Kameda, T. (2005). The robust beauty of
majority rules in group decisions. Psychological Review,
112, 494–508.
Kerr, N., & Tindale, R. S. (2004). Group performance and
decision making. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 623–
655.
Latané, B. (1981). The psychology of social impact.
American Psychologist, 36, 343–356.
Latané, B. (1996). Dynamic social impact: The creation of
culture by communication. Journal of Communication,
46,. 13–25.
Latané, B. & L’Herrou, T. (1996). Spatial clustering in the
conformity game: Dynamic social impact in electronic
groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70(6), 1218–1230.
Lazega, E. (2001). The collegial phenomenon: The social
mechanisms of cooperation among peers in a corporate
law partnership. England: Oxford University Press.
Newman, M. E. J. (2003). The structure and function of
complex networks. SIAM Review, 45(2), 167–256.
Reimer, T., & Hoffrage, U. (in press). Combining simple
heuristics by a majority rule: The ecological rationality
of simple heuristics in a group context. In P. M. Todd, G.
Gigerenzer, and the ABC Research Group (Eds.),
Ecological rationality: Intelligence in the world. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Reimer, T., & Hoffrage, U. (2006). The ecological
rationality of simple group heuristics: Effects of group
member strategies on decision accuracy. Theory and
Decision, 60, 403–438.
Reimer, T., & Hoffrage, U. (2003). Information aggregation
in groups: The approach of simple group heuristics
(SIGH). In R. Alterman, & D. Kirsch (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 982–987). Boston:
Cognitive Science Society.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (1999). When do people use
simple heuristics, and how can we tell? In G. Gigerenzer,
P. M. Todd, and the ABC Research Group, Simple
heuristics that make us smart (pp. 141–167). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sorkin, R. D., West, R., & Robinson, D. E. (1998). Group
performance depends on the majority rule.
Psychological Science, 9, 456–463.
Turner, J. (1996). Social Influence. Buckingham, England:
Open University Press.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network
analysis. Methods and applications. MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Watts, D. .J. (1999). Networks, dynamics, and the smallworld phenomenon. American Journal of Sociology, 105,
493–527.

1484

