regarded
communicativeness

son & Yee, 2005) and as life-like (Yamaoka, Kanda, Ishiguro, & Hagita, 2006). However, the timing of responding
was fixed in the previous work. In other words, it has not
been deeply explored how a human’s impression of the interactant’s response could vary by the timing of responding. In
this paper, therefore, we address the issue on the relationship
between the response latency of the interactant and the participant’s impression, especially the feeling of being looked
at. In the rest of this paper, we first propose the social reflex hypothesis on responsive, nonverbal interaction. Then, to
support our hypothesis, we describe an experiment with an
anthropomorphic, on-screen agent that can respond to participants with eye blinking, and discuss the implication of the
experimental results.

?

response latancy

Figure 1: Social reflex hypothesis: relation between the feeling of being looked at by the partner and the partner’s response latency

Social reflex hypothesis
Yoshikawa et al. (Yoshikawa, Shinozawa, Ishiguro, Hagita,
& Miyamoto, 2006) have demonstrated that the responsive
gaze shift of a robot could give participants a stronger feeling of being looked at by the robot even though the gaze shift
is performed in either mimicking or non-mimicking manner.
Furthermore, they have reported that the degree of such a feeling correlated with the amount of response latency, i.e., more
rapid response could give a stronger feeling of being looked
at. The feeling of being looked at can be supposed to be a feasible measure of the feeling of being attended to or the degree
of a participant’s regard of the interactant’s communicativeness, and therefore will also be examined in this paper. From
the findings in the previous work, it could be conjectured that
humans’ feeling of being looked at depends not on the ways
and channels of responding but mainly on the response latency of the interactants. They have not examined the relation between the feeling of being looked at and the response
latency around the range of almost zero latency. However,
the relation might be drastically changed around there since
humans seldom experience zero latency responses by their
interactants.
In this paper, we propose the social reflex hypothesis as
follows (see Fig.1). In interpersonal communication, humans
unconsciously exhibit arbitrary nonverbal responses to the
partner’s nonverbal behaviors with a certain socially correct
latency. Meanwhile, they unconsciously anticipate that their
communication partner should respond within a certain range
of latency. Hereby, humans might regard their interactant as
communicative when the interactant responds to them within
such a range even if the interactant is not animate. On the
other hand, such socially correct range of latency is considered to be adapted through the feedback response from the
interactants, or be optimized through the co-evolutionary process among the members of a society and then innately given
to us. In either case of acquisition, the range would not be
around zero latency since persons can not always respond to
others with such small latencies. Moreover, since the only
person who can respond to one’s behavior with such small latencies is considered to be oneself, one would feel weird as if

726

one confuses the interactant with oneself when one is facing
the interactant that responds with such small latencies.
If the above hypothesis is true, we can obtain directly applicable requirements to design a communication robot. To
investigate the social reflex hypothesis, we conducted an experiment with an interactive on-screen agent that could exhibit responsive blinking behavior to the participant’s blinking. We made the participants evaluate their feeling of being
looked at by the on-screen agent as a potential indicator of
their unconscious regard of the interactant’s communicativeness. Either of three conditions, namely immediate, rapid,
and slow conditions in which different response latencies had
been specified, were assigned to participants. In the immediate condition, it responded with about 0.0 second latency
while in rapid and slow conditions it responded with about
0.5 and 2.0 seconds latency, respectively. We predicted that
the ratio of feeling being looked at would increase along with
the decreasing of the response latency but would suddenly
decrease if the response latency approached to almost zero
seconds (see Figure.1).

Experiment
Setup
An on-screen agent was shown on a 19-inch monitor display in this experiment (see Figure 2). It consisted of only a
head that had the appearance of a gender-neutral adult without hairs or eyebrows. It could move its eyes in both pan and
tilt axes as well as its eyelids. Although it could also move its
mouth and neck, these degrees of freedom were fixed in this
experiment.
Blinking by the participants was detected by a gaze detection device (Voxer, Nac Image Technology Inc.) and then fed
to the blinking controller for the on-screen agent. Once the
face of a participant is registered, the gaze detection device
keeps tracking her face. Meanwhile, it emits infrared light on
the participant’s eyes and records the reflection to calculate
where she is looking at. The reflected infrared image is used
to calculate the participant’s fixating point on a monitor display in front of her. The gaze detection device can also detect

cen
averting

ter

(a) fixating angles

Figure 2: Experimental setup
Control server PC

Graphic client PC

commands

gaze
data
Terminal

LCD monitor

drawing

sensor
readings

(b) 1 (center)

(c) 2

(d) 3

(e) 4

(f) 5

(g) 6

Eyemark
recorder

Eyemark recorder server PC

Figure 3: The information flow in experiment

the sizes of the participant’s pupils that tells us whether the
person blinks or not since the sizes of the pupils are detected
as zero during the blinking.
Figure 3 illustrates the information flow in the system of
the experiment. The control server PC receives the data including participant’s fixating point as well as the sizes of the
pupils, and then judges whether the participant is blinking
or not from the value of the pupil size. Based on the occurrence of the person’s blinking, the on-screen agent determines
whether to blink. The control signal of blinking is sent to the
client program to draw the on-screen agent through a TCP
connection. The data of the participant’s fixating point and
the size of the pupil were logged together with the parameters of the on-screen agent’s DOFs.

Procedure
The participants were told that they would attend to an experiment to reveal how a person perceives the other’s gaze. They
were asked to sit across from a monitor display and to look at
an on-screen agent that sometimes looked at the participant
while sometimes it did not. After the agent disappeared, they
had to judge whether the agent had looked at them and say
“yes” if they felt they had been looked at by the agent or “no”
otherwise.
After this instruction, the experimenter first let a participant
sit across from the monitor and the gaze detection device, and
then calibrated them. The experimenter did not explain that
the device was used for the blinking control of the on-screen
agent, but only that it was used for analysis of one’s gaze
behavior when one looked at another.

727

Figure 4: The direction of the on-screen agent’s eyes: (a) a
schematic illustration of the angle to focus on or avert from
the participant’s face, and (b)∼(g) appearances of the onscreen agent in the order from (b) one which focuses on the
participant’s face to (g) one which fixates at most distant point
from the participant’s face

Each trial was started from the position of looking at the
blank screen. When the participant chose to begin the next
trial, she pushed a button in her hand, and an on-screen agent
would be shown on the display until 20 seconds passed. The
trials iteratively proceeded 48 times. The participant had two
minutes break after each twelve trials.

Conditions
We compared three conditions of responsive blinking in
which the on-screen agent responsively blinked to the participant’s blinking with different response latency. In the immediate condition, it blinked just after the blinking of the participant was detected. Note that there were still 66 milliseconds
time lag from the occurrence of the participant’s blinking to
the occurrence of the agent’s one due to the delay in the sampling. In rapid and slow conditions, it waited 500 milliseconds and 2000 milliseconds, respectively, after the participant’s blinking was detected, and then blinked. Note that plus
66 milliseconds time lag due to sampling delay also existed
in these conditions. In addition, the on-screen agent blinked
twice at the beginning of each session, namely at 0.3 and 0.55
seconds, in order to provoke the participants’ blinking.
The on-screen agent sometimes looked at the participant
but sometimes did not. These kinds of variations were per-

Table 1: The number of participants for each condition
Method
Male Female Total
Immediate
2
7
9
Rapid
4
5
9
Slow
1
6
7
Total
7
18
25

300

occurence

occurence

300

200

100

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

200

100

0
0.0

2.0

response latency [msec]

Result
Subjects attended an experiment in only one of the three conditions described in the previous section. The number of the
participants for each condition is listed in Table 1. The age of
the participants ranged from 19 to 49. The average age was
31.1 while the standard deviation was 8.2.

(a) immediate

1.0

1.5

2.0

(b) rapid

300

occurence

formed by drawing it as if shifting its fixating point in the
horizontal plane (see Fig.4(a)). We picked up six positions
for the fixating targets by the on-screen agent from the center
to the left side of the participant in the horizontal line. The
appearance of the on-screen agent are shown in Fig.4(b) ∼
(g).

0.5

response latency [msec]

200

100

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

response latency [msec]

(c) slow

Figure 5: The histgram of response latency of the on-screen
agents in (a) immediate, (b) rapid, and (c) slow conditions

The statistics of blinking in the interaction
We observed 48 sessions for each participant, i.e., in total
1200 sessions from 25 participants. However, it was necessary to eliminate some data before the analysis, which were
obtained in the sessions where the system might have failed
to detect blinking. We regarded that the participant blinked
every time when the readings of pupil sizes were zero. Since
they were zero not only when the participant closed her eyes
but also when the gaze detection device failed to track the
participant’s head, the system sometimes wrongly detected
blinking. As exceptional data possibly including such false
positives, we simply eliminated data in the sessions where
the detected number of blinking or the total duration of closing participants’ eyes was large. The exceptional thresholds
of the number of blinking and the duration of closing eyes
were set to 20 times and 10 seconds, respectively , each of
which values was regarded as apparently abnormal. We also
eliminated the cases where the on-screen agent did not have
a chance to respond since the participant blinked almost at
the end of the session or not at all. Through the automatic
process to exclude such abnormal cases, we obtained data of
1091 out of 1200 sessions.
We calculated the average numbers of blinking of the participants and the on-screen agents during the sessions in
three conditions. ANOVA and post-hoc tests revealed that
there were significant differences between every pair both in
the cases of participants (ANOVA: p < 0.01, F(2, 1088) =
48.4; Dunnet’s C: p < 0.05 between every pair) and agents
(ANOVA: p < 0.01, F(2, 1088) = 71.7; Hochberg’s GT2:
p < 0.001 between every pairs). Note that Dunnet’s C was applied since we cannot assume that the variances of the number
of blinking of the participant were equivalent among groups
(Levene: p = 0.026).

728

The average response latency of the on-screen agent’s
blinking and its histgram for each condition are illustrated
in Fig.5. The response latency is defined as the time interval between when the on-screen agent blinked and when the
participant blinked last before the agent’s blinking. Note that
74 cases with the response latency over five seconds were
eliminated from the analysis as were the cases where the participant was regarded to ignore the last blinking of the onscreen agent and voluntarily blink. Although we can see that
the on-screen agent almost succeeded in responding with the
specified response latency in immediate and rapid condition,
namely 0.0 and 0.5 seconds, the response latency in slow condition varied not only around the specified time, that is 2.0
seconds. This could happen when the participant blinked before 2.0 seconds past from her last blinking. However, we
can see that the on-screen agent in the slow condition, at least,
succeeded in responding slower than in other conditions since
the response latency in this condition varied more than 0.5
seconds.
The average response latency of the participants’ blinking and its histgram for each condition are illustrated in
Fig.6. ANOVA concerning response conditions and fixating positions, and post-hoc tests revealed that there were
significant differences between immediate and slow conditions (ANOVA: p < 0.01, F(2, 1014) = 7.90; Dunnet’s C test:
p < 0.05). This result might imply that a person adapts her
response latency to the interactants.

Feeling of being looked at
Fig. 7 shows the ratio of participants’ answers to the question whether they feel being looked at by the on-screen agent.

ratio of negative answers

p = 0.01

response latency [sec]

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
imm.
rapid
slow

0.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

ID of fixating position

0.0

immediate

rapid

slow

Figure 8: The ratio of negative answers on the question of
whether the participant felt she had been looked at by the
on-screen agent in relation to the fixating position of the onscreen agent

condition

Figure 6: The average response latency of the participants

100

Probability of the feeling of being
looked at (%)

1.0

p = 0.02

p = 0.006

50

0
immediate

rapid

slow

Condition

Figure 7: The probability of the feeling of being looked at in
each condition

The distribution of the ratio among the fixating position of the
on-screen agent is visualized in Fig.8. Since the answers and
the conditions of response latency appeared to be dependent
(χ2 = 8.75, p = 0.013), we applied Ryan’s method and found
differences of the probabilities between two pairs, namely
immediate and rapid (p = 0.023) and rapid and slow (p =
0.006). Note that 1091 data were included in this analysis,
which were obtained from the sessions where the on-screen
agent could exhibit responsive blinking at least once. This result seems to support our hypothesis of responsiveness-based
impression on the interactant where less amount of response
latency cause stronger feeling of being looked at but the feeling is suddenly weakened if the response latency approximates to zero.

Discussion
Humans usually respond to their interactant within a certain
range of response latency, or fail to keep turn-taking. We
would feel that our interactant is not willing to communicate
with us if the interactant does not sufficiently rapidly respond
to us. Conversely, we would regard that the interactant is attending to us if the interactant rapidly responds to us. Such a
feeling is regarded to be measured by asking about the participant’s feeling of being looked at in this experiment.

729

Through the analysis of the experiment, we confirmed that
the participant’s feeling of being looked at could be controlled
by changing the latency of responsive blinking (see Fig.7). As
well as apparent behaviors such as gaze shifting examined in
the previous work (Yoshikawa et al., 2006), even subtle behaviors such as blinking seem to be sufficient for affecting
a participant’s impression when they are used in responsive
manners. This result might imply the potential applicability of the social reflex hypothesis for arbitrary channels of
responding. In other words, a channel-independent feature,
namely timing of response, might be able to be a basis of the
human cognitive mechanism for her interactant.
Furthermore, the comparison of the participant’s feeling of
being looked at in different conditions in Fig.7 seems to support the hypothesis of the detail relation between the feeling and the response latency (see Fig.1). In accord with the
prediction, we can see that the feeling of being looked at
increases along with decreasing of the response latency, as
shown by the difference between slow and rapid conditions,
but suddenly decreases if the response latency approaches
to almost zero seconds, as shown by the difference between
rapid and immediate ones.
Such a decrease around zero latency is considered to be
caused by humans’ anticipation of the interactant’s response.
We would expect that the interactant who pays attention to
us should sufficiently rapidly respond to us as tested in the
rapid condition. Meanwhile, we would not expect that the
interactant responds to us too rapidly, namely with zero latency as tested in the immediate condition since we are not
usually responded to by our interactant with such a small latency. In other words, someone who can respond to us with
zero latency might be only ourselves. Therefore, the participants in the immediate condition might not feel like they are
being looked at by the on-screen agent because it appeared
for the participants not as interactant but as a weird existence
that mixed the interactant and themselves.
As a preliminary investigation whether such self-other distinction is interrupted in the immediate condition, we asked
the last 11 participants how old the on-screen agent looked.

This question was supposed to be a potential probe to measure
how equivalently they regarded it with themselves. We found
a weak tendency to positive partial correlation between the
response latency and the transformed difference of the participant’s age and the estimated one holding the participant’s
age fixed (r = 0.61, p = 0.063). Note that we evaluated the
absolute difference of the tens place digits of the participant’s
age and the age of the on-screen agent estimated by the participant since such a difference was regarded to effectively
reflect the participant’s impression of age difference. This
preliminary result seems to potentially support the occurrence
of the interrupting self-other distinction caused by too rapid
response since the participants felt less difference between
themselves and the on-screen agent with less response latency. However, we need further experiments to obtain statistically significant results.
The social reflex hypothesis would provide us with the indicators to improve a communication robot in the aspects of
an intuitive interface and therapeutic tool. For such an engineering purpose, we should conduct further investigations to
examine to what extent we can apply the hypothesis. For example, examining the effects of the response with other channels and of the response with cross- or multi-channels would
be important future issues. Furthermore, we need to address
the issue of how we or a communication robot can find a suitable response latency since it might depend not only on channels but also on cultures and maybe even on persons. This
issue should be investigated along with modeling studies of
human cognitive developmental process such as on sensitivity to interpersonal timing (Striano, Henning, & Stahl, 2006)
and on the concept of self (Rochat, 2001).

Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed the social reflex hypothesis on nonverbal responsive interaction in order to provide a model for
the cognitive mechanism of a communication partner, which
would be utilized to develop a communication robot. In the
hypothesis, we supposed that unconscious nonverbal behaviors in response to a person could effect her impression of the
interactant’s communicativeness. We examined responsive
blinking by an on-screen agent as a simple nonverbal channel and analyzed its effects on the feeling of being looked at
that was held to be a feasible indicator of one’s regard of communicativeness. In accord with the hypothesis, we found that
rapid blinking responses could give stronger feeling of being
looked at than slow or immediate ones. The decreased feeling
of being looked at for immediate response was argued as the
effect of interruption of the self-other distinction. We might
conclude that further studies not only to validate and extend
the hypothesis but also to apply it for designing a communication robot would be mutually beneficial for both areas of
research.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Dr. Rodney Berry for his
kind help to construct the experimental setup.

730

References
Arita, A., Hiraki, K., Kanda, T., & Ishiguro, H. (2005). Can
we talk to robots? ten-month-old infants expected interactive humanoid robots to be talked to by persons.
Cognition, 95, B49-B57.
Bailenson, J. N., & Yee, N. (2005). Digital chameleons: Automatic assimilation of nonverbal gestures in immersive virtual environments. Psycho. Sci., 16, 814-819.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning in
infancy: the naı̈ve theory of rational action. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 7(7), 287-292.
Ishiguro, H., & Minato, T. (2005). Development of androids
for studying on human-robot interaction. In Proc. of
36th international symposium on robotics.
Johnson, S., Slaughter, V., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose gaze
will infants follow? the elicitation of gaze following in
12-month-olds. Developmental Science, 1(2), 233-238.
Kamewari, K., Kato, M., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., & Hiraki,
K. (2005). Six-and-a-half-month-old children positively attribute goals to human action and to humanoidrobot motion. Cognitive Development, 20, 303-320.
Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Imai, M., & Ono, T. (2004). Development and evaluation of interactive humanoid robots.
Proc. of IEEE, 92(11), 1839-1850.
Luo, Y., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Can a self-propelled box
have a goal? psychological reasoning in 5-month-old
infants. Psyhological Science, 16(8), 601-608.
Melzoff, A. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others:
Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 838-850.
Robins, B., Dickerson, P., Stribling, P., & Dautenhahn, K.
(2004). Robot-mediated joint attention in children with
autism. Interaction Studies, 5(2), 161-198.
Rochat, P. (2001). Origins of self-concept. In Blackwell
handbook of infant development (p. 191-212). Blackwell.
Shimizu, Y., & Johnson, S. (2004). Infants’ attribution of a
goal to a morphologically unfamiliar agent. Developmental Science, 7(4), 425-430.
Striano, T., Henning, A., & Stahl, D. (2006). Sensitivity to
interpersonal timing at 3 and 6 months of age. Interaction Studies, 7(2), 251-271.
Watanabe, T., Danbara, R., & Okubo, M. (2003). Effects of
a speech-driven embodied interactive actor ”interactor”
on talker’s speech characteristics. In Proc. of the 12th
IEEE international workshop on robot-human interactive communication (p. 211-216).
Yamaoka, F., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., & Hagita, N. (2006).
How contingent should a communication robot be. In
Proc. of ACM 1st annual conf. on human-robot interaction (p. 313-320).
Yoshikawa, Y., Shinozawa, K., Ishiguro, H., Hagita, N., &
Miyamoto, T. (2006). Responsive robot gaze to interaction partner. In Proc. of Robotics: Science and
Systems ii.

