UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sources of Difficulty in Imagining Cross Sections of 3D Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98p7t49b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Cohen, Cheryl A.
Hegarty, Mary

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sources of Difficulty in Imagining Cross Sections of 3D Objects
Cheryl A. Cohen (c_cohen@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93107
Mary Hegarty (hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93107
Abstract
(1996) coined the term “visual penetrative ability,” to
describe ability to predict the internal structure of a
geological formation, a required skill in structural geology.
The ability to mentally represent cross sections is also
intrinsic to success in engineering drawing (Gerson, Sorby,
Wysocki & Baartmans, 2001; Hsi, Linn & Bell, 1997). In
medicine, the ability to infer and comprehend cross sections
is central to learning anatomy and using medical images,
such as x-ray and magnetic resonance images (Hegarty,
Keehner, Cohen, Montello & Lippa, 2007).
In previous research, we have found that ability to infer
and draw a cross-section of an anatomy-like object is
correlated with spatial ability (Cohen, 2005; Cohen &
Hegarty, in press). Given the well-documented individual
differences in spatial visualization skills, and the relevance
of that ability to interpreting cross sections, questions arise
about the extent and nature of individual differences in this
ability. A novel 30-item multiple choice measure (the Santa
Barbara Solids Test) was developed to examine sources of
difficulty in inferring cross sections. The criterion task was
to identify from four answer choices the correct cross
section of a 3D geometric figure.
To capture specific aspects of performance that may result
from variation in spatial visualization ability, items in the
Santa Barbara Solids Test vary along two hypothesized
difficulty dimensions: geometric structure and orientation of
cutting plane. There are three levels of complexity of
geometric structure: Simple, Joined, and Embedded figures.
Simple figures are primitive geometric solids: cones, cubes,
cylinders, prisms, or pyramids. Joined figures consist of two
simple solids attached at their edges. Embedded figures are
composed of one Simple solid enmeshed inside another
(Figure 1). The use of primitive geometric solids at the
lowest level of proposed difficulty is motivated by research
which holds that most elementary recognizable threedimensional forms are primitive solids. (Biederman, 1987;
Pani, Jeffries, Shippey & Schwartz, 1997). We assume that
it takes more working memory to encode and transform
complex objects (joined and embedded) than simple objects.
Previous research has shown that spatial working memory is
one source of individual differences in spatial visualization
ability (Miyake, Rettinger, Friedman, Shah & Hegarty,

A novel 30-item multiple choice psychometric test was
developed to measure individual differences in a spatial
visualization task that involves identifying the cross section
that results from the intersection of a cutting plane and a
geometric solid. An initial study with 59 participants
established the internal reliability and external validity of the
test. Items in the test varied in complexity of the geometric
solid and orientation of the cutting plane. Cutting plane
affected performance such that people made more errors when
the cutting plane was oblique to the main axes of the object
than when it was orthogonal. Effects of cutting plane also
interacted with the type of geometric structure. Low-spatial
participants had consistently poorer performance. Analyses of
their errors suggested that sources of difficulty in this task
included failure to shift mental perspective from the current
viewpoint to imagine the cutting plane from another
orientation and failure to decompose the complex solids into
geometric primitives.
Keywords: individual differences, spatial ability; strategies

Introduction
Spatial visualization ability can be defined as the
cognitive ability to understand, mentally encode and
manipulate
three-dimensional
visuo-spatial
forms
Component processes of spatial visualization include
encoding a visuo-spatial stimulus, constructing a visualspatial image from perceptual input, mentally rotating an
image, switching one’s view perspective, and comparing a
visual stimulus to an image in working memory. (Carroll,
1993; Hegarty & Waller, 2005).
Some spatial visualization tasks involve relating twodimensional
representations
and
three-dimensional
representations. One such task is inferring a cross section, a
two-dimensional slice of a three-dimensional object. The
ability to infer and interpret the spatial properties of cross
sections is essential in many disciplines of science, and in
science education. Researchers in biology education have
determined that ability to form mental representations of
sectional shapes of anatomical structures is a required skill
for biology students in both for high school (RussellGebbett, 1985) and university (Rochford, 1985) and Lord
(1985) developed a successful spatial visualization training
program to teach high school biology students how to
visualize cross sections of geometric figures. Kali & Orion

179

2001) so we expected that items involving these complex
objects would be more difficult.

Figure 2: Sample item from the Santa Barbara Solids Test
Figure 1. a) Single Orthogonal; b) Joined Orthogonal; and c)
Embedded Oblique figures from the Santa Barbara Solids
Test

Method
Participants
Sixty participants were recruited from the Subject Pool of
the Department of Psychology, University of California,
Santa Barbara, and received course credit for their
participation. One participant withdrew due to illness.

The second proposed difficulty factor is the orientation of
the cutting plane of the test figure. Mental transformations
of objects with axes oblique to the environmental frame of
reference are more difficult to perform than mental
transformations of objects whose main axes are orthogonal
to the environment. (Rock, 1973; Pani et al., 1977). Thus,
the test incorporates two cutting plane orientations:
orthogonal (horizontal or vertical) and oblique to the main
vertical axis of the test figure.
Figure 1 shows examples of each level of geometric
structure and each type of cutting plane. Figure 1a is a
Simple figure with an Orthogonal (horizontal) cutting plane.
Figure 1b is a Joined figure with an Orthogonal (vertical)
cutting plane; Figure 1c is an Embedded figure with
Oblique cutting plane.
Each test item shows a criterion figure and four answer
choices, as shown in Figure 2. In addition to the correct
answer (Figure 2c), each item has three types of distracters.
Egocentric distracters (Figure 2d) represent a shape
participants might imagine if they failed to change their
view perspective relative to the cutting plane of the criterion
figure. Combination distracters (Figure 2b) merge two
possible sections of the test figure into a hybrid shape.
Alternate distracters (Figure 2a) show another possible slice
of the test figure.
We predicted that high spatial participants would
outperform low spatial participants across all levels of
geometric structure and both orientations of cutting plane.
Our second prediction was that items cut on oblique axes
would be more difficult for all participants than items cut on
orthogonal axes. Finally, we predicted that Embedded
figures would be more difficult that Joined figures, which
would, in turn, be more difficult than Simple figures.

Materials
Spatial ability tests. Participants completed the
Vandenberg Mental Rotation Test (Vandenberg & Kuse,
1978) (MRT) and a modified version of Guay’s (1976)
Visualization of Views Test (Eliot & Smith, 1983). In the
Vandenberg Mental Rotation Test, participants view a
depiction of a three-dimensional target figure and four test
figures. Their task is to determine which test figures are
rotations of the target figure, as quickly and accurately as
possible. The maximum score is 80. The Visualization of
Views Test (VV) measures the participant’s ability to
visualize an unfamiliar three-dimensional object from an
imagined perspective. The criterion figure is a line drawing
of a transparent cube with a small block floating in its center
Figure 3).. The participant must identify the corner of the
cube from which a given alternate view of the small block
would be visible. The maximum score is 24.

Figure 3. A sample item from the Visualization of Views
Test

180

Descriptive statistics. Mean score on the Vandenberg
Mental Rotation Test was 30.37 (SD=18.69). and on the
Visualization of Views Test was 9.00 (SD=6.30).
Performance (proportion of items correct) on the Santa
Barbara Solids Test is shown in Figure 3. Mean
performance (proportion correct) across all 29 figures of the
Santa Barbara Solids Test was .54 (SD=.22). Highest
means were on Embedded Orthogonal items (M=.75,
SD=.25), and lowest performance was on Embedded
Oblique items (M=.36, SD=.25). Oblique problems were
consistently more difficult than Orthogonal problems,
across all three levels of geometric structure.

Santa Barbara Solids Test. The Santa Barbara Solids Test
consists of 30 multiple choice items. Three levels of
geometric structure and two types of cutting planes are
distributed evenly across the 30 items: one-third of the
figures are Simple solids, one-third are Joined solids, and
one-third are Embedded solids. Due to experimenter error,
the correct answer for one embedded oblique item was
omitted, so that the score for that category was based on the
remaining 4 embedded oblique items. Joined and Embedded
test figures are composed of two solids of different colors.
(Figure 1); answer choices for Joined and Embedded items
are similarly colored. Fifteen of the test items are bisected
by an Orthogonal cutting plane, and fifteen by an Oblique
cutting plane. Test figures and answer choices were created
in 3D Studio Max, PhotoShop, and Illustrator software. The
test was printed in color on 8 ½ x 11 paper, with two test
items per page.

Procedure
Participants were tested in four groups of 15. The
experimenter asked the participants to read the instructions
silently as she read them aloud to the group.
Test instructions
Four pages of written instructions, including a sample
problem, precede the 30 test items. The instructions define
the term ‘cross section,’ and illustrate the types of geometric
structure and cutting plane orientations in the test. The
instructions also direct participants to imagine how the cross
section will appear from a mental viewing perspective that
is perpendicular to the cutting plane of each test item. This
direction is illustrated by a cartoon figure that adjusts the
orientation of his head so that his gaze is perpendicular to
horizontal, vertical, and oblique cutting planes.
Furthermore, the experimenter demonstrated the process of
changing view perspective with a Styrofoam egg-shaped
prop that was sliced to reveal a cross section by tilting her
head so that it was perpendicular to the cross-sectional
surface of the prop. The experimenter then directed
participants to complete the sample problem, verified the
correct answer, and instructed participants to proceed at
their own pace on the untimed test. After all participants had
finished the test, the experimenter administered the
Vandenberg Mental Rotation (Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978)
and the Visualization of Views Test (Eliot & Macfarlane
Smith, 1983).

Figure 4. Mean proportion of items correct on Santa
Barbara Solids Test, by type of problem.
Effects of Object Complexity and Orientation of Cutting
Plane. A within subjects, repeated measures ANOVA was
conducted to determine the contribution geometric structure
and orientation of cutting plane to performance on the Santa
Barbara Solids Test. There was a significant main effect of
orientation of cutting plane, F (1, 5) = 81.68, p<.001, and a
significant interaction between cutting plane and structure F
(2, 57) = 21.12, p<.000. Across three types of structure,
performance was higher on orthogonal than on oblique
cutting planes. Within Orthogonal items, performance was
highest on Embedded, followed by Joined and Simple
figures. Within Oblique items, performance was highest on
Joined, followed by Simple and Embedded figures (See
Figure 3).
Effects of Spatial Ability. The Vandenberg Mental
Rotation Test and the Visualization of Views Test were
highly correlated with each other (r=.47**) and were
combined into a single spatial score, which was computed
by averaging the z-scores in the two measures. As can be
seen in Table 1, the spatial score has substantial correlations
with total score on the Santa Barbara Solids test and on each
sub-category of items, providing evidence for its validity as
a test of spatial visualization ability.

Results
Internal consistency. Cronbach’s Alpha, an estimate of
internal consistency, was computed for the 29 items
included in the analysis. The coefficient alpha was .86,
indicating satisfactory reliability.

181

figures because they would require more working memory
to transform. In fact, for low-spatial participants, mean
performance was highest on Joined figures, followed by
Simple and Embedded figures. There was a similar trend
for high-spatial participants, who showed highest
performance on Joined figures, followed by Embedded and
Simple figures.
Analysis of the test materials suggests a possible
explanation for the lack of support for our third prediction.
Answer choices for Embedded and Joined problems show
two colored geometric forms in specific spatial relationships
to each other. Answer choices for Simple test items, on the
other hand, are unitary, monochromatic geometric shapes,
lacking internal detail and visible external relationships with
other shapes (see Figure 2). A participant could use the
additional visuo-spatial information inherent in Joined and
Embedded answer choices to eliminate incorrect answers, a
strategy that is not available on the Simple test items. An
examination of Figure 5, an Embedded problem with an
oblique cutting plane, illustrates this point. A participant
could rule out answers (5c) and (5d) by reasoning that an
oblique cross section of a cylinder is an oval, not a circle.
The participant could eliminate answer (5b) by reasoning
that the internal structure should be centered across the
width of the external structure, rather than placed closer to
the right edge of the rectangle.
This explanation is consistent with evidence that problemsolvers can use a variety of strategies on the same spatial
task. For example, Schultz (1991) identified three strategies
that participants used on a battery of spatial visualization
tasks, namely mental rotation, perspective change, and the
analytic strategy of identifying key features of the test
object and subsequently noting that feature's presence,
absence, or change. Participants could use the third strategy
to their advantage in Joined and Embedded problems by
comparing the relations between features of the two simple
shapes that made up the complex solid. This strategy was
not available for the simple shapes.

Table 1: Correlations of Spatial Ability Score with different
categories of items on the Santa Barbara Solids
Type of Test Figure
All figures
(29 items)
Simple figures
(10 items)
Joined figures
(10 items)
Embedded figures ( 9 items)
Orthogonal figures (15 items)
Oblique figures
(14 items)
* p <.05 (two-tailed)
** p <.01 (two-tailed)

Spatial
Score
.50**
.38**
.50**
.31*
.42**
.56**

Using the upper and lower thirds of the distribution of MRT
scores1 as the bounds for high and low spatial ability, we
conducted an additional analysis of variance with spatial
ability, orientation of cutting plane and object complexity as
factors. The main effects of spatial ability and cutting plane
were significant in this analysis, but spatial ability did not
interact significantly with either cutting plane or object
structure.
Patterns of errors. We analyzed the frequency of the four
answer choices (correct, egocentric, combination, and
alternate) across the 29 test item. Overall, participants
chose the correct answer more than half the time (mean
proportion =.54, SD = .21). The most frequently chosen
distracter was the egocentric answer, which was chosen
almost one-quarter of the time (Mean = .23, SD = .17).
Combination (Mean =.12, SD= .13) and alternate (Mean =
.10, SD = .13) answers were chosen less frequently and
approximately equally.

Discussion
In summary, we developed a novel psychometric test that
measures ability to infer the shape of a cross section of a
three-dimensional figure. Two of our three predictions were
supported. First, test items with oblique cutting planes were
more difficult than items with orthogonal cutting planes,
which is consistent with previous research indicating that
imagining rotations of objects around orthogonal axes is
easier than imagining rotations around oblique axes (Pani et
al., 1996; 1997) Second, high-spatial participants
outperformed low-spatial participants across all categories
of items on the test. There were significant positive
correlations between the Santa Barbara Solids Test and the
two psychometric spatial ability tests, suggesting that our
test measures similar cognitive abilities, namely spatial
visualization.
Our third prediction regarding the relative difficulty of the
three types of figures (Simple, Joined, and Embedded) was
not supported by our analysis. We predicted that Embedded
and Joined figures would be more difficult than Simple

Figure 5. An Embedded problem from the Santa Barbara
Solids Test

182

1

Finally, it is possible that differences between high- and
low-spatial individuals on this test reflect differences in
availability of stored memories about the results of
sectioning objects in addition to differences in ability to
transform spatial representations or in strategies. Thus highspatial individuals might be more fluent in forming spatial
memories of cross sections or in accessing these memories
when required for a specific task. Mental images can be
produced from recently acquired visual percepts,
representations previously stored in long-term memory, and
from verbal descriptions. Images can be also be generated
by combining separately stored parts that have been held in
long-term or short-term memory (Kosslyn, 1980; Kosslyn,
Brunn, Cave, & Wallach 1984). It is possible that highspatial participants have had more extensive experience with
spatial forms or pay more attention to spatial forms on in
everyday activities (e.g., noting the shape of cross sections
when slicing vegetables), so that they have more relevant
stored memories to draw on in a task like ours. Thus, a
participant who had previously stored mental images of
orthogonal or oblique cross sections of any of the geometric
forms used in our test might have an advantage over a
participant with limited experience forming and
manipulating images of simple geometric solids. This
possibility is consistent with recent research suggesting that
training in spatial tasks leads to gains that are quite specific
to the experience given, suggesting that what is acquired is
specific memories rather than a more general ability to
transform spatial forms (Pani, Chariker, Dawson, &
Johnson, 2005).

Low spatial ability was defined as MRT≤20. High spatial
ability was defined as MRT ≥38.
By examining the frequency of answer choices in each
problem, we identified two specific cognitive processes that
caused particular difficulty for participants. First,
participants may have failed to change from an egocentric
representation of the stimulus figure to the ‘head-on’
perspective defined in the instructions. Second, participants
may have failed to use an analytic strategy to choose their
answers.
The fact that the egocentric distracter was the most
common error, and that it was chosen on nearly one-quarter
of the trials, suggests that changing view perspective
relative to the orientation of each test figure was a frequent
problem for participants. This interpretation is consistent
with the spatial visualization literature, which holds that
low-spatial individuals have difficulty transforming spatial
representations through mental rotation or change in view
perspective. It is supported by the significant correlations
we observed between the Santa Barbara Solids Test and the
Vandenberg Mental Rotation, and Visualization of Views
Tests, which measure mental rotation ability, and
perspective-taking ability, respectively. It is possible that
egocentric errors resulted from participants’ failure to
understand a basic requirement of the test, that is, to
imagine what the cross section would look like from a
perspective perpendicular to the plane of the cross section.
However, given the explicitness of the test instructions,
including the experimenter’s demonstration of changing
view perspective to accommodate changes in cutting plane
orientation, this explanation is unlikely and it is more likely
that low-spatial participants were simply unable to change
their view perspective.
The second proposed explanation for the pattern of errors
was that participants may have failed to use an analytic
strategy to choose their answer. Whereas the use of a feature
matching strategy (cf. Schultz, 1991). may account for the
improved performance on Embedded vs. Simple figures, the
trends in Figure 3 indicate that this might have been used
more by high-spatial than low-spatial ability participants. In
addition, we observed a particularly diagnostic error for
some of the complex items, in which the cross section of
one of the simple solids making up the complex solid was
not correct. For example, in an item showing an oblique
section of a cylinder making up part of a complex object, a
participant might chose an answer choice showing a circle
rather than an ellipse as the cross section of the cylinder.
This type of error indicates that the participant failed to use
a possible strategy of decomposing the complex object into
its primitives and choosing only answer in which the cross
sections of the primitive objects were correct.

Future research. The pattern of errors we observed in this
study leads to hypotheses about the nature of the spatial
visualization deficiencies among low-spatial individuals.
One hypothesis is that, compared to high-spatial individuals,
low-spatial individuals have difficulty changing their view
orientation during spatial visualization tasks. Another
hypothesis is that low-spatial individuals do not adopt
spatial strategies such as feature matching and task
decomposition. A third hypothesis is that, compared to highspatial individuals, low spatial participants have less
experience encoding, manipulating and retrieving spatial
images.
We are using these hypotheses to design and test training
interventions with the goal of improving the spatial
visualization performance of low-spatial individuals. Future
experiments will use the Santa Barbara Solids Test as a
measure of performance before and after training to
compare the benefits of different forms of spatial
visualization training.
This research was supported by grant 0313237 from the
National Science Foundation. The authors would like to
thank Kevin Beer and Jerome Tietz for technical support.

183

Kosslyn, S., Brunn, J., Cave, K., & Wallach, R. (1984).
Individual differences in mental imagery ability:
A computational analysis. Cognition, 18, 195-243.
Lord, T. (1985). Enhancing the visuo-spatial aptitude of
students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 22,
395-405.
Miyake, A., Rettinger, D. A., Friedman, N. P., Shah, P &
Hegarty, M. (2001). Visuospatial working memory,
executive functioning and spatial abilities. How are they
related? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
130, 621-640.
Pani, J.R., Chariker, J. H., Dawson, T. E. & Johnson, N.
(2005). Acquiring new spatial intuitions: Learning to
reason about rotations. Cognitive Psychology, 51 285333.
Pani, JR., Jeffries, J.A., Shippey, G.T., and Schwartz, K.J.
(1996). Imagining projective transformations: Aligned
orientations in spatial organization. Cognitive Psychology,
31(2), 125-167.
Pani, JR., Zhou, H., Friend, S. M (1997). Perceiving and
imagining Plato's solids: The generalized cylinder in
spatial organization of 3D structures. Visual Cognition,
4(3), 225-264.
Rochford, K. (1985). Spatial learning disabilities and
underachievement among university anatomy students.
Medical Education, 19, 13-26.
Rock, I. (1973) Orientation and form. New York.
Academic Press.
Russell-Gebbett, J. (1985). Skills and strategies: Pupils’
approaches to three-dimensional problems in biology.
Journal of Biological Education, 19(4), 293-298.
Schultz, K. (1991). The contribution of solution strategy
to spatial performance. Canadian Journal of Psychology,
45(4), 474-491.
Schultz (1991). The contribution of solution strategy to
spatial performance. Canadian Journal of Psychology
45(4), 474-491.
Vandenberg, S. & Kuse, A. (1978). Mental rotations: Group
test of three-dimensional spatial visualization. Perceptual
and Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.

References
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-Components: A
Theory of Human Image Understanding. Psychological
Review, 94(2), 115-147.
Carroll, J.B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of
factor-analytic studies. Cambridge University Press
Cambridge; New York.
Cohen, C. (2005). The influence of spatial ability on the use
of a dynamic interactive animation in a spatial problem
solving task. In T. Barkowsky, C. Freksa, M. Hegarty &
R. Lowe (Eds.). Reasoning with mental and external
diagrams. Computational modeling and spatial
assistance. Menlo Park, CA: American Association for
Artificial Intelligence Press.
Cohen, C.A. and Hegarty, M. (In press). Individual
differences in use of an external visualization to perform
an internal visualization task. Applied Cognitive
Psychology.
Eliot, J. & Smith, I. M. (1983). An international directory of
spatial tests. Windsor Berks: Nfer-Nelson.
Gerson, H., Sorby, S., Wysocki, A., & Baartmans, B.
(2001). The development and assessment of multimedia
software for improving 3-D spatial visualization skills.
Computer Applications in Engineering Education, 9 (2)
105-113.
Hegarty, M. & Waller, D. (2005) Individual differences in
spatial abilities. In P. Shah, and A. Miyake (Eds.), The
Cambridge Handbook of Visuospatial Thinking. (121167). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hegarty, M., Keehner, M., Cohen, C., Montello, D. R., &
Lippa, Y. (2007). The role of spatial cognition in
medicine: Applications for selecting and training
professionals. In G. Allen (Ed.) Applied Spatial
Cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Hsi, S., Linn, M.C., & Bell, J.E. (1997). The role of spatial
reasoning in engineering and the design of spatial
instruction. Journal of Engineering Education. 151-158.
Kosslyn. S. (1980). Image and Mind. Harvard University
Press. Cambridge, MA.

184

