UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Surprise, Surprise: The Role of Surprising Numerical Feedback in Belief Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p6597x6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Munnich, Edward
Ranney, Micheal Andrew
Song, Mirian

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Surprise, Surprise: The Role of Surprising Numerical Feedback in Belief Change
Edward Munnich (emunnich@usfca.edu)

University of San Francisco, Psychology Department, 2130 Fulton Street, San Francisco, CA 94117

Michael Andrew Ranney (ranney@cogsci.berkeley.edu)

University of California, Graduate School of Education, 4533 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670

Mirian Song (mirian@berkeley.edu)
University of California, Graduate School of Education, 4533 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670
high the true amount is. Alternatively, one might picture
dumpsters lined up outside of businesses and landfills in
one’s community and not fully grasp how many people are
responsible for producing that much trash; this would lead
to overestimation of per-person garbage production, and
might yield surprise when one sees that the true amount is
much lower. In each of these cases, the surprise brought on
by receiving the true quantity may lead to a reexamination
of one’s assumptions, and could ultimately lead to a greater
coherence across one’s network of beliefs about garbage
and related concepts (e.g., the economy).
Wertheimer (1945) proposed that surprising feedback
(e.g., a recalcitrant badminton opponent) leads to a
restructuring of one’s beliefs, resulting in better solutions to
problems. In terms of cognitive development, Piaget (1977)
argued that highly surprising information leads to
accommodative change, whereas information that is
minimally surprising leads to assimilation into extant
schemas. More recent conceptual change research describes
discrepant events—outcomes that run counter to
expectations––which redirect attention and may lead to the
restructuring of networks of established beliefs (Clement &
Steinberg, 2002; Ranney & Schank, 1998).
Literature on discrepant events often focuses on science
activities, in which surprising outcomes direct students’
attention to beliefs that need revision, and this leads to
deeper understandings of scientific principles. For instance,
Clement and Steinberg (2002) discussed a discovery process
“Susan” exhibited in building electrical circuits. She
initially conceived of electrical current as flowing from a
battery to a bulb to light the bulb. This assumption works
for simple circuits, but fails for more complex ones: When a
capacitor (two metal plates separated by an insulator) was
placed between battery and bulb, Susan predicted that the
bulb would not light, reasoning that current could not
traverse the capacitor’s insulation. She was surprised,
therefore, when the bulb did light—leading her to develop a
model in which current may originate from any piece of
metal (e.g., the aluminum plate of the capacitor nearest the
bulb), not just from batteries. As Susan saw ever more
sophisticated circuits, she ran into conflicts, was surprised,
and then made relevant revisions to her belief network about
circuits. In terms of the ECHO model of reasoning (e.g.,
Ranney & Thagard, 1988), which represents hypotheses and
evidence as propositional nodes within a connectionist
network, discrepant events may yield more coherent

Abstract
What percentage of U.S. residents is incarcerated? If you now
learned the amount and it surprised you, would it be more
memorable than if it were not surprising? Our past research
documented conceptual changes related to policy issues when
one receives a single, critical number. In the present study,
Experiment 1 uses a Numerically-Driven Inferencing (NDI)
paradigm method in which participants estimated policyrelevant quantities, learned the true quantities, and rated their
surprise regarding that feedback. When asked to recall the
quantities either eight or 84 days post-feedback, participants
improved the most over their original estimates on items that
surprised them the most. In Experiment 2, we found that a
measure of prospective surprise (“shock”; Ranney, Cheng,
Nelson, & Garcia de Osuna, 2001)—derived from an interval
in which participants believed the number fell, and
participants’ confidence that the number fell in that interval—
reliably predicted retrospective surprise ratings like those in
Experiment 1. We conclude that surprise is a rather stable
construct about which people have considerable
metacognition. Future work in this area may suggest how
leaders, voters, and consumers can best employ their
emotional responses to numbers and enhance cognitive
strategies that help shape effective policies.
Keywords: Belief Revision; Conceptual Change; Cognition
& Emotion; Decision Making; Estimation; Reasoning.

Please write down an answer to the following: How many
pounds of garbage are produced per capita, per day, in the
U.S.? Include all trash produced by individuals directly and
by businesses (except for waste from construction sites).
Reflect briefly on how you reached this estimate. Now,
think of what you would prefer the quantity to be. The true
quantity is 4.5 lbs. (Table 1). To the extent that this statistic
surprised you, will the surprise make this statistic more
memorable days or months from now?
Surprise has been identified as one of the six basic,
universal emotions (Ekman, 1992), as it is associated with a
distinct bodily reaction over widely divergent cultures.
Thagard (2006) highlights the particular adaptive value of
surprise, in that it is the emotional response yielded when
one receives information that does not cohere with one’s
current representations. As such, surprise leads one into a
cycle of questioning and, possibly, discovery. For instance,
one might estimate garbage production based on what one
hauls to the curbside each week. This strategy would likely
lead to a low estimate, as it leaves out the waste produced
by businesses, and leads to surprise when one learns how

503

networks by (a) adding new nodes, (b) adding excitatory or
inhibitory links among nodes, and/or (c) changing weights
on existing links. Discrepant events are, thus, useful both in
pedagogy and in belief revision research.
Related research on knowledge of policy-relevant
numbers has illustrated ways in which knowing a
particularly salient single number can restructure one’s
beliefs about an issue, and have both qualitative and
quantitative consequences for one’s preferences. Munnich,
Ranney, Nelson, Garcia de Osuna, and Brazil (2003) found
that the same underlying quantity (the number of abortions
in the U.S.) can yield dramatically different levels of
estimation accuracy. Depending on how the question is
addressed, receiving feedback on actual quantities can either
provoke (a) policy shifts, which are non-proportional
changes in numerical preferences (e.g., going from
preferring half as much of what a quantity is thought to be,
to preferring one-tenth as much of what the true quantity is),
or (b) a mere proportional rescaling of prior preferences
(e.g., although feedback changes what one believes the
quantity to be, one maintains a preference that it be halved).
As an illustration of this, when asked the ratio of abortions
to births in the U.S., participants were quite inaccurate and
showed large policy shifts upon learning the true value; in
contrast, regarding the ratio of abortions to fertile women,
participants were much closer to the correct answer, and
largely showed only proportional rescaling of their
preferences. Moreover, Rinne, Ranney, and Lurie (2006)
found that shocking numerical feedback on the death rates
of various diseases led undergraduates to provide funding
allocations that more closely tracked numerical feedback on
relative disease mortality rates. Furthermore, Garcia de
Osuna, Ranney, and Nelson, (2004) found that surprising
feedback led many participants to articulate quite different
kinds of rationales for their numerical preferences than they
had given prior to receiving numerical feedback.
In the present paper, we extend this body of work by
further considering the role of surprising numbers over time.
In particular, we focus on the relationship between surprise
and memory for policy-relevant numbers.

surprised one is by feedback. That is, receiving a single,
surprising number, as in the kinds of discrepant events
described above, may lead one to reconfigure networks of
hypotheses and evidence to achieve a higher degree of
coherence. The overall hypothesis of this paper is that
surprise is a rather stable construct that relates to changes in
numerical beliefs. Specific hypotheses are as follows:
Hypothesis 1: Surprising values highlight incoherence in
one’s belief network, leading to belief revisions that
increase coherence. One source of evidence of this would be
that recall accuracy would improve as a function of how
surprising a number was to a participant.
Hypothesis 2: Surprise is a rather stable construct about
which people have considerable metacognition, such that
the extent to which participants’ pre-feedback expectations
deviate from the actual quantities (i.e., “shock,” a measure
of prospective surprise), is strongly related to how surprised
they actually feel upon receiving the value (i.e.,
retrospective surprise).
Table 1: Questions Given to Students in Experiment 1.
True values were the most recent values available when
the experiment was conducted in 2003-2004.
True
Value

Question
US Legal Immigration

3

per 1000 Residents

UC Berkeley Annual Tuition
College Degrees

$18 K
275

per 1000 Adults

US Voter Registration

507

per 1000 Young Adults

Toyota Camry Price
Mean US Sleep per Night
Mean US One-Way Commute
Households with TV(s)

$20 K
6.9 hrs.
25.5 mins.

per 1000 US Households

US Incarceration
per 1000 Residents

Mean US Male Athlete Salary
Inflation: $1K in ‘62 = __ in ‘02
Mean Garbage Production

Numerically Driven Inferencing
The Numerically Driven Inferencing paradigm (NDI;
Ranney et al., 2001) considers whether, when, and how
numerical evidence can catalyze belief revision. Within the
NDI paradigm, Ranney and colleagues have developed
various methods, including EPIC (Estimate, Prefer,
Incorporate, & Change), in which participants: (1) estimate
a quantity that is relevant to an issue, (2) state what they
prefer the quantity to be, (3) receive correct base rate
feedback to incorporate (e.g., that 507 of every thousand
18-24 year olds are registered to vote), and finally, (4) state
what they now prefer the quantity to be––exhibiting whether
their preferences changed after learning the true number.
This paper again addresses one of NDI’s central
hypotheses about the mechanism of numerically driven
conceptual change: Belief revision is a function of how

Retest
Time

per day per US resident

US Cars
per 1000 Drivers

Female K-12 Teachers
per 1000 Teachers

US Computers
per 1000 Households

Mean Non-Diet Soda Calories

8 Days
PostFB

980
7
$2.5 M
$5.8 K
4.5 lbs.
1.2 K

12
Weeks
PostFB

833
510
150

Experiment 1
As a test of Hypothesis 1, we examined the extent to which
participants’ surprise upon learning a number predicts the
accuracy of their recall of that number.

504

EPIC-RP item sequences were completed after eight days’
delay, and four more after 84 days.
We developed a metric of improvement from one’s initial
estimate to the number one recalled either eight days or 12
weeks after receiving feedback, based on Brown and
Siegler’s (e.g., 2001) Order of Magnitude Error.
Improvement in accuracy was computed as follows1:

Method
Participants were 95 eighth-grade Algebra I students from
three consecutive class periods at a San Francisco Bay Area
middle school. All 95 received four “common” items (Voter
Registration, Immigration, Incarceration, Athlete’s Salary),
and four of 12 other items that were each given to one-third
of the students (see Table 1 for a complete list of items).

EstimationError =
Estimate / TrueNumber {if Estimate ! True}
TrueNumber /Estimate {if True > Estimate}
RecallError =
RecalledNumber / TrueNumber {if Recalled ! True}
TrueNumber / RecalledNumber {if True > Recalled}
Improvement in accuracy = EstimationError / RecallError

Table 2: The Main Steps of Experiment 1’s Procedure
Estimate
Out of 1,000 U.S. Citizens between the ages of 18 and
24, estimate the number of people who were registered
to vote in the presidential election in the year 2000.
Preference
;Preference regarding what the <uantity ought be was
elicited= these data are not addressed herein>
Incorporate Feedback
According to the U.S. Census Bureau,
507
out of
every 1,000 U.S. citizens between the ages of 18 and 24
were registered to vote in the 2000 presidential election.
Rate Surprise
Rate how surprised you are by this number:
1 = Not At All
… 5 = Extremely Surprised
Change Preference?
;See Preference above>
Retention interval: 8 days/12 weeks
Recall Feedback
Out of 1,000 U.S. Citizens between the ages of 18 and
24, try your best to remember the number of people who
were registered to vote in the 2000 presidential election
Change Preference?
;See Preference above>

Results and Discussion
As Munnich et al. (2005) reported with regard to the same
data set, participants’ numerical understandings improved
between estimation and recall, over both the eight-day and
12-week intervals. Our Hypothesis 1, though, concerns the
extent to which improvement in accuracy (numerical
understanding) reflects the surprise that participants
reported upon seeing the true numbers.
Table 3: Improvement in Recall, in Descending Order of
Surprise Ratings (nb. when Improvement > 1, one’s recall
is more accurate than was one’s initial estimate)
Question

Two items in the EPIC format were presented for a few
minutes each day over a four-day period. (See Table 2 for
the procedure; note that it includes all steps, including ones
involving preference that are not examined in this paper; see
Munnich, Ranney, & Bachman, 2005, for discussion of
these steps.) For each item, students first estimated a
quantity. Next, they indicated their preferences for the
estimated quantity. Participants then received feedback (the
true value) to incorporate, after which they indicated on a 15 scale how surprised they were by the actual number; the
students then had the opportunity to revise their preferences
in light of feedback.
Beginning eight days after the first EPIC items were
presented, an “RP” extension of EPIC was administered––in
which students were asked to recall the two numbers they
received on the first day and to again indicate their
preferences. The following (tenth) day, students recalled,
and offered preferences for, the two numbers they received
on the second EPIC day. Eleven weeks after that, students
recalled the feedback for, and offered preferences for, the
remaining four items (again, over two days). Thus, four

8- day

12- wk

1

Immigration
Tuition
College
Vote
Camry
Sleep
Commute
TV
Incarceration
Athlete
Inflation
Garbage
Cars/Driver
Teacher
Computers
Soda

Mean
Surprise
3.5
3.3
2.7
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.1
2
3.3
3
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.4

Mean
Improvement2
18.823
1.19
0.62
0.70
0.79
1.01
0.93
0.60
1.79
1.34
0.87
1.70
0.45
0.98
0.64
0.78

We computed all statistics using absolute values of log ratios
to preserve the pattern of variance, but we present simple ratios
here for expository purposes. Estimation and Recall Errors are
computed to preserve the magnitude of error; in other words, if the
estimate is twice the true value, it is treated as equally erroneous as
an estimate that is half the true value.

505

We predicted that surprise would be associated with the
long-term recall of numerical feedback, so we tested
whether the quantity participants recalled was closer to the
feedback number than it was to the original estimate. (See
Table 3 for summary data.) A linear model was constructed
in which participants and items were treated as random
factors. Using restricted maximum likelihood estimation, we
computed z-scores for regression coefficients assuming
asymptotic normality. Surprise ratings did not reliably
interact with delay of recall, so the interaction term was
removed from the model. Surprise reliably predicted
improvement from estimation to recall (D = 2.34, p = .02),
but delay of recall did not reliably predict improvement (D =
0.46, n.s.).
Experiment 1 indicated that the more surprising the
feedback on a question, the more participants improved over
the retention interval (i.e., how close recall was to the
feedback value relative to the proximity of initial estimates
to that feedback number). This held for both eight-day and
12-week intervals, and both results are evidence in support
of Hypothesis 1.

confidence ratings (prospective surprise; Ranney et al.,
2001), predicted their surprise ratings after they received the
true number (retrospective surprise). To indicate their
prospective surprise, after students provided estimates, they
were asked 1) how high the true number would have to be to
surprise them, 2) how low would the true number would
have to be to surprise them, and 3) how confident they were,
on a scale from 55% to 95%, that the true number would fall
within the non-surprise interval indicated in steps 1 and 2.
Based on these steps, we calculated a 1-10 “shock” scale
(Ranney et al., 2001): If subjects captured the value in their
non-surprise interval, then:
Shock = 11 - ((Confidence percentage + 5) / 10).
If subjects did not capture the actual value in their nonsurprise interval, then:
Shock = (Confidence percentage + 5) / 10
Therefore, a “1” on the shock scale corresponds to hardly
being surprised at all—being 95% confident that one would
capture the number in one’s non-surprise interval and
successfully capturing the number. “5” and “6” correspond
to moderate shock—respectively, 55% confidence and
capturing the number and 55% confidence without capturing
the number. Finally, a shock of “10” corresponds to
maximal surprise—that is, having been 95% confident but
not capturing the number in one’s non-surprise interval.

Experiment 2
This experiment was performed to further our understanding
of the nature of surprise—how surprised one expects to be
prior to feedback and how surprised one feels upon
receiving feedback. To the extent that there is a relationship
between anticipated surprise and the surprise one indicates
upon learning the true quantity, that relationship would
suggest that surprise is a relatively stable construct, about
which people have notable metacognition (Hypothesis 2).

Table 4: Questions in Experiment 2. True values were the
most recent values available when the experiment was
conducted in 2003.
Question

Method
We analyzed data from our laboratory (McGlothlen, 2003)
collected from 14 high school students who were asked to
give oral explanations while responding to nine EPIC items
(Table 4). For this analysis, we were concerned with the
extent to which students’ non-surprise intervals and

College Degrees
per 1000 Adults

US Legal Immigration
as % of Total Population

2

It is reasonable to ask why some mean improvements are, in
fact, decrements (i.e., <1), indicating that participants performed
less accurately for some items, at the recall stage, than they
performed originally at estimating. It appears that (a) many
students had forgotten less surprising feedback numbers by the
time they were retested, and were actually re-estimating rather than
recalling, and (b) spontaneous student comments suggested that
that students were not trying as hard at the recall stage (when the
task had lost some of its novelty). So, their re-estimates would not
be expected to be as accurate as their original estimates. That said,
note that for all four items in which mean surprise was three
(“moderately surprised”) or greater—immigration, tuition,
incarceration, and athlete salaries—students showed clear
improvement at the recall stage. This is consistent with Hypothesis
1, in that when feedback was surprising it improved students’
memories for the numbers.
3
Since mean improvement for the immigration item was
considerably greater than for other items, a separate analysis
excluded this item—yet still showed that surprise reliably
predicted improvement (D = 2.44, p = .02).

True
Value
275
0.3%

California Population
Mean Age in U.S.
Median College Vs. HS Grad Wages
Median US Net Worth (< 35 yrs.)
Median US Net Worth (65-74 yrs.)
Murders

35.1 M
36.6 yrs.
1.8 : 1
$11.6 K
$176 K

Deaths in Auto Crashes

148

per 1 Million Residents
per 1 Million Residents

55

Results and Discussion
To analyze the results, we constructed a linear model (in
which participants and items were treated as random
factors) and tested whether students’ shock values predicted
their surprise ratings post-feedback. Results show this to be
the case, as prospective surprise on the shock scale was a
reliable predictor of retrospective surprise (F(1,103) =
12.10, p < .001). Further analyses examined the relationship
between shock and surprise across items, subject-by-subject.
Nine out of 14 students exhibited correlations of .64 or

506

higher (all pEs < .03). Two additional students exhibited
marginally significant correlations (r = .56, p = .06; r = .49,
p = .09), perhaps suggesting that more items would have
yielded even more reliable relationships. (If these were
reliable relationships for the two students, their correlations
suggest that their shock values would respectively explain
31% and 24% of the variance of their surprise ratings.) One
of the remaining three students consistently captured the
true numbers in the student’s non-surprise intervals with
confidence ratings of 75% and higher, so the individual’s
nonsignificant correlation may have been due to restricted
range. Finally, two students exhibited non-significant
correlations (although one was r = .38, p = .16).
In Experiment 2, we found that students’ pre-feedback
expectations reliably predicted their surprise upon receiving
feedback, which lends support to Hypothesis 2: Surprise
does appear to be a relatively stable construct, about which
people have notable metacognition. Variation in the
predictive value of the shock index for individual students’
surprise suggests that, although the two scales correlate,
they may tap partially dissociable aspects of a broader
notion of surprise. In the General Discussion, we will return
to the question of how each scale might be independently
inform prediction of how well a student will ultimately
remember a statistic.
The present findings suggest that people may have
reasonably apt metacognition in that prospective surprise
involves one's ability to anticipate one's own surprise. An
alternative explanation is that offering a non-surprise
interval and a confidence rating ahead of time may lead
participants to deliberately provide post-feedback surprise
ratings that are consistent with values elicited before
feedback (i.e., reflecting how surprised they said they would
be, not how surprised they actually were). We do not think
this is a likely explanation, since the prospective (i.e., nonsurprise intervals and confidence) and retrospective surprise
questions were phrased quite differently, did not appear on
the same page, and were separated by several other
questions––so it would not have been obvious to
participants that the two measures served the same purpose.
Below, we propose follow-up experiments that manipulate
the inclusion of both types of surprise measure in recall
experiments, so as to determine better how independent the
measures are.

physiological measures that may provide neural
perspectives on the surprise reaction.
Our findings build on research on learning from
discrepant events, given surprise’s role among the basic
emotions. Unlike fear, surprise is not clearly negative (i.e.,
not a withdrawal emotion), so one does not remember what
was surprising just to avoid an event in the future; indeed,
surprise is often enjoyable. Unlike happiness, a clearly
positive (i.e., approach) emotion, surprise may provoke us
to restructure our world-views, so that we are not surprised
again. That is, surprise is not so jarring that we reflexively
avoid an event in the future, but just jarring enough for us to
redirect our attention and reorganize our conceptual
understandings.
This research suggests two directions for future work on
the role of surprise in numerical understanding. First, we
think it important to turn to a more detailed qualitative
analysis of what happens to people’s explanations of how
they arrive at predictions––both immediately after
surprising feedback, as well as over time (Ranney &
Thagard, 1988; Ranney, Schank, Mosmann, & Montoya,
1993). The dynamics of the role of surprise in estimating
and recalling numbers could also be more finely modeled.
Thagard’s (2006) HOTCO model employs a connectionist
network that incorporates emotion in achieving coherence
during argumentation. In HOTCO, beliefs are connected via
excitatory and inhibitory links (as with ECHO), and surprise
arises following the introduction of new information (as in
discrepant-events experiments) or when a discovery is made
about the inconsistency of aspects of one’s extant network.
Surprise then triggers re-weighting of the present links and,
as necessary, the introduction of new belief nodes. The
present paper shows that surprising feedback can lead to the
long-term retention of numbers that are relevant to social
issues; understanding the dynamics of how this unfolds
presents an important challenge for the future.
A second possible direction for future research is to
explore how hindsight bias moderates the feeling of being
surprised by new numbers. Hindsight bias (e.g., Hawkins &
Hastie, 1990) arises when one has knowledge of an outcome
and is overconfident about how well one would have
anticipated that outcome earlier. In terms of numerical
outcomes, Rinne et al. (2006) found that estimating a
disease’s mortality rate before feedback increased the
influence of the feedback on one’s later preference for
research funding. Such participants more often explained
their decisions by making reference to the actual values as
well. An attractive explanation for this increased reliance on
feedback numbers is that having just made an estimate, and
faced with evidence of one’s misunderstanding of the data
involved with an issue, the possibility that one would show
hindsight bias is reduced. Awareness of our numerical
misunderstandings seems to spawn greater surprise at the
feedback numbers, and, thus, greater belief revision.
Consider how estimating a number and providing an a
priori non-surprise interval relates to hindsight bias, and to
the surprisingness of numerical feedback. The present paper

General Discussion
The present work provides a new perspective on numerical
understanding to the body of work on “hot cognition” (e.g.,
Thagard, 2006)—the intersection of cognition and emotion.
We draw two main conclusions from the present findings:
First, there is a reliable relationship between the
surprisingness of a single piece of numerical feedback and
the accuracy of participants’ subsequent recall of that
number. Second, individuals seem to have rather good
metacognition regarding their surprise response, as
projected surprise was a good predictor of retrospective
surprise. Ultimately, we hope this work might include

507

points to the impact of that surprisingness on the long-term
retention of numbers: To the extent that surprise is
accentuated when one “puts one’s cards on the table” by
specifying an estimate, we would expect that estimating
before learning a quantity’s true value would lead to
improved retention of feedback numbers. In this paper, we
observed a large, but not complete, overlap between the
prospective shock values and the retrospective surprise
ratings. In the future, manipulating the asking of prospective
and retrospective surprise questions as a part of long-term
numerical recall studies may illuminate both shared and
separate components of these two scales. It is possible that
eliciting a non-surprise interval lessens hindsight bias,
thereby accentuating a sense of surprise, which might then
drive the long-term retention of numerical feedback.
In this paper, we considered two data sets that,
respectively, indicate that numerical surprise 1) has a longterm impact on how accurately people retain numbers, and
2) can be reliably predicted using metacognitive selfassessment. As our project moves forward, we hope to
understand better the dynamics of numerical cognition. We
also hope to further connect other domains involving
discrepant events that contribute to surprise, which increases
the coherence of an individual’s representations. Findings in
this research area should interest both educators and others
involved in public policy, as they aim to help people attain
more coherent understandings of what numbers mean in the
contexts of learning and citizenship.

judgments of past events after the outcomes are known.
Psychological Bulletin, 107(3), 311-327.
McGlothlen, L. (2003). High school students reasoning with
numbers: Interviews of students using the estimate,
predict, incorporate, and change (EPIC) method.
Unpublished MA Paper. U.C. Berkeley.
Munnich, E., Ranney, M., & Bachman, M. (2005). The
longevities of policy-shifts and memories due to single
feedback numbers. In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M.
Bucciarelli (Eds.) Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1553-1558). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Munnich, E., Ranney, M., Nelson, J., Garcia de Osuna, J., &
Brazil, N. (2003). Policy shift through NumericallyDriven Inferencing: An EPIC experiment about when
base rates matter. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 834-839). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: E<uilibration
of cognitive structures (A. Rosin, Trans.). New York:
Viking. (Original work published 1975).
Ranney, M., Cheng, F., Nelson, J., and Garcia de Osuna, J.
(2001). Numerically driven inferencing: A new paradigm
for examining judgments, decisions, and policies
involving base rates. Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Society for Judgment & Decision Making
Ranney, M., & Schank, P. (1998). Toward an integration of
the social and the scientific: Observing, modeling, and
promoting the explanatory coherence of reasoning. In S.
Read & L. Miller (Eds.), Connectionist models of social
reasoning and social behavior (pp. 245-274). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Ranney, M., Schank, P., Mosmann, A., & Montoya, G.
(1993). Dynamic explanatory coherence with competing
beliefs: Locally coherent reasoning and a proposed
treatment. In T.-W. Chan (Ed.), Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computers in Education:
Applications of Intelligent Computer Technologies (pp.
101-106).
Ranney, M., & Thagard, P. (1988). Explanatory coherence
and belief revision in naive physics. Proceedings of the
Tenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 426-432). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rinne, L., Ranney, M., & Lurie, N. (2006). Estimation as a
catalyst for numeracy: Micro-interventions that increase
the use of numerical information in decision-making.
Proceedings of the Seventh Annual International
Conference of the Learning Sciences.
Thagard, P. (2006). Hot thought: Mechanisms and
applications of emotional cognition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT.
Wertheimer, M. (1945). Productive thinking. Oxford, UK:
Harper.

Acknowledgements
We thank Mandy Bachman, Jake Disston, Lilian
McGlothlen and their students, Myles Crain, Barbara
Ditman, Andrew Galpern, Jacob Levernier, Tania
Lombrozo, Nick Lurie, Luke Miratrix, Janek Nelson,
Patricia Schank, Maureen O’Sullivan, Sophia RabeHesketh, Luke Rinne, and full UCB Reasoning Group for
their skills and comments. This work was funded by UCB
faculty research grants and an AERA/IES Postdoctoral
Fellowship.

References
Brown, N. & Siegler, R. (2001). Seeds aren’t anchors.
Memory G Cognition, 29(3), 405-412.
Clement, J. & Steinberg, M. (2002). Step-wise evolution of
mental models of electric circuits: A “learning-aloud”
case study. Journal of the Learning Sciences 11(4), 389452.
Ekman, P. (1992), An argument for basic emotions.
Cognition G Emotion N, 169-200.
Garcia de Osuna, J., Ranney, M., & Nelson, J. (2004).
Qualitative and quantitative effects of surprise:
(Mis)estimates, rationales, and feedback-induced
preference changes while considering abortion. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 422-427). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hawkins, S. & Hastie, R. (1990). Hindsight: Biased

508

