UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Optimal Cognitive Template of Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mv770rc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
M. Afzal, M. Afzal M. Afzal

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Optimal Cognitive Template of Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives
M. Afzal Upal (upal@oxy.edu)
Cognitive Science, Occidental College
Los Angeles, CA 90041 USA
Kintsch and Greene (1978) selected an Apache tale
and a story from Brothers Grimm. Similar to Bartlett, they
found that five retellings of the Apache story introduced
more severe distortions than the Grimm story. They
concluded that this happened because the Grimm story
better conformed to the structure expected by their subjects.

Abstract
After studying the differences between culturally successful
and unsuccessful folk tales, Norenzayan et al. (2006) recently
postulated that culturally successful folk tales share a
structure. In particular, they argued that having two or three
minimally counterintuitive concepts made a story more
memorable which in turn gave it transmission advantages
allowing it to become widespread. This paper reports on a
study conducted to test that hypothesis. This involved
presenting subjects with stories containing 1,3, or 6
minimially counterintuitive concepts and measuring the story
recall. The experiments do not support the Norenzayan et al.
hypothesis and suggest that there is no one optimal template
for counterintuitive narratives. The paper suggests that an
alternative account is needed to explain recall and
comprehension for stories containing counterintuitive ideas.
Keywords: Anthropology, Cognitive Science, Language
understanding, Social cognition.

Introduction
Why do some stories become widespread as successful
folktales while others die soon after their creation?
Memorability has been considered to be an important
variable that explains some of the differences in distribution
of cultural concepts (Boyer 1994). Everything else being
equal, stories that are easier to remember and recall would
be more likely to be transmitted in a population. Systematic
studies of story memorability started with Bartlett’s classic
studies (Bartlett 1932). In a series of experiments, Bartlett
asked asked British university students to read passages
from various folk tales including the Native North American
folk tale “the war of the ghosts” (Erdoes & Ortiz 1984) and
retell it to others in writing who then retold it to others.
Bartlett analyzed the transformation of various concepts
over successive retellings. He concluded that culturally
unfamiliar concepts were distorted and replaced by more
familiar concepts; for instance, a canoe was replaced by a
rowboat. In none of the series of ten reproductions of, “the
war of ghosts,” did a mention of ghosts remain, even though
the story’s title mentions ghosts. Bartlett reasoned that
culturally unfamiliar concepts such as canoe and ghost are
more difficult to represent in human memory and therefore
they are more likely to get distorted. Even though, Bartlett
did not systematically measure and compare the recall rates
of culturally familiar and unfamiliar concepts, he argued
that culturally unfamiliar concepts are less likely to be
remembered and recalled and hence less likely to be
transmitted than familiar concepts.

Barrett and Nyhoff (2001) also repeated Bartlett’s
methodology using a larger set of Native North American
folk tales from Erdoes & Ortiz (1984). Six stories of about
500 words or less, containing both intuitive concepts such as
the river, mountain, and bird and expectation violating
counterintuitive concepts such as a talking bird and a
walking stone, were chosen. They found that recall rates for
counterintuitive concepts were significantly higher than
recall rates for intuitive concepts. Barrett and Nyhoff also
designed an artificial story to better control for the number
of intuitive and counterintuitive concepts, narrative
structure, and the amount of repeated exposure to a concept.
The futuristic story about a person visiting a museum to see
alien beings and artifacts was designed to contain six
concepts of each of the following three types:
1. intuitive concepts that conform to expectations such as
a being who is aware of its existence
2. minimally counterintuitive concepts that violate one
intuitive expectations such as a being who never dies,
and
3. bizarre concepts that do not violate any category
expectations but have an unusual feature value such as
a being who weighs 1000 pounds.
They found that after three retellings, counterintuitive
concepts were better recalled than bizarre concepts which
were better recalled than intuitive concepts.
Boyer and Ramble (2001) used a variant of Barrett and
Nyhoff’s (2001) alien museum story but did not use a serial
reproduction task. Instead, they had subjects read a story
and following a brief distraction task answer a question
requiring reproduction of as many intuitive, counterintuitive
and bizarre items mentioned in the story as the subject could
recall.
Their results supported Barrett and Nyhoff’s
conclusion that minimally counterintuitive items are best
recalled and the intuitive items are worst recalled.
However, none of these studies addressed the question of
whether stories containing minimally counterintuitive ideas
are recalled better or not? i.e., does the presence of
minimally counterintuitive ideas improve story recall? If so
is there a particular number of counterintuitive concepts that

1575

does so? What is the optimal cognitive template of folktales
for memorability?
Norenzayan, Atran, Faulkner, and Schaller (2006)
conducted experiments to address this questions. They
select 42 Grimm Brothers folktales such that half of the
stories were judged to be “culturally successful” (they
attained more hits on 400 world wide web Google searches)
and the other half were considered to be “culturally
unsuccessful” (because they had fewer Google hits). The
numbers of counterintuitive ideas present in each story were
then counted. The results indicated that a large majority of
the folk tales deemed culturally successful had two or three
counterintuitive ideas whereas the number of ideas was
more distributed from none to six. Subjects were then asked
to read these stories and answer a number of questions to
determine if the subjects thought that the stories were
memorable, easy to transmit, interesting enough to tell their
peers, and appropriate for children. Their results indicated
that subjects thought that stories that had more Google hits
were indeed judged by subjects to be more memorable and
worth telling their friends. On the basis of this evidence,
Norenzayan et al. argued that stories that contain two or
thee counterintuitive ideas enjoy memorability advantages
over stories that have fewer (0 or 1) or more (4, 5, 6, or
larger) counterintuitive ideas and hence they should be
considered an optimal template for culturally successful
folktales.

first time. Three versions of each story were then designed.
The first version had one counterintuitive idea, while the
second version had three and the third version had six
counterintuitive ideas.
Six packet-groups were then
designed such that each packet-group contained all three
stories and all three versions. For instance, the first packet
group contained Version 1 of Story 1, Version 2 of Story 2,
and Version 3 of story 3 while the second packet group had
Version 2 of Story 1, Version 1 of Story 2, and Version 3 of
Story 3. By varying the order in which stories appear six
different versions of each packet group were designed for a
total of thirty six different packets. So, for instance, Packet
1 of the first packet group had Story 1 as its first story, and
Story 2 as its second story and Story 3 as its third story
while Packet 2 had Story 1 as its first story, and Story 3 as
the second story and Story 2 as its third story. Thirty six
University of Toledo undergraduate and graduate students
ranging in age from 18 to 24 were then recruited to
participate in the experiments.
Subjects were asked to carefully read all three stories so
that they can answer some questions about them. Then they
were asked to solve simple arithmetic problem for one
minute. Following that they were asked to write down as
much of each story as they could remember. Story recall
was then measured by dividing each story into individual
idea units constituting each story. The ideas roughly
corresponded to the sentences in each story, although this
wasn’t always the case as some sentences were judged to
have multiple concepts in them. “The Trader” was
determined to have significantly smaller number of ideas
(around 30) than the “The Journey Home” and “The Night”
had roughly the same number (around 50 each) idea units.
Subject responses were then graded by how well they recall
each idea. Numbers between 0 to 1 were assigned based on
how closely the subject had recalled the idea with 1 being
assigned to ideas that were deemed to have been recalled
very well and 0 was assigned to ideas that were not recall by
the subjects. Story recall was measured by adding the recall
numbers for individual ideas constituting each story and
dividing the sum by the total number of ideas in the story.
Thus a perfectly recall story would be assigned the recall
value of 1 while a story that is not recalled at all would get
the recall value of 0.

However, Norenzayan et al. did not directly measure the
recall rates for stories containing various numbers of
counterintuitive ideas. Subject judgments about what they
think should be memorable may not correspond with what is
actually memorable and the Grimm Brother stories selected
as “culturally successful” may be widespread for a number
of other reasons and not because they are more memorable
for people. We believe that the hypothesis that “stories
containing 2 or 3 counterintuitive ideas are more memorable
than stories that contain fewer or more such ideas” can be
tested directly. Next, we report on an experiment designed
to do precisely that.

Experiment
Material & Method
We decided not to use the Grimm Brother’s stories used by
Norenzayan et al. for the following reasons. First, because
we wanted to control the number of concepts embedded in
each story. Second, because of the practical difficulty of
measuring recall for long stories.1 We designed three short
stories containing 300-400 words each. Two of the stories,
namely, “The Journey Home” and “The Trader” have been
previously used in previous experiments (Barrett & Nyhoff
2001; Boyer & Ramble 2001; Upal 2005) while the third
story ‘The Night” (shown in Appendix) was used for the
1
Although this concern may be partly addressable by the use of
automatic story recall software such as AutoCoder (Golden 2005).

Results & Discussion
We compared the recall rates of different versions of each
story. If Norenzayan et al.’s hypothesis is correct then
stories containing 3 counterintuitive concepts should be
recalled significantly better than stories containing 1 or 6
counterintuitive concepts.
The results are shown in Table 1. It shows that recall rates
do not vary significantly as a function of the number of
concepts embedded in each story. While there is no
statistically significant difference, for Story 1 and 3 recall
rates actually increase as the number of counterintuitive

1576

expectation violating then minimally counterintuitive ideas.
This is so because subjects fail to integrate such concepts
with the story theme using the available background
knowledge. Since we know that people from different
cultures differ in the background knowledge that they bring
to bear on understanding a narrative, by making connections
between comprehension, memorability, and transmissibility
of ideas explicit such a theory would allow us to not only
explain the aspects of a culture that are common with other
cultures but also those aspects of a culture that are unique to
it. For instance, this explains that the reason why Barlett’s
British subjects did not remember canoe is that is that they
did not judge canoe to be a crucial part of the theme of these
stories (replacing canoe with “row boat” instead in their
recreated stories). This can also explain that recall did not
increase as the number of counterintuitive concepts was
increased in the culturally unfamiliar “The Night” as it did
in the culturally familiar stories because the addition of even
more counterintuitive ideas in a story that was hard to
integrate into a known pattern to begin with made the
aspects of story too difficult to integrate for our subjects.

concepts is increased. However, this trend is reversed for
Story 3 where the recall actually decreases as the number of
counterintuitive concepts is increased from 1 to 3 to 6.
These results indicate that there is no unique optimal
template for counterintuitive stories.
Table 1: Recall Results for each version of the story. NMCI is the version of the story containing N minimally
counterintuitive ideas.
1- The Journey Home
2- The Night
3- The Trader

1-MCI
0.26
0.26
0.17

3-MCI
0.28
0.24
0.20

6-MCI
0.31
0.23
0.23

Our results beg for a theory that can explain as to why we
observe the trends that we did. Previously (Upal 2005; Upal
et al. 2007) we have argued for the need to connect the
cognition and culture work with the traditional cognitive
psychological work on language comprehension (Kintsch
1998). We believe that such a theory is needed to explain
the recall for a satisfactory explanation of the recall for
stories containing counterintuitive ideas.
The work on story comprehension suggests that when
subjects read a story they attempt to infer a coherent theme
from it. Memorability of a story is a function of the strength
of connections that are established between the cue (e.g., the
story title) and the mental model the readers construct from
a story. Reader’s success at inferring a coherent theme and
establishing strong connections between the story theme and
ideas constituent in a story depends on the prior knowledge
that is activated in the subject’s minds. Counterinuitive
ideas and expectation violating ideas, in general, are
remembered better to the extent to which they activate a
subject’s background knowledge that can help in integration
those ideas and fit it in the theme of the story. If these
unexpected ideas cannot be integrated with the main theme
and are judged to be irrelevant to the story then they are not
remembered as well.
This explains that minimally
counterintuitive ideas are recalled well because they violate
a subjects expectations about objects/events of that type.
Minimally counterintuitive ideas of the type found by
cognitive anthropologists such as Boyer (1994) and Sperber
(1996) to be widespread across the globe, however, are
distinct from any garden variety expectation violating
concepts (Schank & Abelson 1972) in that they involve
violation of basic category assumptions. The extent to
which people from different cultures share the knowledge of
basic categories such ideas would have memorability
advantages beyond those obtained by other expectation
violating concepts.
This also explains as to why maximally counterintuitive
concepts are not recalled as well as the minimally
counterintuitive ideas even though they are even more

The “Journey Home” and “The Trader”, on the other
hand, could be integrated even when they had six
counterintuitive concepts in them. The presence of a larger
number of counterintuitive concepts, however, made
subjects spend more cognitive effort to activate more
background knowledge to integrate more expectation
violating concepts into a coherent theme. This resulted in
an increased recall for these stories. However, the recall for
“The Trader” story was less than that of “The Journey
Home”. This is because, as several of our subjects
spontaneously indicated to us during the debrief, the list-like
nature of this story makes it more difficult to integrate
descriptions of the individuals in the story with the overall
theme of the story.

Conclusions
The paper contradicts the notion that there is one unique
optimal template for counterintuitive narratives. Unlike,
previous work, experiments reported here were designed to
directly address the question of memorability for stories
containing various number of counterintuitive concepts
show that the presence of two or three counterintuitive
ideas, on its own, does not make stories more memorable
than stories containing fewer or larger number of ideas.
However, unlike Norenzayan et al.’s (2006), we used short
artificially designed stories which gave us more control but
also limits the results. It would be interesting to conduct a
similar study with longer stories.
Considerable work needs to be done to further clarify the
theory we outline above to have an accurate cognitive model
of the comprehension, memorability, and transmissibility of
narratives. We are planning several studies to further clarify
these issues.

1577

References
Atran, S. & Norenzayan, A. 2004. Religion’s evolutionary
landscape: Counterintuition, commitment, compassion,
communion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Barrett, J. L. & Nyhof, M. A. (2001). Spreading Non-natural
concepts: the role of intuitive conceptual structures in
memory and transmission of cultural materials. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Bartlett, F C. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Boyer, P. & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts. Cognitive Science, 25, 535-564.
Boyer, P. (1994). The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A
Cognitive Theory of Religion, Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A Paradigm For
Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W. & Greene, L. (1978). The Role of Culturespecific schemata in the comprehension and recall of
stories, Discourse Processes, 1, 1-13.
Norenzayan, A., Atran, S., Faulkner, J., Schaller, M. (2006)
Memory and Mystery: The Cultural Selection of
Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives, Cognitive Science,
30, 531-553.
Sperber, D. 1996. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic
Approach, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Upal, M. A. (2005) Role of context in memorability of
intuitive and counterintuitive concepts, In Proceedings of
the 27th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2224-2229), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
M. A. Upal, L. Gonce, J. Slone, and R. Tweney,
Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context affects
comprehension and memorability of counterintuitive
concepts, Cognitive Science, vol 31, in press.

Appendix
“The Night”
The 1-MCI version:
I woke up in the middle of the night and heard someone call
my name. I put on my shoes and headed out to find out
what was going on. As soon as I opened the front door, a
gust of wind picked me up and carried me to the graveyard
across from our house. I followed the voice which seemed
to be coming from the mausoleum of Sheik Abdul Qadir
Jilani located at the center of the graveyard.
A man opened the door for me and asked me to enter. As
I entered, the great sheik walked out of his grave and said,
"welcome Ali, I have been waiting for you." As I heard his
voice, I recognized that the voice I had heard earlier in the

night was that of the Sheik himself. He hugged me and
placed a kiss on my forehead. He said, "ask me what's in
your heart son and I'll answer it." I asked him about the
heaven.
He told me to hold his hand and come with him. I did as
he said. We walked out of the mausoleum into the woods
behind the graveyard. The path led us into the most
picturesque valley the likes of which I've never seen before
or since. There were trees full of delicious fruits and
streams of milk and honey. They were full of the most
beautiful animals: butterflies, birds of paradise, rabbits, and
deer.
As we approached the ground the birds seemed to
welcome us with their chirping. The water flowing through
the river seemed to be singing in unison with the birds.
Two maidens brought us the most delicious food and drinks
I have ever tasted. I ate as much as I could while the Sheik
watched me.
The sheik told me that the time of the morning prayer was
upon us and that we should go to the mosque and pray.
Next thing I remember is prostrating in prayer in my local
mosque. I quickly finished my prayer and walked home. I
came home and decided to write down this blessed incident.
The 6-MCI version:
I woke up in the middle of the night and heard someone
call my name. I put on my shoes and headed out to find out
what was going on. As soon as I opened the front door, a
gust of wind picked me up and threw me on top of a carpet.
The magic carpet started flying. It flew over the city, the
desert, the oceans and great mountain ranges dropping me at
the Golden gate of the Sheik Hasan Jilani's mausoleum in
Baghdad.
A man opened the door and asked me to enter. As I
entered, the great sheik walked out of his grave and said,
"welcome Ali, I have been waiting for you." I recognized
that voice. It was the same haunting voice that had woken
me up from my sleep. He hugged me and placed a kiss on
my forehead. He said, "ask me what's in your heart son and
I'll answer it." I asked him about the heaven.
He told me to hold his hand and come with him. I did as I
was told. As we walked to his grave, it opened up and we
descended into the most picturesque valley the likes of
which I've never seen before or since. There were trees full
of delicious fruits and streams of milk and honey. I saw the
most beautiful animals I have ever seen: butterflies, birds of
paradise, rabbits, and deer. As we approached the ground
the birds welcomed us with the song

1578

salam O beloved of Allah
Salam O Sheik of Sheiks
The whole world (the deer, the water, and the ground)
joined in with the birds and started singing to welcome us.
The ground danced rhythmically as we stepped on it. Two
beautiful angels with wings of heavenly hues brought us the
most delicious food and drinks. I ate as much as I could but
the plates were still full. It was as if I hadn't touched
anything.

There was another person who has read thousands of
books. He has read huge collections of books.
Nyima had finished telling people what he had seen in
these far-away places. He told them that after he had
traveled to those places he had felt homesick and that was
why he had come back to be with his family.

“The Journey Home”
The 6-MCI version:

The sheik told me that the time of the morning prayer was
upon us and that we should go to the mosque and pray. My
next memory is that of lying on the ground prostrated in
prayer at my local mosque. I quickly finished my prayers
and walked home so that I could write down this blessed
incident.

“The Trader”

My sister and I were walking home from school. We saw
a cat belonging to one of our friends. The cat crouched on
the front lawn as she composed a symphony. Since the cat
was completely absorbed in her work, we continued on our
way chatting about what we had learned in school that day
until a beautiful rose jumped right in front of us. We knew
that we must get home soon before our mother starts
worrying so we slipped away from the rose.
We had hardly moved when we noticed an earthworm
crossing the sidewalk. I picked it up and felt its slimy
texture and the squirm of its movement. I put it on the grass
on the other side of the pavement and we continued on our
way.

The 6-MCI version:
There was a person who was at two places at same time.
She was at one place and at another place at the same
moment.
There was another person who could recognize people he
had met before. If she met someone she would remember
them.
There was another person who weighed more than an ox.
It was terribly difficult to lift him.
There was another person who could guess future events.
She knew exactly what was going to happen.
There was another person who was taller than a house. He
was very tall and impressive.
There was another person who could hear what people
said. If people talked next to him he heard what they said.
There was another person who ran faster than a horse. He
went so fast that the horse could not catch up with him.
There was another person who went through walls. If he
wanted he could walk right through a wall.
There was one person who had no shadow. Even in broad
daylight, he did not have a shadow.
There was another person who could understand jokes. If
you told her a joke she laughed.
There was another person who could see through a
mountain. He could see what was on the other side of the
mountain.
There was another person who could remember thousands
of different names. He recalled the names of thousands of
people.
There was another person who could see villages very far
away. He could even see villages many miles away.
There was another person who was five feet tall. His
height was a little above that of a woman.
There was another person who cried if you punched him.
It hurt him wherever you were to hit him.

As we were walking my sister's shoes sprouted roots
which broke up the pavement below and impaired her
movement. I remembered that she had had this trouble with
these shoes before and carried a pocket knife in order to cut
the roots. While she was uprooting herself a crumpled piece
of newspaper blew past me in the cool breeze almost
brushing my leg.
The leaves, which had fallen from the trees a while ago
were brittle and crackled under our feet. We swished our
way through the numerous leaves. I grabbed a bunch of
leaves and throw them at my sister.
I was getting kind of hungry so I reached into my
backpack to retrieve a bag of carrots which I had not eaten
during lunch. I was just about to take a bite of one of the
carrots when it screamed, "Stop!" I decided to spare the
carrot and put it back in the bag.
My sister was getting farther away from me. The sky had
become darker. A few snow flakes had started falling and
the wind had picked up quite a bit. I was getting really cold
and worried. That is when I saw our dog Jack. He asked
me if I needed help getting home and offered me a ride. I
jumped on his back. He jumped into the air and started
flying. My sister grabbed my right leg as I flew by her. I
almost fell off the dog but I quickly grabbed Jack's ears.

1579

Soon we caught sight of the white picket fence in the
front yard. Finally we were home

