UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Explicit Strategy Instruction on Problem-solving Behaviors across Intelligent
Tutoring Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28f5473p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Chi, Min
VanLehn, Kurt

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Explicit Strategy Instruction on Problem-solving Behaviors across
Intelligent Tutoring Systems
Min Chi (mic31@pitt.edu)
Learning Research Development Center 3939 O’Hara St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Kurt VanLehn (vanlehn@cs.pitt.edu)
Learning Research Development Center 3939 O’Hara St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
and are seldom observed in a pure form in natural human
problem solving. Early studies of experts and novices
suggested that novices used BC and experts used FC
(Larkin et al. 1980), but later studies showed that both used
fairly similar mixtures (Priest & Lindsay 1992). Eventually,
work in this area diminished because it appeared that most
human solvers use a mixture of strategies, analogies with
past solutions, heuristics, and many other kinds of
knowledge in order to guide their problem solving.
Although neither experts nor novices seem to use FC and
BC in their pure form, the strategies’ success in guiding
computer problem solvers suggests that teaching students to
use pure FC or BC might improve their problem-solving
abilities. There have been several tests of this hypothesis.
Sweller and his colleagues conducted a series of studies
comparing the learning of students who were or were not
required to use FC (Owen & Sweller 1985; Tarmizi &
Sweller 1988). Students who were required to use FC to
solve problems learned more than those who could use
unconstrained mixture of strategies. This suggests that
“teaching” students a single problem-solving strategy
improves learning. However, the number of inferences made
by the FC students is generally larger than the number of
inferences made by those who use the usual unconstrained
mixture of strategies. Thus, the FC students could have
benefited simply from having more practice in applying the
domain principles. Indeed, when the study was modified so
that students in both conditions applied the same number of
domain principles, they learned the same amount (Sweller,
1988). Thus, although these studies are consistent with the
hypothesized benefits of explicit strategy instruction, there
are other explanations for the results as well.
Trafton and Reiser (1991) tested the benefits of explicit
strategy instruction in a subdomain of computer
programming, wherein students had to compose and
combine primitive functions to produce a more complex
function specified by the experimenter. Three forms of
instruction were compared based on the way in which the
function was to be composed: forward-only, backward-only
or freely. After 13 training problems completed in less than
one hour, all three groups achieved the same learning gains.
The study did not find benefits on learning gains for explicit
instruction in a problem-solving strategy. Although it is
always hard to interpret a null result, it could be that the task

Abstract
Explicit instruction of a problem-solving strategy improved
students’ performance in the domain where it was taught and
in a second domain where it was not taught. Since the two
domains, probability and physics, share no overlapping
domain principles, it seems likely that the problem-solving
strategy itself was transferred from one domain to the other.
We analyzed the computer logs to identify the strategies
employed in the physics domain. On hard problems the
Strategy group did in fact employ the taught strategy in
question. However on easier problems they appeared to
abandon the strategy in favor of more sophisticated strategies.
We conjecture that explicit strategy instruction increased
students’ focus on domain principle acquisition, which in turn
accelerated their learning to the point where they no longer
needed to use the taught strategy and instead could use more
expert-like strategies. However, when they got stuck, they
fell back on the taught strategy. That is, explicit strategy
instruction appears to act as surprisingly effective scaffolding
for domain principle acquisition.
Keywords: Problem-solving strategy, Acceleration of future
learning, preparation for learning, cross-domain transfer.

Introduction
A task domain is deductive if solving a problem requires
producing an argument, proof or derivation consisting of
one or more inference steps, and each step is the result of
applying a general domain principle, operator or rule.
Deductive task domains, such as physics and geometry, are
common parts of mathematical and scientific courses. Two
common problem-solving strategies in deductive domains
are forward chaining (FC) and backward chaining (BC)
(Russell & Norvig, 2003). In FC, the reasoning proceeds
from the given propositions toward the goal. The solver
starts with a set of known propositions, applies a principle
to some subset of them, produces at least one new
proposition, and continues doing this until the problem is
solved. BC is goal-directed. It works backward from a goal
state to the known state. At any time, it backward-applies a
deductive rule that can infer the current goal from some
subgoals in the context of the current state. It then picks a
subgoal as its current goal, and repeats this process until the
known state is reached. This procedure produces a plan,
which is then executed.
FC and BC have been widely used in computer science;
however, they are rarely taught to human problem solvers

167

domain was too simple, about 4 minutes per problem, to
allow a problem-solving strategy to demonstrate its benefits.
Scheines and Sieg (1994) gave students over 100 training
problems in sentential logic over a 5 week period. Students
were divided into three groups: one was taught and required
to use FC; another was taught BC and required to use it; and
a control group was not taught any strategy and operated
freely. After five weeks training, no significant differences
were found among the three groups on the mid-term exam
(post-test). When the FC and BC groups were aggregated as
a one-way strategy condition, there were still no significant
differences between them and the control group on post-test
scores. However, contrary to our hypothesis, the control
group gained more than the one-way strategy students on
difficult problems, where one would expect an explicit
search strategy to be especially helpful. The experiment
suggested that constraining students to use just one strategy
may actually harm their performance. However, Sieg and
Byrnes (1998) discovered a more efficient strategy that used
FC on certain inference rules and BC on others. They
hypothesized that the control students' superiority could
have been due to their use of elements of this strategy. This
is consistent with the fact that the control students used BC
on 46% of their moves and FC on the rest. Sieg’s group is
currently investigating the effects of explicitly teaching
students this strategy (Sieg, personal communication,
December 2006).
VanLehn et al. (2004) compared an explicitly taught
version of BC to unconstrained problem-solving. On some
post-test measures, the students who were explicitly taught
the strategy scored higher than those who were not taught a
strategy and could solve problems in any order. However,
on other measures, the two groups did not differ. Overall,
performance on the post-test was quite poor, suggesting a
floor effect—the post-test was too difficult for both groups.
Although there have been other studies of explicit strategy
instruction, they mostly involved inductive rather than
deductive problem solving. For instance, students who were
taught inquiry strategies, such as CVS (control-of-variables
strategy) or VOTAT (Vary One Thing At a Time), not only
employed them more frequently and consistently, but they
also induced more domain knowledge than students who
were not taught any inquiry methods (Vollmeyer et al. 1996;
Klahr & Nigam 2004; Toth et al. 2000).
In summary, the studies of deductive problem-solving
strategies have primarily shown how difficult such studies
are to conduct, as they have been plagued with confounded
designs (Owen & Sweller 1985; Tarmizi & Sweller 1988;
Sweller, 1988), null effects (Trafton & Reiser 1991),
teaching of suboptimal strategies (Scheines & Sieg 1994),
and floor effects (VanLehn et al. 2004). Despite all this
work, we still lack an unequivocal answer to the simple
question: Given that BC, FC, and other domain-general
strategies work so well for computer problem solving,
should we teach them to human students?
This study was designed to test two hypotheses: (1)
because FC and BC benefit computer problem solving by

reducing search space, but search occurs only on some
problems, we hypothesize that explicit strategy instruction
will cause increased search efficiency on problems that
require multiple principle applications, but not on singleprinciple problems. (2) Our second hypothesis, again
inspired by computer problem solving, is that the explicitly
taught strategy is domain general. That is, if students are
taught a strategy in one domain, they will be able to use the
strategy in a second domain without any further instruction.
As the earlier work shows, choice of task domain can
affect the ability to test the impact of strategy on learning.
In order to assess inter-domain transfer, we needed two
domains that share a problem solving strategy. The domains
should be complex enough that following the strategy
visibly improves problem solving on multi-principle
problems, thus allowing us to detect the strategy’s usage.
The task domains chosen were probability and introductory
physics, because earlier work (e.g., VanLehn et al., 2004)
suggested they had the properties listed above.
As a brief overview, the experiment proceeded as follows.
During probability instruction, students studied 10
principles of probability, such as Bayes rule. The Strategy
students were trained on a tutoring system that explicitly
taught the Target Variable Strategy (TVS), a domaingeneral BC strategy (VanLehn et al. 2004); while the Nostrategy students were trained on another tutoring system
without any explicit strategy instruction. During the
subsequent physics instruction, students studied 10
principles of work and energy, such as conservation of total
mechanical energy. Both the Strategy and No-strategy
students were trained on the same physics tutoring system,
which did not teach any strategy.
If our hypotheses are correct, the Strategy students should
outperform the No-strategy students in learning both
domains. Moreover, if this difference is due to increasing
the efficiency of problem solving, as hypothesized, then it
should show up only on multi-principle problems, where the
strategy actually does increase efficiency. For singleprinciple problems, the Strategy and No-Strategy students
should perform identically.
As reported earlier (Chi & VanLehn, 2007), teaching the
TVS caused acceleration of learning in both domains and
unexpectedly on all types of problems. The Strategy
students gained significantly more than the No-strategy ones
on both single-principle problems and multi-principle
problems in both domains. Moreover, the effects were large:
Cohen’s d was 1.17 for probability post-test scores and 1.28
for physics post-test scores. To investigate why this
welcome benefit occurred, we analyzed computer logs of
students’ problem-solving behavior in order to determine
whether the Strategy students were applying the TVS during
the physics instruction where no strategy was taught.

Methods
Participants
We recruited 91 college students who received payment for
their participation. They were required to have basic

168

knowledge of high-school algebra, and not to have taken
college-level statistics or physics courses. Students were
randomly assigned to the two conditions. Each student took
from two to three weeks to complete the study. Because of
the winter break and length of the experiment, only 44
participants completed the experiment. Two students were
eliminated from the final sample size (N = 44) because of a
perfect score on the probability pre-test and a lack of time
consistency, respectively. Of the remaining 42 participants
(59.5% female), 20 were Strategy students and 22 were Nostrategy students.

Table 1: Procedure.
Strategy
No-strategy
Survey
Background survey
Probability pre-training
Probability pre-test
Pyrenees video
Andes-Prob. video
Learning
Probability
Problem-solving
Problem-solving with
with Pyrenees
Andes-Probability
Probability post-test
Andes-Probability
Andes
video
Interface
Solve a problem
Training
with Andes-Prob.
Physics pre-training
Physics pre-test
Learning
Andes-Physics video
physics
Problem-solving with Andes-Physics
Physics Post-test
During pre-training all students studied the domain
principles. For each principle, they read a general
description, reviewed some examples, and solved a series of
single-principle and multi-principle problems. After solving
a problem, the answer was marked correct or incorrect, and
the correct solution was displayed. If students failed to solve
a single-principle problem, then they were asked to solve an
isomorphic one; this repeated until they either succeed in
solving a problem or failed three times. On multipleprinciple problems, students had only one chance to solve
the problem and were not asked to solve an isomorphic
problem if their answer is incorrect.
Next, students took a pre-test. Feedback on answers was
not given. This was also true for the post-tests.
During phase 3, all students watched a video that covered
solving a domain problem in the corresponding tutoring
system. When learning probability, the Strategy students
also read a text description of the TVS.

Materials:
Three tutoring systems: Two were used for probability
instruction, Pyrenees and Andes-probability, and one for
physics, Andes-physics. Apart from domain knowledge,
Andes-probability and Andes-physics were identical.
Pyrenees explicitly taught the TVS and required students to
follow it. Andes provided no explicit strategic instruction
nor did it require students to follow any particular strategy.
Students using Andes could input any entry, and Andes
would color it green if it was correct and red if it was
incorrect. An equation was considered correct if it was true,
irrespective of whether it was useful for solving the
problem. Students could enter an equation that was an
algebraic combination of several principle applications on
Andes but not on Pyrenees.
Besides providing immediate feedback, both Pyrenees
and Andes provided help when students asked. When an
entry was incorrect, students could either fix it on their own
or ask for what’s-wrong help. When they do not know what
to do next, they could ask for next-step help. Pyrenees and
Andes gave the same what’s-wrong help, but their next-step
help differed. Because Pyrenees required students to follow
the TVS, it knew exactly what step the student should be
doing next so it gave specific hints. In Andes, on the other
hand, students could always enter any correct step, so Andes
did not attempt to figure out the student’s problem-solving
plans or intentions Instead, it picked a step that it would
most like to do next, and hinted that step. Both types of help
were provided via a sequence of hints that gradually
increased in specificity. The last hint in the sequence, called
the bottom-out hint, told the student exactly what to do.

Table 2: Number of single- and multi-principle problems
SingleMultiTotal
Pre-Training
14
5
19
Pre-test
10
4
14
Probability
Training
0
12
12
Post-test
10
10
20
Pre-Training
11
3
14
Pre-test
9
5
14
Physics
Training
0
8
8
Post-test
5
13
18
During phase 4, both conditions solved the same
problems in the same order. Each main domain principle
was applied at least twice. All students could access the
corresponding pre-training textbook. When learning
probability, the Strategy students could also access the
description of the TVS.

Procedure:
The procedure for this study had 4 main parts: Background
Survey, Learning Probability, Andes Interface Training, and
Learning Physics (see Table 1, left column). All the
materials were online. Only the Strategy students took the
third part, Andes Interface Training. Its purpose was to
familiarize the Strategy students with the Andes user
interface without introducing any new domain knowledge.
Learning Probability and Learning Physics had the same
five phases: 1) pre-training 2) pre-test, 3) watching a video,
4) training on an ITS, and 5) post-test. We will describe
each phase.

169

Finally, all students took a post-test. Five of the post-test
problems were isomorphic to training problems in phase 4.
In addition, there were five non-isomorphic problems on the
probability post-test and eight on the physics post-test.
Table 2 shows the distribution of single-principle and
multi-principle problems in the experiment. Most of the
multi-principle problems had dead-end search paths so that
the TVS could show an advantage in search efficiency.
To summarize, the procedural difference between the two
conditions were: 1) during Learning Probability, the
Strategy students trained on Pyrenees while the No-strategy
students trained on Andes; 2) the Strategy students learned
how to use Andes’ GUI before learning physics.

Coding categories:
Andes-Physics logged every user interface action performed
by the student, including their help requests, tool usage, and
equation entries. We coded each correct equation entry in
the solution logs with 3 features:
Relevance: The equation was labeled relevant or irrelevant
based on whether it contributed to the problem solution.
Help: The student’s equation was labeled “Help” if it was
entered after the student asked for help from the tutoring
system. Otherwise, it was labeled “No-help”.
Content: The equation’s content was coded as either (1)
incorrect, (2) algebraic manipulation of an existing
equation, (3) repetition of an existing equation, or (4)
correct equation with new physics content

Results

Overall characterization

We begin by summarizing results reported earlier (Chi &
VanLehn, 2007). Despite the high attrition, the incoming
student competence was balanced across conditions. There
were no significant differences between the two conditions
on the background survey, which included self-reported
GPA and SAT scores, nor on the probability pre-training
scores, nor on the probability pre-test scores. Moreover,
there were no group differences on any of the 4 training
times: probability pre-training, probability training, physics
pre-training and physics training.
On the other hand, the two groups did differ on posttraining problem-solving scores. Students’ answers were
scored both with and without partial credit. With a few
exceptions, different scoring rubrics produced the same
pattern of results. The results for the no-partial-credit rubric,
which was the most objective rubric, are shown in Table 3.
Numbers in the cells are the effect size. An ms or ns
indicates that the difference between the means was only
marginally significant or non-significant.
As shown in Table 3, the Strategy students learned more
than the No-strategy ones during probability training,
physics training and perhaps even physics pre-training.
Moreover, the Strategy training advantage does not seem to
be only due to increasing the search efficiency, as the gains
appeared even on single-principle problems, which do not
require any search. The learning gains on single-principle
problems may have been caused by increased motivation, or
increased acquisition of domain principles, or both. If it was
due to motivation only, then we might see little actual use of
the TVS during physics problem-solving. This possibility
motivated our analysis of physics problem-solving behavior,
which is presented next.
Table 3: Effect sizes of Strategy students compared to
No-strategy students
SingleMultiAll
Problem type
1.24
0.87
Probability Post-test
1.17
Pre-Training
0.64 1
ns
ns
Physics
Pre-test
ms
ns
0.69
Post-test
1.00
1.23
1.28
1

We first tried to characterize the overall difference in
students’ solutions of the physics training problems. We
found that the Strategy students made significantly fewer
next-step help requests than No-strategy ones on every
problem, which suggested that the Strategy students may be
using the TVS more frequently, and thus getting lost less
frequently. However, there are other possible explanations,
so we conducted several other analyses.
Based on the characteristics of the help requests, solutions
were grouped into three categories, smooth, help-abuse, and
rocky, which were defined as follows:
Smooth solutions included no help requests, except on
problems that require more than eight principle applications,
where students were permitted up to two what’s-wrong help
requests.
Help-abuse solutions are produced when every entry was
derived from one or more next-step hints.
Otherwise, the solution was categorized as a rocky
solution, in which, students appeared capable of solving part
of the problem on their own, but needed help on the rest.

Figure 1: Solution Percentage by Type
As Figure 1 shows, there was a significant difference
between two groups in the total number of help-abuse
solutions, rocky, or smooth solutions: χ2(2) = 41.33, p(χ2) <
0.0001. Overall, the Strategy students had significantly
more smooth solutions and less help-abuse solutions than
the No-strategy ones.
The next analysis was conducted with a smaller unit of
analysis: individual equations. We sought to find out how
frequently students made steps toward solving the problem
without any help from the tutor. In terms of the three-feature
coding mentioned earlier, such an equation would be coded
as “relevant”, “No-help”, and “correct equation with new

On single-principle problems solved correctly at the first try.

170

physics content”. Thus, we called them desirable steps and
we measured desirable steps ratio DSR as:

was a significant 3-way interaction involving condition,
strategy, and solution, F (3,20) = 2.712, p < 0.05.
Specifically, the Strategy students demonstrated a greater
difference between BC and FC in rocky solutions than the
smooth solutions, whereas there was no such difference in
the no-strategy condition. No other effects were significant.

As shown in Figure 2, the Strategy students have
significantly higher DSR than the No-strategy ones: t(253) =
8.09, p < 0.0001. It is also true on rocky solutions alone,
t(136) = 3.27, p = 0.001. These results indicate that the Nostrategy students’ rocky solutions were even “rockier” than
the Strategy students’. This may have contributed to their
poorer learning gains.

Discussion
Learning a problem solving strategy, the TVS, in one task
domain, probability, noticeably improved students’ learning
in a second domain, physics. Three analyses showed that
Strategy students exceeded No-strategy students in their
ability to solve physics training problems on their own. The
Strategy students (1) asked for significantly less next-step
help, (2) produced significantly more smooth solutions and
fewer help-abuse solutions, and (3) had significantly higher
desirable step ratio (DSR) overall. One interpretation of
these results is that the TVS functioned as strategic resource
that the Strategy students could use when they got stuck or
began to doubt their progress. The No-strategy students
lacked this resource, so they sought help from hints instead,
often by asking for hints on every step (help-abuse).
Learning the TVS in probability also altered the
distribution of strategies employed on non-help-abuse
solutions to physics training problems. Regardless of
whether the solution was smooth or rocky, the No-strategy
students displayed the same distribution of strategies while
the Strategy students displayed different ones. The Strategy
students tended to use the BC strategy on rocky solutions,
but shifted to FC or equation combining during the smooth
solutions. One interpretation of the strategy-distribution
findings, among many, is that the Strategy students were
beginning to master the principles well enough that they
could plan solutions in their heads, as experts do (Chi,
Glaser & Rees, 1982; Priest & Lindsay, 1992), at least on
easier problems. This allowed them to combine equations
algebraically before writing them down or to write the
equations in FC order. However, on harder problems, they
continued to use the TVS because they could not plan far
enough ahead.
This explanation, which is based on principle mastery,
makes sense given the behaviors of the two tutoring
systems. As part of the TVS, Pyrenees often asks the student
“Which principle do you want to apply?” Only after a
principle application has been specified are students allowed
to enter an equation. In contrast, Andes allows students to
enter equations without specifying principle applications.
Therefore, the TVS strategy draws students’ attention to
individual principles so they may have learned to think of
problem-solving as application of individual principles.
Moreover, by applying the TVS, the Strategy students may
realize that the only hard subtask is to choose a proper
principle—once that is done, writing the equation and
solving it becomes routine. Therefore, the better they know
the principles, the more successful they may become at this
key subtask. This meta-cognitive realization may persist
into the second task domain, physics. When they are given a

%DSR
100
80
Strategy
No-Strategy

60
40
20
0
Smooth

Rocky

Overall

Figure 2: RSS_R on rocky, smooth and overall solutions

Strategy usage
Finally, we examined students’ strategies more closely. If a
student applied the TVS, we would expect the order of the
equations to follow the BC order since TVS is a BC
problem-solving strategy. Thus, we subcategorize each
desirable step into (1) FC, (2) BC, (3) combined equations
(CB), or (4) Others. CB refers to equations that are
algebraic combinations of several principle applications. For
example: Tme=0.5*m*v^2+ m*g*h combines three
principles: Tme=Ke+Gpe; Ke=0.5*m*v^2, and Gpe=m*g*
h. We defined four ratios: BC%, FC%, CB% and Others%,
by dividing each count by desirable steps, e.g. BC% is the
proportion of desirable steps that were coded as BC.
80 %
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

BC%
FC%
CB%
Other%

Smooth

Rocky

Strategy

Smooth

Rocky

No-strategy

Figure 3: Strategy usage.
Figure 3 shows that the No-strategy students
demonstrated very similar problem-solving strategies in the
rocky and smooth solutions. The Strategy students, on the
other hand, demonstrated different strategies. The data were
analyzed using a mixed between-within repeated measures
ANOVA with condition as the between subjects variable,
and solution and strategy as two within-subjects variables.
The analysis showed that the two conditions are
significantly different overall: F (1, 40)=8.102, p =0.007 . In
addition, the pattern of strategy use was different for the two
conditions, F (3, 120) = 39.735, p < .0005. Finally, there

171

sequence of single-principle physics problems, they would
then pay more attention to the principles because they
realize that they will need to know them well later. This
could explain why the Strategy students outscored the Nostrategy students on the physics single-principle problems of
Table 3.
In contrast, the No-strategy students are simply asked to
enter equations in Andes. They may have adopted an
emphasis on memorizing them in lieu of other things. They
may not see the equations as applications of principles, but
as lines in the solution of a problem. They may focus on
acquiring schemas that are the size of a whole problem
(Sweller, 1988). Solving a new problem becomes a matter
of piecing together equations from partially recalled
problem schemas, which would explain why the equations
are entered in a mixture of FC and BC orders, and the
distribution of strategies is the same on both rocky and
smooth solutions. This would also explains why No-strategy
students ask for help more frequently and why they more
often just give up on solving the problem and instead ask
the tutor to solve it for them (help-abuse) so that they can
see another worked example and (in their view) study
another problem schema.
In short, our conjecture is that the most important element
that transfers between probability and physics is not the
TVS per se, but the meta-cognitive focus on principle
applications vs. problem schemas. Nonetheless, it must also
be said that the evidence for this conjecture is not sufficient.
Our analysis of the log data is continuing.
To summarize, we have found that teaching students an
explicit problem-solving strategy did not merely give the
Strategy students a head start in learning physics, as one
would expect from identical-elements theories of transfer
(Singley & Anderson, 1989); instead, it increased the
students’ rate of learning of physics. Such acceleration of
future learning is rarely found, which makes it a particularly
intriguing form of robust learning. It may be related to
Preparation for Learning and Adaptive Expertise (Schwartz
& Bransford, 2005). Moreover, the large size of this crossdomain transfer (approximately 1 standard deviation effect
size) suggests that it may have important applications in
education. Taken literally, this lab experiment suggests that
teaching students one course in a single deductive task (e.g.,
a discrete math) using Pyrenees may cause them to learn
more quickly and deeply in subsequent courses, including
physics and many others. The next step toward application
should probably be an in vivo experiment in the PSLC
physics LearnLab (www.learnlab.org).

References
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in
problem-solving. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
Psychology of Human Intelligence, Vol. 1 (pp. 7-75).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chi, M. & VanLehn, K. (2007). Accelerated Future
Learning via Explicit Instruction of a Problem Solving
Strategy, accepted by 13th International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Education. LA. July 9-13, 2007
Klahr, D. & M. Nigam. 2004. The equivalence of learning
paths in early science instruction: effects of direct
instruction and discovery learning Psychological Science
15(10): 661-667;
Larkin, J., J. McDermottt, D.P. Simon, and H.A. Simon.
1980. Expert and novice performance in solving physics
problems. Science, 208:1335-1342.
Owen, E and Sweller, J (1985) What Do Students Learn
While Solving Mathematics Problems? Journal of
Educational Psychology, Volume 77(3), p 272-284
Priest, A. G., and R. O. Lindsay (1992). “New Light On
Novice-Expert Differences in Physics Problem-solving,”
British Journal of Psychology, 83, 389-405.
Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2003). Artificial Intelligence: A
Modern Approach (Second Ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Scheines, R., & Sieg, W. 1994.Computer environments for
proof construction. Interactive Learning Environments,
4(2), 159-169.
Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D.,et al. (2005). Efficiency
and innovation in transfer. In J. P. Mestre (Ed.), Transfer
of Learning from a Modern Multidisciplinary Perspective
(pp. 1-51): Information Age Publishing.
Sieg W. and Byrnes. J. 1998 Normal natural deduction
proofs (in classical logic). Studia Logica, 60:67-106,
Singley, M. K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The transfer of
cognitive skill.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sweller, J. 1988. Cognitive load during problem-solving:
Effect on Learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285
Tarmizi R, A & Sweller, J (1988) Guidance During
Mathematical Problem-solving. Journal of Educational
Psychology Volume 80(4), p 424-436
Toth, E. E., Klahr, D., & Chen, Z. (2000) Bridging Research
and Practice: a Cognitively-Based Classroom Intervention
for Teaching Experimentation Skills to Elementary
School Children. Cognition & Instruction,18(4), 423-459.
Trafton, J.G. and B.J. Reiser, (1991) Providing natural
representations to facilitate novices' understanding in a
new domain: Forward and backward reasoning in
programming. Proceedings of the 13th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, p. 923-927.
VanLehn, K., Bhembe, D., Chi, M. et al. 2004. Implicit
versus explicit learning of strategies in a non-procedural
cognitive skill. 7th Conference on ITSs, Maceio, Brazil.
Vollmeyer, R., Burns, D., & Holyoak, J. (1996). The impact
of goal specificity on strategy use and the acquisition of
problem structure. Cognitive Science, 20, 75-100.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the NSF Grant 0354420 to
PSLC (Pittsburgh Science Learning Center) and NSF Grant
0325054. We also thank Chris Schunn, Kevin Ashley, and
Peter Brusilovsky for early comments; and Marguerite Roy
for help with statistics (though any errors are the sole
responsibility of the first author), and Collin Lynch, Bob
Hausmann, and Pamela Jordan for their help on this project.

172

