UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Interaction of Food-Quantity Differences and Temporal Presentation on the Amount of
Food People Consume

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tg7p991

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Choplin, Jessica M.
Motyka, Laura

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Interaction of Food-Quantity Differences and Temporal
Presentation on the Amount of Food People Consume
Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu) and Laura Motyka
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504
they ate. Previously published empirical results (Brigell &
Uhlarik, 1979; Jordan & Uhlarik, 1984; Massaro &
Anderson, 1971; Schiano, 1986) and proposed theories of
attribute evaluation (Anderson, 1965, 1981; Choplin &
Hummel, 2002; Parducci, 1965; Wedell, Parducci, &
Geiselman, 1987) predict very different patterns of how
these two factors are likely to interact to bias food-quantity
judgments and the amounts of food people eat. The research
presented here thereby represents a preliminary opportunity
to pit these seemingly contradictory empirical results and
theories of attribute evaluation against each other to see
which might best fit food-quantity judgments and the
amounts of food people eat.

Abstract
Previous research suggests that judgments of food quantity
affect the amounts of food people eat. In two experiments, we
investigated the interaction of food-quantity differences and
temporal presentation on participants’ judgments of food
quantity and the amounts they ate. In Experiment 1,
participants viewed drawings of two portions of mashed
potatoes presented either simultaneously or sequentially and
later recalled sizes from memory. In Experiment 2,
participants viewed two serving bowls of pasta salad
presented either simultaneously or sequentially and ate as
much or as little as they wished from the smaller bowl. The
amounts they ate were inversely related to biases in
judgments of food quantity.
Keywords: Dietary decision making; size judgments;
attribute evaluation.

Range-Frequency and Integration Theories

Wedell, Parducci, and Geiselman (1987) presented
pictures of women’s faces either simultaneously or
sequentially and asked their participants to rate the physical
attractiveness of the faces. They found assimilation effects
(evaluations of the attractiveness of target faces were biased
toward the attractiveness of contextual faces) when faces
were presented simultaneously and contrast effects
(evaluations of the attractiveness of target faces were biased
away from the attractiveness of contextual faces) when
faces were presented sequentially. A similar pattern has
been observed in the parallel line-length illusion (Jordan &
Uhlarik, 1984). Wedell et al. modeled ratings of
simultaneously presented faces using Anderson’s (1965;
1981) integration theory and ratings of sequentially
presented faces using Parducci’s (1965) range-frequency
theory. These models predict that biases ought to be greater
the larger the differences between values: the larger the
difference in attractiveness between simultaneously
presented values the greater the assimilation effects ought to
be and the larger the difference in attractiveness between
sequentially presented values the greater the contrast effects
ought to be.
Although attractiveness judgments might seem
qualitatively different from food-quantity judgments,
Wedell et al. (1987) intended their model as a general model
of attribute evaluation. If food-quantity judgments follow
the same pattern as attractiveness judgments, then when a
small target quantity is presented at the same time as a
larger quantity the small target quantity would appear larger
the larger the difference between it and the larger quantity.
By contrast, when a small target quantity is sequentially
presented after a larger quantity the target quantity would
appear smaller the larger the difference. Experiment 1 tested
these hypotheses. If the amount of food people eat is
inversely related to biases in judgments of food quantity,
then people ought to eat more the greater the difference

Food Quantity Judgments

Judgments of food quantity affect the amounts of food
people eat (Wansink, 2004). Specifically, in previous
research the amounts participants ate were inversely related
to biases in their judgments of food quantity. When
participants believed that a quantity was smaller, they ate
more; and when they believed that it was larger, they ate
less. For example, participants ate more when food was
packaged in larger containers (Wansink, 1996), served in
larger portions (Edelman, Engell, Bronstein, & Hirsch,
1986; Nisbett, 1968; Rolls, Morris, & Roe, 2002), or on
larger plates or bowls (Wansink & Cheney, 2005). Wansink
(2004) argued that people eat more in these conditions
because these factors cause people to judge quantities
smaller than they actually are which, in turn, makes people
believe that they ought to eat more or leaves them at liberty
to eat more. Several researchers (Raghubir & Krishna, 1999;
Wansink & Van Ittersum, 2003) have found that
participants consume more from short-wide containers than
from tall-thin containers. These researchers argued that their
results could be explained because short-wide containers
appear smaller than do tall-thin containers.
Wansink, Painter, and North (2005) devised a particularly
cleaver demonstration of the principle that people eat more
when they are misled to believe that quantities are smaller
than they actually are by giving their participants bowls of
tomato soup that, unbeknownst to the participants, were
refilled through a concealed tube as they were trying to eat
the soup. These participants consumed 73% more soup on
average than did control participants whose soup bowl was
not refilled.
The research presented here investigated the interaction of
food-quantity differences and temporal presentation on
participants’ judgments of food quantity and the amounts
881

verbal, language-based comparisons (e.g., “the triangle is
larger than the circle“) on size judgments. Consistent with
previous research in linguistics (Rusiecki, 1985), Choplin
and Hummel argued that verbal comparisons cause people
to imagine particular sizes and size differences. When
imagining a quantity of food that is “larger” than another
quantity, for example, people are unlikely to imagine that
the larger quantity is vastly different from the first. They are
certainly unlikely to imagine a quantity that fills an entire
dining room table. They are also unlikely to imagine a tiny
difference. The difference would, at the very least, have to
be large enough to be noticeable to the naked eye. Rather
people are likely to imagine a quantity that is larger by an
intermediate amount.
To illustrate the principle that food quantity comparisons
suggest intermediate differences, we used a technique
pioneered by Rusiecki (1985). We showed a group of 16
pretest participants a bowl containing 3.00 lbs. of pasta
salad and asked them to imagine a larger quantity and then
scoop out the quantity they imagined. All 16 participants
scooped out intermediate differences. The smallest quantity
was 3.92 lbs and the largest quantity was 5.80 lbs (we used
these quantities as comparison quantities in Experiment 2).
We will call these quantities comparison-suggested
quantities, because they are the quantities that the
comparison suggested to these pretest participants. We will
call the differences between the 3.00-lb quantity and the
quantities participants scooped out comparison-suggested
differences, because they are the differences that the
comparison suggested to these pretest participants. The
smallest difference was 0.92lbs (3.92lbs minus 3.00lbs) and
the largest difference was 2.80lbs (5.80lbs minus 3.00lbs).
Choplin and Hummel (2002) found that verbal
comparisons bias size judgments towards comparisonsuggested quantities and differences. When people see
particular quantities and the quantities suggested by verbal
comparisons are different from those quantities, people will
make judgments by combining (taking a weighted average
of) the two sources of information. For example, if the
actual difference between two quantities were only 0.92 lbs
(i.e., the smallest difference in our pretest and a difference
that was smaller than the comparison-suggested difference
for 15 out of the 16 pretest participants), then for 15 of our
pretest participants averaging the two sources of information
would bias judgments of the sizes apart toward their larger
comparison-suggested differences (note that comparisoninduced biases cannot be described as contrast or
assimilation effects, because all biases in this model are
assimilation
effects
toward
comparison-suggested
differences). The smaller quantity would be judged smaller
and the larger quantity would be judged larger than they
would have been judged otherwise. Likewise, if the actual
difference between two compared quantities were 2.80 lbs
(i.e., a difference that is larger than the comparisonsuggested difference for 15 out of the 16 pretest
participants), then for 15 of our pretest participants
averaging the two sources of information would bias
judgments of the sizes together toward their smaller
comparison-suggested differences. The smaller quantity

when quantities are presented sequentially and less the
greater the difference when quantities are presented
simultaneously. Experiment 2 tested these hypotheses.

Perceptual Contrast Effects

In perceptual contrast effects, the judged sizes of items are
biased away from the sizes of the items they are placed near.
A classic demonstration of a perceptual contrast effect is the
Ebbinghaus illusion. In the Ebbinghaus illusion (see Figure
1), a circle is judged larger when it is surrounded by small
circles than when it is surrounded by large circles. The
center circle in Group 1 appears larger than the center circle
in Group 2, for example, because its judged size is biased
away from the sizes of the circles that surround it. Unlike
the Wedell et al.’s (1987) findings and the parallel linelength illusion wherein simultaneous presentation produced
assimilation, and sequential presentation produced contrast
(Jordan & Uhlarik, 1984), Ebbinghaus illusion contrast
effects are strong when items are presented simultaneously
and weaken or disappear when items are presented
sequentially (Jaeger & Pollack, 1977).
Of importance to the research reported here, Ebbinghaus
illusion contrast effects (unlike line-length illusion biases,
Brigell & Uhlarik, 1979; Schiano, 1986) become greater the
larger the actual differences (Massaro & Anderson, 1971).
In Figure 1, for example, the center circle appears smaller in
Group 2 than in Group 3 although it is always smaller than
the circles that surround it, because the difference between it
and the surrounding circles is greater in Group 2 than in
Group 3.

Figure 1. The Ebbinghaus Illusion.
Placing quantities of food near each other so that they are
seen simultaneously might produce similar biases. If so,
then when a target quantity is surrounded by larger
quantities the target quantity would appear smaller the
larger the difference between it and the larger quantities that
surround it. Experiment 1 tested this hypothesis. If the
amount of food people eat is inversely related to biases in
judgments of food quantity, then when a quantity of food is
surrounded by larger quantities people ought to eat more the
greater the difference between that quantity and the larger
quantities to which it is perceptually compared. Experiment
2 tested this hypothesis.

Comparison-Induced Distortions

Choplin and Hummel (2002) investigated the effects of
882

would be judged larger and the larger quantity size would be
judged smaller than they would have been judged otherwise.
By biasing judgments toward comparison-suggested
quantities and differences, verbal comparisons produce
patterns of bias that are the exact opposite of those found in
the Ebbinghaus illusion. If actual differences are smaller
than comparison-suggested differences, verbal comparisons
will—like the Ebbinghaus illusion—bias values away from
each other. However, these biases away from each other
become smaller as actual differences become larger until
actual differences are equal to comparison-suggested
differences at which point there will be no biases. If actual
size differences are larger than comparison-suggested
differences, verbal comparisons will bias values toward
each other and these biases toward each other become
greater as actual differences become larger. That is, verbal
comparisons produce a pattern of bias wherein the larger the
difference between values the less likely values will be
biased away from each other and the more likely they will
be biased toward each other—the exact opposite pattern
from that observed in the Ebbinghaus illusion.
Language-based biases start with perceived values. Lowlevel perceptual illusions such as the Ebbinghaus and
parallel line-length illusions will, therefore, trump languagebased biases. Furthermore, although language-based biases
also operate when values are presented simultaneously and
values are perceptually available (Choplin & Hummel,
2005), they are stronger when values are presented
sequentially because once exact size information is no
longer perceptually available participants will start to rely
upon other sources of information such as verbal
comparisons (Choplin & Hummel, 2002) and category
membership (Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Vevea, 2000) to
evaluate quantities. Participants will then be more likely to
rely upon verbal comparisons and be susceptible to the
biases produced by verbal comparisons under sequential
presentation than under simultaneous presentation.
We tested the interaction of food-quantity differences and
temporal presentation on participants’ judgments of food
quantity and the amounts they ate in two experiments. To
investigate this interaction, Experiment 1 used a paradigm
in which participants viewed drawings of two portions of
mashed potatoes one of which was smaller than the other.
The drawings were then taken away and participants redrew
sizes from memory. To investigate the effects of perceptual
and verbal comparisons on the amounts of food people eat,
Experiment 2 used a paradigm in which participants viewed
two serving bowls of pasta salad—one of which was filled
with a smaller quantity than the other, compared them, and
then ate as much of the smaller quantity as they wished.

Method

Participants. Forty people (Half women, half men)
volunteered to participate after being approached by the
experimenter on the DePaul University campus or in the
surrounding community. Half saw portions presented
simultaneously and half saw portions presented
sequentially.
Materials and Procedure. Each participant received a
questionnaire. Participants in the simultaneous-presentation
condition saw two portions presented on the same page: one
small and one large. The small portion was 2.70cm in
diameter. To set the sizes of the large portions, we used a
group of 16 pretest participants to identify differences that
were smaller and larger than comparison-suggested
differences (for 15 of the 16 pretest participants and
approximately the same proportion of participants in the
experiment). Participants saw the 2.70-cm portion and then
each imagined a portion that was larger than this portion and
drew it. The smallest portion drawn by this group was 4.35
cm in diameter (calculated by averaging the height and
width of their drawings at their greatest extent). This
difference—1.65cm—was less than the comparisonsuggested difference for 15 of the 16 pretest participants so
this size was used as the size of the large portion in the
small-difference condition. The largest portion drawn was
7.80 cm in diameter so this size was used as the size of the
large portion in the large-difference condition. The pictures
were taken away and participants were given a page on
which to redraw the sizes they had seen from memory. After
completing one difference condition, participants completed
the other and the order of the conditions was
counterbalanced as was the location of each portion (top or
bottom of the page). Participants in the sequentialpresentation condition saw the same portions presented at
the same locations on each page except that the two portions
were presented on separate pages and the order of
presentation was counterbalanced. The experimenter
verbally compared portion sizes noting which one was
larger and smaller than the other as participants were
viewing them.

Results

A 2(presentation: simultaneous or sequential) x
2(difference: large or small) mixed-factors analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on the sizes redrawn by participants
found a significant interaction between the type of
presentation and the difference between portions,
F(1,38)=78.22, p<.01. Posthoc Tukey analyses found that
when portions were presented simultaneously the small
portion was recalled significantly larger when there was a
small difference between portions than when there was a
large difference between portions, but when portions were
presented sequentially the small portion was recalled
significantly smaller when there was a small difference
between portions than when there was a large difference
between portions.
The pattern observed under simultaneous presentation
was consistent with the pattern observed in the Ebbinghaus
illusion (Jaeger & Pollack, 1977; Massaro & Anderson,

Experiment 1

Experiment 1 investigated the interaction of food-quantity
differences and temporal presentation on participants’
judgments of food quantity. Participants saw drawings of
two portions of mashed potatoes (a small portion, 2.70cm in
diameter, and a large portion, either 4.35cm in diameter or
7.80cm in diameter) and redrew them. The two portions
were presented either simultaneously or sequentially.

883

1971) and inconsistent with the patterm observed in the
parallel line-length illusion (Jordan & Uhlarik, 1984) or the
pattern of biases observed by Wedell et al. (1987) for
attractiveness judgments. The pattern observed under
sequential presentation was consistent with the patterns of
bias produced by verbal comparisons (Choplin & Hummel,
2002) and again inconsistent with the patterns of bias
observed in the parallel line-length illusion (Jordan &
Uhlarik, 1984) or those observed by Wedell et al. (1987) for
attractiveness judgments. The results for sequential
presentation reported here may have differed from the
results for sequential presentation in the Ebbinghaus illusion
reported by Jaeger and Pollack (1977), because they
presented four comparison sizes rather than one. Also their
converging method of limits dependent measure which
required participants to verbally compare the center circle to
a comparison circle might have discouraged participants
from verbally comparing the center circle to the surrounding
circles. Although other explanations of this pattern of results
might be proposed, no other explanations have been
proposed in the literature to date. In fact, this paper is the
first to report simultaneous contrast and sequential
assimilation effects although we have replicated the results
reported in Experiment 1 several times and reported an
analogous pattern for judgments of skin color tones
elsewhere (Choplin & Wilson, 2006).
Several factors might account for the difference between
the results reported here (and Choplin & Wilson, 2006) and
the patterns observed in the parallel line-length illusion
(Jordan & Uhlarik, 1984) and Wedell et al.’s (1987)
attractiveness judgments. One possibility is that different
attribute dimensions might have their own idiosyncrasies.
Some dimensions such as geometric shapes and color tones
might be susceptible to one set of low-level perceptual
biases, while other dimensions such as line length might be
susceptible to another set of low-level biases, while still
other dimensions such as attractiveness might be susceptible
to different higher-level cognitive biases.
Alternatively, different dependent measures might
produce different patterns of bias (Biernat, Manis, &
Kobrynowicz, 1997). In particular, unlike Experiment 1
Wedell et al. used a category-rating measure of attribute
evaluation while Jordan and Uhlarik (1984) used a gradedseries scale measure which may have some properties of
rating scales (but see Choplin & Wilson, 2006). Effects of
verbal comparisons are often difficult to gage on category
rating measures (see Choplin, 2004). If the results of
Experiment 1 could have been different had we used a
different dependent measure, one might reasonably question
the construct validity of the size reproduction measure we
used. Experiment 2 will address this concern by
investigating the interaction of food-quantity differences
and temporal presentation on real dietary decision making,
the amount of food participants eat.

Method

Participants. Eighty undergraduate students (42 women; 38
men) participated in exchange for class credit. Half saw
quantities of food presented simultaneously and the other
half saw them presented sequentially. Half saw a large
difference between quantities and half saw a small
difference. We instructed participants not to eat before
arriving at the lab. Three women and one man admitted that
they had not followed these instructions. Four women
reported restricting their diet. Excluding their data did not
affect results, so we include their data in the analyses
presented below.
Materials and Procedure. Participants arrived at the
laboratory individually during lunchtime hours. The
experimenter told each participant that a second (fictional)
participant was also coming, but that the second participant
was apparently running late. The participant sat down at a
table. Two serving-bowl sized quantities of pasta salad were
prepared—one for the participant and one for the fictional
participant who never arrived. Several paper/pencil pretests
and previous research (Wansink & Cheney, 2005) suggested
the possibility that opaque plates and bowls might provide
an alternative perceptual standard of comparison. To control
for this possibility, the bowls used in this experiment were
transparent. The participants’ quantity of pasta salad was
3.00 lbs. They ate directly from the serving bowl rather than
scoop out a portion for themselves, because other factors
such as the size of the bowl could have affected how much
they scooped out. This method also allowed us to avoid
ceiling effects should we have served them a reasonably
sized portion, the social norm that participants should clean
their plates, unit bias (Geier, Rozin, & Doros, 2006), and
any feelings on the participants’ part that they had been
deprived a full portion. The fictional participant’s quantity
was 3.92 lbs for participants in the small-difference
condition and 5.8 lbs for participants in the large difference
condition. We used the group of 16 pretest participants
described above to set these sizes so that differences would
be smaller and larger than comparison-suggested differences
(for 15 of the 16 pretest participants and presumably the
same proportion of participants in the experiment).
The quantities were presented either simultaneously or
sequentially. In the simultaneous-presentation condition, the
experimenter set out the bowls, explicitly compared them,
and asked participants to eat as much or as little as they
wished. Both bowls were left on the table while participants
ate. In the sequential-presentation condition, the
experimenter placed the fictional participant’s bowl in front
of the participant but then interrupted and explained she had
given them the wrong bowl. She then removed the fictional
participant’s bowl and gave participants’ their bowl,
explicitly compared them, and asked participants to eat as
much or as little as they wished. These vocal comparisons
did not differ across condition and, in most cases, fit
naturally into the conversation. Typically, the participant
remarked on the quantities of pasta salad which gave the
experimenter an opportunity to explain that the participant’s
quantity was smaller than the fictional participant’s and that
the fictional participant’s quantity was larger than the

Experiment 2

In Experiment 2, participants saw two quantities of pasta
salad presented either simultaneously or sequentially and ate
as much as they wanted of the smaller quantity.

884

Experiment 1, participants viewed drawings of mashedpotato portions that differed by a small or a large amount
presented either simultaneously or sequentially. Participants
who saw portions presented simultaneously redrew the
small portion smaller when the difference was large than
when it was small, but participants who saw the two
portions presented sequentially redrew the small portion
larger when the difference was large than when it was small.
In Experiment 2, participants viewed quantities of pasta
salad that differed by a small or large amount presented
either simultaneously or sequentially. Consistent with
previous findings suggesting that the amounts people eat are
inversely related to biases in judgments of quantity, the
effects of temporal presentation and the difference between
quantities were the exact opposite of those found in
Experiment 1. Participants who saw the quantities presented
simultaneously ate more of the smaller quantity when the
difference between the quantities was large than when it was
small; but participants who saw the two quantities presented
sequentially ate more of the smaller quantity when the
difference was small than when it was large.
The pattern observed under simultaneous presentation
was consistent with the pattern observed in the Ebbinghaus
illusion (Jaeger & Pollack, 1977; Massaro & Anderson,
1971) and the pattern observed under sequential
presentation was consistent with the patterns of bias
produced by verbal comparisons (Choplin & Hummel,
2002). The results were inconsistent with the patterns of
bias observed in the parallel line-length illusion (Jordan &
Uhlarik, 1984) or those observed by Wedell et al. (1987) for
attractiveness judgments. In fact, this paper is the first to
report simultaneous contrast and sequential assimilation
effects, and while other potential explanations of this pattern
might be proposed, no other potential explanations have
been proposed in the literature to date.
Of potential importance to future research, the
Ebbinghaus illusion is moderated by factors such as the
distances between items, the number of items (Massaro &
Anderson, 1971), and similarity (Choplin & Medin, 1999;
Coren & Enns, 1993; Coren & Miller, 1974) between items.
Likewise, verbal comparison-induced biases are likely to be
moderated by such factors as the likelihood that they will
verbalize comparisons—whether or not they explicitly
vocalize them, and how important comparison are to them
(Choplin & Hummel, 2002, 2005). All of these factors may,
in turn, affect how much food people eat in real dietary
decision making contexts. Furthermore, serving food in
opaque plates or bowls (as opposed to the clear plastic
bowls used in Experiment 2) may provide alternative
standards of comparison and thereby moderate the effects of
other comparisons (Wansink & Cheney, 2005).
People typically eat more when they eat in groups than
when they eat alone (deCastro & Brewer, 1992).
Researchers have proposed several reasons for this social
eating effect including the possibility that conversation
distracts people and thereby reduces their ability to monitor
how much food they eat, that people might model other
eaters and only stop eating if other people stop eating as
well, and that how much other people have eaten or are
eating might serve as a consumption norm suggesting how

participant’s. The experimenter then left participants alone
to eat.
Once participants indicated that they had finished eating,
the experimenter weighed and recorded the amount eaten
and took several secondary measures. To measure
participants’ judgments of how much they had eaten,
participants estimated the amount they had eaten by
scooping that amount from a bucket into a separate bowl.
To measure satiety, participants rated how satiated they
were on a scale from 1(not full) to 10(very full). As a
secondary measure of satiety, participants were given a
100grams of M&M’s® Chocolate Candies for dessert and
ate as many as they wished.

Results and Discussion

We ran a 2(gender) x 2(presentation: simultaneous or
sequential) x 2(difference: large or small) between-subjects
ANOVAs on the amount eaten, estimated amount eaten, and
our measures of satiety. Of primary interest, the ANOVA
testing for amount eaten found a significant interaction
between temporal presentation and the difference between
quantities, F(1,72)=18.49, p<.01. Tukey posthoc analyses
revealed that in the simultaneous condition, participants ate
less if there was a small difference (M=0.23 lbs; 104.33
grams≈231.02 calories) than if there was a large difference
(M=0.38 lbs; 172.37 grams≈381.68 calories) between
quantities. But in the sequential condition, participants ate
more if there was a small difference (M=0.48 lbs; 217.72
grams≈482.09 calories) than if there was a large difference
(M=0.33 lbs; 149.69 grams≈331.46 calories) between
quantities. These results suggest that the size reproduction
measure used in Experiment 1 has construct validity.
Participants in the sequential condition (M=0.41 lbs;
185.97 grams≈411.79 calories) ate more than participants in
the simultaneous condition (M=0.30 lbs; 136.08
grams≈301.32 calories), F(1,72)=8.87, p<.01. The typical
gender difference wherein men eat more than women failed
to reach significance, F(1,72)=2.58, p>.05.
Despite the fact that temporal presentation and the size of
the difference between quantities affected how much
participants ate, we found no evidence that participants were
aware that they had been affected. We found no analogous
interaction for their estimates of how much they had eaten,
F(1,72)=0.04, p>.05, or their ratings of satiety,
F(1,72)=0.36, p>.05. Nevertheless, in some cases these
factors might have affected how many M&M’s® they
subsequently ate, F(1,72)=6.79, p<.05. Tukey posthoc
analyses failed to find differences in M&M’s® consumed
among participants was saw the pasta salad presented
sequentially, but found that among participants who saw the
pasta salad presented simultaneously those who saw a large
difference ate more than twice as many M&M’s® as those
who saw a small difference (28.10 grams≈138.25 calories
versus 13.40 grams≈65.93 calories). That is, the group that
had eaten more pasta salad continued eating more M&M’s®
afterwards.

General Discussion

We investigated the interaction of food-quantity differences
and temporal presentation in two experiments. In
885

much they should eat (Wansink, 2004). Food-quantity
comparisons and the biases they create (or lack thereof)
might be implicated in some of these explanations. For
example, distractions might make verbal comparisons less
likely. Also comparisons to consumption norms or how
much other people eat will likely bias evaluations of how
much people are eating and thereby affect how much they
subsequently eat.

Edelman, B., Engell, D., Bronstein, P., & Hirsch, E. (1986).
Enironmental effects on the intake of overweight and
normal-weight men. Appetite, 7, 71-83.
Geier, A. B., Rozin, P., & Doros, G. (2006). Un it bias: A
new heuristic that helps explain the effect of portion size on
food intake. Psychological Science, 17, 521-525.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (2000). Why
do categories affect stimulus judgment? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129(2), 220-241.
Jaeger, T., & Pollack, R. H. (1977). Effect of contrast level
and temporal order on the Ebbinghaus circles illusion.
Perception & Psychophysics, 21, 83-87.
Jordan, K., & Uhlarik, J. (1984). Assimilation and contrast of
perceived length depend upon temporal factors. Perception
& Psychophysics, 37, 447-454.
Massaro, D. W., & Anderson, N. H. (1971). Judgmental
Model of the Ebbinghaus Illusion. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 147-151.
Nisbett, R. E. (1968). Determinants of food intake in human
obesity. Science, 159, 1254-1255.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgments: A range-frequency
model. Psychological Review, 72, 407-418.
Raghubir, P., & Krishna, A. (1999). Vital dimensions in
volume perception: Can the eye fool the stomach? Journal
of Marketing Research, 36, 313-326.
Rolls, B. J., Morris, E. L., & Roe, L. S. (2002). Portion size of
food affects energy intake in normal-weight and
overweight men and women. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 76, 1207-1213.
Rusiecki, J. (1985). Adjectives and Comparison in English.
New York: Longman.
Schiano, D. J. (1986). Relative size and spatial separation:
Effects on the parallel-lines illuson. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 63, 1151-1155.
Wansink, B. (1996). Can package size accelerate usage
volume? Journal of Marketing, 60, 1-14.
Wansink, B. (2004). Environmental factors that increase the
food intake and consumption volume of unknowing
consumers. Annual Review of Nutrition, 24, 455-479.
Wansink, B., & Cheney, M. M. (2005). Super bowls: Serving
bowl size and food consumption. Jama-Journal of the
American Medical Association, 293(14), 1727-1728.
Wansink, B., Painter, J. E., & North, J. (2005). Bottomless
bowls: Why visual cues of portion size may influence
intake. Obesity Research, 13, 93-100.
Wansink, B., & Van Ittersum, K. (2003). Bottoms up! The
influence of elongation on pouring and consumption.
Journal of Consumer Research, 30, 455-463.
Wedell, D. H., Parducci, A., & Geiselman, E. (1987). A
formal analysis of ratings of physical attractiveness:
Successive contrast and simultaneous assimilation. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 230-249.

Acknowledgments

The research reported here was supported by grants from the
DePaul University Research Council and the National
Science Foundation (NSF-0621664) awarded to Jessica M.
Choplin. Portions of this research were conducted as part of
the second author’s masters thesis. We would like to thank
Brian Wansink, Traci Mann, D.A. Zellner, Peter Hermann,
and James Cutting for helpful conversations.

References
Anderson, N. H. (1965). Averaging versus adding as a
stimulus-combination rule in impression formation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70, 394-400.
Anderson, N. H. (1981). Foundations of integration theory.
New York: Academic Press.
Biernat, M., Manis, M., & Kobrynowicz, D. (1997).
Simultaneous assimilation and contrast effects in
judgments of self and others. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 73(2), 254-269.
Brigell, M., & Uhlarik, J. (1979). The relational
determination of length illusions and length aftereffects.
Perception, 8, 187-197.
Choplin, J. M. (2004). Toward a model of comparisoninduced density effects. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude
comparisons distort mental representations of magnitude.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 131(2),
270-286.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2005). Comparison-induced
decoy effects. Memory & Cognition, 33, 332-343.
Choplin, J. M., & Medin, D. L. (1999). Similarity of the
perimeters in the Ebbinghaus illusion. Perception &
Psychophysics, 61(1), 3-12.
Choplin, J. M., & Wilson, M. (2006). Social ComparisonInduced Distortions Among African Americans' Judgments
of Skin Color Tones. Paper presented at the Midwestern
Psychological Association Conference, Chicago, IL.
Coren, S., & Enns, J. (1993). Size Contrast as a Function of
Conceptual Similarity Between Test and Inducers.
Perception and Psychophysics, 54, 579-588.
Coren, S., & Miller, J. (1974). Size Contrast as a Function of
Figural Similarity. Perception and Psychophysics, 12, 355357.
deCastro, J., & Brewer, E. (1992). The amount eaten in meals
by humans is a power function of the number of people
present. Physiological Behavior, 51, 121-125.
886

