UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Gestures in Spatial Explanations: Change in Spatial Perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19x0q15r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Takenaga, Tutsuki

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Gestures in Spatial Explanations: Change in Spatial Perspective
Tatsuki Takenaga (takenaga@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Abstract

the cognitive load. In this study, the rate and type of
gestures were analyzed using a spatial explanation task that
involved a different perspective.
According to studies on large-scale spatial representations,
two perspectives of spatial representation have been
proposed—route perspective and survey perspective. The
route perspective is viewpoint within an environment. On
the other hand, the survey perspective is outside the
environment. Some studies have revealed that there exists a
cost for switching perspectives from encoding to test (e.g.,
Shelton & McNamara, 2004; Taylor & Tversky, 1992).
They use text descriptions followed by text-based questions
regarding the spatial layout. Such texts rely on spatial terms
as the medium for route and survey perspectives (e.g., right–
left vs. north–south). Comparison of the performance for a
“same perspective” (e.g., route study–route test) and the
performance for a “different perspective” (e.g., route study–
survey test) revealed the cost for perspective switching. In
this study, by modifying the paradigm, participants also
learned a fictional environment via the text of either the
route perspective or survey perspective, and then explained
routes and the location of landmarks. If there is a cost of
switching one perspective to another, the rate of gestures for
different perspective (e.g., route study–location explanation)
should be higher than the rate of gestures for a same
perspective (e.g., survey study–location explanation).
In terms of the type of gestures reflecting cognitive load,
there are two theoretical possibilities. The lexical retrieval
hypothesis proposed that gestures are generated from the
semantics of lexical items (Morrel-Samuels & Krauss,
1992). Morsella & Krauss (2004, 2005) showed that the
concreteness and spatiality of words is associated with
gesture production. The suggestion of these studies assumes
that gestures have the iconicity of the spatio-motoric nature
of semantic representation, and are generated from preexisting representation. Moreover, Franklin (2007) showed
that speakers produced gestures reflecting factual
representation when they asked to deceive a listener by
telling a story. If gestures are generated on such a preexisting mental model already constructed by the speakers,
then the type of gesture should always be compatible with
the type of spatial representation that the speakers form.
According to these pre-existing views of representation, in
location explanation, participants who learned from the
route perspective should produce Enactment mode gestures
(more route-oriented gestures), that correspond to the
learned perspective, than those who learned the survey
perspective. In route explanation, on the other hand,

The goal of this paper is to investigate the role of gestures in
verbal descriptions of a spatial layout. Participants listened to
a text describing a fictional environment from the route or
survey perspective, and then asked to explain the pairs of
landmarks, some with route perspective (directions from one
landmark to another) and other with survey perspective (to
provide the locations of two landmarks). Analysis of gestures
during the explanation in Experiment 1 revealed that speakers
who learned from the route perspective produced more
gestures when the explanation involved the survey
perspective. The type of increased gestures was consistent
with the perspective that the task demanded. These results
support the Information Packaging Hypothesis. The fact that
the effect of changing from survey perspective to route
perspective was not found in Experiments 1 and 2 indicated
an advantage of the survey text over the route text.
Keywords: gesture; perspective taking; spatial cognition;
representation

Introduction
This paper investigates the underlying cognitive processes
involved in relating spatial information from verbal input to
two output modalities (i.e., speech and gesture). Recently,
researchers have started exploring the possible cognitive
function of co-speech gestures. The Information Packaging
Hypothesis (Kita, 2000) has been proposed to explain how
gestures and speech are produced. According to this
hypothesis, gestures help speakers to organize knowledge
that is spatio-motoric in nature and convert it into a verbally
expressible form (e.g., propositional representation). If
gestures are in themselves beneficial, they increase with the
difficulty of the problem.
Some studies have provided supportive evidence for the
Information Packaging Hypothesis, by varying the difficulty
of conceptualization. For example, Hostetter, Alibali, &
Kita (in press) found that speakers produced more gestures
when the task required complex conceptualization. Alibali,
Kita, Young (2000) found the same result in children.
Moreover, many studies showed that the rate of gestures
was related to the cognitive load (Gaber & Goldin-Meadow,
2002; Goldin-Meadow, Nusbaum, Kelly, & Wagner, 2001).
These results were also consistent with the Information
Packaging Hypothesis.
However, the types of gestures reflecting cognitive load
are unclear. Although Emmorey, Tversky, & Taylor (2000)
showed that the type of gesture was compatible with the
type of speaker’s description, their task did not manipulate

1533

participants that learned from the survey perspective should
produce more survey-like gestures (referred to as
Objectification mode gestures), that correspond to the task,
than those who learned from route perspective.
The Information Packaging Hypothesis, on the other hand,
proposed that gestures originate from an impromptu
representation that results from a “thinking for speaking
process.” If so, the type of gestures should align with a
perspective that has an advantage for performing the task.
According to the Information Packaging Hypothesis, in
location explanation, participants that learned from a route
perspective should produce more objectification mode
gestures that correspond to the task, than participants who
learned the survey perspective. In the route explanation, on
the other hand, participants that learned from a survey
perspective should produce more enactment mode gestures
that correspond to the task, than the participants that learned
from route perspective.

explanation task, which demanded the survey perspective,
they were asked to explain the locations of two separate
landmarks.
Map Drawing After completing the explanation tasks,
participants were given a blank sheet of paper and asked to
sketch the environment they had learned. No particular
orientation was required for the map drawing. The order of
drawing landmarks and the choice of drawing orientation
was analyzed.
Asia

Panda
Monkey

Polar
Restaurant

Gate

Experiment 1
Koala

Conceptualization in a large-scale spatial representation is
considered to involve a switching of perspectives. If
gestures do indeed help in conceptualization, speakers
should produce more gestures that are consistent with the
perspective that the task demands. Consequently, verbal
descriptions of a fictional environment were used as stimuli
in order to gain control over the amount of route and survey
learning. To confirm that participants had in fact built up
corresponding mental representation, a map-drawing task
was used.

Penguin

Kangaroo

Australia

Zone
Lion
Elephant
Africa

Figure 1: The map of fictional environment1

Procedure

Method
Participants Thirty-two native Japanese speakers (20 males,
12 females) were recruited from an undergraduate
educational psychology class at the University of Tokyo.
Participants were randomly assigned to a survey text group
or route text group, with the constraint that each group
contain equal numbers of male and female participants.
Texts Two types of texts, modified from a version of
Shelton & McNamara (2004), were prepared. Both involved
a fictional environment, one based on a route perspective,
and the other, on a survey perspective (see Figure 1). The
survey text first introduced the four major quadrants of the
environment, and then, explained the individual landmarks.
The route text, on the other hand, immediately introduced
the first landmark and revealed information on the overall
layout of the environment in a stepwise manner.
Furthermore, the survey text employed canonical spatial
terms such as in the southern part of, while the route text
used relative spatial terms, such as on your left.

Half of the 32 participants were asked to listen to the route
text, while the remaining half listened to the survey text.
The participants listened to the text up to four times. They
were asked to memorize the text as much as possible. After
the encoding phase, they completed two types of
explanation tasks (i.e., route explanation and location
explanation). The order of the two tasks was
counterbalanced over the participants. Following the
explanation tasks, the unaware participants were asked to
draw a map of the environment. With the permission of
participants, the entire experiment was recorded for analysis.
Gesture coding Each gesture in the explanation tasks was
classified into one of two modes (i.e., Objectification Mode
and Enactment Mode). Objectification mode gestures were
characterized using a 2D plane as if the speakers were
outside the environment, and were responding from a survey
perspective. In particular, speakers produced gestures as
though drawing a map on a horizontal plane or on a vertical
plane.
Enactment mode gestures appeared as if the speakers
were within the environment and indicated directions from
their own perspective (i.e., route perspective). Enactment
mode gestures generally moved away from the speaker and
used the entire 3D space (rather than a 2D plane).
A single coder initially coded all of the data. For the
reliability check, two coders who were blind to the

Explanation tasks Participants were required to explain 15
pairs of landmarks (i.e., 9 route explanations and 6 location
explanations). In the route explanation task, which
demanded the route perspective, they were asked to give
directions from one landmark to another. In the location

1

1534

Note that participants were not presented with the map.

experimental hypotheses independently assessed another
12.5% of the data (the explanation task from each 4
participants). Agreement between coders was 89% for
classifying the mode of gestures (into objectification mode
or enactment mode).

Use of spatial terms during explanation tasks In order to
control the language used between the groups, the total
number of spatial terms and the proportion of spatial terms
in explanation tasks were analyzed. Although the survey
text group produced slightly more spatial terms than route
text group, the group effect was not significant (survey text
(M = 53.4 vs. route text M = 62.2, F (1,30) = 0.90, p > .1).
Thus, there was no evidence for the difference of the rate of
gestures due to the amount of spatial terms.
The spatial terms used in the explanation tasks were
classified as canonical spatial terms (e.g., east and west) or
relative spatial terms (e.g., in front of you).
For the location explanation task, the survey text group
used more canonical spatial terms (M = 97%) than the route
text group (M = 79%, F (1, 30) = 4.79, p < .05, see Figure
3). According to the lexical retrieval hypothesis, the survey
text group that used more canonical spatial terms should
produce more objectification mode gestures. However, the
result obtained was the opposite of that expected. The
survey text group that used more canonical spatial terms
produced fewer objectification mode gestures.
For the route explanation task, the route text group used
more relational spatial terms (M = 84%) than the survey text
group (M = 12%, F (1, 30) = 63.61, p < .001, see Figure 3).
The results of spatial terms suggested that participants
constructed corresponding spatial mental model.

Results
Gestures during explanation tasks The proportion of
responses accompanying one or more gestures was
subjected to an analysis of variance, with terms for text
(route vs. survey) as a between-subjects factor, and mode of
gesture (objectification vs. enactment), as a within-subjects
factor.
Gestures in location explanation If gestures are related to
changing perspective, the route text group should produce
more gestures than the survey text group. The main effects
of the mode of gesture (F (1,30) = 38.60, p < .001) and text
(F (1,30) = 9.28, p < .01) were significant. According to the
Information Packaging Hypothesis, the route text group,
should produce more objectification mode gestures, than the
survey text group, with regard to location explanation. For
the objectification mode gesture, the simple main effect of
text was significant (F (1,30) = 11.18, p < .05, see the left
part of Figure 2).
Gestures in route explanation The main effect of mode of
gesture was again significant (F (1,30) = 21.51, p < .001).
However, the main effect of text was not significant (p
= .18). According to the Information Packaging Hypothesis,
the survey text group, should produce more enactment mode
gestures, than the route text group, with regard to route
explanation. For the enactment mode gesture, the simple
main effect of text was significant (F (1,30) = 5.13, p < .05,
see the right part of Figure 2). However, the effect of text
was opposite of that expected: the survey text group
produced fewer enactment mode gestures.

Figure 3: Proportion of spatial terms used in explanation
tasks
Further analysis of gesture and speech in route
explanation The effect of switching perspectives was not
detected in route explanation, because most of the spatial
terms used in the survey text group were canonical spatial
terms (see Figure 3). To provide further evidence for the
Information Packaging Hypothesis, gesture production by
participants who used only spatial terms congruent with the
text was compared with that of participants who used both
spatial terms (relative and canonical spatial terms) in route
explanation. Participants who used both spatial terms could

Figure 2: Proportion of gesture – accompanied responses in
explanation tasks

1535

partly change from route perspective to survey perspective
in route explanation. Participants who used only congruent
spatial terms, on the other hand, did not change their
perspective. According to the Information Packaging
Hypothesis, participants who use both spatial terms should
produce more enactment mode gestures than those who use
only congruent spatial terms. The data from route text group
supports this hypothesis (F (1,30) = 4.46, p < .05, see Table
1). In terms of objectification mode gestures, there was no
difference between two groups (p > .1).

with what the task demanded rather than the spatial terms
used.
These results support the Information Packaging
Hypothesis in that the gestures demanded by the task assist
in conceptualization. The gestures help participants switch
perspectives as they use spatial representation congruent
with the demands of a specific task. However, in the current
experiment, the survey text group did not produce more
gestures in route explanation than the route text group. One
possible reason is that the survey text led to a spatial
representation with more fine-grained localization than the
route text. Another possible reason is that the survey text
group hardly used relative spatial terms. Further experiment
was required to explore these possibilities.

Table 1: Proportion of enactment mode of gesture –
accompanied responses in the route explanation task (route
text group)

Experiment 2

Enactment mode of gestures
Both spatial terms Congruent spatial terms
0.46
(0.44)

In Experiment 1, participants freely chose their own spatial
terms. It is possible that the survey text group might not
have changed their perspective in the route explanation task,
because most of the spatial terms used in the survey text
group were canonical spatial terms (Figure 3). To test the
significance of canonical spatial terms, the instruction in the
spatial explanation task was changed. In Experiment 1,
participants could freely choose canonical spatial terms. In
Experiment 2, participants were asked to use relative spatial
terms.

0.12
(0.24)

Map drawing To confirm that participants constructed
corresponding spatial representation, the order of drawing
landmarks and drawing orientation were analyzed. In route
representation, information about landmarks was organized
in a stepwise manner. In survey representation, on the other
hand, information about landmarks was organized in a
hierarchic manner. Thus, the temporal order of landmarks
was more important in route representation than in survey
representation. If the text affected spatial representation that
participants formed, the order of drawing landmarks should
be affected by the text in the route text group rather than
survey test group. Rank correlation between the order of
drawing landmarks and the order of presented landmarks in
the text was calculated. The mean correlation coefficient
was 0.86 for the route text group and 0.29 for the survey
text group. There was significant difference between two
groups (t (24) = 7.38, p < .001).
The drawing orientation was also analyzed. All
participants in survey text group drew the map from northas-up orientation. Eleven out of 16 participants in the route
text group drew the map from the initial orientation of the
text description. Thus, they drew the map from north-as-left
orientation. The other participants in route text group drew
the map from north-as-up orientation. The drawing
orientation was a significant difference between two groups
(p < .001).
These results of map drawing indicated that participants
constructed the spatial mental model that was consistent
with the perspective of the text.

Method
Participants Sixteen native Japanese speakers (8 males, 8
females) were recruited from an undergraduate educational
psychology class at the University of Tokyo. All
participants were assigned to the survey text group.
Text Survey text was the same as in Experiment 1.
Explanation tasks The instruction of how participants
explained the route direction and the location was modified.
Participants were required to explain 15 pairs of landmarks
(i.e., 9 route explanations and 6 location explanations). In
the route explanation task, which demanded the route
perspective, they were asked to give directions from one
landmark to another, using relative spatial terms as much as
possible. In the location explanation task, which demanded
the survey perspective, they were asked to explain the
locations of two landmarks, using canonical spatial terms as
much as possible.
Procedure This remained the same as with the survey text
group in Experiment 1, except for a modification of
explanation tasks.

Discussion

Results

When the route text group used canonical spatial terms, they
produced more gestures, than the survey text group or those
who used only relative spatial terms. Moreover, in terms of
the mode of gestures, gestures produced were consistent

Spatial terms in explanation tasks To check the
manipulation of instruction, the proportion of spatial terms
in explanation tasks was analyzed (see Figure 4). In the
location explanation task, the survey text group used
canonical spatial terms (99%). In the route explanation task,
1536

the survey text group in Experiment 2, used more relative
spatial terms (M = 57%) than in Experiment 1 (M = 12%, F
(1,15) = 18.92, p < .001). This result showed that the
modified instruction successfully led to the increase of
relative spatial terms in the route explanation.

showed no difference in the proportion of gestures in the
route explanation task (F (1,30) = 0.59, n.s.). Moreover, the
route text group in Experiment 1 produced more enactment
gestures than the survey text group in Experiment 2 (F
(1,30) = 6.55, p < .05). Experiment 2 replicated the data of
the previous experiment’s survey text group.

Discussion
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to test the significance of
canonical spatial terms. However, the result of the survey
text group in Experiments 1 and 2 was quite similar. This
result implied that the use of spatial terms was not important,
at least in the changing from survey perspective to route
perspective. The cost of perspective switching was not
detected in Experiment 1, because of the superiority of
survey representation to route representation. Spatial
representation from survey perspective may be more finegrained and general than route perspective.

General Discussion
Using spatial explanation tasks, speech protocols were
collected in which participants could freely choose whether
to produce gestures. The goal of this paper is to analyze the
rate and type of gestures, yielded by the spatial explanation
task that involved a change in perspective. When the route
text group used canonical spatial terms, they produced more
gestures than either the survey text group or those who used
only relative spatial terms. Cognitive load of switching from
route perspective to survey perspective led to an increase of
gestures in spatial explanation tasks. In terms of the types of
gesture, the route text group produced more gestures
consistent with perspectives that have an advantage in
performance of a task. These results supported the
Information Packaging Hypothesis. The gestures help
speakers switch perspectives as they reorganize spatial
mental model congruent with the demands of a specific task.
In terms of changing from survey perspective to route
perspective, there was no significant increase of gestures.
Comparison of the survey text group in Experiment 1 and in
Experiment 2, implied that the cognitive load of switching
survey perspective to route perspective, was slightly smaller.
According to more recent studies on large-scale spatial
representation, survey description was found to be superior
to route description (Noordzij & Postma, 2005; Noordzij,
Zuidhoek, & Postma, 2006). In distance comparison task,
participants who learned from the route perspective made
more errors than those who learned from the survey
perspective (Noordzij, Zuidhoek, & Postma, 2006).
The result of map drawing showed that participants
constructed the spatial representation that was consistent
with the perspective of the texts. This result might have
reflected the static nature of the spatial representation.
Gestures generated from an impromptu, dynamic
representation that might be separated, form a situation
model. A situation model, that speakers produced gestures,
is related to the proposal of the role of perceptually
represented structure in language comprehension. Barsalou

Figure 4: Proportion of spatial terms in survey text group in
Experiment 2
Gestures during explanation tasks Coding of gestures in
spatial explanation tasks was the same as in Experiment 1.
Gestures in location explanation The survey text group
produced more objectification mode of gestures than
enactment mode of gestures in location explanation (F
(1,15) = 18.92, p < .001, see the left part of Table 2).
Gestures in route explanation The survey text group
produced more objectification mode of gestures than
enactment mode of gestures in route explanation (F (1,15) =
25.72, p < .001, see the right part of Table 2).
Table 2: Proportion of gesture – accompanied responses in
explanation tasks (survey text group)
Location explanation
Objectification Enactment
0.43
(0.42)
Parenthetical
deviations

0
(0)
values

Route explanation
Objectification Enactment
0.53
(0.42)

are

between-subjects

0.08
(0.15)
standard

Comparison with Experiment 1 and Experiment 2
To test the significance of the using canonical spatial terms,
the survey text groups in Experiment 1 and in Experiment 2
were compared. If the use of canonical spatial terms was
important, the modified instruction in Experiment 2 should
lead to an increase in the rate of gestures. When compared,
the survey text group in Experiment 1 and in Experiment 2,

1537

proposed a Perceptual Symbol Systems theory, that
language comprehension can be explained as the languageinduced mental simulation of the described actions
(Richardson, Spivey, Barsalou, & McRae, 2003, see also
Barsalou, 1999).
Shelton & McNamara (2004) showed the interesting
finding that there was orientation dependence in route and
survey leaning. Through scene recognition for route and
survey images, when the test view matched the participants’
learned orientation, the same perspective recognition
performance was facilitated. Kita (2003) investigated
gestures during the route description in the real environment.
Although his task did not manipulate the perspective, he
proposed that the choice between the concepts right and left
during speech was facilitated by the alignment of gestures
and the speaker’s torso orientation with the environment.
The expansion of these studies would consist of examining
whether there are systematic relationships between
orientation dependence in the same perspective and gesture
productions.

Acknowledgments
A part of this research was presented previously at the 5th
International Conference of the Cognitive Science
(Takenaga, 2006).

References
Alibali, M. W., Kita, S., & Young, A. J. (2000). Gesture and
the process of speech production: We think, therefore we
gesture. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 593–613.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Emmorey, K., Tversky, B., & Taylor. H. A. (2000). Using
space to describe space: Perspective in speech, sign, and
gesture. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 2, 157-180.
Franklin, A. (in press) Blending in Deception: Tracing
Output Back to its Source. in Duncan, S. D., Cassell, J. &.
Levy, E. T. (Eds.) Gesture and the Dynamic Dimension of
Language: Essays in Honor of David Mcneill
Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help
speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture:
Window into thought and action, pp.162–185. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kita, S. (2003). Interplay of gaze, hand, torso orientation,
and language in pointing. In Kita, S. (Ed.) Pointing:
Where language, culture, and cognition meet. pp. 307-328.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hostetter, A. B., Alibali, M. W., Kita, S. (in press). I see it
in my hands’ eye: Representational gestures reflect
conceptual demands. . Language and Cognitive Processes.
Garber, P. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2002). Gesture offers
insight into problem-solving in adults and children.
Cognitive Science, 26, 817-831.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Hearing Gesture: How Our
Hands Help Us Think, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

1538

Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., & Wagner,
S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing lightens the load.
Psychological Science, 12, 516-522.
Morrel-Samuels, R., Krauss, R. M. (1992). Word familiarity
predicts temporal asynchrony of hand gestures and speech.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory
& Cognition, 18, 615-622.
Morsella, E, & Krauss, R. M. (2004). The role of gestures in
spatial working memory and speech. American Journal of
Psychology, 117, 411-424.
Morsella, E, & Krauss, R. M. (2005). Muscular Activity in
the Arm during Lexical Retrieval: Implications for
Gesture-Speech Theories. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 34, 415-427.
Noordzij, M. L., & Postma, A. (2005). Categorical and
metric distance information in mental representations
derived from route and survey descriptions. Psychological
Research, 69, 221-232.
Noordzij, M. L., Zuidhoek, S., & Postma, A. (2006). The
influence of visual experience on the ability to form
spatial mental models based on route and survey
descriptions. Cognition, 100, 321-342.
Richardson, D. C., Spivey, M. J., Barsalou, L. W., McRae,
K. (2003). Spatial representations activated during realtime comprehension of verbs. Cognitive Science, 27, 767780.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (2004). Orientation and
perspective dependence in route and survey learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory,
& Cognition, 30, 158–170.
Takenaga, T. (2006). The role of gestures in spatial
representations derived from route and survey texts,
Proceedings of The 5th International Conference of the
Cognitive Science, 203-204.
Taylor, H. A., Tversky, B. (1992). Spatial Mental Models
Derived from Survey and Route Descriptions, Journal of
Memory Language, 31, 261-292.
Taylor, H. A., Tversky, B. (1996). Perspective in Spatial
Descriptions, Journal of Memory Language, 35, 371-391.
Wesp, R., Hesse. J., Keutmann, D., & Wheaton, K. (2001).
Gestures maintain spatial imagery American Journal of
Psychology. 114, 591-600.

