UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Object-Relation Continuum in Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03j7g77h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Feist, Michele I.
Ferez, Paula Cifuentes

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Object-Relation Continuum in Language
Michele I. Feist (feist@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Paula Cifuentes Férez (paulacf@um.es)
Departamento de Filología Inglesa, Universidad de Murcia
Murcia, Spain
paraphrased. Afterwards, the paraphrases are presented to a
new set of participants whose task is to either paraphrase the
paraphrased sentences (Gentner & France, 1988) or to
choose the original word from a set of possibilities in a
“retrace task” (Fausey et al., 2006; Gentner & France,
1988). Assuming that the less a word’s meaning changes,
the more likely it is to be recovered (Gentner & France,
1988), the rate at which the original noun or verb is either
produced (in the back-paraphrase task) or chosen (in the
retrace task) is taken to be indicative of the extent to which
the meaning of the word has remained stable despite the
semantic incompatibility of the original sentence. In
English, it has been found that nouns are both reproduced
and chosen in a retrace task more commonly than are verbs
(Fausey et al., 2006; Gentner & France, 1988), although this
finding has not generalized beyond English (Fausey et al.,
2006).
Like the semantic features of translatability and
mutability, the psychological differences between nouns and
verbs may relate to the relatively broader meanings
associated with verbs. For instance, Kersten & Earles
(2004) found that verbs are more difficult to recognize in
new semantic contexts than are nouns, suggesting that this
may be due to the variation in verb meaning as a function of
semantic context. As a case in point, the way in which a
horse runs is different from the way in which a machine
runs. Because the action that will come to mind when told
that a horse runs is different from the action associated with
a machine running, it may be difficult to recognize run in
the context of a machine having encoded it in the context of
a horse. This difference is argued to be less pronounced for
the concepts associated with nouns: the animal that comes
to mind for “the horse runs”, for example, is not very
different from the one that comes to mind for “the horse
eats”.
Finally, it has been argued that both children and second
language learners are slower to acquire verbs than nouns
(Gentner, 1981, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001), a
difference that likely stems from the difference in breadth of
meaning, as it stands to reason that it would be simplest to
learn to consistently use a word in its appropriate contexts if
there are few such contexts.
While the differences noted between nouns and verbs may
be based on a difference in breadth of meaning associated
with the two word classes, it is by no means clear that even
this difference stems from the lexical class per se of the

Abstract
Gentner (1981, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001) identified
a number of ways in which noun meanings differ from verb
meanings. One striking difference is that nouns tend to name
objects, while verbs tend to name relations that hold between
objects. In this paper, we ask whether other differences noted
between nouns and verbs might generalize to differences
between names of objects and names of relations. Focusing
on the test case of mutability of meaning under semantic
strain, we find evidence for a relationality continuum.
Keywords: relational language; mutability; semantic strain

Introduction
Differences between nouns and verbs have long been
recognized as spanning both syntactic and semantic features
(Gentner, 1981, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001).
Syntactically, verbs function as the center around which a
sentence is built, according their contribution to the meaning
of a sentence particular importance. Semantically, in
comparison to noun meanings, verb meanings have been
argued to be broader, less straightforwardly translatable,
more variable across languages, and more prone to mutation
in response to semantic strain (Gentner, 1981; see also
Levin, 1993). As a result, verbs are more difficult to
recognize (Kersten & Earles, 2004) and slower to be
acquired (Gentner, 1981, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001) by both children and second language learners.
Given the relative breadth of meaning typical of verbs, it
is unsurprising that they would exhibit the other semantic
and psychological traits that have been noted for them.
Consider first the issue of translation. In order to find a
maximally appropriate translation, it is necessary to identify
a word in the target language which can be used in the same
range of semantic and syntactic contexts as the original
word. As breadth of meaning increases, so too should the
range of possible contexts in which the word would be
acceptable, which would in turn adversely affect the
likelihood that a single word in the target language can be
used in the same set of contexts.
Similarly, it is to be expected that greater breadth of
meaning would lead to greater semantic mutability, i.e.,
tendency of a word to change its meaning as a function of
context. One way in which the mutability of noun and verb
meanings has been studied has been to create semantically
strained sentences, then present them to participants to be

251

words in question. Rather, it may be that differences in the
nature of the meanings of nouns and verbs are responsible
for the broader set of linguistic and psychological
differences that have been noted. As Gentner has pointed
out (1981, 1982), the most salient semantic difference is that
nouns tend to name objects and entities, while verbs tend to
name relations between objects. In this paper, we follow up
on this explanation, addressing the question of whether
differences can be noted between more relational and less
relational words in general, regardless of their lexical class.
If in fact the constellation of differences between nouns
and verbs stems from a difference in the extent to which
their meanings are relational, we should see similar
differences between sets of words which differ with respect
to relationality regardless of syntactic class. Gentner and
Kurtz (2005; see also Asmuth & Gentner, 2005) discuss just
such a contrasting pair of word types: object nouns and
relational nouns.
Like verbs, relational nouns name
relations between objects and entities, rather than the
objects and entities themselves (which are named by object
nouns).

meanings, relational nouns should be more mutable, and
thus less likely to be returned in the back-paraphrase task,
than object nouns.

Part 1: Paraphrase
Participants 27 English speakers and 22 Spanish speakers
volunteered or received course credit for their participation.
The English speakers were students at the University of
Louisiana at Lafayette; the Spanish speakers, at the
University of Murcia, Spain. Data sets from three Spanish
speakers and five English speakers were excluded because
they failed to follow directions. The incomplete sets of
responses of an additional seven English speakers were
combined to create five complete sets of paraphrases, for a
total of twenty complete sets of English paraphrases and
nineteen complete sets of Spanish paraphrases.
Materials A set of ten object nouns, ten relational nouns,
and ten verbs were chosen for this task. Each verb was
paired with one object noun and one relational noun for a
total of twenty intransitive sentences of the form “The noun
verbed”. Care was taken to ensure that the action named by
the verb was typical of neither the object noun nor the
relational noun paired with the verb, thus ensuring that the
sentences in both conditions would exhibit semantic strain.
In addition, the materials were chosen with the goal of
maximizing the faithfulness of the translations of the
individual words between English and Spanish. Finally, the
frequencies of the object nouns, relational nouns, and verbs
did not differ significantly 1 , as confirmed by a 2 (language)
x 3 (word type) ANOVA, all Fs < 1.5. Pairwise
examination of the nouns occurring with each verb revealed
that the object noun is more frequent in 5/10 English sets,
and in 6/10 Spanish sets. The English nouns and verbs are
presented in Table 1.

Experiment 1
Although prototypically nouns refer to sets of entities
characterized by their shared intrinsic properties, this is not
always the case. Notably, some nouns denote sets of
entities whose membership is determined by the relations in
which they participate (Asmuth & Gentner, 2005; Gentner
& Kurtz, 2005) rather than by the presence or absence of
shared intrinsic properties. For example, an entity can be
called a bridge if it connects two other entities or points, be
they concrete or abstract. Failure to do this (imagine, e.g., a
“bridge” floating in the air such that it is in contact with
nothing), may preclude the use of bridge (particularly
without qualification), regardless of whether the object
physically resembles other bridges. Drawing on this
distinction between types of nouns, Asmuth and Gentner
(2005) found that relational nouns, like verbs, are more
semantically mutable and harder to recognize in new
contexts than are object nouns.
In Experiment 1 we sought to replicate and extend
Asmuth and Gentner’s (2005) finding that relational nouns
are more mutable than object nouns, considering both a
different task from Asmuth and Gentner’s, and an additional
language. We thus employed a back-paraphrase task like
that used to study the semantic mutability of verbs relative
to nouns (Gentner & France, 1988), run in both English and
Spanish. The experiment was organized in two parts: a
paraphrase task, in which participants were asked to rewrite
a set of semantically strained sentences in their own words;
and a back-paraphrase task, in which a new set of
participants was given the paraphrases generated in Part 1
and asked to guess what the original sentences may have
been.
If the verb mutability effect noted by Gentner and
colleagues (Fausey et al., 2006; Gentner & France, 1988) is
indeed due to a difference between object and relational

Table 1: English nouns and verbs used in Experiment 1
Object nouns
Lizard
Mouse
Lion
Dog
Cat
Table
Television
Computer
Book
Vase

Relational nouns
Barrier
Carnivore
Bridge
Goal
Shield
Surprise
Weapon
Map
Trap
Tool

Verbs
Dress
Ring
Soften
Break
Relent
Die
Worship
Shiver
Complain
Flicker

Procedure The twenty sentences from Experiment 1 were
combined with an additional ten sentences (see Experiment
2). Separate random orders of the thirty sentences were
prepared for each participant and arranged in booklets.
1
English frequency data was taken from Francis & Kučera
(1982); Spanish data from www.elcorpusdelespanol.org.

252

Furthermore, we found an effect of type of noun on the
rate at which content words reappeared in the backparaphrases, whereby participants in both language groups
were more likely to reproduce the original content words in
sentences involving object nouns (M = .22) than in
sentences involving relational nouns (M = .12), F(1,72) =
12.50, p = .001. Of particular interest was the interaction
between the two factors (F(1,72) = 16.76, p < .0001),
suggesting that the effect of sentence type was entirely due
to the differing rates at which object nouns and relational
nouns reappeared in the back-paraphrases (Figure 2). As
predicted, we found that object nouns returned more often
than relational nouns, while there was no difference in the
rate at which verbs in the two types of sentences returned.

As in earlier studies (Fausey et al., 2006; Gentner &
France, 1988), participants were told to imagine that they
had overheard the sentences in the booklet and to restate
each sentence in their own words, taking care not to repeat
any of the words in the sentence. Special attention was paid
to the repetition of the target nouns, verbs, and prepositions;
participants were asked to reparaphrase sentences in which
these words were repeated 2 . Participants were told that
there were no right or wrong answers, and that our interest
was in understanding what they thought that the sentences
meant. The resultant paraphrases were then used as
materials in Part 2.

Part 2: Back-paraphrase
Participants 20 English speakers and 19 Spanish speakers
from the same populations as in Part 1 volunteered or
received course credit for their participation; none had
participated in Part 1. Data from one English speaker was
excluded due to failure to respond to all of the sentences.

0.70
0.60
0.50
object noun
sentences
relational noun
sentences

0.40

Materials The sets of paraphrases produced in Part 1
comprised the booklets for Part 2.

0.30

Procedure Participants were given booklets including one
paraphrase for each of the original sentences. They were
told the sentences were paraphrases of sentences, and asked
to write out what they thought the original sentences were.

0.10

0.20

0.00
noun

verb

Figure 2: Rate of return of nouns and verbs in the two types
of sentences, averaged across language

Results
As predicted, Experiment 1 replicated previous results
showing greater semantic mutability for verb meanings than
for noun meanings, and extended this result to an additional
language, Spanish. Across both kinds of sentences and both
languages, the original nouns appeared in the backparaphrases more often than the verbs with which they were
paired (Figure 1), F(1,72) = 69.15, p < .0001.

Discussion
In Experiment 1 we asked whether the verb mutability effect
noted by Gentner and her colleagues (Fausey et al., 2006;
Gentner & France, 1988) might generalize to a relational
mutability effect, whereby words referring to relational
categories are more mutable than words referring to object
categories, regardless of lexical category.
Our results
support this analysis: relational nouns were returned less
often in a back-paraphrase task than were object nouns,
suggesting greater semantic mutability. Because in both
cases the words in question were nouns, this difference is
not explainable by a difference in syntactic category 3 .
Further, this difference can not be explained by a difference
in breadth of meaning. Taking synonymy relations as
indicative of breadth of meaning, we asked how many
WordNet synsets the English nouns in our study participated
in. We found that, in contrast with the mutability results,
the relational nouns participate in more synsets (M= 4) than
do the object nouns (M = 4.8) 4 . We thus conclude that the

0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
noun

verb

Figure 1: Rate of return of nouns and verbs averaged across
both sentence types and both languages.
2
In line with our prediction of greater mutability for more
relational words, one might expect the paraphrase task to be harder
for object noun sentences than relational noun ones. There is
limited support for this: of the unusable sentences in English, 46
were object noun sentences (32 due to nouns; 14, to verbs) and 28
were relational noun sentences (20 due to nouns; 8, to verbs).
Similarly, the only Spanish sentence not fully paraphrased was an
object noun sentence (El libro se quejó ‘The book complained’).
We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this analysis.

3
Despite this, it is possible that syntactic category per se also
results in differences in mutability, as seen in the differing rates of
return of nouns and verbs. As this is not the focus of the current
experiments, we leave this issue to future research.
4
Breadth of meaning may be involved in the Spanish results, as
the Spanish relational nouns had more synonyms (M = 10.6) than

253

observed difference is likely due to the semantic difference
between more relational and less relational meanings.

Table 2: English stimuli used in Experiment 2
Verb
Arrive
Escape
Return
Rise
Fall
Enter
Descend
Exit
Approach
Cross

Experiment 2

Prepositional phrase
Over the room
Under the park
In the house
Against the chair
In the door
Around the room
Outside the building
To the cage
Between the trees
Toward the street

In Experiment 2 we sought to extend the findings from
Experiment 1 to a second relational contrast: verbs and
spatial prepositions. Like verbs, spatial prepositions occur
in a wide range of contexts (e.g., Brugman, 1988;
Herskovits, 1986), suggesting breadth of meaning. In order
to compare the mutability of verbs and prepositions, we
sought verbs that commonly co-occur with prepositions, yet
are semantically compatible with only a subset of the
available prepositions.
Because they describe motion along a particular path in
space, path verbs provided just such a set. To ensure that
our sentences would be semantically strained, we paired
each path verb in our set with a spatial preposition which
names a path or location different from that lexicalized in
the verb.
As in Experiment 1, we employed a back-paraphrase task
(Gentner & France, 1988) in both English and Spanish. If,
as Gentner suggests (Gentner, 1981; Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001), spatial prepositional meanings are indeed more
relational than verbal meanings, we should expect to see
that spatial prepositions are more mutable, and thus less
likely to be returned in a back-paraphrase task, than are path
verbs.

Part 2 of Experiment 2 was identical to Part 2 of Experiment
1. The paraphrases generated in Part 1 were assembled into
booklets, along with the paraphrases from Experiment 1,
and participants were asked to try to figure out what the
words had been in the original sentences.
Upon examining the data from Part 2, it was found that
the original preposition appeared in a high proportion of the
initial English paraphrases (from Part 1) for two of the
sentences (She exited to the cage, and He fell in the door).
As a result, these two sentences were removed from the
analysis in both language samples.

Part 1: Paraphrase

Results

Participants The participants in Part 1 of Experiment 1 also
served as participants in Part 1 of Experiment 2.

As predicted, we found a difference in the rate at which path
verbs and spatial prepositions were returned in the backparaphrase task. In both languages, the original verb
reappeared more often than the preposition with which it
was paired (Figure 3), suggesting greater semantic
mutability for spatial prepositions than for path verbs. This
result was confirmed with a 2 (language: Spanish or
English) x 2 (word type: verb or spatial preposition)
ANOVA, F(1,28) = 9.94, p < .005.

Part 2: Back-paraphrase

Materials A set of ten path verbs and ten prepositions was
chosen for this task. Each verb was paired with an
incompatible preposition to form an intransitive sentence.
In order to ensure that any changes in the verbs and
prepositions under paraphrase were due to their semantic
incompatibility, English sentences were presented with
animate pronouns as subject (half he and half she), and
Spanish sentences were presented without overt subjects. As
in Experiment 1, the sentences were all in the past tense,
and the materials were chosen with the goal of maximizing
the faithfulness of the translations of the individual words
between English and Spanish 5 . The English verbs and
prepositions are presented in Table 2.

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

Procedure The procedure was the same as in Part 1 of
Experiment 1: participants were given a set of sentences,
asked to imagine that they had overheard the sentences, and
then to rewrite them in their own words.

0.00
verb

preposition

Figure 3: Rate of return of path verbs and spatial
prepositions, averaged across language
did the object nouns (M = 2.4) (based on a count of synonyms in
www.elcorpusdelespanol.org).
We leave resolution of this
language difference and its ramifications for future research.
5
Due to the extremely high frequency of prepositions, word
frequency could not be balanced in this experiment.

There were no other significant effects or interactions.

254

(E1). 6 While we cannot directly compare across the two
experiments, this difference raises issues to be addressed in
future research. Though there is a clear semantic difference
between the verbs used in the two experiments, we think it
is likely that our results are driven by the diverging degrees
of relationality between the words accompanying the verbs.
Concretely, in Experiment 1, verbs were paired with nouns,
which are less relational, whereas in Experiment 2, they
were paired with prepositions, which are more relational.
According to the Relational Mutability Hypothesis, the
meaning of the more relational word will change to
accommodate the less relational word in situations of
semantic strain (Gentner, 1981). Thus, it is to be expected
that the verb meanings will be more stable when paired with
an incompatible preposition than when paired with an
incompatible noun.
In addition to extending previous findings beyond the
comparison of nouns and verbs, the current study extends
the relational mutability effect into Spanish, which is
typologically distinct from English. First, Spanish is a prodrop language (i.e. a language in which it is possible to omit
pronominal subjects from sentences), which may result in a
more central role accorded to the verb (Choi & Gopnik,
1995; Tardif, 1996; see also Fausey et al 2006) due to the
fact that the verb is the only necessary element. Second,
path verbs (like those used in E2) are more frequent in
descriptions of motion events in Spanish than in English
(Aske, 1989; Slobin, 1996; Talmy, 1985), which may make
them more lexically available and hence more likely to
appear in back-paraphrases. Third, the distributed semantics
of the two languages differ: Spanish overtly distributes
spatial relational meaning into spatial prepositions and verbs
(Sinha & Kuteva, 1995), with the result that Spanish spatial
prepositions are relatively broad in meaning (Aske, 1989;
Slobin, 1996), whereas verbs carry much semantic weight
regarding localization of the event and give the specificity
necessary for comprehension. This situation is what one
might expect given that Spanish is a verb-framed language
(Talmy, 1985). In contrast, English tends to restrict the
overt expression of spatial relational meaning to a single
word within the sentence, either the verb or the preposition,
but not both at the same time (Sinha & Kuteva, 1995).
Further, as English is a satellite-framed language (Talmy,
1985), the expression of path and spatial location is most
likely to occur in the preposition. All of these facts together
suggest that greater importance may be accorded to the verb
in Spanish than in English, with the result that Spanish
verbs may be less mutable (cf, Fausey et al., 2006). Despite
these cross-linguistic differences, we observed the predicted
relational mutability effect in Spanish, suggesting that the
object-relation continuum may play a similar role in the two
languages.
While the results presented here support the conjecture
that mutability under semantic strain is related to
relationality of meaning, they raise the question of whether
other semantic features may also play a role. For example,

Discussion
Following up on Gentner’s (1981; Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001) suggestion that the meanings of spatial prepositions
are more relational than the meanings of verbs, Experiment
2 built upon the result from Experiment 1 by examining the
differential mutability of path verbs and spatial prepositions.
When presented in semantically strained intransitive
sentences describing motion events, path verbs were found
to be more likely to reappear in back-paraphrase than were
spatial prepositions, suggesting that the path verbs are less
mutable. This result generalizes the relational mutability
effect across the object-relation continuum proposed by
Gentner (1981; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001).

General Discussion
Linguistically and psychologically, it has long been noted
that there are many differences between nouns and verbs. In
the present paper, we consider one difference, breadth of
meaning as evidenced by semantic mutability. We asked
whether the noun and verb mutability effects reported for
English (Fausey et al., 2006; Gentner & France, 1988)
might represent the effects of the relative positions of the
words tested along a proposed object-relation continuum
(Gentner, 1981; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001) by testing
additional positions along the continuum: the position of
relational nouns relative to object nouns, and the position of
spatial prepositions relative to path verbs. In both cases, we
found evidence for the influence of such a continuum on the
semantic mutability of words. Furthermore, we extended
the examination of these effects into an additional language,
Spanish, suggesting that the effects that have been reported
are not due to peculiarities of the English language.
Our results from Experiment 1 both replicate and extend
previous findings: under semantic strain, nouns were less
mutable than verbs, and, within the noun category,
relational nouns were more often semantically adjusted than
object nouns, in both English and Spanish. Unlike nouns
and verbs, relational nouns and object nouns belong to the
same lexical category (i.e. both are nouns). However, like
nouns and verbs, relational nouns and object nouns differ
with respect to where they fall on the object-relation
continuum. Thus, the greater mutability of relational nouns
relative to object nouns provides support for the conjecture
that the verb mutability effect (Fausey et al., 2006; Gentner
& France, 1988) is due to a semantic, rather than a lexical
category, difference.
Experiment 2 extended the evidence for the effect further
along the object-relation continuum: English and Spanish
speakers were more likely to preserve the meanings of path
verbs than of spatial prepositions in situations involving
semantic strain, as shown by the higher rate of returning
verbs.
Looking at the rates at which the verbs returned in the two
experiments, we note that the verbs were more likely to
return when paired with incompatible prepositional phrases
(E2) than when paired with incompatible subject nouns

6

255

We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.

Asmuth and Gentner (2005) suggest that the degree of
concreteness or abstractness of relational nouns may have
an effect on their potential mutability under semantic strain.
For instance, “bridge” and “tool” might be seen as more
concrete than “surprise” or “goal”; might they also be less
prone to shifts in meaning under semantic strain?
Finally, we have considered here only one semantic
consequence of the object-relation distinction: mutability
under semantic strain. However, Gentner (1981, 1982;
Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001) has identified a family of
semantic differences between verbs and nouns, including
breadth of meaning, variability across languages,
translatability, memorability, and ease of acquisition by
children and second language learners. We leave to future
research the question of whether these effects can be
extended along the object-relation continuum.

Fellbaum, C. (Ed.) (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical
database. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Francis, W. N. & Kučera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161178.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.
Kuczaj (Ed.), Language development: Vol. 2. Language,
thought and culture. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development (pp. 215-256). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D., & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutability
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns
and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M. K.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Lexical ambiguity resolution:
Perspectives from psycholinguistics, neuropsychology,
and artificial intelligence (pp. 343-382). San Mateo, CA:
Kaufmann.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Relational categories.
In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B.
Markman, & P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside
and outside the laboratory (pp. 151-175). Washington
DC: APA.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kersten, A. W., & Earles, J. L. (2004). Semantic context
influences memory for verbs more than memory for
nouns. Memory & Cognition, 32 (2), 198-211.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation.
Chicago:
University of
Chicago Press.
Sinha, C. & Kuteva, T. (1995). Distributed spatial
semantics. Nordic Journal of Linguistics, 18, 167-199.
Slobin, D. I. (1996). From "thought and language" to
"thinking for speaking". In J. J. Gumperz & S. C.
Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns:
Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description (Vol. 3, pp. 57-149).
Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Tardif, T. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before
verbs:
Evidence from Mandarin speakers’ early
vocabularies. Developmental Psychology, 32 (3), 492504.

Conclusion
The two experiments reported in this paper present evidence
that the differences noted between nouns and verbs (Fausey
et al., 2006; Gentner, 1981, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001) may be due more generally to the distinction between
more relational and less relational meanings. In addition,
these results extend the investigation to a typologically
distinct language, Spanish, in which the same effects were
noted.
Further investigations into the object-relation
continuum across languages can shed light on the generality
of the effects noted here while refining our understanding of
the nature of the object-relation continuum in language.

Acknowledgments
We thank Roxi Benoit and Derek James for their help with
the collection and tabulation of the English data, and we
gratefully acknowledge the comments of three anonymous
reviewers.

References
Aske, J. (1989) Path predicates in English and Spanish: a
closer look. Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistics
Society, 15, 1-14.
Asmuth, J. & Gentner, D. (2005) Context sensitivity of
relational nouns. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 163168.
Brugman, C. M. (1988). The story of over. New York and
London: Garland.
Choi, S. & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs in
Korean: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of Child
Language, 22, 497-529.
Fausey, C., M., Gentner, D., Asmuth, J., & Yoshida, H.
(2006) The verb mutability effect: Noun and verb
semantics in English and Japanese. In R. Sun & N.
Miyake (Eds.). Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.

256

