UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Bayesian Logic of the Conjunction Fallacy: Effects of Probabilities and Frequencies in
Contingency Tables

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40g5b899

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Momme, Momme Momme

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Bayesian Logic of the Conjunction Fallacy:
Effects of Probabilities and Frequencies in Contingency Tables
Momme von Sydow (momme.von-sydow@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, Universität Göttingen,
Gosslerstr. 14, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany
is the union of n other disjoint subsets of events Ei is the
sum of the probabilities of those subsets:

Abstract

P( E1 ∪ E 2 ∪ ... ∪ E n ) = ∑ P ( Ei )

In this paper a Bayesian logic of the conjunction fallacy (CF)
is advocated as a normative and descriptive proposal for
testing hypotheses about dyadic logical connectors. According to traditional extensional probability a violation of additivity and, in particular, a violation of P(A) ≥ P(A ∧ B) or of
P(Linda is a bank teller) ≥ P(Linda is a bank teller AND an
active feminist) is a fallacy. The psychological literature has
adopted this interpretation. In contrast, the proposed Bayesian
model formulates qualitative as well as quantitative conditions under which such a judgment is reasonable. Qualitatively, the model is applicable to situations in which probabilities have to be taken (or are taken) not directly as extensional
probabilities, but as (posterior) probabilities for alternative
logical hypotheses about whole situations. If the preconditions
of the model are given, Bayesian logic should be applicable to
novel situations, like highly transparent tasks, even if frequency information is provided in a fully specified contingency
table. Quantitatively, the model makes predictions about the
effects of extensional probability patterns and resulting
Bayesian probabilities and corresponding ‘CFs’. Additionally,
while keeping the probability patterns constant, the model
predicts effects of different underlying frequencies (sample
sizes). In the experiment two quantitative factors were varied
using highly transparent tasks with explicit frequency
information in a contingency table. Despite using these strict
conditions, the results supported the predicted occurrence of
‘double CFs’ and the differential effects of sample size.

There are alternative calculi of probability or belief which
have abandoned or extended the axioms of probability
theory. In our context, the most prominent approaches are
the Dempster-Shafer theory of belief functions, Cohen’s
Baconian probabilities, and different formalizations of
multi-valued or fuzzy logic (cf. e. g., Hájek, 2001, Hayek,
2003). The belief functions postulated by Dempster-Shafer
theory are non-additive, but they meet the requirement of
Equation 1. Likewise, the Baconian probability of a conjunction violates Equation 2 – it is equal to the minimum of
the probabilities of their conjuncts, but does not violate
Equation 1. Finally, in multi-valued or fuzzy logic there are
quite different t-norms (Łukasiewicz, Gödel, product), but
these t-norms are all consistent with P(A) ≥ P(A ∧ B).

The Conjunction Fallacy Debate in Psychology

Keywords: Bayesian logic, conjunction fallacy, probability
theory, hypothesis testing, noise, frequency format, logic

The Additivity of Probability in Classical and
Non-Classical Probability Theories
It is a basic truth of standard extensional probability theory
that the probability of a set X can never become larger than
the probability of a set Y if the latter has a larger extension
than the former (inclusion rule). Applied to logical
connectors and, particularly, to conjunctions, no conjunction
‘A ∧ B’ can be more probable than one of its conjuncts, ‘A’
or ‘B’, since the intersection of both is a subset of each
conjunct. The conjunction is true for A & B cases only,
whereas, for instance, the conjunct ‘A’ is additionally true
for A & non-B cases. Correspondingly, probabilities have to
satisfy the (extensional) conjunction rule:
P(A) ≥P(A ∧ B); P(B) ≥ P(A ∧ B)

(2)

i

(1)

Taking the classical axioms of probability theory of
Kolmogorov, this can be derived directly from his third
axiom (σ-additivity): The probability of an event set which

When Tversky and Kahneman (1983) initiated a broad psychological debate on the conjunction fallacy as a cornerstone of their ‘heuristic and biases’ program, they took the
conjunctive rule (1) as a general norm of rational thought.
The conjunction debate was mostly concerned with tasks
of the sort of the Linda task. In this task subjects read:
“Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright.
She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply
concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice,
and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations.”
Subjects were asked to rank several statements about Linda
to their probability, including: “Linda is a bank teller” (T)
and “Linda is a bank teller and she’s active in the feminist
movement” (T and F). Tversky and Kahneman (1983) found
that a majority of subjects judged ‘T and F’ to be more
probable than ‘T’ and concluded that subjects committed a
conjunction fallacy (CF) due to ‘representativeness’ of ‘F’.1
In the subsequent debate all aspects of the task and its
interpretation became objects of closer scrutiny.
One group of objections concerned subtle linguistic or
pragmatic aspects of the task which makes the interpretation
of ‘T’ as well as of ‘T and F’ logically ambiguous, perhaps
exculpating participants from committing a fallacy. A
precondition for calling a judgment a ‘conjunction fallacy’
is that natural language roughly corresponds to the meant
ideal connectors in the first place.
Firstly, in natural language ‘A and B’ is not always to be
interpreted as a conjunction ‘A ∧ B’, with the common truth
1

Conjunction tasks which have been explained by availability are
not topic of this paper.

1617

table function ‘1, 0, 0, 0’ (for A & B, A & ¬B, ¬A & B,
¬A & ¬B). As Hertwig (1997, cf. Mellers, Hertwig &
Kahneman, 2001) made clear, the sentence “we invite
friends and colleagues to the party” often implies an
inclusive disjunction of friends and colleagues (with a truth
function ‘1, 1, 1, 0’), not their intersection. Hertwig suggested that the phrase ‘bank tellers who are active in the
feminist movement’ would exclude this unintended interpretation as union, not testing true CFs. In Mellers, Hertwig
and Kahneman (2001), Kahneman conceded that ‘and’
might have indeed been semantically ambiguous. However,
in regard of Hertwig’s ‘who are’ formulation he objected
that this phrase is also inadequate, since it too strongly cued
participants to interpret AND as a subset only. In their adversarial collaboration they settled on an “and are” formulation (we shall even use the stricter ‘who’ formulation). Their
between-subject tests in a frequency format did not lead to a
clear decision of their dispute (Mellers, et al. 2001).
Secondly, a proposition ‘A’, if presented in the context of
a proposition ‘A and B’, needs not to be interpreted as the
dyadic connector ‘affirmation A’ (with the truth function ‘1,
1, 0, 0’), but it may be interpreted as ‘A but not B’ (‘0, 1, 0,
0’). “Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist
movement” might itself prompt an interpretation of “Linda
is a bank teller” as “Linda is a bank teller and not active in
the feminist movement”. Actually, Tversky and Kahneman
(1983) themselves in one experimental condition aimed to
remove this problem by using the phrase “Linda is a bank
teller whether or not she is active in the feminist
movement”, but this only partially reduced the number of
observed CFs. However, Hilton (1995, 260, cf. Tentori,
Bonini & Osherson, 2004) noted that this formulation might
still be misinterpreted as asserting that Linda is a bank teller
even if she is a feminist. Moreover, Tversky and Kahneman
did not simultaneously remove the other mentioned misunderstanding. Actually, Macdonald and Gilhooly (1990, cf.
Tentori et al., 2004) did observe a much larger reduction
with some problem alterations and the wording “Linda is a
bank teller who may or may not be active in the feminist
movement” (we shall use a similar formulation).
Another group of objections concerned the concepts of
probability and of representativeness. Fiedler (1988) mentioned alternative understandings of the term ‘probability’
and experimentally significantly reduced the portion of CFs
by using a frequency formulation instead (cf. Tversky &
Kahneman, 1983). Gigerenzer (1991, cf. 1996) criticised
Kahneman and Tversky’s bias and heuristic approach and
argued that the errors in probabilistic reasoning, like CFs,
are in fact not violations of probabilistic theory, since from
a frequentist perspective extensional probability theory is
not applicable to single events. Kahneman and Tversky
(1996) objected that giving up the inclusion rule for single
events leads to normative agnosticism and empirically they
showed CFs also to occur in a frequency format, at least in
between-subject tasks. Gigerenzer (1996) defended his
position and objected to a content-blind application of
norms like the conjunction rule and to vague heuristics, like
‘representativeness’, as one-word explanations. To
Gigerenzer, between-subject designs are not decisive, since

they do not prove a violation of internal inconsistency (also
affecting Mellers, Hertwig, and Kahneman, 2001, findings).
Hertwig and Chase (1998) showed that besides a frequency format an estimation response mode also reduces
CFs. Hertwig and Gigerenzer (1999) showed that the word
‘probability’ is polysemous, whereas the natural language
sense of frequency ‘is primarily mathematical’. Sloman,
Over, Slovak and Stibel (2003) emphasised the importance
of the ranking vs. rating responds mode and suggested that
ranking may lead to understanding the options as alternatives. Recently, the existence of CFs was also shown by
Tentori, et al. (2004) in transparent within-subject tasks both
with a probability and a frequency format and also by Sides,
Osherson, Bonini and Viale (2002) in betting contexts.

The Bayesian Logic
of the Conjunction Fallacy
Building on the result that ‘probability’ is polysemous (cf.
Hertwig and Gigerenzer, 1999), a specific interpretation of
probability is proposed that differs from standard
extensional probability but is neither non-mathematical nor
irrational. Bayesian logic provides probabilities about hypotheses concerning dyadic logical relations and whole
situations (not particular cases, as in other Bayesian accounts:
e. g. Fisk, 1998, cf. e. g. the BLOG model in machine
learning). Although the proposed Bayesian logic may well
be applicable more generally, the current article is confined
to the discussion of the conjunction fallacy.
The advocated Bayesian logic is related to Oaksford and
Chater’s Bayesian optimal information gain approach
(Oaksford and Chater, 2003) elaborated for the Wason
selection task (for an extension to different probabilistic
connectors, see von Sydow, 2006). However, the Bayesian
logic advocated here is a model of hypotheses evaluation
based on complex data patterns integrating over many noise
levels and not one of information selection which is only
concerned with single data points and one noise level.
The proposed Bayesian logic of hypothesis testing
(‘Bayesian logic’ for short) inherits aspects of probability
theory and of propositional logic of dyadic connectors.
Nonetheless, it does not subscribe to the inclusion rule or,
more particularly, to the conjunction rule. Based on an
observed pattern of data, D, given in a 2 × 2 contingency
matrix, the Bayesian model specifies the posterior probability,
P(H|D), of different ‘logical’ hypotheses, Hk, like ‘pupils
from the Linda school generally become bank tellers’ (B) or
they ‘generally become bank tellers and feminists’ (A and B).
(1.) Similar to other kinds of multi-valued or fuzzy logics,
this probabilistic Bayesian logic replaces the two values ‘true’
(‘T’ or ‘1’) and ‘false’ (‘F’ or ‘0’) of bivalent propositional
logic by instead admitting truth values in the whole interval,
[0, 1], normally used for probabilities. On the logical side,
Bayesian logic is basically still concerned with all 14
possible dyadic connectors, i, of propositional logic (like
AND, OR, etc.) which may relate any atomic propositions A
and B, A i, B, without tautology or contradiction.
(2.) More specifically, Bayesian logic assesses probabilities for hypotheses PH(X) that concern patterns of probabilities or ‘probability tables’ (PTs), probabilistic
analogues to deterministic truth tables. PTs are hypothetical

1618

Tables 1a, b, c. Probability tables for three different connectors i and different uncertainty levels R = r.
Table 1a
Table 1b
Table 1c
A AND B
B
Non-B
ONLY A
B
Non-B
A OR B
B

A
t - (t-c)r cr
A
t - (t-c)r t - (t-c)r
Non-A
cr
cr
Non-A
cr
cr
Note: The probability c of convergence for maximal uncertainty is here set to .25.
constructs that can be tested against data. Dyadic Bayesian
logic is confined to PTs based on tuples of four probabilities
(P(A ∧ B) + P(A ∧ ¬B) + P(¬A ∧ B) + P(¬A & ¬ B) = 1).
(3.) Logical connectors and hypotheses about probability
tables are linked by the two assumptions of idealization and
uncertainty. According to the assumption of idealization the
connector is based on a deterministic relation with a
basically equal probability distribution for true cases. The
assumption of uncertainty (noise, error, risk, or randomness)
assumes some general level of uncertainty R for a natural set
of observations of a relation. This corresponds to the fact
that we live in an uncertain world, with only probabilistic
relations (objective uncertainty) or limited knowledge
(subjective uncertainty). Rational models of testing hypotheses
about logical relations under uncertainty are needed. Only in
the borderline case of R = 0 a single disconfirmatory case
should falsify a hypothesis. The model asserts that uncertainty/noise is equally distributed over the PT. The actual R
value r (0 ≤ r ≤ 1) may be fixed by prior knowledge or can be
calculated from the model itself.
Mathematically, the probability of a false case in a PT with R
= 0 is zero: P(F°i) = f = 0. The probability of a true case, P(T),
in such a PT is weighted by the number of true cells of the
connector under investigation: P(T°i | R = 0) = 1 / N(T°i) = t (cf.
Table 1). If the error term approaches its maximum the PTs of
all connectors i in question converge at a pattern where all
cases have the same probability, c = .25. Formally, for any
PT(I, r) the probability of a true case T (now with noise) is t r (t - c). Likewise, noise increases the zero probability of a false
case F by r multiplied with the convergence value c. This
formalization of randomness levels is coherent with the idea
that of all true cases of a connector a portion r is distributed at
random over all four possible cases (including other true cases).
Table 1 provides examples for the PTs of the hypothesis of a
conjunction ‘A AND B’, an affirmation ‘A’ and an inclusive
disjunction ‘A OR B’. Here the error level is modeled as a
discrete variable (in steps of .10). Please note that the combined
hypothesis Hk represent a connector combined with an
uncertainty level (Hk = i ∧ Rj). For the experiment, the prior
probabilities for the hypotheses Hk are assumed to be equal.
(4.) We now calculate the probability of some observed data
pattern given one hypothesis, P(D | Hk). A data sample, ordered
in a 2 × 2 contingency matrix, D, consists of four frequencies,
x1, x2 , x3, x4 (with Σ xl = n). The multinomial distribution gives
the discrete probability distribution P(x1, x2, x3, x4 | n, p1, p2, p3,
p4) = P(xl | n, pm) of obtaining a particular pattern of the four
disjoint outcomes, x1, x2, x3, x4, in a total sample of n
independent trials given a hypothesis with the respective
probabilities p1, p2, p3, p4 (with 0 ≤ pm ≤ 1, Σ pm = 1). It has the
following probability mass function:

A
Non-A

t - (t-c)r
t - (t-c)r

Non-B

t - (t-c)r
cr

n

 x1 x2 x3 x4
 p1 p 2 p 3 p 4 (3)
P ( x l | n, p m ) = 
 x1 x 2 x 3 x 4 
(5.) In order to calculate the posterior probabilities of each
combination of connector and uncertainty level, Hk, given the
observed pattern of data, D, Bayes’ theorem is used:
´ P( H

k

| D) =

P( D | H k ) P( H k )
P( D)

(4)

The normalizing probability P(D) of the data D under all
hypotheses Hk (connector-uncertainty combinations, i × Rj )
is calculated by:

P(D) =

∑ P(D | H

k

)P ( H k )

(5)

k =1

As simple measure of information gain, one can calculate
the impact of the data on the probability of each hypotheses:

PDiff ( H k , D ) = P ( H k | D ) − P ( H k )

(6)

Since we are here concerned with logical hypotheses (Hi
= i) without a specified error level, and since we
calculated the posterior error levels from the data, we have
to formulate an integration rule to determine the global probability of the logical hypotheses in question. Here for each
Hi the sum of the posterior probabilities over all error levels
rj is calculated, resulting in a probability mass function:2

P(H i | D) =

∑ P(H

i, j

| D)

(7)

j

Predictions of Bayesian Logic
Bayesian logic provides a suitable alternative to traditional extensional probability, not replacing it, but supplementing it.
Bayesian logic (itself based on extensional probabilities) is
meant as a rational formalization of probabilities for alternative
hypotheses of connectors corresponding to the whole of a
probabilistic truth table (‘hypotheses probability’ or PH(X) for
short). In contrast, extensional probability theory provides us
with probabilities of those subsets of a PT which are specified
by true extensions of the corresponding logical connectors
(‘extensional probability’ or PE(X) for short). Here we are
concerned with PH(X) in the context of the conjunction fallacy,
considering two kinds of predictions, although only the latter
one is varied in our study:
2
Alternatively one may weight R values by their reciprocal, 1/ r. In
the experiments conducted here, data sets have been used, for
which both models lead to the same predictions.

1619

(1.) Qualitative predictions. From the preconditions of the
model one can derive constraints for a situation in which the
outlined model should be normatively and descriptively
applicable: In the reported experiment we are going to
construct situations in which it is plausible to understand
probabilities as alternative hypotheses (cf. Hertwig &
Chase, 1998, Sloman et al., 2003) about connectors, each
relating to a whole situation (not to a subset). If such
preconditions of the model are met, it is claimed that one can
achieve a substantial portion of ‘conjunction fallacies’ even
with extremely transparent tasks, salient frequency
information, and excluded misunderstandings (concerning ‘A
and B’ and ‘A’). Here I will use explicit contingency tables
(going beyond the experiments of Sloman et al., 2003, and
Tentori et al., 2002). Nonetheless, Bayesian logics (unlike
e. g. Gigerenzer, 1996) predicts CFs.

(2.) Quantitative predictions. Here we are particularly
concerned with two novel predictions of the model, both distinguishing PH(X) from PE(X). According to Bayesian logic
there are quantitative conditions, in which a hypothesis with
a narrower extension may have a higher hypothesis
probability, PH(X), than a one with a broader extension.
Firstly, one prediction is concerned with the probability
pattern given by the data if the sample sizes are large, as in
Example 1 and 2 of Figure 1. Here, whether a CF should
occur or not, should depend on the probability pattern of the
data. Example 1 provides a data pattern under which a novel
double CF effect (with PH(A) ≅ PH(B) <PH (A ∧ B)) is
predicted. In contrast, Kahneman and Tversky were concerned only with single CFs, if feature A is more
‘representative’ than feature B (the prediction P(B)
< P(A ∧ B)). However, for Example 1 a double focus effect

Figure 1: Graphs of information gain for three hypotheses ‘A ∧ B’, ‘A’, and ‘B’ given the observed frequencies, for each
uncertainty level (P(Hk|D)-P(Hk), r = .1 to 1.0, left) or summing up the weighted noise levels (P(Hi|D)-P(Hi), right).
0, 8

Figure 1a:
Example 1,
Graphs for
frequency pattern
‘26, 13, 14, 12’.

0, 35

P (A &B | D ) - P (A &B )

P (A &B | D ) - P (A &B )

0, 3

0, 6

P (A | D ) - P (A )

P (A | D ) - P (A )
0, 25

P (B |D ) - P (B )

P (B |D ) - P (B )

P (A &B | D ) - P (A &B )
0, 4

0, 2
0, 15

0, 2

0, 1
0

0, 05

1
0

-0, 2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

P (B |D ) - P (B )

10

P (A | D ) - P (A )

-0, 05
-0, 4

-0, 1

0, 8

Figure 1b:
Example 2,
Graphs for
frequency pattern
‘26, 25, 14, 12’.

0, 35

P (A |D) - P (A )

P ( A &B | D ) - P (A &B )

0, 3

0, 6

P ( B |D ) - P (B )

P ( B |D ) - P ( B )
0, 4

0, 2
0, 15

0, 2

0, 1
0

0, 05

1
0

- 0, 2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

- 0, 05
P (A &B | D ) - P ( A &B )

0 , 02

0, 04

Figure 1c:
Example 3,
Graphs for
frequency pattern
‘2, 1, 1, 1’.

P ( B |D ) - P (B )

- 0, 4

-0,1

P ( A &B | D ) - P (A &B )

P ( A &B | D ) - P (A &B )

0, 015

0, 03

P (A | D) - P (A )

P (A | D) - P (A )
0, 02

0 , 01

P ( B |D ) - P ( B )

P ( B |D ) - P (B )

0, 005

0, 01

P (A | D ) - P (A )

P (B |D ) - P ( B )

0

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

- 0, 01

P (A &B | D ) - P ( A &B )

1

- 0, 00 5
-0 , 01

- 0, 02

- 0, 01 5

- 0, 03

-0 , 02

- 0, 04

0, 8

0, 04

Figure 1d:
Example 4,
Graphs for
frequency pattern
‘2, 2, 1, 1’.

P ( A &B | D ) - P (A &B )
P (A |D ) - P (A )

P (A | D) - P (A )
0, 25

P ( A &B | D ) - P (A &B )

P ( A &B | D ) - P (A &B )
0, 03

0, 6

P (A | D ) - P (A )

P (A | D) - P (A )
0, 02

P ( B |D ) - P (B )

P ( B |D ) - P ( B )
0, 4

0, 01
P (A | D) - P (A )

0, 2

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

- 0, 01

10
0
1

- 0, 02

P (A &B | D ) - P ( A &B )
- 0, 2

- 0, 03
- 0, 4

- 0, 04

1620

P ( B |D ) - P (B )

and for Example 2 no or only a weak single CF effect is
predicted (the latter point is not tested here). The Bayesian
logic of hypotheses concerning whole PTs obviously differs
from Fisk’s (1998) Bayesian model related to extensional
subsets only, which never allows for P(A ∧ B | D) > P(A | D).
Secondly, when keeping the probabilities PE(X) constant
the model predicts no change in the discussed Bayesian probabilities, PH(X), provided there is a substantial sample size.
Whereas extensional probabilities should remain unaffected
by sample size and traditional extensional sampling statistics would differ for large and medium sample sizes,
Bayesian probabilities should change in a specific way if the
sample size is very low. Bayesian models integrate aspects
of reliability into the probability measure. The Examples 3
and 4 show that despite constant extensional probabilities
the predicted Bayesian patterns get less pronounced, but the
Bayesian pattern of ‘A AND B’ in Example 3 is clearly
more affected than the pattern ‘ONLY A’ in Example 4.

Experiment
The reported experiment tests the mentioned qualitative and
quantitative predictions of the advocated Bayesian logics.
Qualitatively, extremely transparent ranking tasks were
used, where all hypotheses, A & B, A and B, but no filler
hypotheses were formulated. Simultaneously, the aim was
to exclude the misunderstandings concerning P(A & B) and
P(A) (cf. Tentori et al. 2004). The task was conducted as
within-subjects task. One objective was to test whether CFs
could even be elicited under conditions where frequency
information is explicitly provided in a contingency table.
Quantitatively, the frequencies of all logical cases were
shown and varied according to Table 2, investigating both
the effects of the probability patterns (AND versus A conditions) and of sample size (small versus large sample size).3
Table 2: The Observed Frequencies of Different Cases in
Different Schools/Conditions (Linda, Maria, Sara, Nina)
A∧B
A ∧ ¬B
¬A ∧ B
¬A ∧ ¬B
High AND 102
51
52
50
High A
102
100
50
52
Low AND 2
1
1
1
Low A
2
2
1
1
Method The 98 participants were told in the instructions
that they had to find out which ‘hypotheses’ about schools are
most probable and closest to truth. In order to fulfill the
preconditions of the model (alternative hypotheses interpretation and whole PT interpretation) the task concerned different schools, such as a Linda school. Each hypothesis concerned a school as a whole. A 2×2 contingency table with information about a sample of pupils was given, using side labels like “bank tellers”, “no bank tellers” etc. (Table 2).
Each participant investigated two schools in which the observed patterns differed both in probability and sample size.
Subjects were asked to tick for each school the option, which
3

The predictions are almost identical to those in Figure 1. The
different examples led to broader distributions and were used to
visualize that there are probability distributions over error levels.

(s)he regards to be most probable. Subjects were asked to
make this judgment intuitively. The hypotheses read:
A hypothesis: “Today, the girls in the Linda [Maria, etc.]
school are generally bank tellers, whether they are feminists
or not.” (“[…] sind heute in der Regel Bankangestellte, egal
ob sie aktive Feministinnen sind oder nicht.“)
B hypothesis: “[…] are generally active in the feminist
movement, whether they are bank tellers or not.”
AND hypothesis: “[…] are generally bank tellers who are
active feminists” (“Bankangestellte, die”, cf. Introduction).
No hypothesis (‘?’): “Based on the data no single hypothesis is really better supported than the other hypotheses.”
Results
Table 3: Percentage and Number of Choosing Hypotheses
as Being most Probable
A
B
AND
?
n
High AND 17 % 8 17 % 8 42 % 20 25 % 12
48
High A
67 % 32 6 % 3 15 % 7 13 % 6
48
Low AND 10 % 5 6 % 3 19 % 9 65 % 31
48
Low A
52 % 25 4 % 2 6 % 3 38 % 18
48
Note: The predicted cells are darkened.
For each condition, Table 3 summarizes the number and
percentage of participants choosing a particular hypothesis
as the most probable one. As predicted, the portion of
‘AND’ choices was significantly larger in the ‘high AND’
condition than in the ‘high A’ condition (χ2(1, n = 96) = 8.71;
p < .01). Apart from the ‘?’ answers, 56 % of the participants
in the ‘high AND’ condition committed a ‘double CF’ (single
CFs were not tested). Likewise, the portion of ‘A’ choices
was lower in the ‘high A’ condition than in the ‘high AND’
condition, χ2(1, n = 96) = 24.69; p < .001). Moreover, it was
confirmed that the AND selections were significantly reduced
in the ‘low AND’ relative to the ‘high AND’ condition (χ2(1,
n = 96) = 5.98, pone-tailed < .01). In contrast, it was likewise
corroborated that the A selections were not significantly
reduced in the ‘low A’ relative to the ‘high A’ condition (χ2(1,
n = 96) = 2.12; p = .15) and there were more A choices in the
‘low A’ than in the ‘low AND’ condition (χ2(1, n = 96) =
19.39; p < .001). Finally, it was shown that there were more
‘?’ choices in the two high frequency conditions than in the
two corresponding low frequency conditions (χ2(1, n = 96) =
15.21; p < .001; χ2(1, n = 96) = 8.00; p < .01) and that there
were more such choices in the ‘low AND’ condition than in
the ‘low A’ condition (χ2(1, n = 96) = 7.04; p < .01). A
slightly different replication of the study led to similar results.

Discussion
The results of the experiment were predicted by Bayesian
logic. The effects of probability patterns as well as the
differential effects of sample size were corroborated.
The ‘high AND’ condition elicited estimations
corresponding to P(A ∧ B) > P(A) and P(A ∧ B) > P(B). The
expected double CFs were confirmed for the first time in
situations with extremely transparent tasks, clear set inclusion
and explicit frequency information in a contingency table.
According to extensional probability the correct answer in the
‘high AND’ condition would have been ‘B’, but the ‘B’

1621

choices occurred only as often as the ‘A’ choices. It is
particularly problematic for the frequentist position (e. g.
Gigerenzer, 1996) that CFs occur even if a full contingency
table is provided.
Furthermore, the specific predictions regarding set size
were also confirmed. High and low sample conditions had
roughly the same extensional probabilities, but the posterior
probabilities of the tested hypotheses, PH(Hi|D), differed and
were actually judged differently. The number of answers
without a clear preference rose. More importantly, as
predicted, in the ‘Low AND’ condition the ‘A AND B’
selection did not remain the modal answer, whereas in the
‘Low A’ condition the ‘A’ selection was reduced but
remained predominant. This supports Bayesian logic.
One may perhaps think that the results are post hoc also
explainable by another formal model in the CF debate. As
mentioned before, Fisk’s (1996) Bayesian model, based on
extensional subsets, does not allow for any rational CFs.
Tversky and Koehler’s (1994) support theory cannot explain
the results, since there should be an equal unpacking in all
conditions. Replacing probability by reverse probability is
another plausible candidate (cf. Fisk, 1996; Hertwig &
Chase, 1998; Sides et al. 2002, p. 191-192) but it is difficult
to see how one may apply this interesting idea to our
frequency table tasks. In traditional Linda tasks inverse
probability may indeed partially exculpate participants since
P(D|A&B) > P(D|A) appears reasonable, because “Linda is
more likely to be single, outspoken, and so on, on the
assumption that she is a feminist bank teller than on the mere
assumption that she is a bank teller” (Sides, et al., 2002, 192).
Nonetheless, in our current study there are no varying
characteristics of Linda, but only different frequencies. Any
single-cue explanation (Hertwig & Chase, 1998) is excluded,
since, given that this effect appears to refer to an interaction
of two cues, it cannot account for the novel double focus
effects. But how to formalize inverse probability here? Using
the formalization of Bayesian logic would go beyond
previous models. Interpretations which lead to P(D|H) = 1 or
collapse with extensional probability (P(D|A&B)= PE(A&B))
have to be excluded. Interpreting P(A) as average probability
(P(A)AV = PE(A ∧ B) + PE(A ∧ ~B)) / 2) allows for violation
of the conjunction rule, but this measure would here falsely
predict CFs for the ‘high A’ condition as well. This would
not be improved, if we assumed different prior probabilities
for A ∧ B and A: Without frequency information the original
probability P(Bank teller ∧ Feminist) would be judged to be
lower than the probability for its compounds. Hence, the
difference between the original estimation and the resulting
estimation given the frequencies would even clearly lead to
falsely predict CFs in the ‘low A’ condition as well.
In conclusion, the results corroborate Bayesian logic and
have not been predicted by any other theory of the CF.
It remains an open question, whether the developed
Bayesian logic has to be understood as a more precise
formalization of the vague heuristic ‘representativeness’, or
whether it constitutes a third concept beside extensional probability and representativeness (cf. Gigerenzer, 1996,
Gigerenzer et al. 1999). In any case, Bayesian logic shows
that ‘CFs’ may (partly) not be ‘fallacies’ at all, even if we
are concerned with the evaluation of contingency tables.

Acknowledgements
I thank Björn Meder and three reviewers for helpful comments. Thanks to my research group for inspiration. I also
want to thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for a
grant ‘Bayeslogik’ (Sy 111/1-1) that made this work possible.

References
Fiedler, K. (1988). The dependence of the conjunction fallacy
on subtle linguistic factors. Psychological Research, 50,
123-129.
Fisk, J. E. (1996). The Conjunction Effect: Fallacy or Bayesian
Inference? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 67, 76-90.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On Narrow Norms and Vague
Heuristics: A Reply to Kahneman and Tversky (1996).
Psychological Review, 103, 592-596.
Hájek, A. (2001). Probability, Logic, and Probability Logic. In
L. Goble (Ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Logic (362384), Oxford: Blackwell.
Hajek, P. (2002). Fuzzy Logic. In Zelta, E. N. (Ed.), The
Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy.
URL:
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-fuzzy/ (3rd Sep.).
Hertwig, R., & Chase, V. M. (1998). Many reasons or just one:
How response mode affects reasoning in the conjunction
problem. Thinking and Reasoning, 4, 319-352.
Hertwig, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The ‚Conjunction
Fallacy’ Revisited. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
12, 275-305.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1996). On the reality of
cognitive illusions. Psychological Review, 103, 582-591.
Mellers, B. A., Hertwig, R., & Kahneman, D. (2001). Do
frequency representations eliminate conjunction effects?
Psychological Science, 12, 269–275.
Moutier, S., & Houdé, O. (2003). Judgement under uncertainty
and conjunction fallacy inhibition training. Thinking and
Reasoning, 9, 185-201.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2003). Optimal data selection:
Revision, review, and reevaluation. Psychological Bulletin &
Review, 10, 289-318.
Sides, A., Osherson, D., Bonini N., & Viale, R. (2002). On the
reality of the conjunction fallacy. Memory and Cognition,
30, 191-198.
Sloman, St. A, Over, D, Slovak, L., & Stibel, J. M. (2003).
Frequency illusions. Organizational Behavior and Human
Processes, 91, 296-309.
von Sydow, M. (2006). Towards a flexible Bayesian and
deontic logic of testing descriptive and prescriptive rules:
Explaining Content Effects in the Wason Selection Task.
Doctoral dissertation, Universität Göttingen.
Tentori, K., Bonini, N., & Osherson, D. (2004). The conjunction fallacy: a misunderstanding about conjunction?
Cognitive Science, 28, 467-477.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.
Tversky, A., & Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: A
nonextensional representation of subjective probability.
Psychological Review, 101, 547-567.

1622

