UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking More Lowers Hand Waving: Dual Task Damps Hand Movements During Mental
Rotation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5j27b9bn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Chandrasekharan, Sanjay
Bora, Samudragaupta
Athreya, Dilip
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thinking More Lowers Hand Waving: Dual Task
Damps Hand Movements During Mental Rotation
Sanjay Chandrasekharan (sanjayan@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing,
College of Computing,
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, USA

Samudragupta Bora (samudragupta12@gmail.com)
Dilip Athreya (athreyadilip@yahoo.com)
Narayanan Srinivasan (ammuns@yahoo.com)
Centre for Behavioural and Cognitive Sciences
University of Allahabad, Allahabad 211002, India

Abstract

The ideomotor view argues for a common coding
between actions (motor activation) and observation of
actions (perceptual activation). This common coding allows
the latter to generate the same physical effects as the former.
Models that draw on this idea postulate that the brain
automatically mimics perceived movements in the world
(Brass & Heyes, 2005; Prinz, 2005). This automatic
activation of movement is considered to usually stay covert
due to inhibition, but this covert ‘simulation’ of movement
is believed to contribute towards cognition.
In some cases, the automatic activation does not stay
covert – it leads to the execution of overt actions that are
complementary to the perceived movement. We have
developed a model to explain how such overt actions are
generated, using a mental rotation task where such
complementary actions compatible to the observed stimuli
are naturally activated (Chandrasekharan, Athreya &
Srinivasan, 2006). The model assumes the ideomotor idea
that the observation of movement leads to the brain
automatically activating actions compatible with the
observed stimuli, but these actions remain covert due to
inhibition. However, in our model, as cognitive load rises,
processing resources move away from this ‘caretaker’
inhibitory process, which keeps the actions covert. This
results in the ‘orphaning’ of the covert activation, leading to
overt execution of the action.
This ‘orphan’ model of complementary action generation
extends the ideomotor idea beyond automatic activation and
inhibition, to cognitive-load-modulated inhibition. It
explains two puzzles related to complementary actions: 1)
why are such actions generated mostly in high cognitive
load conditions? and 2) why are non-compatible actions
never generated? It also explains why actions noncompatible with cognitive tasks lower performance (see
next section for a brief review).
In this paper, we report an experiment that investigated
the orphan model further, using the same mental rotation
task. The objective of the experiment was to see whether
there is a threshold of cognitive load, beyond which covert
activation of movement becomes overt action. We used a
dual task paradigm to investigate this question. Surprisingly,
rather than generating more overt actions, the dual task
actually lowered the overt activation of action.
The paper is organized as follows: section 1 outlines the
complementary action problem, the experimental paradigm
used to investigate it, and a summary of earlier results.

We report a dual task experiment investigating
complementary actions (such as hand movements) that
arise during cognitive tasks (such as counting). The
‘orphan model’ of the mechanism underlying such
parallel actions predicts that a dual task would raise the
frequency of such actions. However, rather than leading
to more complementary actions, the dual task actually
lowered usage of hands during mental rotation. This
result fits models that consider motor area activation to
be modulated by working memory load, such as models
where motor area recruitment is initiated and driven by
mental rotation, rather than by movement perception, as
assumed by the orphan model. But studies on mental
rotation show that there is no activation of the motor
area during mental rotation of objects. Given this
conflict, we propose two models that explain the dual
task’s damping effect on hand activation, and outline
current experiments to test these models.
Keywords: Complementary Actions; Orphan Model;
Mental Rotation; Situated Cognition; Ideomotor Theory

Introduction
Once upon a time, there lived a naïve hen and a wily fox on
the edge of a forest. The sight of the hen made the fox drool,
but as soon as the hen saw the fox, she flew to the branch of
a tree. The fox tried many times to coax the hen to come
down, but she was never enticed by his sweet words. The
fox then hit on an interesting idea: instead of persuading the
hen to come down, he decided to run round and round under
the tree. The hen, following the fox’s movement intently,
grew dizzy and fell down, and became the fox’s dinner.
This Indian folktale illustrates how observing an action
can have the same effect as doing an action (going round
and round can make you dizzy, but equally, watching
something go round and round can also make you dizzy).
The ideomotor principle (Prinz, 2005), first outlined by
William James, explains this effect:
Every representation of a movement awakens in some
degree the actual movement which is its object; and
awakens it in a maximum degree whenever it is not kept
from doing so by an antagonistic representation present
simultaneously in the mind (James, 1890)
857

Section 2 presents the dual task experiment, and a
discussion of the results. We conclude with current work.

observer’s motor system ‘know’ which muscle activations
will lead to the observed movement?”
This question was used to frame the generation question
for complementary actions: how does the participant’s
motor system ‘know’ which muscle activations will lead to
‘compatible’ actions in a task? Further, how does it ‘know’
when to generate such actions?
One possible answer is: it doesn’t ‘know’. In imitation,
this view is termed Associative Sequence Learning (ASL),
and it postulates that visual and motor components become
linked through Hebbian learning, and imitation is an
automatic activation of motor representations when
observing an action (Brass & Heyes, 2005).
A large body of imaging evidence shows the automatic
activation of motor representations while observing actions
(see Metzinger & Gallese, 2003; Svenson & Ziemke, 2004;
Brass and Heyes, 2005, Gallese, 2005). Behaviorally, there
is only indirect evidence for the automatic activation model.
Most experiments are based on an interference paradigm
similar to the one used by Wexler et al. (1998). An example
is the finger-tapping paradigm, which illustrates a variant of
the Simon Effect (Simon, Sly, & Villapakkam, 1981), where
movement execution is faster when accompanied by
observation of a congruent movement than with an
incongruent movement (Brass, Bekkering & Prinz, 2002).
Even planning another action can interfere with mental
rotation (Wohlschlager, 2001).
The ASL model of action generation is generalist, and
would predict that such activation of motor components is
automatically triggered by perception, therefore “they are
not expected to be restricted to situations where imitation is
intended.” (Brass & Heyes, 2005) This is in contrast to a
specialist view, termed Active Intermodal Matching (AIM),
which postulates a special mechanism mediating imitation,
where a supra-modal representation of the action to be
imitated is generated. This mechanism would allow the
“switching on” of the motor module only when imitation is
intended (Brass & Heyes, 2005; Heyes et al., 2005).
We applied these two models of the mechanisms
underlying imitation to the question of how complementary
actions are generated. A generalist model would predict that
compatible actions would be automatically activated while
executing visual tasks involving movement. Therefore this
activation would not be limited to situations where the
actions contribute beneficially to the tasks. In contrast, a
specialist model would predict a “switching on” of the
motor module only when the action is beneficial.
We conducted two experiments to test these two models
of complementary action generation, using a mental rotation
task where participants tended to significantly generate hand
or head rotations (Chandrasekaran, Athreya, & Srinivasan,
2006). Briefly, the experiments consisted of showing
participants a rotation operation, which they had to
remember. They were then presented a target pattern, along
with four rotated versions of the same pattern (answers).
The participants were then asked to mentally execute the
remembered rotation operation on the target pattern, and

Action Supporting Cognition
Many studies have reported that actions compatible with
cognitive tasks play a beneficial role in cognition. Kirsh &
Maglio (1994) showed that players use actions to lower
computational load in the Tetris videogame (maneuvering
falling shapes into slots on screen). Players execute actions
on the falling ‘zoids’, to expose information early, to prime
themselves to recognize zoids faster, and to perform
external checks and verifications to reduce the uncertainty
of judgments. It is argued that such actions are executed
“not for the effect they have on the environment as much as
for the effect they have on the agent”.
Another influential experiment is Wexler et al. (1998),
which showed that unseen motor rotation leads to faster
reaction times and fewer errors, when the motor rotation is
compatible with the mental rotation than when they are
incompatible. In some cases the motor rotation made
complex mental rotations easier. Also, speeding (slowing)
the motor rotation speeded (slowed) the mental rotation.
Similarly, manipulating virtual objects have been reported
to improve subsequent mental rotation and recognition of
such objects (Wexler & van Boxtel, 2005).
Besides the above direct evidence, Kosslyn (1994) reports
extensive indirect evidence for the role of action in mental
rotation, including an experiment where participants
required more time to perform mental rotations that were
physically awkward, and another study where incompatible
movements disrupted memory. Kosslyn also refers to a
brain-damaged patient who consistently reached for the
screen and tried to ‘twist’ the stimulus in a rotation task.
On a different vein from mental rotations, Kirsh (1995)
reports higher accuracy in a coin-counting task when
participants pointed at the stimulus, compared to a nopointing condition. Gestures during cognitive tasks have
been shown to lower cognitive load and promote learning
(Goldin-Meadow & Wagner, 2005). Humans and other
animals exploit head and eye movements to better perceive
depth, absolute distance, heading and 3D objects (Wexler &
van Boxtel, 2005). Bergen et al. (2004) reports that
processing time for sentences involving actions increases
when participants perform incompatible actions in parallel.
All the actions reported in the above brief review do not
meet the ‘epistemic action’ criteria set out by Kirsh &
Maglio (1994), so we use the more general term
‘complementary actions’ to refer to such actions generated
during cognitive tasks.
How are such actions generated? In previous work, we
extended two models from imitation research to investigate
this question. A recent review (Brass & Heyes, 2005)
succinctly captures the central problem in imitation: “When
we observe another person moving, we do not see the
muscle activation underlying the movement, but rather the
external consequences of that activation. So how does the

858

choose the right answer from the four options. The rotation
operation had two levels of complexity, low and high.
In contrast to reported work, our results showed that
complementary actions not only did not improve
performance, but actually hindered it. This supported
automatic activation (generalist model). However, the
actions were activated mostly in the high complexity
condition. To explain this, we postulated that when
cognitive load rises in the high complexity task, resources
are taken away from the inhibition process that keeps the
automatic motor activation under check, and this
‘orphaning’ of the covert activation leads to the covert
action getting executed overtly.
To investigate this idea of cognitive-load-modulated
activation of action further, we developed a dual task
experiment. If complimentary actions are just covert actions
moving to overt status because of rise in cognitive load, a
rise in processing load should see more such overt actions.

patterns were generated by rotating the original four patterns
by 90°, 180° or 270°. Any one of the four orientations of a
particular stimulus pattern was randomly used as a stimulus
in a particular trial. Out of the six patterns used, three were
symmetric and three were asymmetric.

(1)

Experiment

(2)

In the following experiment, participants executed the
mental rotation task while reciting the English alphabet
backwards. We presented participants with the stimuli while
they did the dual task, keeping track of 1) the trials where
participants rotated their hands (and heads), and 2) the
accuracy for the action and no-action cases. The experiment
had two objectives: one, see whether overt actions were
activated in the low complexity condition, and at which
point; two, see in which point of increasing complexity the
actions became activated.
On objective one, if actions were generated in low
complexity trials in the dual task, this would indicate that
the rise in cognitive load is driving the activation of action.
But if they were executed mostly in the high complexity
trials even in the dual task, that would indicate that it is not
just cognitive load that is involved in the overt execution.
Objective two was driven by an ambitious agenda. If overt
generation of action resulted from the orphaning
mechanism, it may be possible to identify the point of
complexity where the orphaning happens, given that the
complexity of our stimuli rose in graded steps. If this point
could be identified, we could track the neural correlates of
the orphan process by tracking that complexity point.

Figure 1: The (1) symmetric and (2) asymmetric basic
patterns used in the study

90o Rotation

180o Rotation

Horizontal flip followed by 90o rotation

Method
Participants: Nineteen student volunteers from University
of Allahabad, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision
participated in the experiment. None had prior laboratory
experience with mental imagery.
Apparatus: A computer screen, microphone and keyboard,
placed on a table in front of the subjects. The screen was
parallel to participants’ frontal plane, at eye level and
approximately 75 cm from the participant.
Stimuli: A set of six small 2D patterns within a white
square (frame) were prepared on a 3x3 matrix with only five
cells being filled, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The visual angle
was 1.5 o x 1.5o. With each of these patterns, three more

Vertical flip followed by 90o rotation
Figure 2: Snap shots of the rotation operations
There were eight rotational operations (see Fig. 2) with
two levels of complexity (low or high). Each level of
complexity had four operations. Low complexity operations
were rotations of 90° (right and left) and 180° (right and
left). High complexity operations were vertical and
horizontal flips followed by a rotation of 90° (left or right).
859

The rotational task was given a reference by providing an
empty-blank white square (frame). To demonstrate the
operations, video clips were created using Flash (sample
files at: http://www.sce.carleton.ca/~schandra/CAflash).
Each rotation in the low complexity condition took twenty
seconds of display time.
In the high complexity condition, each flip operation took
twenty seconds in addition to each rotation operation, which
also took twenty seconds to complete. There was a two
second gap between flip and rotation. The end position
(frame), after the rotational operation completed, stayed for
five seconds.

Results and Discussion
Use of hands: Out of nineteen participants, only six used
their hands extensively (used hands in more than 50% of
trials: high-action-generation group) and the remaining
thirteen did not use their hands (used hands in less than 50%
of trials: low-action-generation group). The high-actiongeneration group used their hands in 75% of the trials, while
the low-action-generation group used their hands in only
10% of the trials. Occasional head movements were ignored
in this analysis.
A two-way within ANOVA (task complexity: low, high;
stimulus complexity: symmetric, asymmetric) was
performed on the percentage of trials in which hands were
used by the participants. Among the high-action-generation
group, there was no significant difference in hands usage in
terms of task complexity as well as stimulus complexity.
Note that the number of participants in the high-action
condition is small (n=6).
Among the low-action-generation group, there was no
significant difference in hands usage as a function of task as
well as stimulus complexity.
Accuracy: The accuracy results are shown in Figure 4. A
2 between (action: high-action-generation, low-actiongeneration) x 2 within (task complexity: low, high) x 2
within (stimulus complexity: symmetric, asymmetric)
ANOVA was performed on the accuracy values from all the
participants. The results also show that performance in the
low task complexity condition (0.49) was significantly
better than performance in the high task complexity
condition (0.31), F (1, 17) = 10.354, p = 0.005. No other
effect was significant. However, there is a trend (F (1, 17) =
1.509, p=0.236) with better accuracy in the low-action
generation group (43%) compared to the high actiongeneration group (34%). There is also a trend with the threeway interaction (F (1, 17) = 1.979, p=0.177) which indicates
that all the factors may interact with each other.

Figure 3: The screen during the second phase
Procedure: The experiment consisted of forty eight trials (8
operations x 6 patterns), presented randomly. Each trial had
two phases. In the first phase, a rotation was demonstrated
using a video clip. Participants were asked to remember the
rotation they saw, apply the same operation on the pattern
coming up in the second phase and select the answer that
best fitted the mentally rotated pattern.
The second phase started after four seconds, during which
the screen was blank. This phase presented a pattern to be
mentally rotated, along with four possible answers (as
shown in Fig. 3), which remained on screen until
participants pressed a key following which a text box
appeared in which the participants typed their choice (1, 2, 3
or 4). They then pressed the Enter key to initiate the next
trial, which started after two seconds. In addition to the
mental rotation task, the participants were instructed to
recite the letters of the English alphabet backwards, starting
with Z. The participants were instructed to do the task at a
comfortable speed without compromising accuracy.
Commercially available software (DirectRT, running on a
PC with a VGA monitor) was used for stimuli presentation
and data collection.
The experimenter sat beside the participant and used a
chart to document the trials in which the participant
generated complementary actions. There were three kinds of
actions -- finger, wrist and elbow movements. There were
no head movements in relation to the mental rotation task.

Task Complexity
0.7

Accuracy

0.6
0.5

Low

0.4

High

0.3
0.2
High-Action Generation

Low-Action Generation

Figure 4: Accuracy with High-action-generation and
Low-action-generation with Dual Task
In a total reversal of our earlier experiment results, hands
usage actually came down significantly in the current dual
task experiment. While majority of participants used hands
extensively (17 out of 23) in the non-dual task experiment,
860

with a dual task, the majority of the participants (13 out of
19) did not use hands extensively. In addition, the actual
amount of hands usage for both the high-action and lowaction generation groups came down in the dual task
experiment. Note that task complexity affected hands usage
in the non-dual task version, with more hands usage in the
high complexity condition. However, with the dual task,
high complexity did not increase hands usage.
In terms of accuracy, one common factor was task
complexity. Accuracy was better with low task complexity,
compared to high task complexity. The introduction of the
dual task produced a significant decrement in performance.
In the previous experiment, those who did not use hands
performed better than the ones who used hands. This
advantage is reduced with the dual task. While not
significant at this point, the trend again indicates that
performance is better with the low-action generation group
compared to the high-action generation group.

motor area activation would not be initiated by the mental
rotation. The second reason is experiments showing that
perception of movement activates motor components. So it
is improbable that motor activation happens only at the
mental rotation stage.
This leaves two other possible hypotheses. One is a
combination view: the motor area recruitment is initiated by
perceiving the moving stimulus (as assumed by the orphan
model), but this recruitment is ‘carried over’ to the mental
rotation phase and mental rotation is coupled with motor
area activation (as assumed by the working memory view).
This is plausible, because in the Wraga study, motor area
activation for rotation of hand stimuli and neutral object
stimuli were compared. It was found that when the hand
stimuli came first, followed by the object stimuli, motor
areas were activated for the object cases as well. However,
when objects stimuli followed object stimuli, there was no
activation of the motor area.
Even though the stimuli in our experiment were both
objects, a similar ‘carryover’ effect could lead to the mental
rotation of patterns in the second stage ‘keeping alive’ the
motor recruitment initiated by the rotating square. In such a
mechanism, this carryover motor recruitment would be
driven by the rate of mental rotation. This mechanism would
explain the dual task results, as in this view, the dual task
lowers the resources available for mental rotation, and since
mental rotation is keeping alive the carryover motor
recruitment, this also takes away resources from motor area
activation, thus lowering the chances of hands being
activated.
The above hypothesis considers cognitive load as generic,
and does not consider the form of the load. However, it is
possible that the form of the dual task may have had an
impact on hand movement, as the reverse alphabet task is
linear while the rotation stimulus is circular. A possibility is
that the linear task interferes with the rotation task. In this
view, the activation of the motor area happens only at the
perceptual level, but since the dual task we used is of a
different format from the rotation task, it interferes with this
automatic activation – it ‘dampens’ the motor recruitment
process. In effect, the alphabet task is acting like a noncompatible action, and is inhibiting the automatic activation
of movement, similar to the damping in the finger-tapping
experiment and the mental rotation experiments reviewed
earlier (Brass et al., 2003, Wexler et al., 1998).

Varieties of Motor Activation
Since we are interested in the mechanism underlying
action generation, we will ignore the accuracy results, and
focus on why hand movements came down in the dual task.
The orphan model assumes the ideomotor view that motor
area is automatically activated by the perception of
movement, and the recruitment of the motor area happens at
the point of perceiving the rotation of the square. According
to this model, this motor area activation is usually inhibited,
but the inhibition takes up processing resources. In high
cognitive load conditions, the inhibiting process loses
processing resources, and this leaves the motor activation
orphaned, leaving it to move towards execution. This view
predicts that increasing the processing load should lead to
more hand movements, as the load would affect only the
inhibition process, and not the activation process, as the
latter is automatic.
However, there is another view where the dual task result
would not be surprising. If we assume that the motor area
recruitment happens only later in the process, i.e. only
during the mental rotation of the patterns, the dual task
would be expected to lower hand movements. The reason is
that both processing resources and attention are split by the
dual task, and this would mean lower mental rotation, and
hence lower recruitment of the motor area, as motor
recruitment is triggered only by mental rotation in this view.
Such a model considers motor recruitment to be mediated
by working-memory, and it would predict the lower hands
usage in the dual task, as the dual task uses more working
memory.
We believe this model is not plausible, because of two
reasons. One is that at least two imaging studies have ruled
out motor recruitment during mental rotation of objects
(Windischberger et al., 2003; Wraga, et al., 2003; see also
Vingerhoets et al., 2002). Though motor areas do get
activated when the rotated stimuli is hands or tools. Since
our stimulus was a box frame, the above results suggest that

Current Work
We are currently developing experiments to test these two
hypotheses. If the latter hypothesis is true, a dual task with a
circular nature would bring back hand activation, as its form
is compatible with the mental rotation task. We are currently
developing such a dual task. If the former ‘carryover’
hypothesis is true, raising working memory load, or
distracting attention, by any means would lead to hands
usage going down, as in this view lowering of mental
rotation is what lowers hands usage. We are running dual
861

Goldin-Meadow, S. & Wagner, S.M. (2005). How our
hands help us learn. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9. 234240
Heyes, C., Bird, G., Johnson, H., Haggard, P. (2005).
Experience modulates automatic imitation. Cognitive
Brain Research, 22, 233-240
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York:
Holt.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18, 513-549.
Kirsh D. (1995). Complementary Strategies: Why we use
our hands when we think. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1994). Image and Brain. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
Metzinger, T & Gallese, V. (2003) The emergence of a
shared action ontology: Building blocks for a theory.
Consciousness and Cognition, 12, 549 – 571, Special
Issue on Grounding the Self in Action.
Noe, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA. MIT
Press.
Prinz, W. (2005) An ideomotor approach to imitation. In S.
Hurley, N. Chater (Eds.), Perspectives on imitation: From
neuroscience to social science, Vol. 1, pp. 141-156.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simon, J.R. Sly, P.E., Villapakkam, S. (1981). Effect of
compatibility of S-R mapping on reactions toward the
stimulus source. Acta Psychologica, 47, 63-81
Svenson, H. and Ziemke, T. (2004). Making Sense of
Embodiment: Simulation Theories and the Sharing of
Neural Circuitry Between Sensorimotor and Cognitive
Processes. In K. D. Forbus, D. Gentner & T. Regier
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Chicago. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vingerhoets, G., de Lange, F.P, Vandemaele, P, Deblaere,
Achten, E. (2002) Motor imagery in mental rotation: an
FMRI study. Neuroimage 17. 1623-1633
Wexler, M., & van Boxtel, J.J.A., (2005). Depth perception
by the active observer, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9,
431-438.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn S.M., & Berthoz, A. (1998). Motor
processes in mental rotation. Cognition, 68, 77-94.
Windischberger, C., Lamm, C., Bauer, H., Moser, E. (2003).
Human motor cortex activity during mental rotation,
Neuroimage, 20, 225-232.
Wohlschlager, A. (2001). Mental object rotation and the
planning of hand movements. Perception and
Psychophysics, 63 (4), 709-718.
Wraga, M., Thompson, L.M., Alpert, N. M., Kosslyn, S. M.
(2003) Implicit transfer of motor strategies in mental
rotation. Brain and Cognition, 52, 135-143.

tasks using memory (remembering alphabets, numbers,
emotions etc.), and sounds, to test this hypothesis.
Regardless of the mechanism involved, our results show
that raising cognitive load at times has the beneficial effect
of lowering actions that hinder cognitive tasks (remember
higher hands usage actually lowers performance in the
rotation task). On the application front, this result opens up
the possibility of more fine-grained engineering of multitasking in complex environments such as cockpits and
control rooms of nuclear reactors.
Interestingly, since the ideomotor view is modalityneutral and can apply to auditory perception, the orphan
model and the dual task explains a common experience:
why your head, hand or leg starts moving unconsciously in
rhythm to dance music, but the movement suddenly stops
when you attend to another task.
A better understanding of how actions are generated from
perceived and simulated movements may have other
implications as well. For instance, in the case of a recent
shooting incident in a Canadian college campus, it was
reported that the gunman played violent videogames
involving shooting. He also posted fantasies on the Internet
about shooting people. At which point does such internal
simulations of actions move to real actions, and how?
Understanding the control mechanism underlying action
generation may throw light on this question.

References
Bergen, B., Chang, N., Narayan, S. (2004). Simulated
Action in an Embodied Construction Grammar. In K. D.
Forbus, D. Gentner & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Chicago. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brass, M. & Heyes, C. (2005). Imitation: is cognitive
neuroscience solving the correspondence problem?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 489-495
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., & Prinz, W. (2002). Movement
observation affects movement execution in a simple
response task. Acta Psychologica, 106.
Chandrasekharan, S., Athreya, D., Srinivasan, N. (2006).
Twists and Oliver Twists in mental rotation:
complementary actions as orphan processes. In Ron Sun,
ed., Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver. Sheridan.
Cooper, L.A. & Shepard, R. N. (1973). The time required to
prepare for a rotated stimulus. Memory and Cognition, 1,
246-250.
Frick, A., Daum, M.M., Walser, S., Mast, F.W. (2005).
Developmental changes in the interference of motor
processes with mental rotation. Proceedings of the 27th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
CogSci2005, Stresa, Italy.
Gallese, V. (2005). Embodied simulation: from neurons to
phenomenal experience. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 4. 23-48

862

