UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Translating From Perceptual to Cognitive Coding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78c5c1js

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Davis, Tyler
Love, Bradley C.
Maddox, W. Todd

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Translating From Perceptual to Cognitive Coding
Tyler Davis (thdavis@mail.utexas.edu)
Bradley C. Love (brad_love@mail.utexas.edu)
W. Todd Maddox (maddox@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
features typical to a certain class of objects or a particular
individual (Gauthier & Tarr, 1997; Tanaka & Gauthier,
1997). While these representational changes have been
shown to facilitate the learning of new similar classes or
new individuals within a class (Gauthier, et al., 1998;
Tanaka, Curran, & Sheinberg, 2005), they likely do not
generalize beyond a given basic level category.
Thus,
perceptual expertise is extremely useful for developing an
automatic, stable, and permanent reidentification capacity
for a class or an individual object, but it is too slow and
specific to subserve all of the occasions where people need
to be able to engage in subordinate level identification.
Another capacity, which may bootstrap reidentification
performance while perceptual expertise is developing, is a
process we will refer to as translation. Translation will be
defined as the mapping of sensory information onto a
compositional alphabet of symbols that refer to sensory
qualities or featural characteristics of objects. As with
perceptual expertise, we argue that many of these symbols
are learned, but instead of being fused configural entities,
they refer to independent features, and can be applied across
a wider variety of domains. These symbols may be acquired
from a variety of sources, most particularly through the
learning of a language (e.g. Quine, 1960), explicit
instruction (Experiment 2), or the learning of task specific
invariants (e.g Schyns, Goldstone, & Thiabut, 1998).
For these symbols to be useful for object reidentification,
a person must be able to use them systematically, and
productively. That is, if an individual possesses a set of
feature labels that they are able to attach to one object, they
should at the very least be able to identify those qualities in
any of their combinations in any other object. Another
further constraint on the success of translation in a given
context is that the symbols must stand in a one to one
relationship with the sensory qualities to which they refer.
For example, the term green may be sufficient for
identifying a particular object when the only colors in the
environment are green or blue, but when the colors of the
objects vary more continuously the term green will quickly
lose its utility.
Though we are treating translation and the development of
expertise as distinct, in many cases they may be intertwined
in a manner similar to the algorithmic and automatic
processes that operate in tasks like mental math (e.g. Logan,
1988; see Figure 1 for summary of proposed pathways). To
this end, translation may not only be well suited for
bootstrapping reidentification during the early stages of
perceptual expertise, but it might continue to operate

Abstract
An important question in cognitive science is how conceptual
knowledge interacts with perception. For example, how does
knowing that trucks have wheels and windshields impact a
person's recognition of a truck? Through a series of
categorization tasks, we explore two pathways by which
humans can learn to identify objects. One pathway involves
the acquisition of perceptual expertise through extensive taskrelevant experience, and leads to the rapid identification of
individual stimuli. A second pathway involves a translation
process in which percepts of objects are encoded
into symbolic descriptions. The use of this pathway results
in a similar ability to identify individual stimuli, but requires
more time to operate due to the demands of the online
translation process. These results are discussed in terms of
related work in categorization, perceptual expertise, and
influence of language on thought.
Keywords: expertise; object identification; symbolic coding;
translation; categorization; language and thought

Introduction
One of the most fundamental psychological capacities is
the ability to recognize sameness. In categorization and
object recognition this capacity is typically studied in terms
of the formation and use of equivalence classes, however
there are numerous occasions where a person’s goals require
going beyond category membership to the level of
individual identity. Whether it be taking the right car home
from work, or the right dog home from the dog park, many
times getting things exact makes all of the difference. This
ability to recognize that something is the same as or
equivalent to something seen on a previous occasion,
termed reidentification (cf. Millikan, 1998), is fundamental
to our everyday survival. The present study investigates
two capacities, perceptual expertise and translation that
interact to allow humans to maximize their ability to track
objects across time.
Perceptual expertise refers to a variety of representational
changes that occur due to experience with a particular object
or within a particular domain. These changes alter the way
in which people process the objects for which they have
expertise such that they become as efficient at recognizing
them and as knowledgeable about their unique
characteristics at subordinate levels (e.g. as an individual or
a species) as they are at naming and discussing them as
members of a basic level category (Tanaka & Taylor, 1991).
However, perceptual expertise is acquired rather slowly,
with the representations formed being largely configural,
and thus specific to the metric relationships between
929

these two requirements can be met. In these tasks, the
majority of stimuli can be classified according to an
imperfect rule, however there are also several exception
stimuli that do not follow this rule. Participants learning a
category that includes exceptions must individuate these
items, and reidentify them throughout the course of the task.
As a result of this individuation, the exception items become
more prominent in memory and are recognized to a greater
extent in transfer memory tasks (e.g. old/new judgments) in
comparison to rule-following items (Palmeri & Nosofsky,
1995; Sakamoto & Love, 2004). Thus, the rule-plusexception task requires the sort of reidentification of
individual objects that we wish to test, and the exception
advantage effect can be used as a measure of the ability for
participants to successfully individuate a particular stimulus.
Studies of perceptual classification also offer a ready
solution to the manipulation of translatability. In perceptual
classification tasks, stimuli typically come in one of two
possible varieties that are used as if they were virtually
interchangeable, discrete (usually binary), and continuous.
The translation hypothesis suggests however, that these
types of stimuli may be different in terms of participants’
abilities to reidentify them on the individual level. That is,
discrete stimuli are easily mapped onto values that stand in a
one to one correspondence with the sensory qualities of the
stimulus (e.g. large, red, triangle), whereas those with
continuous values do not.
Experiment 1 will test whether translation is important for
reidentification by using a rule-plus-exception design which
forces participants to identify exceptions at the individual
level, and by manipulating translatability through the use of
stimuli that can be made to appear continuous or discrete
depending on the availability of additional verbal cues. If
translatability affects participants’ abilities to reidentify
objects in the absence of perceptual expertise participants in
the continuous condition should perform worse in learning
to classify the exception items, and show little to no
advantage for them in a follow-up recognition task.

Figure 1. Proposed pathways to object identification
depending on the context in which an individual finds
themselves. For example, a bird expert may recognize a
golden- cheeked warbler automatically due to extensive
experience, but might engage in the more algorithmically
based and costly translation process when they witness an
instance of golden- cheeked warbler exhibit an exceptional
trait and they wish to be able to track it over future
occasions. Further, even if they are confident in their
abilities to track this exceptional warbler, they may
nonetheless wish to translate it so that they might be able to
convince a skeptical comrade of its existence with a verbal
description of its warbler and non-warbler-like features.
In the present series of experiments we provide evidence
for the existence of the translation process while shedding
light on some of the similarities and differences it has in
relation to perceptual expertise. In Experiment 1, we show
that the reidentification of individual perceptual figures in
the early stages of perceptual expertise depends upon how
readily they can be translated. In Experiment 2A & 2B, we
provide evidence for the algorithmic nature of translation by
showing that learning a vocabulary by which to translate
perceptual stimuli can lead to reidentification as successful
as perceptual expertise, but sufficient time is necessary at
encoding for this to occur. Finally, in Experiment 3, we
look further into translation and perceptual expertise by
investigating how readily they generalize to new categories.
This results in the replication of findings from Experiment
2A & 2B as well as findings from the expertise literature
which have suggested that expertise generalizes well to new
items when they come from the same general class.

Method
Stimuli
Each stimulus was a box that varied in terms of its height
and the position of a line segment along its lower boundary
(see Figure 2). In the discrete version of the stimuli, tic
marks and labels marked each value along both of the
dimensions. The only difference between the continuous
discrete stimuli was the absence of these labels in the former
condition (For illustrative purposes and ease of presentation,
these groups will be referred to as Tic Marks and No Tic
Marks for the discrete and continuous conditions,
respectively). The categories were constructed according to
a rule-plus-exception design where there was an imperfect
rule orthogonal to one of the dimensions, and each category
contained an exception item that appeared as if it belonged
to the opposite category (see Figure 3). There were 36
stimuli which formed a 6X6 grid, with each category
containing 14 regular rule following members, 1 exception,

Experiment 1
A critical component of the translation hypothesis is that
for reidentification of an object to occur in the early stages
of perceptual expertise, a person must possess an adequate
vocabulary upon which to map the object. To begin to test
the adequacy of the translation account, we will use a
perceptual classification task in which participants have to
reidentify individual exemplars, and where the conditions
differ in terms of how easily the stimuli are mapped onto
symbolic descriptions. Rule-plus-exception designs (e.g.
Nosofsky et al.,1994) are precisely the type of task where
930

Results
Classification
Performance in the classification task differed between
conditions, where the Tic Mark condition performed better
at classifying the exception items with a mean of .55 correct
in the final block whereas the No Tick Mark condition had a
mean of .33. The groups, however, did not differ to any
large extent in how they classified the rule following items
with a mean of .87 correct for the Tic Mark condition and
.86 for the No Tic Mark condition. The overall interaction
was significant, F(1,101)=17.688, p<.001, and each of the
planned comparisons were as expected, with the difference
in exception performance between conditions being
significant t(101)=5.895, p<.001, and the difference
between rule performance not t<1.

Figure 2. An example of a Tick Mark (discrete) (A) and a
No Tick Mark (continuous) (B) stimulus from Experiment
1. The stimuli vary in terms of their height and the position
of the line segment along their lower boundary.
1 rule-following item that matched the exception in terms
frequency of presentation, and 2 foils taken out for use in a
the follow-up recognition phase. The categories were set up
to mirror each other with the special items placed in one of
four locations such that the exception and frequencymatched rule following items were always diagonal to each
other, and with the remaining two positions reserved for
foils.

Recognition
Performance in the 2AFC recognition task also differed
between conditions with the Tic Mark condition showing a
sizeable exception advantage with a mean of .78 correct for
exceptions and .63 for rule items, whereas the No Tic Mark
condition did not exhibit an exception advantage with a
mean of .59 for the exceptions and the .57 for the rule items
(see Figure 5). This interaction was also significant
F(1,101)=6.043, p=.016, and each of the planned
comparisons were as expected where the Tic Mark
condition showed a significant exception advantage
t(52)=4.09, p<.001, and the No Tic Mark condition did not,
t<1.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to either the Tic
Mark (discrete) or No Tic Mark (continuous) condition with
the relevant dimension for the rule following items, and
exception placement counter-balanced.
Participants
completed three blocks of classification training where they
classified each regular item one time, and each of the
exceptions and frequency matched rule items three times.
They were given unlimited time to make each classification
decision, followed by 2 seconds of feedback where the
stimulus remained on the screen. Following training,
participants completed a series of two-alternative forced
choice (2AFC) recognition trials, where they were
instructed to identify which item they had seen before, with
each old item (exception or rule) paired with each foil twice.

Discussion
Experiment 1 successfully demonstrated that having a
vocabulary upon which to map sensory stimulations is
important for tracking individual items in the absence of
perceptual expertise, as predicted by the translation
hypothesis. Whether an individual was able to track the
exception items over the experimental session was shown to
depend on whether they were able to map them onto
discrete symbols.

Experiment 2A
Although Experiment 1 demonstrated that translatability
is important for reidentifying items in the absence of
expertise, there is still the question of how people are able to
obtain the symbols that they use to translate objects. Unlike
the stimuli in Experiment 1, objects in the real world don’t
often come with labels on them, yet people can still
reidentify objects in the absence of expertise.
In
Experiment 2A, we investigated how the ability to translate
is developed, and how it might differ from other types of
expertise that do not involve learning a feature vocabulary.
Accordingly, in Experiment 2A, two groups of experts
were trained such that one group was taught a vocabulary
upon which to map the box stimuli from Experiment 1 prior
to learning how to classify them in the rule-plus-exception
task. The other group simply attained expertise within the

Figure 3. A sample category structure with exceptions in
italics and frequency-matched rule items in capital letters.
The ?’s represent foils used in the recognition phase.

931

original classification task used in Experiment 1. It was
expected that both groups of experts would learn to
individuate and reidentify the exception items, but the
identification group was expected to be able to do this
accurately without having as much experience within the
classification task itself.
However, since translation is
hypothesized to be more algorithmic, it is possible that the
ability of participants in the identification condition to
reidentify the exceptions will depend on the amount of time
available to encode them after feedback.
Specifically, the goal of the second experiment was to test
whether learning to track the exception items was possible
without any tic marks, and if it was, whether it required
actual experience in classifying them, or if it could be
achieved through translation.

Recognition
There were also differences between conditions for 2AFC
recognition performance, where the classification condition
showed a robust exception advantage with mean .96 and .58
correct for exceptions and rule following items respectfully,
but the ID group failed to show a significant exception
advantage with .51 correct for exceptions and .40 for rule
following items. This resulted in a substantial main effect
where-by the classification outperformed the ID group in
recognition overall, F(1,8)=34.524, p<.001 (see Figure 5).
Planned comparisons for item and condition showed that
these results were due to a significant exception advantage
in the classification condition, t(4)=3.457, p=.026, but a
non-significant difference between exception and rule
recognition in the ID condition, t<1. Post-hoc tests showed
that recognition of neither the exception nor the rule was
significantly different from chance in the ID condition, t<1,
and t(4)=1.020, p=.365, for the exception and rule items
respectfully (see figure 5 for Experiment 2A & 2B
recognition results).

Method
Stimuli
Stimulus design and category structure for the
classification, identification, and recognition tasks were
identical to Experiment 1, except that no stimuli included
the tic marks or labels.

Discussion
In Experiment 2A there were large differences between
groups in their performance with the exception items.
Whereas the classification condition performed well,
participants in the ID condition showed a deficit in their
ability classify and recognize exceptions correctly. These
results are understandable in light of the translation
hypothesis as well as predictions derived from Experiment
1. In Experiment 1, it was shown that participants do not
typically encode the values of the features fully before
making a classification decision, as evidenced by the fact
that participants in the No Tick Mark condition were not
impaired at rule-following items. Thus, where a subject is
likely to resort to translation is in the event of an error,
meaning they will have to sufficiently encode the values of
the stimulus within the feedback time. It is a possibility
then, that the feedback time used in Experiment 2A was not
long enough for subjects to translate the exception stimuli.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to either
identification (ID) or classification training. Both groups
were trained in their respective condition for 14 blocks over
3 sessions on consecutive days, and an additional 3 blocks
in the final session. During these training sessions, the
classification training condition simply practiced the
identical task that they would be tested on, with the same
design as Experiment 1. The ID condition practiced naming
the different stimulus dimensions according to a grid (see
Figure 4), where they made an independent response for
each dimension and then received feedback for the entire
stimulus for 2 seconds. After the 3 additional training
blocks in the final session, the testing procedure was
identical to experiment 1, where participants ran the original
classification task, followed by 2AFC recognition for
exceptions and frequency matched rule items.

Results
Both training conditions gained a high deal of proficiency
in their respective training regime by the time that they
began the final day assessment. Performance was at or near
ceiling for all participants and all items.
Classification
There were differences in performance between groups
where the classification condition performed better at
classifying exceptions than the ID condition with .93 and
.53 correct respectively, but both performed similarly in
terms of their rule item performance (.97 and .97). The
interaction between condition and item type was marginally
significant, F(1,8)=5.236, p=.051.

Figure 4. An illustration of the identification learning task

932

Figure 5. Recognition result Experiment 1 (left) Experiment 2&2B (center), and Experiment 3 (right).

Experiment 2B

reidentify the exceptions, Experiment 3 was conducted to
test whether the results of Experiment 2B were replicable
while extending the practice of having participants transfer
to a novel classification task to the classification condition.
Therefore, to overcome the possible confounds in
Experiment 2B, and to provide more information on the
abilities of the classification experts, in Experiment 3 we
trained two groups of experts in a manner identical to
Experiment 2. On the final test day, all participants
received two classification tasks with a feedback time of 4
seconds followed by a 2AFC recognition phase. It was
predicted that the feedback time would be sufficient for the
ID participants to show an exception advantage in both
tasks. In the second task it was uncertain how the
classification condition would perform. Results from the
expertise literature suggest that they should be able to
assimilate some of the new category structure to their prior
expertise, but at the same time they may be expected to
exhibit a good deal of interference from their prior learning.
In correspondence with these predictions and the results
of Experiments 2A and 2B, there was a significant main
effect for exceptions in the first 2AFC recognition phase
across groups F(1,6)=7.229, p=.036 (see Figure 5). In
correspondence to the hypothesis that there would be
assimilation of the new category structure to prior expertise
in the classification condition, this exception advantage
carried over into the second 2AFC recognition phase
F(1,6)=16.215, p=.007.

To test whether the feedback time provided in Experiment
2A was responsible for the suboptimal performance
witnessed in the ID condition, in Experiment 2B, we had the
ID experts from Experiment 2A return for an identical
procedure to the previous session, except that they were
trained on the opposite rule dimension, and were given 4
seconds of feedback rather than 2. The expectation being
that longer feedback should increase recognition
performance for the exception items, but not the rule items
leading to a more robust exception advantage for the
identification trained participants.
Accordingly, the classification results improved to where
there was no significant difference between performance
with exceptions and rule following items, t<1. Further,
exception recognition increased in 2AFC to where there was
a significant exception advantage t(4)=3.45, p=.026, and in
comparison to the previous session there was a significant
main effect showing an increase in recognition performance
between sessions F(1,4)=9.954 (see Figure 5). Planned
comparisons revealed that this significant change in
performance was likely due to an increase in exception
recognition between sessions, t(4)=3.076, p=.037, and not in
rule item recognition t<1.
Thus Experiment 2B taken with Experiment 2A
demonstrates that perceptual expertise and translation are
unique pathways to object identification. Whereas
perceptual expertise results in the automatic recognition of
objects for which an individual has developed expertise, as
evidenced by the lack of impairment in the classification
condition in Experiment 2A, translation’s algorithmic
characteristics make it such that its ability to lead to
successful reidentification depends upon the amount of time
available at encoding. When encoding time is not sufficient
translation does not provide a benefit over novice
performance.

General Discussion
The account of object identification described herein
focuses on two ways in which people can learn to identify
individual objects. The first of these is perceptual expertise,
which results in rapid and automatic identification of objects
for which a given individual has extensive experience. The
second, translation, is an algorithmic process by which
sensory stimulations can be mapped onto discrete symbols.
In Experiment 1, we provided support for this process by
demonstrating that translatability is crucial for performance
when a stimulus must be reidentified from amongst other
perceptually similar stimuli in the absence of perceptual
expertise. In Experiment 2A and 2B, we showed that a

Experiment 3
Since Experiment 2B was potentially confounded by
knowledge of the experimental hypothesis, and participants’
awareness of the conditions under which they would have to
933

interplay of language, categorization, and object recognition
can be investigated.

vocabulary by which to translate perceptual stimuli is
learnable, and can aid in individuating these particular
stimuli. However, unlike the more automatic perceptual
expertise developed from extensive experience within a
particular domain, it requires time in order to operate, thus
supporting the characterization of translation as an
algorithmic process.
Finally, Experiment 3 provided
information on how these two learning mechanisms allow
people to generalize to new training sets, replicating results
from Experiment 2A & 2B, as well as the expertise
literature.
There are several implications of the present research on
studies of perceptual expertise and classification. First, it
suggests that large differences can arise in perceptual
classification tasks depending on whether the stimuli have
discrete or continuous valued dimensions. As mentioned
previously, these types of stimuli are often assumed to be
completely interchangeable. However, since their main
difference is in translatability, and this factor has presently
been demonstrated to have large effects on performance,
this practice should now be considered suspect.
Similarly for the domain of expertise, the present research
suggests that experts may differ in important ways
depending on how they interact with the stimuli for which
they have expertise. Bird experts, for instance, possess not
only a great deal of experience with birds, but also a large
vocabulary by which to translate birds if the need arises
(Tanaka & Taylor, 1991). Thus, whether an individual
relies upon their perceptual expertise or translation in a
particular act of identification will vary widely with the
context. A more complete account of expert performance
will need to develop a better understanding of how these
two mechanisms interact.
Finally, the present series of experiments also has
implications for the language and thought literature. For
example, the present experiment suggests that where
language is going to have the largest impact on recognition
performance is in situations that call for translation, and less
so in cases of perceptual expertise where items are
represented more holistically. Correspondingly, a great deal
of research in the language and thought literature has shown
enhanced discrimination around linguistically relevant color
boundaries (see Kay & Regier, 2006 for review). Since
color terms are predominately used to represent object
features, this is likely related to the normative constraints
put on the use of these symbols by a culture for purposes of
translation and communication about objects. Thus, the
way that we represent objects in language for other people is
probably strongly related to how we represent them to
ourselves for purposes of reidentification.
In conclusion, the perceptual expertise/translation
dichotomy is a useful way to approach object identification
that may help to open a broader dialog between a wide
variety of research programs in the cognitive sciences. The
present research not only takes a first step in characterizing
how these processes interact, but also provides a coherent
methodology by which future questions regarding the

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by AFOSR Grant FA9550-04-10226 and NSF Grant 0349101 to Bradley C. Love and NIH
Grant R01 MH59196 to W. Todd Maddox.

References
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M.J. (1997). Becoming a “Greeble”
expert: Exploring mechanisms for face recognition.
Vision Research, 37, 1673-1682.
Gauthier, I., Williams, P., Tarr, M.J., & Tanaka, J. (1998).
Training ‘greeble’ experts: a framework for studying
expert object recognition processes. Vision Research, 38,
2401-2428.
Kay, P. & Regier, T. (2006). Language, thought and color:
recent developments. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10, 5154.
Logan, G.D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492-527.
Millikan, R.G. (1998). A common structure for concepts of
individuals, stuffs, and real kinds: More mama, more
milk, and more mouse. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
21, 55-100.
Nosofsky, R. M., Palmeri, T. J., & McKinley, S. C. (1994).
Rule-plus-exception model of classification learning.
Psychological Review, 101, 53-79.
Palmeri, T.J., & Nosofsky, R.M. (1995). Recognition
memory for exceptions to the category rule. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21, 548-569.
Quine, W.V. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Sakamoto, Y., & Love, B.C. (2004). Schematic influences
on category learning and recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 534-553.
Schyns, P.G., Goldstone, R.L., & Thiabut, J.P. (1998). The
development of features in object concepts. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 21, 1-54.
Tanaka, J.W., & Taylor, M. (1991). Object categories and
expertise: Is the basic level in the eye of the beholder?
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 457-482.
Tanaka, J.W., Curran, T., & Sheinberg, D.L. (2005). The
training and transfer of real-world perceptual expertise.
Psychological Science, 16, 145-151.
Tanaka, J., & Gauthier, I. (1997). Expertise in object and
face recognition. The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 36, 83-125.

934

