UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding User Behavior Using Cognitive Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1tb4q71h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Navarro, Daniel J.
Mackay, Marisa Maio
O'Doherty, Kieran

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding User Behavior Using Cognitive Models
Daniel J. Navarro (daniel.navarro@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide, Adelaide SA 5005, Australia

Marisa Maio Mackay (marisa.maiomackay@mnetcorporation.com)
m.Net Corporation, Level 2, 16 Leigh St, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia

Kieran O'Doherty (kieran.odoherty@mnetcorporation.com)
m.Net Corporation, Level 2, 16 Leigh St, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia
(e.g., representatives of various other companies), there are
1395 returning customers, operationally defined as a user
who actively1 downloaded at least 4 products over the period;
using the same criteria, 614 products are of interest over the
period. In total, there are 8395 downloads in this data set,
unevenly distributed across people and products. The data
is illustrated in Figure 1, with users and products sorted by
the number of downloads.
The rate at which products are purchased is not constant.
Downloads peak over February-April 2006 at a rate of about
300 per week, but are at other times occur at a roughly constant rate of about 150 per week. Not surprisingly, the timing
of events follows the diurnal cycle, with 82% of all downloads occurring in the \pm", and 3pm to 9pm being the peak
hours. The full distribution over download time is shown
in Figure 2, and shows a strong asymmetry, characteristic of
many other behavioral phenomena (e.g., arrivals in intensive
care; Cox & Lewis, 1966). Consequently, a standard von
Mises distribution (dashed line) is inappropriate. Adopting
a general method proposed by Fisher (1993), it is simple to
construct an asymmetric circular model (a wrapped Gumbel2;
solid line) that describes the daily distribution well.

Abstract
We consider the application of cognitive models to a range of
problems in mobile telecommunications. In particular, consideration is given to the characteristic patterns that emerge
in how people use mobile content in a natural environment.
Using cognitive models drawn from the literature on decisionmaking, preference and semantics, we show that the mobile
content environment possesses a range of interesting psychological properties, which can be used to further both pure and
applied research goals.
Keywords: User models, decision-making, preferences

Recording customer behavior has become common practice
in a variety of commercial endeavors. Organizations that provide services to their clients on a large scale have an interest
in learning about the preferences and intentions of the clients,
but can only uncover these by analyzing observed behavior.
In telecommunications, for instance, the core business relies
on a very large number of users, each with different goals,
habits and resources. While it is not difficult for a company to form a database (or corpus) of user behaviors, it is a
considerable challenge to draw sensible inferences about the
users. In order to learn successfully about users, databases
must be accompanied by well-tuned models of user behavior.
To a large extent, this is an exercise in psychological modeling, and so one might expect that existing models for human
preferences, decision-making and semantic knowledge could
provide a great deal of insight into these problems.
In this paper, we consider how the methods developed
by cognitive modelers can be usefully applied in order to
understand the patterns that emerge when we look at how
people download `content' for mobile phones. Despite the
complexity of the environment, cognitive models are able
to shed light on a range of properties of the domain. This
provides telecommunications companies with the opportunity
to better serve their customers, and provides insight into a
number of basic psychological questions.

The Time Course of User Decisions
User downloads can be viewed as a set of decisions made by
people; and so user modelling requires a basic understanding
of how people make real-world decisions. In general, people
make decisions in heuristic, non-compensatory ways (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999, Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky,
1982), taking action as soon as they have enough information, rather than wait until they have observed everything that
may be relevant to a decision. For this reason, a cognitive
modeling approach assumes a latent evidence-accumulation
process that drives the response (e.g., Vickers, 1979, Luce,
1986, Ratcliff, 1978). Moreover, we would expect this pro1
In this context, `active' means that there is clear evidence that
the product was genuinely chosen by the user, rather than received in
a promotional event. Operationally, this is indicated by the presence
of a `mobile originated' (MO) signal appearing in the system log,
indicating a user-originated request.
2
The Gumbel is an asymmetric distribution with broad support
on the real line, and is one of the limiting distributions for a
minimum statistic (in the same way that the normal distribution
is the limiting distribution for a mean statistic). Wrapping around
the unit
yields the probability density function p(θ | a, b) =
Pcircle
∞
(1/b) k=−∞ exp ((1/b)(2πkθ + a) + exp ((1/b)(2πkθ + a))),
for θ ∈ [0, 2π). For the current paper, the key point is that a
simple parametric model can explain the daily activity pattern.

A Small Corpus of User Behavior
The data under consideration are a subset of system logs
from a company that provides managed mobile services, over
the period from 1 August 2005 to 31 May 2006. These logs
record the occasions on which each user accessed a particular
data service. Data services can cover a range of products,
including wallpapers, ringtones, games and so on; most of the
high volume products in the current data are ringtones. After
removing `users' that appear not to be genuine customers

527

Frequency
User

200
100
0

0

200

400

600

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

200

400

600

0

0

Product

20
40
Frequency

Figure 3: Posterior predictive distributions (solid lines) describing
the response times for high volume users (solid bars). Most users
have a characteristic pattern of response timing that is well-captured
by the Weibull model. The x axes denote time since release, from
0 to 250 days, while the y axes denote probability.

60

Figure 1: The preprocessed data: there are 1395 users and 614
products under consideration, with a total of 8395 downloads distributed unevenly across both users and products. Users are ordered
by number of downloads, with the heaviest users at the bottom.
Products are also ordered by the number of downloads, with the
most popular products on the left. The number of downloads for
each user and product is shown on the plots above and to the right.
1000

Frequency

800

Figure 4: Posterior predictive distributions (solid lines) for low volume users. The x axes denote time since release, from 0 to 250
days, while the y axes denote probability. With so few data points
(circles), it is difficult to get a clear picture of the empirical distributions, but it appears that the user behavior is reasonably wellcaptured. Note that the height of the circles shows the probability
assigned by the model, and not a property of the data.

600
400
200
0

3am

6am

9am
12pm
3pm
Time of Day

6pm

9pm

Figure 2: Times of day at which people choose to make downloads.
Not surprisingly, the basic pattern is diurnal, with peak hours between 3pm and 9pm. The asymmetry on the data means that a
von Mises distribution (dashed line) fits poorly, whereas a wrapped
Gumbel distribution (solid line) fits well.

to be sequentially sampling information from the environment, accruing information over time until some criterion is reached. To model user decision-making, we
employ a `non-informative' Bayesian approach (e.g., Jeffreys, 1961), assuming that p(η) ∝ 1/η and p(β) ∝
1/β. Applying Bayes' theorem, we obtain the posterior probability p(η, β | x) ∝ p(x | η, β)p(η)p(β), and the
posterior predictive
distribution for a new observation x0 ,
R
0
0
p(x | x) = p(x | η, β)p(η, β | x)d(η, β). To demonstrate
the approach, we look at user RT to products for which the
onset of the signal t = 0 is (possibly) observable in the
corpus (listed in Table 1).

cess to have a different character for each user. As a result,
in an applied context we want to be able to infer something
about the idiosyncratic profile of a particular user, on the basis of a small sample of their behavior and a large database
of other user behaviors (e.g., Rouder, Sun, Speckman, Lu, &
Zhou, 2003; Navarro, Griffiths, Steyvers, & Lee, 2006).

Idiosyncratic Response Timing
We begin by considering the extent to which users have characteristic response times (RT). Conceptually, we can imagine
that upon the creation/release of a product, a signal appears
in the larger environment to which some users respond in
due time. Although theoretical RT distributions often have
a complex form (e.g., Ratcliff, 1978), they can be reasonably well-approximated by a Weibull distribution in many
practical situations (e.g., Rouder et al., 2003),
p(x | η, β) =

βxβ−1 −(x/η)β
e
ηβ

Treating downloads as a time-dependent cognitive decision problem proves highly informative. Figure 3 plots the
posterior predictive distributions for the 10 highest-volume
users against their empirically-observed behavior. With one
exception (lower right hand corner panel), the Weibull model
performs well. To show that it also captures more typical
users well, Figure 4 shows the predictive distributions and
observed values for 10 lower-volume users. In view of the
extent to which real world data are usually extremely noisy, it
is remarkable to see how well the approach works for most
users. The modal (i.e., maximum a posteriori) parameter
values for all 1395 users are shown in Figure 5. This distribution appears very simple, making individual differences
easy to model.

(1)

In this equation, η > 0 is a scale parameter and β > 0
is a shape parameter. This kind of distribution is generally appropriate in situations where people are assumed

528

Table 1: Key for the 30 products under consideration. Each product
has an acceptably large number of downloads, and had no downloads during the first fortnight of covered by the data, suggesting
that the initial period of the product lifetime is captured in the
corpus. All products are polyphonic ringtones.

403

Shape

55

Index
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

7

1

1

7
Scale

55

403

Figure 5: Distributions over (modal) user parameters on a logscale. The x-axis shows the shape η, and the y-axis shows the
scale β. The correlation between the log-shape and log-scale is
weak (r = 0.32) but significant (p ≈ 3.6 × 10−34 ).

The Lead User Hypothesis
The previous analysis indicates that, although each user
shows considerable variation in RT, this variation is systematic, and is well-captured by psychological decision-making
models. The practical utility of this is evident when one considers how the notion of individual differences in response
time plays out in the real world context.
An important concept in the industry is the hypothesis
of the lead user. The idea is that there exists a subset of
people who characteristically express their preferences faster
than other users. As a consequence, it is hypothesized that
during the lifetime of an individual product, there is a distinct
turnover in the kind of people who become interested. If true,
it would imply that marketing could be targeted to individuals
at the appropriate stage of a product life cycle.
To determine the extent to which the lead user concept
is appropriate, it is important to see if these user RT distributions provide sufficiently strong constraints on the uptake
process over the lifetime of a product. It turns out that these
constraints are quite strong, as shown in Figure 6. In each
panel, the RT for each download of a particular product (see
Table 1) is plotted against the corresponding mean RT extracted from the other 29 products. The strong positive correlations imply that it is possible to make reasonably good
guesses about the RT to a specific product on the basis of the
known RT behavior of the user to other products. In total,
28 of the 30 correlations are significant (p < .05), and most
products correlate strongly enough to be useful in practical
contexts.

Title
Flaunt It
My Humps
Love Generation
Run It
Everything I'm Not
LOVE
From Paris To Berlin
Golddigger
Stick Wit U
Check On It
Wasabi
Pump It
Faded
Push The Button
When It Falls Apart
Gasolina
Pon De Replay
Forever Young
Beep
Wake Up
Boyfriend
When I'm Gone
Far Away
Anything For You
Like You
Watching You
Because Of You
Stupid Girls
Listen To Your Heart
Confessions Of A Broken Heart

Download Count
129
173
109
125
147
134
81
109
122
103
101
71
103
64
79
52
70
57
70
62
73
62
52
60
61
65
62
52
55
54

we observe that characterizes the amount of time that elapses
between successive downloads by the one user (the wait
time). With 8395 downloads in the data set and 1395 users,
there are exactly 7000 occasions upon which we can measure the length of time that passes between two successive
downloads by the same user. Of these occasions, about half
(3636, or 52%) occur within the first hour, and another 540
within the hour following. In fact, 4989 of the observable
7000 wait times (71%) are less than three days in length.
This decline continues over time: when we extend the time
line to cover the full data set, we observe the long-tailed
distribution shown in Figure 7. In some cases, the gap between successive instances can cover several months. After
examining the behavior of individual users, it is clear that
this distribution is not an artifact of averaging across a large
number of users.
Having made this observation, it is useful to consider the
distribution of wait times. On noting the steep curve in Figure 7, it is tempting to think that the distribution is approximately exponential. An exponential distribution over wait
times would indicate that the probability that a user makes
a download is roughly constant over time (not counting onset and offset events; i.e., first and last known purchases).
However, upon close examination it is clear that that this
is very unlikely to be true. An exponential distribution has
equal mean and standard deviation (e.g., Evans, Hastings,
& Peacock, 2000). Across the whole data set, the mean
gap is approximately 11.7 days, but the standard deviation is
much higher, at 29.4 days. The implication of this is that the
empirical distribution is highly over-dispersed: there are far
too many observations at the low end (fast returns) and/or
too many at the high end (long lapses) of the scale. Inter-

Waiting for People to Tune In
The previous section was concerned primarily with decision
times, in which we suppose the existence of some signal in
the world to which individual users respond. In doing so,
however, we effectively `reset' the clock to zero whenever
a signal occurs, and effectively disregard the `global' time
course of the data. To redress this, this section considers
some more global aspects of behavioral timing in this environment.
In particular, there is an extremely interesting pattern that

529

1

2

3

4

250

5

6

7

8

9

Frequency

200

10

150
100
50
0

11

12

13

14

0

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

50
100
150
200
250
Number of Days Between Successive Downloads

300

Figure 7: The long tailed distribution over time discrepancies between successive downloads. Not shown properly is the fact that
over the first 3 days, there are 4989 downloads observed. The
dashed line shows an exponential curve fit to the tail (ignoring the
first three data points).
0.8

26

27

28

29

Hazard

0.6

30

0.4

0.2

0

Figure 6: Correlations between response times to each of the 30
products (y-axis) and the average of the other 29 (x-axis). All
are significant at p < .05 except products 18 and 25. However,
products 12, 15 and 19 also have r2 < .2, and so in these cases the
relationship may not be of practical importance. In all plots, both
axes run from 0 to 250 days.

p(t)
.
Rt
1 − 0 p(u)du

20

40
60
Days Since Last Download

80

100

Figure 8: The empirical (circles) and smoothed (line) hazard function for downloads, aggregated across users. The overall conclusion
is that there is a strong tendency for a download to follow immediately after the first, but after that initial spike the probability
immediately reverts to a constant probability.

estingly, however, the long tail shown in Figure 7 is wellapproximated by an exponential. When we look only at those
intervals that exceed 3 days, then the empirical mean is 40.2
days and the standard deviation is 43.1 days. This is illustrated by the solid line in Figure 7, which fits an exponential
curve to the tail of the distribution.
In view of this, we can be relatively confident that the distribution of inter-download times is exponential-tailed. This
is useful, since it indicates that the longer wait times follow
an exponential distribution, and are consistent with a constant probability model. Essentially, there is strong evidence
to suggest that there is some tendency for a user to return
quickly after the original download, but after some amount
of time (three days at most) since the last download, any
such effect is gone. This is shown in Figure 8, which plots
the (smoothed) empirical hazard function for the first 100
days. For a random variable t > 0 with density p(t), the
hazard function h(t) is given by
h(t) =

0

over time, a user is likely to `tune in' to the market, and
may download multiple products during the tune-in period.
However, the tune-in period is very short, lasting a few days
at most (and more likely lasting only a few hours), and the
user then tunes out again. Presumably the tune-in effect is
partly due to the existence of product offerings that allow
people to purchase some number of products for a fixed fee.
However, it is not clear whether this explains the sheer size
of the effect (e.g., 52% of all wait times are less than 1 hour).
In other words, it seems likely that a `tune in and out' pattern
would emerge even without such offerings.

Product Lifetimes and Semantics
We now consider how user behavior acts to provide structure to the product environment. In the first instance, we
look at how long a product remains popular. Since peoples'
preferences are not static, it is expected that the profile of
`in play' products will be constantly changing. Moreover,
in view of the fact that the timing of downloads is wellcaptured by standard response time distributions, it might be
expected that the popularity of a particular product will have
a similar shape over time. To illustrate this, we look at the
same 30 high volume products listed in Table 1. In general,
the pattern is a sharp rise in downloads, followed by a long
tail. In this case we extend the Weibull model slightly by
including a time offset parameter δ,

(2)

Noting that the exponential distribution is the only distribution with a flat hazard function (e.g., Luce, 1986), we can
conclude that wait times are exponentially distributed after
an initial spike.
This suggests that (again ignoring onset and offset events)
we might best think about user behavior in terms of a tune
in and out model, much like recent psychological models for
political preference (Hsu, Regenwetter, & Falmagne, 2005).
The basic approach is very simple: with constant probability

p(x | η, β, δ) =

530

β(x + δ)β−1 −((x+δ)/η)β
e
ηβ

(3)

1

2

3

4

5

50
Baseline
Forced Choice
Memoryless Model (MM)
Accumulator
MM + User Scaling (US)
MM + Prior Odds (PO)
MM + PO + US

40

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Recall (%)

6

30
20
10
0

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
Precision (%)

70

80

90

100

Figure 11: Precision-recall behavior for several different models.

26

27

28

29

In addition to inferring models for product lifetimes, it
is important to understand the semantic relationships between products. Inspired by classic semantic network models
(Collins & Loftus, 1975, Quine & Uillian, 1970), an initial
attempt to examine the interrelationships between products
uses the concept of a product network. In this approach a
graph is formed connecting various products in such a way
that products that are frequently downloaded by the same
users are near one another in the graph. As a first evaluation, an edge is inserted between products i and j if the
overlap between the sets of users (ui and uj ) that download
those products is sufficiently large. That is, if gij = 1 if an
edge exists and 0 otherwise, then

30

Figure 9: Product popularity as a function of time. In each case
a simple time-shifted Weibull model is used (solid line). Each
circle indicates the number of downloads over a particular twoweek period. The model predictions for future data are shown as
the dashed line. The y-axis counts number of downloads (from 0
to 35) over a two-week period, and the x-axis is the elapsed time
since the first download (from 0 to 250 days)

gij = 1 ⇐⇒

ui ∩ uj
>θ
ui ∪ uj

(4)

To evaluate the extent to which this graph-construction
heuristic provides a reasonable approximation to the underlying semantics, we look at the extent to which products
downloaded by the same user are in fact closer in the graph
than would be expected if they were a randomly located. To
avoid over-fitting, we adopted a cross-validation approach
(e.g., Browne, 2000) in which the graphs were constructed
using a random subset of 50% of the users, and then tested
against the remaining users. Across a range of θ values
(mostly between 0.1 and 0.3) the graphs constructed in this
manner tend to provide considerable structure to the observed
pattern of user preferences. For the cross-validated subset,
at a good value for θ product distances tend to be less than
half that of a random product-pair. An example of one user
for which the approach works well is user 56, shown in Figure 10. Downloaded products (shaded nodes) tend to clump
together in the graph. This is a characteristic of most users,
though not all. Overall, the semantic network approach provides a reasonable first account of the semantic structure of
the domain.

Figure 10: Download profile of a moderately high volume user
(user 56), plotted against a network formed from the 198 products
that have 10+ downloads over the period, with θ = 0.12.

As before, p(η) ∝ 1/η and p(β) ∝ 1/β. A tighter prior for
the offset was used, with p(δ) ∝ 1/δ 2.
For most products, the Weibull model fits well, as shown
in Figure 9. The gray histograms show the empirical distribution over download times for each product, and the dashed
line illustrates the point where the records vanish for each
product (i.e., May 2006), along with model predictions for
the future. Products 7 and 17 are not as well fit as the others,
showing clear evidence of bimodality; in some cases it may
make sense to assume the existence of multiple signals for
the same product, and fit a mixture of Weibulls. In general,
a popular product appears to have an effective lifespan of
only a few months, indicating a rapidly changing environment. In view of the previously demonstrated parallels between human memory and the changing information structure
of an environment Anderson and Schooler (1991), it would
be interesting to see how closely user memory matches the
observable changes.

Predicting Product Choice
As a final exercise we evaluate a few approaches to making predictions about user choice behavior, again inspired
by cognitive decision models. The approach loosely follows
Lee and Corlett (2003), using evidence-accumulation models based on the work of Vickers (1979) and Gigerenzer and
Todd (1999). For this simple evaluation, we calculate the
evidence zjk that a download of product j provides in favor
of a subsequent download of product k in a slightly post(k=1)
(h=0)
hoc fashion, by assuming that zjk = nj
/nj
where
531

(k=1)

nj

counts the number of people who download product

We thank Nancy Briggs and Peter Hughes for their contributions to
this work.

(k=0)
nj

j that also download product k and
is the number of
such people who do not. For a particular user, all models use
the notion of an `evidence tally' for each product that changes
after each observed download by that user. In an accumulator model, the tallies are incremented after each download.
Once a tally reaches a pre-set threshold, the model predicts
that the user will one day download the corresponding product. The memoryless model is similar, but looks only at
the value of zjk for the most recent download. A forced
choice model is identical to the memoryless model, except it
is forced to make one prediction after each download. The
models can all be augmented by starting the tallies at a level
set by the base rates (a prior odds variant), or lowering the
threshold over time in order to reflect the increased probability that the user in question is a high-volume user (a user
scaled version). Not all versions of the models are useful,
however, so only the useful possibilities are shown.
The results are shown in Figure 11, which shows
precision-recall curves for a range of models. For each
model, the \curve" is produced by varying the model parameters (i.e., decision thresholds). To interpret the plots, note
that precision is the proportion of model-predicted downloads that turn out to be correct, and recall is the proportion
of downloads that were predicted by the model. Since the
base rate is so low (about 1%), very few events ever provide
positive evidence in favor of any other event. As a consequence, both the memoryless model and the accumulator
model (which require positive thresholds) are extremely conservative, achieving recall rates that never exceed about 5%.
However, the precision is very high, allowing accurate predictions to be made for that 5%. Forcing the models to make
a choice after every event does not improve recall. User scaling increases recall but lowers precision, though this can be
improved by incorporating prior odds.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396-408.
Browne, M. W. (2000). Cross-validation methods. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 44, 108-132.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading activation
theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82, 407428.
Cox, D. R., & Lewis, P. A. W. (1966). The statistical analysis of
series of events. London, UK: Methuen.
Evans, M., Hastings, N., & Peacock, B. (2000). Statistical distributions (3rd ed). New York, NY: Wiley.
Fisher, N. I. (1993). Statistical analysis of circular data. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us
smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hsu, Y.-F., Regenwetter, M., & Falmagne, J. C. (2005). The tune
in-and-out model: A random walk and its application to a presidential election survey. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
49, 276-289.
Jeffreys, H. (1961). Theory of probability. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgement under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Lee, M. D., & Corlett, E. Y. (2003). Sequential sampling models
of human text classification. Cognitive Science, 27, 159-193.
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Navarro, D. J., Griffiths, T. L., Steyvers, M., & Lee, M. D. (2006).
Modeling individual differences using dirichlet processes. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 50, 101-122.
Quine, W. V. O., & Uillian, J. S. (1970). The web of belief. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological
Review, 85, 59-108.
Rouder, J. N., Sun, D., Speckman, P. L., Lu, J., & Zhou, D.
(2003). A parametric hierarchical framework for inference with
response time distributions. Psychometrika, 68, 589-606.
Vickers, D. (1979). Decision processes in visual perception. New
York, NY: Academic Press.

Discussion
Across a range of key industry questions, the basic methods
of cognitive modeling can be applied to good effect. Models of semantic structure, response time and decision-making
aid us in understanding and predicting user behavior. This of
course allows companies to provide better services, with less
unwanted intrusion on users. Importantly, however, when
basic science is applied to real world problems, it is not just
the applied domain that benefits. In the course of developing this approach, we observe evidence of the value of the
tune-in-and-out approach to understanding preferences, fastand-frugal models of decision-making, response-time modeling, and the attempt to model semantic structure. In the
applied context, we observe a rapid turnover in the structure
of the environment, providing added weight to the `rational'
understanding of human forgetting. While none of these applications are definitive, it is extremely satisfying to see the
endeavors of cognitive modeling playing out successfully in
the real world.

Acknowledgments
DJN was supported by an Australian Research Fellowship (ARC
grant DP-0773794). The current project was funded through ARC
grant LP-0562206, and generously supported by m.Net corporation.

532

