UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Computational Text Analysis Tools to Compare the Lyrics of Suicidal and Non-Suicidal
Songwriters

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0dh4553j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Lightman, Erin J.
McCarthy, Philip M.
Dufty, David F.
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Computational Text Analysis Tools to
Compare the Lyrics of Suicidal and Non-Suicidal Songwriters
Erin J. Lightman (elightman@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 365 Innovation Dr.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Philip M. McCarthy (pmccarthy@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 365 Innovation Dr.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

David F. Dufty (d.dufty@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 365 Innovation Dr.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 365 Innovation Dr.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
Recent research in cognitive science and psycholinguistics
has provided evidence that extreme behaviors such as suicide
may be predicted by analyzing an individual’s writing style.
This study seeks to extend research of this kind to a new and
less traditional written genre: song lyrics. We applied the
computational tools Coh-Metrix and Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count to a corpus of 35 songs each by 16 different
songwriters in order to investigate how differences between
suicidal and non-suicidal songwriters’ lyrics reflect previous
research on suicide. The results of our study suggest that
suicidal songwriters use words of lower concreteness, fewer
words, more future verbs, and fewer death-themed words in
their lyrics. Overall, our results contrast notably with previous
research, providing a new perspective on deriving
psychological information from non-traditional texts.
Keywords: Coh-Metrix; cohesion; coherence; difficulty; text
analysis; suicide; lyrics; songwriters.

Introduction
To study an individual’s cognitive processes and personality
traits, we often look at that individual’s use of language.
The psychological implications of language use have been
studied with computational tools in a variety of mediums,
ranging from classical literature and poetry (e.g., Stirman &
Pennebaker, 2001) to transcripts from therapy sessions (e.g.,
Stone et al., 2000). Lyrics from music however, have rarely
been considered in this context. While clear distinctions can
be made between song lyrics and more conventional forms
of text, such as textbooks and novels, the relationship
between song lyrics and poetry has been widely
acknowledged (Guerra, in press). As such, this study seeks
to investigate the linguistic features of song lyrics to study
musicians, particularly in terms of suicidal behavior.
Destructive behaviors such as suicide are considered to
be a greater risk for musicians than for the general

population (Raeburn, 1999; Stack, 1997). The current
study’s design draws from theoretical models and research
on suicide using two diverse but complimentary
computerized textual analysis tools: Coh-Metrix (Graesser
et al., 2004) and Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC,
Pennebaker & Francis, 1999). The analyses produced by
these computational tools are potentially capable of
revealing aspects of the cognitive and affective processes
involved in suicidal thought.
Over the past 40 years, research using computational
text analysis tools has made substantial developments in the
fields of cognitive science and psycholinguistics (Jurafsky
& Martin, 2000). For example, Newman et al. (2003) used
LIWC to predict whether an individual is telling a truthful
or fabricated story. And Pennebaker and Stone (2002) used
LIWC to explore the relationship between language and
aging using a large and diverse corpus of texts, including
novels, transcripts of conversations, and classical poetry.
Along with personality and demographic traits, research
has addressed a variety of clinical problems including
suicide (McDermott & Porter, 1989; Stirman & Pennebaker,
2001). For instance, Thomas and Duszynski (1985) found
text analysis to be an effective predictor of suicide among
medical students. And Silverman and Will (1986)
computationally analyzed the work of Sylvia Plath, a
famous poet who committed suicide, and found that she
shifted from using a somewhat traditional form of writing to
a more personal, expressive form over the years as she
neared suicide1.
Much of this research has been based on psychoanalytic
theories of suicide, such as Durkheim’s social
integration/disengagement model. Durkheim’s model

1217

1

However, McCarthy et al. (2006) used Coh-Metrix to analyze
stylistic changes in writing throughout the careers of three wellknown authors finding that each of them significantly shifted in
style over their careers although none of them committed suicide.

suggests that suicidal individuals tend to become detached
from social life as a result of failing to effectively integrate
into society (Durkheim, 1951; Petrie & Brook, 1992).
Related theories involving disengagement (Farberow &
Marmor, 1996; Prezant & Neimeyer, 1988) suggest that
suicidal individuals withdraw from social relationships, try
to detach from the sources of their pain, and become more
self absorbed. More traditional theories of suicide (e.g.,
Beck et al., 1979) are based on hopelessness models and
suggest that suicide takes place during prolonged periods of
sadness and desperation. The overwhelming feeling of
hopelessness and helplessness, along with the inclination to
think of the world in terms of absolutes, leads a depressed
individual to conclude that suicide is the only way to stop
the pain (Stirman & Pennebaker, 2001).
The models of suicide described above provided a base
for Stirman and Pennebaker (2001), who investigated how
the writing styles and characteristics of writers who have
killed themselves differ from writers who have not. Stirman
and Pennebaker applied LIWC to a corpus of 300 poems
written by suicidal or non-suicidal poets, and found that
suicidal poets used more first-person singular pronouns than
the non-suicidal poets. No other significant results emerged,
but directions of some categories agreed with their
predictions. The suicidal poets in their corpus used
communication words (e.g., talk, share, listen) less often
and used death-themed words (e.g., dying, coffin, funeral)
more often as they neared the ends of their lives.
Building on the work of Stirman and Pennebaker, we
assessed song lyrics by suicidal and non-suicidal
songwriters with two computational tools. The first tool,
Coh-Metrix (Graesser et al., 2004) computes over 700
indices of textual cohesion, difficulty and conceptual
characteristics (Graesser et al., 2004). The system evaluates
texts using Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA, Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; Landauer et al., 2006), lexicons, pattern
classifiers, part-of-speech taggers, syntactic parsers, shallow
semantic interpretations, and other components developed
in computational linguistics research (Jurafsky & Martin,
2000). Coh-Metrix incorporates a large number of lexicons
including Celex (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Van Rijn, 1993),
WordNet (Miller et al., 1990), the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database (Coltheart, 1981), and lexicons that estimate the
frequency of word use. These lexicons allow Coh-Metrix to
assess each word on various components such as number of
syllables, abstractness, imagery, ambiguity, frequency of
usage, and age of acquisition (Graesser et al., 2004). In the
output, Coh-Metrix offers a linguistic representation of
practically any given text.
The second computational tool we used in this study is
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC, Pennebaker,
Francis, & Booth, 2001). LIWC was developed in response
to a need for an efficient and effective method for
examining the many cognitive, emotional, structural, and
process components in writing and speech (Pennebaker et
al., 2001). To capture these concepts, the text analysis
program uses a word count strategy whereby LIWC

searches a text for more than 2300 words or word stems
within its dictionary. These search words are categorized
within the tool into over 70 linguistic dimensions, including
standard language categories (e.g., articles, prepositions,
pronouns), psychological processes (e.g., positive and
negative emotion words), relativity-related words (e.g.,
time, verb tense, spatiality), and content dimensions (e.g.,
death, sex, home, occupation). The output reveals how
much these categories and subcategories of words are
represented in a text (Pennebaker, Mehl, & Niederhoffer,
2003).
Five LIWC dimensions and five Coh-Metrix indices
were selected to investigate the writing styles and
characteristics of suicidal and non-suicidal songwriters.
These choices were based on previous research concerning
the relationship between psychological health and language
use (e.g., Stirman & Pennebaker, 2001; McDermott &
Porter, 1989), and on theoretical models of suicide (e.g.,
Durkheim, 1951; Petrie & Brook, 1992). The following are
brief descriptions of the 10 indices/dimensions and rationale
for their predictive power. More detailed explanations can
be found for Coh-Metrix in Graesser et al. (2004) and for
LIWC in Pennebaker et al. (2001).

Coh-Metrix Indices
Argument Overlap This index measures aspects of
cohesion. The argument overlap index that we used,
adjacent, refers specifically to referential similarities such
as table/tables and it/table, in adjacent sentences (Kintsch,
1998). Using both Coh-Metrix and LIWC, Phillips-Stoll and
Schober (2006) reported that currently depressed college
students write less cohesively than never depressed and
formerly depressed college students. Considering the widely
acknowledged relationship between depression and suicide
(Dieserud et al., 2001), we predicted that the lyrics by
suicidal songwriters would be less cohesive than the lyrics
by non-suicidal songwriters, as indicated by lower argument
overlap values.
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) LSA is a statistical
algorithm that compares the contextual similarity between
words, sentences, paragraphs, and complete texts, reflecting
that text’s cohesiveness (Landauer et al., 2006). LSA, like
argument overlap, is a measure of cohesion. LSA differs
from argument overlap in that values are produced for
relative similarities. For example, pen/pens generates a
higher value than pen/paper, which in turn generates a
higher value than pen/octopus. Based on our prediction that
suicidal songwriters would write less cohesively, we
predicted that suicidal artists’ lyrics would have lower LSA
values than non-suicidal artists.
Word Concreteness This index measures a word’s
concreteness based on human ratings. For example, words
such as garden and door score more highly than words such
as envy or despair. Disengagement theories have suggested
that suicidal individuals attempt to escape their source of

1218

pain (e.g., Durkheim, 1951) and detach from the real,
concrete world, which would suggest that suicidal
individuals might think in less concrete terms. We therefore
predicted that this escapism instinct would be indicated by
less concrete language.

Communication Words These are words that signify
communication, such as talk, share, and converse. Based on
Durkheim’s (1951) social integration/disengagement model,
we predicted that the suicidal songwriters would use fewer
communication words than their non-suicidal counterparts.

Tense/Aspect Ratio This index measures an aspect of
temporal cohesion: the degree to which sentences are linked
by time relations. A popular hypothesis on temporality and
suicide is that suicidal individuals experience distorted time
perception in which the present seems never-ending
(Neuringer & Harris, 1974; Twenge et al., 2003). We
predicted that this focus on the present would be reflected
by lower tense/aspect ratio, meaning that tense/aspect
would shift less often between representations of past,
present, and future.

References to Time We measured the incorporation of verbs
referred to as future tense and words related to time in general.
Cognitive aging literature has suggested that perception of time
is associated with social and emotional adjustment. This theory
indicates that individuals with socially restricted goals think of
themselves as having limited futures, and individuals with
larger networks of friends have more future-oriented
perspectives of time (Carstensen, Isaacowitz, & Charles, 1999;
Danner, Snowdon, & Friesen, 2001). Applying this concept to
the social disengagement aspect of Durkheim’s model (1951),
we predicted that suicidal songwriters would use fewer futuretense verbs, such as shall or will, than non-suicidal songwriters.
Drawing from the idea that suicidal individuals perceive time
as interminable (Neuringer & Harris, 1974), we predicted that
suicidal artists would also focus more heavily on time, and
thus, use more time-related words.

Word Count This index is simply the number of words in a
text. Phillips-Stoll and Schober (2006) suggest that
depressed individuals, when told to write about something,
tend to write less than non-depressed individuals. Thus, we
predicted that the songs written by suicidal songwriters
would generally have fewer lyrics.

Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count Dimensions
First, it should be noted that some of these dimensions
required more than one measure to provide a comprehensive
representation. Although 5 dimensions were selected, 9
LIWC measures were incorporated.

Death-Themed Words This category includes 29 words
related to death and dying, such as dead, burial, and coffin.
Preoccupation with death seems to be an understood element of
suicidal thought (e.g., Durkheim, 1951). Hence, we predicted
that suicidal songwriters would use more death-themed words
than non-suicidal songwriters.

Method

References to Self and Others To assess self absorption
and relationships with others, we used three measures: first
person singular pronouns, total first person references, and
references to other people (first person plural, second
person, and third person pronouns). Various studies have
found differences in pronoun use between people as a
function of depression. For instance, Bucci and Freedman
(1981) examined speech samples of five elderly depressed
subjects and found a higher frequency of first person singular
pronouns and a lack of second and third person pronouns. They
interpreted these results as a limited ability or desire to connect
with others. Drawing from this literature, we predicted that
lyrics by suicidal songwriters would more first person pronouns
and all self references as well as fewer references to other
people.
Emotion Words The words that address affective or emotional
processes can be divided into two categories: positive emotion
words, such as happy and pretty, and negative emotion words,
such as enemy and worthless. Because of the close relationship
between suicidal behavior and depression (Dieserud et al.,
2001), and because depression is often characterized by
negative affect, we predicted that suicidal artists would use
fewer positive emotion words and more negative emotion
words than non-suicidal artists. However, we note that Stirman
and Pennebaker (2001) found no significant differences in
either category for suicidal and non-suicidal poets.

Two groups of song lyrics were collected. We selected eight
songwriters who committed suicide for the first group. Each
suicidal artist was matched with a songwriter who has not
shown signs of suicidal intentions (i.e., no reported attempts).
The songwriters were matched as closely as possible for genre
of music, date of birth, degree of fame, nationality, mental
status, presence or absence of addiction, and education.
The artists were matched in order to control for variables
other than suicidal action; during statistical analysis, the groups
were evaluated as independent samples. Our corpus does not
include female musicians, because few of the female musicians
who have committed suicide wrote extensively. All artists were
native English speakers and represent diverse regions of the
United States and the United Kingdom. We were careful to
select a wide range of music encompassing traditional genres
such as classic rock, country, and folk music as well as more
recently developed genres such as punk and grunge (see Table
1).
Each artist is represented by the lyrics of 35 songs
obtained from websites devoted to that artist or his band.
Because some of the websites did not specify when choruses or
phrases were repeated, many of the songs were listened to in
order to correct any omission errors. Lyrics for each song were
processed through both Coh-Metrix 2.0 and LIWC.

1219

Table 1: Suicidal songwriters, their non-suicidal matches and general information.
Suicidal Songwriter
Stuart Adamson
Adrian Borland
Kurt Cobain
Ian Curtis
Tom Evans
Pete Ham
Shannon Hoon
Phil Ochs

Counterpart
Paul Weller
Mark Smith
Chris Cornell
David Byrne
Joey Molland
George Harrison
Scott Weilland
Tom Paxton

Genre
punk/rock
rock
grunge
punk
rock/pop
rock/pop
alternative
folk

Nationality
England
England
United States
England
England
England
United States
United States

Results
Of the 14 selected indices/measures, 4 revealed significant
differences in paired samples t-test (see Tables 2 and 3). As
shown in Table 2, the Coh-Metrix analyses indicated that
the lyrics by the non-suicide group incorporated more
concrete language than the lyrics by the suicide group. The
mean difference between groups was -4.73, and the 95%
confidence interval for the estimated population mean
difference was between -8.33 and -1.13. An independent ttest showed that the differences between conditions was
significant (t(279) = -2.59, p = 0.01, two-tailed).
Coh-Metrix analyses also indicated that the average
word count per song was larger for the non-suicidal
songwriters. The mean difference between groups was
-13.8, and the 95% confidence interval for the estimated
population mean difference was between -26.94 and -0.66.
An independent t-test showed that the difference between
groups was significant (t(279) = -2.07, p = 0.04).

Birth
1958
1957
1967
1956
1947
1947
1967
1940

Death
2001
1999
1994
1980
1983
1975
1996
1976

Cause of Death
hanging
crushed by train
gunshot to the head
hanging
hanging
hanging
overdose: heroin
hanging

death-themed words. The mean difference between
conditions was -0.18, and the 95% confidence interval for
the estimated population mean difference was between -0.32
and -0.03. An independent t-test showed that the difference
between groups was significant (t(279) = -2.41, p = 0.02).
Table 3: LIWC Dimensions in terms of Pronoun Use,
Emotion Words, Communication Words, Time Words,
Future Tense Verbs, and Death-Themed Words for
Suicidal and Non-suicidal Songwriters.

Table 2: Coh-Metrix indices in terms of Argument
Overlap (AO), Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA),
Concreteness, Tense/Aspect Ratio, and Word Count for
Suicidal and Non-Suicidal Songwriters.

suicide
non-suicide
1st person singular
7.53 (5.37)
7.49 (6.63)
all 1st person
8.90 (5.31)
8.40 (6.42)
references to others
7.71 (4.84)
7.97 (5.00)
positive emotions
2.60 (2.59)
2.99 (3.50)
negative emotions
2.22 (2.47)
2.03 (2.26)
Communication
1.68 (2.02)
1.71 (2.15)
time words
4.36 (3.38)
4.11 (3.55)
future verbs
1.94 (2.42)*
1.55 (2.00)*
death words
0.25 (0.65)*
0.43 (1.02)*
Notes: standard deviations are in parentheses; * p < 0.05

suicide
non-suicide
AO
0.21 (0.15)
0.23 (0.16)
LSA
0.19 (0.14)
0.21 (0.15)
concreteness
328.68 (20.17)*
333.41 (24.17)*
tense/aspect
0.89 (0.11)
0.88 (0.11)
word count
193.40 (79.13)*
207.20 (80.25)*
Notes: standard deviations are in parentheses; * p < 0.05

Discussion

As shown in Table 3, LWIC analyses indicated that
future-tense verbs appeared more frequently in the lyrics by
suicidal songwriters. The mean difference between
conditions was 0.39 and the 95% confidence interval for the
estimated population mean difference was between 0.03 and
0.75. An independent t-test showed that the difference
between conditions was significant (t(279) = 2.15, p = 0.03).
The lyrics by non-suicidal songwriters also contained more

In this study we used the computational tools Coh-Metrix
and LIWC to investigate how differences between suicidal
and non-suicidal songwriters’ lyrics reflect previous
research and theoretical models on suicide. The corpus
consisted of 560 songs, half written by suicidal songwriters
and half written by non-suicidal songwriters. Our focus on
songwriters addresses the higher than average rate of suicide
for musicians.
The Coh-Metrix results partly adhered to our original
predictions, although the results of this study did not
strongly replicate previous research on suicidal behavior
using computational text analysis. The non-suicide group’s
higher use of concrete words was in line with our
predictions and could possibly lend support to
disengagement models of suicide (Durkheim, 1951; Petrie

1220

& Brook, 1992). In addition to corresponding with our
predictions, the lower word frequency for the suicide group
was congruent with Phillips-Stoll and Schober’s (2006)
research on depressed college students. However, whereas
the suicidal songwriters used more abstract language and
wrote songs with fewer lyrics, the argument overlap, LSA,
and tense/aspect ratio did not yield significant results.
The values for the five LIWC dimensions did not
adhere to our predictions. Although there was a trend of
suicidal songwriters using more self-references and fewer
references to others, the distinctions were not significant.
There were also no significant differences in frequency of
emotion words, references to time, and communication
words. The values for future-tense verbs and death-themed
words were not in agreement with our predictions and
contrast notably with previous research. While most
psychoanalytic literature suggests that suicidal individuals
are preoccupied with thoughts of death and the
interminability of the present, the suicide group used
significantly more future-tense verbs and fewer deaththemed words than the non-suicide group.
The suicidal group’s lower usage of death-themed
words might be partially explained by the therapeutic
benefits of writing. Therapeutic writing is based on the idea
that writing about negative emotions and events can be
cathartic, and has been heavily implemented into counseling
and research (e.g., Smyth, 1998). The eight suicidal
songwriters in the corpus were matched with eight nonsuicidal songwriters based on several criteria including
mental health and addiction. Therefore, it is a reasonable
assumption that most or all of these individuals experienced
depression on some level. We cannot say that writing more
about death and dying relates to the non-suicidal
songwriters’ choices to live, but the results might suggest a
healthier and more progressive mental state.
Along with death-themed words, the positive results for
future-tense verbs and null results for argument overlap,
LSA, positive and negative emotion words, first person
pronouns, references to others, and communication words
did not support previous research on poetry and writing
samples. These dissimilarities may be the outcome of
distinctions between song lyrics and other forms of writing.
There are several factors that may explain why the
medium of song lyrics might have yielded results different
from poetry and other forms of writing. First, people other
than the credited songwriters, such as band members and
record producers, may have shaped the lyrics during the
writing and editing processes: Whereas most traditional
writers work independently of co-authors, many songwriters
have band members (who have not committed suicide) with
whom they collaborate in the writing process. Second, while
there is strong evidence that computational tools like CohMetrix and LIWC can interpret mental states from text, the
tools are not designed to recognize subtleties such as irony.
Irony is often prevalent in music; a melancholy song can
have positive lyrics set to sorrowful melodies and timbre.
The abstractness of songwriting might make it impractical

to analyze lyrics with computational tools. Third, there are
important contextual differences between music and
traditional writing. A poem or novel can be studied through
its text alone, but music is arguably best presented through
auditory means. Perhaps elements of songwriters’ mental
states cannot be interpreted through their lyrics alone
because all of music’s components must be considered.
Results may have also been influenced by limitations in
the corpora. The lengths of the individual songs may have
affected the results. Most of the text files consisted of fewer
than 200 words, and some of the computational algorithms
that we used are more reliable with larger text samples. In
addition, our corpus consisted of sixteen songwriters. This
rather low number is due to our constraints of carefully
matching the suicidal and non-suicidal song-writers.
Nonetheless, these sample size constraints may account for
the limited effect sizes. Our future analyses will attempt to
include a larger and more diverse corpus. Our goal is to
collect corpora for additional songwriters, incorporating
more diverse genres, time periods, and nationalities. We
will also collect corpora by poets and novelists in order to
further examine the measures we used in this study and
replicate results of previous studies. Future research will
also investigate stylistic changes in writing throughout the
careers of suicidal songwriters.
Coh-Metrix and LIWC have emerged as valuable tools
in cognitive science. Given the scope of these resources, it
may be possible to improve upon existing models of suicide
and maybe even create new models. Our goal for this
research is to find elements of language that differ between
suicidal and non-suicidal songwriters. These differences
could provide insight into the mental states behind suicide,
and thus offer potential in developing preventative
treatments for musicians, and perhaps, the general
population.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Institute for Education
Sciences (IES R305G020018-02). Opinions, findings,
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the IES. The authors would also like to
acknowledge the contributions made to this paper by Art
Graesser, Max Louwerse, and Zhiqiang Cai.

References

1221

Baayen, R.H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (Eds.)
(1993). The CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM].
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia: Linguistic Data
Consortium.
Beck, A.T., Rush, A.J., Shaw, B.F., Emery, G. (1979).
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford
Press.
Bucci, W., & Freedman, N. (1981). The language of
depression. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 45, 334-358.

Carstensen, L.L., Isaacowitz, D.M., & Charles, S.T. (1999).
Taking time seriously: A theory of socioemotional
selectivity. American Psychologist, 54, 165-181.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database
quarterly. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497505.
Danner, D., Snowdon, D., & Friesen, W. (2001). Positive
emotions in early life and longevity: Findings from the
Nun Study. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80, 814.
Dieserud, G., Roysamb, E., Ekeberg, O., & Kraft, P. (2001).
Toward an integrative model of suicide attempt: A
cognitive psychological approach. Suicide and LifeThreatening Behavior, 31, 153-168.
Durkheim, E. (1951). Suicide. New York: Free Press.
Farberow, N.L., & Marmor, K. (1996). Short-term group
psychotherapy with suicidal patients. In M. Rosenbaum
(Ed.) Handbook of short-term therapy groups. The master
work series. Northvale: Jason Aronson Inc. (pp 337-355).
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M., & Cai,
Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and
language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 36, 193-202.
Guerra, B. (in press). Music is poetry. Middle School
Language Arts Lessons. Retrieved November 6, 2006,
from
http://www.youthfirst.org/winners/musicpoetry.htm.
Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J.H. (2000). Speech and language
processing: An introduction to natural language
processing, computational linguistics, and speech
recognition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Landauer, T., McNamara, D.S., Dennis, S, & Kintsch, W.
(Eds.) (2006). Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McCarthy, P.M., Lewis, G.A., Dufty, D.F., & McNamara,
D.S. (2006). Analyzing writing styles with Coh-Metrix. In
Proceedings of the Florida Artificial Intelligence
Research Society International Conference (FLAIRS).
Menlo Park, California: AAAI Press.
McDermott, J.F., & Porter, D. (1989). The efficacy of
poetry therapy: A computerized content analysis of the
death poetry of Emily Dickinson. Psychiatry, 52, 462468.
Miller, G.A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C., Gross, D., &
Miller, K. (1990). Five papers on WordNet (Technical
Report). Princeton University, Cognitive Science
Laboratory.
Neuringer, C., & Harris, R.M. (1974). The perception of the
passage of time among death-involved hospital patients.
Life-Threatening Behavior, 4, 240-254.

Newman, M.L., Pennebaker, J.W., Berry, D.S., & Richards,
J.M. (2003). Lying words: Predicting deception from
linguistic style. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 29, 665-675.
Pennebaker, J.W., & Francis, M.E. (1999). Linguistic
inquiry and word count (LIWC). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pennebaker, J.W., Francis, M.E., & Booth, R.J. (2001).
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): LIWC2001.
Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pennebaker, J.W., Mehl, M.R., & Niederhoffer, K.G.
(2003). Psychological aspects of natural language use:
Our words, our selves. Annual Review of Psychology, 54,
547-577.
Pennebaker, J.W., & Stone, L.D. (2002). Words of wisdom:
language use across the lifespan. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 85, 291-301.
Petrie, K., & Brook, R. (1992). Sense of coherence, selfesteem, depression and hopelessness as correlates of
reattempting suicide. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 31, 293-300.
Phillips-Stoll, A.K., & Schober, M.F. (2006, July). Textual
cohesion in writing by depressed, formerly-depressed,
and never-depressed students. Presentation at the 16th
Annual Meeting of the Society for Text and Discourse,
Minneapolis, MN.
Prezant, D.W., & Neimeyer, R.A. (1988). Cognitive
predictors of depression and suicide ideation. Suicide Life
Threatening Behavior, 18, 259-264.
Raeburn, S. D. (1999) Psychological issues and treatment
strategies in popular musicians: A review, part 1. Medical
Problems of Performing Artists, 14, 4.
Silverman, M.A., & Will, N.P. (1986). Sylvia Plath and the
failure of emotional self-repair through poetry.
Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 55, 99-129.
Smyth, J.M. (1998). Written emotional expression: Effect
sizes, outcome types, and moderating variables. Journal
of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 66, 174-184.
Stack, S. (1997). Suicide among artists. The Journal of
Social Psychology, 137, 129-130.
Stirman, S.W., & Pennebaker, J.W. (2001). Word use in the
poetry of suicidal and non-suicidal poets. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 63, 517-522.
Stone, A., Smyth, J., Kaell, A., & Hurewitz, A. (2000).
Structured writing about stressful events: Exploring
potential psychological mediators of positive health
effects. Health Psychology, 19, 619-624.
Thomas, C.B., & Duszynski, K.R. (1985). Are words of the
Rorschach predictors of disease and death? The case of
“whirling.” Psychosomatic Medicine, 46, 201-211.
Twenge, J.M., Catanese, K.R., & Baumeister, R.F. (2003).
Social exclusion and the deconstructed state: Time
perception, meaninglessness, lethargy, lack of emotion,
and self-awareness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 409-423.

1222

