UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual, Lexical, and Contextual Effects on Word Identification of Korean

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1652264b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Kim, Say Young

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual, Lexical, and Contextual Effects on Word Identification of Korean
Say Young Kim (syk2@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4120 Sennott Square,
Banquet Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15217 USA

The Korean Writing System and Sentence Structure
In order to illustrate the characteristic processes in Korean
word identification, writing system of Korean should be
reviewed briefly. The Korean alphabet, Hangul, consists of
24 primary letters, with 14 consonants and 10 vowels. It is
considered an alphabetic syllabary because each phoneme is
represented by a letter, and each word is made from letters
that are combined into syllables that consist of compact
character blocks as in Figure 1 (see Taylor, 1980).

Abstract
In order to assess the role of visual, lexical, and contextual
information on word identification during Korean sentence
reading, a self-paced reading experiment was conducted. It
was found, in regard to word length variables, that the number
of syllables and the number of visual features affected reading
times significantly, but the other sub-lexical units (i.e.,
phonemes and letters) did not. Word length (i.e., the number
of syllable) also interacted with word frequency, which is
consistent with previous studies. It suggested a conclusion
that in Korean the relevant processing unit, in the context of
sentence, is the syllable, taking internal structure variations
into account. Word frequency and predictability affected
reading times respectively; however, the interaction between
these two variables did not. The results imply that Korean
word identification during reading can be possibly affected by
word frequency and word predictability, additively. This
result is consistent with recent eye-tracking studies using
English.

Figure 1: Spatial arrangement of letters in Korean syllables
and words, “chayk sang”1 (desk in English) with the leftmost “box” containing the first CVC syllable (i.e., the
letters, ㅊ, ㅐ, ㄱ), and the right-most “box” containing the
second CVC syllable (i.e., the letters, ㅅ, ㅏ, ㅇ).

Keywords: word length; word frequency; context effect;
word identification; Korean

Introduction
Does word identification occur in the same way regardless
of language specifics (e.g., alphabetic language or nonalphabetic language) or the situation of word identification
(e.g., word in isolation or word in text)? In order to answer
this question, the present study focuses on Korean word
identification for cross-linguistic comparisons and to
examine the process of word identification during the
reading of a sentence, not just a word in isolation.
To examine the degree to which language-specific factors
and contextual factors in a sentence affect word
identification, this current study examined how word
identification is affected by three main variables: word
length, frequency, and predictability. This study used
Korean to allow comparisons with other languages (e.g.,
English) and the self-paced reading of sentences to address
the following four research questions: First, what are the
basic units of processing (e.g., letters, syllables, and/or
words) during the reading of Korean? Second, to what
degree do lexical variable (e.g., word frequency) play a role
in the reading of Korean? Third, to how much do the
sentential constraints imposed by syntax and/or meaning
(i.e., word predictability) affect word identification during
the reading of Korean? Finally, how do the three main
variables of interest (word length, frequency, and
predictability) interact with each other?

As the Figure 1 shows, each syllable begins with a
consonant, and has at least one additional consonant and one
vowel, which may represent a CV, CVC, or CVCC syllable.
Because of its one-to-one correspondence between letters
and phonemes, Korean does not have some of the
confusions that exist in English. For instance, in English, a
single letter can represent a variety of sounds, and a single
sound can be represented by several different letters or letter
group (Taylor, 1980).
At a higher, linguistic level, Korean sentence structure is
different from many other commonly studied languages
(e.g., English) in that it is head-final, which simply means
that verbs are placed at the ends of sentences (i.e., SOV
word order). In addition, due to case markers, word order in
sentences is thus more flexible than in English, and
syntactic categories are represented using by case markers
(e.g., ‘는 –nun’ for the subject and ‘를 –lul’ for the object in
Example 1).
Example (1)
선주는*
낚시를* 좋아한다.
SeonJoonun* Nakksilul* cohahanta.
SeonJoo
fishing
likes

These important characteristics of Korean may influence
the word predictability effect because it is determined – at

1157

1
All transliterations in this article follow the Yale Romanization
System (Martin, 1992).

least in part – by the syntactic information that occurs prior
to a given word. Thus, one might predict that, in the case of
Korean, the head-final syntactic structure and the use of
case markers might together provide different contextual
constraints on each word in a sentence, especially weak
syntactic constraints, and thereby reduce the overall size of
any word predictability effects that might be observed in the
present experiment.
Previous Findings
First, word length is thought of as a fundamental constraint
to identify a word, which supported by results of many
different languages, such as Korean (Park, 1993; Nam et al.,
1997), English (Lee, 1999), Hebrew (Lavidor & Whitney,
2005), and French (Juphard, Carbonnel, & Valdois, 2004).
These studies have generally found that naming and lexicaldecision latencies for target words are longer for long words
than for short words. This result is thought to be due to the
fact that our visual system has limited visual acuity which
makes it more difficult to identify larger objects (e.g.,
words). In addition, the tasks demand cognitive processes,
for instance, matching the printed scripts to their sounds. If
the time to complete these processes increases linearly as
word length increases, then it would take more time to name
long words than short words.
In terms of the internal structure of Korean words, there
are two properties of the Korean alphabet (Hangul) system:
the first is the different types of CV blocks in a word
(Taylor, 1980); the second is the number of visual features
making up letters and words. In Hangul, the square-like
spatial arrangements of the individual letters within each
syllable may possibly relate to the complexity of a word,
because there can be relative variation of the visual features
or the CV block types in the limited space. There are five
different CV combination types that can be categorized into
three levels of visual complexity (see Table 1).
Basically, the complexity increased by adding a
consonant might affect word identification simply because
increasing the complexity of a word increases the number of
visual features, and thereby induces more low-level visual
processing necessary to identify the word.
Table 1: Example of Hangul Syllable Blocks Showing
Three Levels of Complexity (adapted from Taylor (1980)
with permission of Springer Publisher) and Number of
Visual Features (added by the author).
Complexity
Level

Linear
Arrangement

SyllableBlock

Number
of
Feature

Syllable &
pronunciation

Meaning

I

ㅏ

아

3

V /a/

suffix;
ah

I

ㄷㅏ

다

5

CV /da/

All

II

ㅏㄹ

알

8

VC /al/

Egg

II

ㄷㅏㄹ

달

10

CVC /dal/

Moon

III

ㄷㅏㄹㄱ

닭

12

CVCC /dalg/

Hen

Nam and colleagues (1997) found the role of sublexical
units in Korean as well as visual features, such as
horizontal, vertical, and diagonal lines, and circles
(examples shown in Table 1) using naming and lexicaldecision tasks. The result showed that the reaction times
increased as the number of visual features in the words
increased, even when the number of syllables was
controlled. It may reflect the fact that native speakers of
Korean are sensitive to the visual complexity of words, even
though these visual features are not related to the linguistic
aspects of the language.
Based on the internal structure of a Korean word, one
might still ask whether or not the CV blocks and/or visual
components of the letters (e.g., vertical lines) have a role in
word identification within text. Although a couple of
previous studies dealt with characteristics of the internal
structure of Korean, neither tested its effect on during word
identification during a reading of sentence: Taylor (1980)
used non-language task and Nam et al. (1997) used
recognition task of isolated words. Task differences might
be expected to induce a specific priority in word
identification, for example, compared to silent reading task,
the naming task possibly requires that readers access
phonological information from printed words.
The second variable considered in the present study is
frequency of occurrence. Many previous studies using a
variety of different experimental methods have consistently
demonstrated word frequency effects (Monsell, Doyle, &
Haggard, 1989; Allen, McNeal, & Kvak, 1992). Allen et al.
(1992) examined the effect of word frequency by
manipulating stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA), the interval
between onset of the prime and the onset of the target. In
their lexical decision experiments, word-frequency effects
were found across the different SOAs, between the
presentation of a letter string and a subsequent pattern mask
in a lexical decision task, with no interaction between
frequency and SOA. In addition, Monsell et al. (1989)
designed a series of experiments to compare the effect of
word frequency using different types of tasks (e.g., semantic
categorization, syntactic categorization, etc.), and showed a
consistent word-frequency effect in lexical identification
with little variability of its effect size. Together, these
results suggest that word frequency effects are robust, and
can be expected across languages, because this process can
be achieved by a language-independent mechanism.
A more interesting aspect of frequency could be its
relationship with other variables in a word. For example,
Lee (1999) found an interaction between frequency and
word length with native English speakers, with larger wordlength effects for low-frequency than high-frequency words.
Studies of Korean have also reported this kind of interaction
(Choi, 1986; Park, 1993; Nam et al., 1997). For example,
Park (1993) showed a larger frequency effect in 2- and 3syllable words than in 1- and 4-syllable words. The
interaction between word frequency and word length
suggests the locus of both variables. Namely, word length
affects not only prelexical processes, but also lexical

1158

processes, because the interaction between these two
variables can be interpreted as evidence that both variables
share a processing stage (Sternberg, 1969).
Word predictability, the third variable in this study, has
been studied using different methods like eye tracking
(Rayner & Well, 1996) which examined the effect of
contextual constraint on the eye movements of readers who
encountered predictable versus unpredictable words in a
sentence. In eye tracking experiments, participants were
more likely to fixate (i.e., have greater fixation probability)
on words in the low-constraint than medium- or highconstraint conditions. In addition, Rayner and colleagues
(2004) showed, in their eye movement experiment, that
predictability at least does not interact with frequency,
which suggests that these two variables influence different
stages of word identification. This result is interesting
because it is in contrast to the prediction that the effect of
contextual information can be expected to be greater on less
frequent words. Moreover, the frequency effect usually has
interactions with other variables, for example, age of
acquisition (Morrison & Ellis, 1995) and word length (Lee,
1999).
In sum, previous studies relevant to three main variables
(i.e., word length, word frequency, and word predictability)
have been reviewed. Because of the Korean writing system
and orthography, internal structure properties should be
considered (i.e., visual features and complexity). Together,
these word length and internal structure properties will be
investigated to examine what levels of sublexical units in
Korean play a significant role during reading. In addition,
word frequency and word predictability effects will also be
investigated in the following two experiments.

Method
Cloze Task for Selecting Stimuli Sentences
In order to select a set of target words that were highly
predictable from their sentence contexts so that these items
would be used in a subset of stimuli (see Stimuli section) a
self-paced reading experiment. Seventy-eight Korean
undergraduate participants were presented 120 sentence
fragments like Example (2) that terminated with a blank,
and participants were instructed to write down the first word
that come to their mind after reading each fragment.
Example (2)
Sentence fragment: 용욱이는/ 밤새워/ 시험 공부를 하기/ 전에/
한잔의 _____
Pronounced:
Yongwuk-i-nun/ pam-say-we/ si-hem kong-bu-lul /
ha-ki/ cen-ey/ han can-uy _____
Phrasal meanings: Yong-Wook/ during overnight/ studying for exam/
before/ a cup of _____

As shown in Example (2), a main verb of Korean
sentence is frequently placed at the end of the sentence (i.e.,
after the target word), and thereby it might be thought to
provide little constraint on the target word. In contrast, the
verb in an English sentence is typically located near middle
of the sentence, and thereby provides relatively more
constraint on the target word.

In results of this task, thirty-two responses from the cloze
task that were given more than 25% of the time in sentence
fragments were assigned to the high-predictability condition
(M = 60%; range = 25 – 97% ). The mean cloze-probability
for highly predictable target words in Korean was 60%,
whereas in one of study using English (Rayner et al., 2004)
was 78%. English sentences can provide both semantic and
syntactic constraints on a target word in a sentence, but
Korean sentences mostly provide semantic, and not
syntactic, constraints on a target word.
Experiment : Self-Paced Reading
For the purpose of examining how the visual, lexical, and
contextual characteristics of Korean affect word
identification during natural reading, word length,
frequency, and predictability were manipulated among the
target words. To do this, three different sets of stimuli were
constructed as described in the next section.
Participants. Twenty-one native Koreans in
Pittsburgh community participated in this experiment,
twenty-five Koreans in Seoul also participated in
experiment for about $10 each. All of the participants
normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

the
and
this
had

Stimuli. A set of 108 sentences was generated, and
part of this sentence set was originated from the cloze-task
norms (see stimulus Set III). These stimuli consisted of
three sets of 32 sentences and 12 filler sentences. More
specific information about each set of sentences is given in
the following:
Set I consisted of 32 sentences containing target words
that varied in terms of word length (i.e., number of
syllables: 1–4) and word frequency (high frequency: Mdn =
180 per million, range = 59–849; low frequency: Mdn = 1.3
per million, range = 1–26). Therefore, Set I provided the
opportunity to evaluate the effect of the number of syllables
as a possible unit of word length, and a possible interaction
with frequency.
Set II consisted of 32 sentences containing two-syllable
target words with various numbers of phonemes (M = 5.1;
range = 3–7) and letters (M = 2.6; range = 2–6). The internal
structure properties of the Korean words also varied in this
set, but they were not directly manipulated (as was
frequency in Set III) based on two properties: the various
possible syllable-block (CV) combinations (Taylor, 1980),
and the number of visual features (e.g., vertical lines, etc.;
Nam et al., 1997). CV block combinations can have three
levels of complexity based on a single letter, so the
complexity of the present stimuli was based on the sum of
each syllable’s complexity level (M = 4.8; range = 3–6). The
number of visual features was also based on the sum of all
components in each word (M = 12.7; range = 7–19).
Set III consisted of 32 target sentences extracted from the
cloze task and containing four types of target words: (1)
high-frequency predictable words; (2) high-frequency
unpredictable words; (3) low-frequency predictable words;

1159

and (4) low-frequency unpredictable words. The frequency
of the high-frequency words and low frequency words were
over 53 per million (M = 149, Mdn = 114, SD = 134) and
less than 9 per million (M = 2.9, Mdn = 2.3, SD = 2.5),
respectively (National Academy of the Korean Language,
2002). Predictable target words were selected from the cloze
task that were given more than 25% of the time (M =
60.38%, Mdn = 63%, SD = 17.64%).
Table 2: Examples of Target Stimuli of Set III.

HF– P
HF – U
LF – P
LF – U

Example Sentences
일요일에는 미뤘던 빨래와 청소를 해야겠다.
On Sunday, postponed, laundry, and, cleaning, have to.
차가 더러워졌으니 일요일에는 반드시 청소를 해야겠다.
Car, dirty, on Sunday, necessarily, cleaning, have to.
차가 더러워졌으니 일요일에는 반드시 세차를 해야겠다.
Car, dirty, on Sunday, necessarily, car-wash, have to.
일요일에는 미뤘던 빨래와 세차를 해야겠다.
On Sunday, postponed, laundry, and, car-wash, have to.

420
400
380
360

In sum, as Table 2 shows, each target word (high- or lowfrequency) embedded in sentences was either predictable or
unpredictable. In the unpredictable conditions, target words
were selected from responses that were given less than 1%
of the time. To control word length, all of the target words
in Set III were two-syllable words.
Procedure. The initial display consisted of a line of
dashes preserving spaces between words. The participants
were instructed to press the space bar to see the first word,
and then to press the bar to see each new word of the
sentence; thus, whenever participants pressed the space bar,
each set of dashes changed to a word (i.e., a self-paced
moving window paradigm where each new word replaced a
set of dashes). Participants were also instructed to read at a
natural rate and to comprehend what they were reading.
Before starting the experimental session, each participant
read five practice sentences to become familiar with the
procedure. During the experimental session, true/false
comprehension questions were randomly presented after one
fourth of the sentences (on average) to impose on-line
comprehension of the sentence and to avoid “mechanical”
pressing of the button to move forward through the text.
They were then given feedback if their answer was
incorrect.
Results of Experiment
Forty-one participants’ data were analyzed, and all reading
times for target words that were more than 3 SD’s from the
mean of each stimulus set were excluded from the data
analyses.
Set I: Word length (number of syllables) and
frequency. A stepwise regression analysis was conducted
using the order as the number of syllables, corrected
frequency (i.e., logarithmic frequency), and the interaction
between those two variables as predictors. The R2 statistics
showed that the number of syllable did significantly predict
reading times [R2 = .832, F(1, 30) = 148. 05, p < .001].
1160

Reading Time (ms)

Condition

As predicted, the effect of word length was reliable, with
the reading times for target words increasing with the
number of syllables, which demonstrates the importance of
word length in word identification, and the significance of
the syllable as a critical processing unit in Korean. Word
frequency also significantly accounted for variance [∆R2 =
.026, F(1, 29) = 5.20, p < .05]. Finally, interaction between
the number of syllable and frequency also accounted for
significant proportion of variance [∆R2 = .021, F(1, 28) =
4.93, p < .05]. Figure 2 shows the result of reading times
dependent on word frequency and number of syllables. In
general, as far as word frequency is concerned, highfrequency words received shorter reading times than lowfrequency words (M= 298.9 ms vs. 326.9 ms, respectively).

340
320

High Freq
Low Freq

300
280
260
240
220
200
one

tw o

three

four

Number of syllables

Figure 2: Reading times for target words in Set I a function
of the word frequency and the number of syllables.
In addition, there was an interaction effect between
frequency and length as shown in previous studies (Lee,
1999; Park, 1993; Nam et al., 1997). Interestingly, however,
the pattern of the effect sizes of frequency in this
experiment is different from a previous study using Korean
(Park, 1993). His results showed a larger frequency effect
for two- and three-syllable words compared to one- and
four- syllable words.
In contrast, the present experiment showed the different
pattern of interaction as Figure 2, namely, word frequency
effects were greater in one- and four- syllable words than in
two- and three- syllable words. For the different effect sizes
of frequency depending on the number of syllables, the
numerical ratio of 1–4 syllable words in the database that
has used in this study was calculated as 1: 17: 14: 5
respectively. Therefore, I can conclude that the larger effect
of frequency in one and four syllable words in the present
experiment is because one and four syllable words are
expected to be used relatively less frequently as compared to
two-and three-syllable words, and it possibly made Korean
native speakers’ sensitivity to one-and four-syllable words
much higher compared to two-and three-syllable words. It is
possible, though, that latency of word identification is a
function of not only the syllabic types (1-4 syllable), but
also token frequency of each syllabic type.

Set II: Word length (number of letters, phonemes)
and visual complexity. Because each of the target words of
Set II was a two-syllable word, only the number of
phonemes varied across the target words (in contrast to the
target words in Set I). The visual complexity level of each
word was defined using both the CV block measure and the
number of visual features (see Table 1).
A stepwise regression analysis showed that only the
number of visual features reliably predicted reading times (r
= .373, p < .05). These results are partially consistent with
results from experiments using words in isolation, such as
with a lexical decision task or a naming task (Nam et al.,
1997), which showed the effects of other sublexical units
(i.e., phonemes, letter) as well. Thus, sublexical units’ effect
might be dependent on the task, for example, when native
speakers of Korean read a sentence, they may be sensitive to
the internal structure, but not phonemes and letters.
Set III: Word frequency and predictability. A 2
(high vs. low frequency) ° 2 (predictable vs. unpredictable)
ANOVA indicated reliable effects of word frequency [F(1,
40) = 5.54, p < .01] and a marginal effect of predictability
[F(1, 40) = 3.80, p = .058], but no interaction (F < .5). A
power analysis indicated that the latter was not likely to be a
Type II error (power = 0.945).
320

310

Reading time (ms)

300

290

280
Predictable
Unpredictable

270

260

250

240
High Freq

Low Freq
Frequency

Figure 3: Reading times for target words in Set III as a
function of word frequency and predictability additively.
Both variables showed main effects, but no interaction.
The overall findings from Set III were thus consistent
with previous eye-tracking experiments that have examined
the same variables (Rayner et al., 2004). As in these
experiments that used English, Korean also showed the
effects of word frequency and predictability, but no
interaction. Therefore, we can conclude that word frequency
and predictability affect lexical access additively or that the
effect different stages of lexical processing (e.g., pre-lexical
vs. post-lexical processing). Note that there was a relatively
weak effect of word predictability in Korean can probably
be explained by the relatively lower cloze probability in this
experiment.

General Discussion
The results provided some interesting findings as follows:
reading times of Korean words within a sentence were
affected by the number of visual features and the number of
syllables, but not by number of phonemes or letters. Word
frequency, representing a lexical variable, also had a
significant effect on reading time for target words, as many
other previous studies have shown; therefore, we can
conclude that people rapidly access the meaning of frequent
words as compared to infrequent words. In addition, the
interaction between frequency and the number of syllables
was significant. Another major finding of the present study
was a sentential context effect on word identification. For
the contextual effect, predictability of target words was
controlled by the syntactic and semantic information shown
prior to the target words. Word predictability reliably
affected the reading times of target words. However, an
interaction between word frequency and word predictability
was not found.
One of the underlying goals of the present experiment
was to suggest evidence of what reading units, among
various units, have a significant role in word identification
during the reading of Korean. Korean, having an alphabetic
syllabary, shares properties with both English (alphabetic)
and Chinese (morpho-syllabic). This property is shown in
the processing unit of Korean. First, as compared to the
Chinese writing system, both Korean and Chinese have a
similar written form - square-shaped characters. In
particular, Korean words of the CVCC type are more similar
to Chinese logographs (Taylor, 1980; see Table 1).
Although the internal structure variables are not directly
related to word reading units, their influence has been
reported. With respect to the internal structure, visual
factors might play a role of in both Chinese and Korean. In
Chinese, there is a complexity of character which is
measured by the number of strokes (Taylor, 1980). A stroke
is a dot, an L-shape, or a horizontal, vertical, or diagonal
line, and there are about 20 stroke types (Wang, 1981), and
it is very similar to a visual feature in Korean (Nam et al.,
1997). Using Chinese, Yeh and Liu (1972) reported an
adverse effect of complexity on recognition: latency for
recognition was longer for complex characters (15 or more
strokes) than for simple ones (10 or fewer strokes). A
similar effect was found in a previous study of Korean using
a lexical decision task (Nam et al., 1997) and the current
experiment using self-paced reading task supports this
conclusion. These results support the conclusion that both
native speakers of Chinese and Korean are sensitive to this
sort of visual factor, even if it is not directly related to word
reading units.
Next, considering a purely alphabetic language, such as
English, results from experiments showed the effect of word
length, which can be measured in the number of letters (Lee,
1999) or in the number of syllables (Lovatt, Avons, &
Masterson, 2000). In Korean, previous studies (Choi, 1986;
Lee & Kim, 1989; Nam et al., 1997) found that the number
of syllables affect the latencies for naming or lexical

1161

decision tasks. In addition, Nam and colleagues (1997)
found effects based on other sublexical units, such as the
number of letters or phonemes. In contrast to the
experiments using naming or lexical decision tasks, the
present study employed self-paced reading and only found
an effect of the number of syllables. Therefore, considering
both the characteristics of the Korean writing system (i.e.,
alphabetic syllabary) and task difference (self-paced
reading), these findings suggest that the preferred
processing unit of printed Korean words is the syllable,
which takes the internal structure of Hangul variation into
account. This conclusion is also consistent with some
previous results which found that the frequency of syllable
and the number of syllables that were Kulca (i.e., the
Hangul orthographic units which corresponds to single
syllable) (Yi, 1993; Lee & Kim, 1989).
In conclusion, the evidence from the present study has
some implications: as an alphabetic syllabary writing
system, Korean word identification is reliably affected by
the number of syllables and visual features. It indicates that
the status of Korean writing system, because its writing
system shares the properties of neighbor writing system.
Therefore, both visual features as a logographic property
(i.e., strokes in Chinese) and syllables as an alphabetic
property have influence on Korean word identification. The
reason why there are no effects of letters and phonemes on
reading times cannot be currently determined, now, but the
task situation, word in text, can imply that the sublexical
units’ role could be reduced in that situation. There was no
effect of the number of letters or phonemes in this
experiment. Word frequency is a strong factor for Korean
word identification regardless of task differences. Word
predictability also has a significant role in this process, even
if its cloze probability was lower (by weak syntactic
constraints) than English study. This may reflect a broad
difference between languages: Korean (or Chinese) is more
topic prominent language rather than English which is more
syntax prominent language (Li, 1976).

References
Allen, P. A., McNeal, M., & Kvak, D. (1992). Perhaps the
lexicon is coded as a function of word frequency. Journal
of Memory and Language, 31, 826–844.
Choi, Y. (1986). Effect of the number of syllable on
recognition of Korean words. Master’s Thesis, Pusan
University, Pusan, Korea
Juphard, A., Carbonnel, S., & Valdois, S. (2004). Length
effect in reading and lexical decision: Evidence from
skilled readers and a developmental dyslexic participant.
Brain and Cognition, 55, 332–340.
Lavidor, M., & Whitney, C. (2005). Word length effects in
Hebrew. Cognitive Brain Research, 24, 127–132.
Lee, C. H. (1999). A locus of the word-length effect on
word recognition. Journal of Reading Psychology, 20,
129–150.

1162

Lee, J.-S., & Kim, K.-L. (1989). The processing unit of
Korean Words. Korean Journal of Cognitive Science, 1,
221–239.
Li, Charles N. (1976). Subject and Topic. New York:
Academic Press.
Lovatt, P., Avons, S. E., & Masterson, J. (2000). The word
length effect and disyllabic words. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 53, 1–22.
Martin, S. E. (1992). A Reference Grammar of Korean.
Rutland and Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Publishing.
Morrison, C. M., & Ellis, A. W. (1995). Roles of word
frequency and age of acquisition in word naming and
lexical decision. Journal of Experimental Psychology;
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 21, 116–153.
Monsell, S., Doyle, M. C., & Haggard, P. N. (1989). Effects
of frequency on visual word recognition tasks: Where are
they? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 118,
43–71.
Nam, K., Seo, K., Choi, K., Lee, K., Kim, T., & Lee, M.
(1997). The word length effect on Hangul word
recognition. The Korean Journal of Experimental and
Cognitive Psychology, 9, 1–18.
National Academy of the Korean Language (2002). The
Frequency Database of Korean Words.
Park, K. (1993). Mental code involved in Hangul word
recognition. The Korean Journal of Experimental and
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 40–55.
Rayner, K., Ashby, J., Pollatsek, A., & Reichle, E. D.
(2004). The effects of frequency and predictability on eye
fixations in reading: Implications for the E-Z Reader
Model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 30, 720–732.
Rayner, K., & Well, A. D. (1996). Effects of contextual
constraint on eye movements in reading: A further
examination. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3, 504–
509.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages:
Extensions of Donders’ method. In W. G. Koster (Ed.),
Attention and Performance II. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Taylor, I. (1980). The Korean writing system: An alphabet?
A syllabary? A logography? In P. A. Kolers, M. E.
Wrolstad, & H. Bouma (Eds.), Processing of visible
language (Vol. 2). (pp. 67–82) New York: Plenum.
Wang, S-Y. W. (1981). Language structure and optimal
orthography. O. J. L. Tzeng & H. Singer (Eds.),
Perception of print: reading research in experimental
psychology. (pp. 223 – 234). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Yeh, J.-S., & Liu, I.-M. (1972). Factors affecting
recognition thresholds of Chinese characters. Acta
Psychologica Taiwanica, 14, 113–117.
Yi, K-O., (1993). Effect of orthography on mental lexicon
structure and search during the Korean word
identification. The Korean Journal of Experimental and
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 26–39.

