UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Weighing the Evidence: Children's Naïve Theories of Balance Affect Their Exploratory Play

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0pf5d8nc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Bonawitz, Elizabeth Baraff
Lim, Suejean
Schulz, Laura E.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Weighing the Evidence:
Children’s Naïve Theories of Balance Affect Their Exploratory Play
Elizabeth Baraff Bonawitz, Suejean Lim, & Laura E. Schulz
{liz_b, slim13, lschulz}@mit.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

& Piaget, 1958; Koslowski, 1996; Kuhn, 1989). These
results pose a problem for the Piagetian account: if
children’s exploratory play is largely unsystematic, how
might they generate the type of evidence that could support
learning?
One possibility is that although the particular actions
children take in the course of play might not be systematic,
children’s exploratory play might nonetheless be sensitive
to the ambiguity of the evidence they observe. In a recent
study for instance, children were introduced to a toy and
shown either confounded or unconfounded evidence about
the causal structure of the toy. The toy was removed and
then returned, along with a novel toy and children were
allowed to play freely for 60 seconds. Children who
observed unconfounded evidence showed the standard
novelty preference and played primarily with the novel toy.
However, children who observed confounded evidence did
not show the novelty preference: they spent more time
playing with the familiar toy (Schulz & Bonawitz, in press).
This research was a first step in understanding how
different types of evidence might lead to differential
exploration.
In that study, children were shown different patterns of
evidence (confounded v. unconfounded) under the
assumption that all children had similar prior beliefs about
how the toy might work. However, research suggests that
children’s theories affect their interpretation of evidence
(Bonawitz, Griffiths, & Schulz, 2006; Schulz, Bonawitz, &
Griffiths, in press). If theories play an important role in how
children construct knowledge, then children who have
different initial theories but observe identical evidence
might also show different patterns of exploratory play. The
current study tests this hypothesis.

Abstract
In this paper we show that, given identical evidence,
children with different naïve theories exhibit different
patterns of exploratory play. Karmiloff-Smith & Inhelder
(1974) demonstrated that before children develop an adult
"Mass Theory" of balance, they entertain a "Center
Theory", believing that all objects should be balanced at
their geometric center. Younger, "No Theory" children
balance blocks by trial and error. In Experiment 1 we let
Mass Theorists and Center Theorists play with a block that
was weighted off to one side. We then “balanced” the
block on a post either at the block's geometric center or at
its center of mass. (Thus evidence that was theoryconsistent for a Center Theorist was theory-violating for a
Mass Theorist and vice versa.) We also introduced a novel
toy (a peg and rings). Children were allowed to play freely
for 60 seconds. When the evidence about the balancing
block was consistent with the children's theories, they
showed a standard novelty preference and played mostly
with the novel toy. When the evidence violated children's
theories, they preferentially played with the balancing
blocks. In Experiment 2, we replicated the design with
younger, No-Theory children; they showed a novelty
preference regardless of whether the block was balanced in
its geometric center or center of mass. These results
suggest that children's spontaneous exploratory play is
systematically affected by the interaction of their naïve
theories and the evidence they observe. We discuss these
results in terms of the optimality of children's play.
Keywords: Exploratory play, theories, evidence, balance
task, cognitive development, learning

Play and Learning
Since Piaget (1951), researchers have believed that
children’s own actions on the environment play a central
role in how they learn about the world. At the heart of the
Piagetian account is the idea that children “construct”
knowledge (and particularly causal knowledge) by active
exploration. Although this “constructivist account” is
widely accepted, there is in fact little evidence for a
systematic relationship between children’s play and their
naïve theories. In general, the only systematic finding
about children’s exploratory play is that children (and
many other creatures) preferentially explore novel over
familiar stimuli (e.g. Berlyne, 1960; Hutt & Bhavnani,
1972; Pavlov, 1927). Moreover, considerable research
suggests that even older children have difficulty designing
informative experiments (Chen & Klahr, 1999; Inhelder

Getting ahead with a theory of balance
Because the development of children’s theories has been
well established in the domain of balancing blocks, this
domain is particularly conducive for investigating the
relationship between children’s folk theories and their
exploratory play. In a seminal study, Karmiloff-Smith &
Inhelder (1974) looked at children’s understanding of
balance between the ages of 4 and 9 years of age. They
demonstrated that between 6 and 8 years, children first
entertain a “Center Theory”, believing that regardless of the
center of mass, an object should be balanced at its
geometric center. Center Theorists repeatedly attempt to
balance unevenly weighted blocks at their geometric center.
113

Gradually, children develop the correct, adult theory of
balance: “Mass Theory”. Mass Theorists understand that
in order for a block to be stable, it must be balanced over
its center of mass. Children’s understanding of balance
has subsequently been investigated by many researchers
(e.g. Halford, 2002; Janson, 2002; Normandeau, 1989;
Siegler, 1976). However, much of this literature focuses
on the transition between incorrect and correct rules and
strategies and not on the processes, like exploratory play,
that might generate the evidence that could support such
discoveries.

Experiment 1: Center- & Mass-theorist Play
To a Center Theorist, a block with a conspicuously heavy
side balancing on its geometric center may not be
surprising; however, this evidence should surprise a Mass
Theorist. Conversely, to a Center Theorist, a block with
one heavy side balancing under its center of mass might
be surprising, but that evidence should not surprise a
Mass Theorist. To investigate how children’s theories
affect their exploratory play, we used a method similar to
the free play paradigm of Schulz and Bonawitz (in press).
We presented children with evidence about the balancing
blocks and then let them choose to play freely with either
the balancing blocks (the familiar toy) or a peg and ring
toy (the novel toy). If children are unsurprised by the
evidence about the balancing blocks, they should spend
most of their time playing with the novel toy; if they are
surprised by the evidence, they might overcome the
novelty preference and preferentially explore the familiar
toy. We predict that children who observe identical
evidence but have different theories will show different
patterns of exploratory play.

Figure 1: Methods and Design
a metal key ring with several charms; the ring was placed
on a pointed rod and base similar to those of the balances.
An opaque bag was used to cover the novel toy.
Procedure In order to make sure participants were
attentive, children were first given the pretest book and
asked two simple memory checks. If children failed the
memory checks, they were discontinued from the study.
Children were then given a theory-classification task. In
this task, children were presented with the three
classification blocks in random order and were asked to try
to balance each block on the post. We coded whether the
child attempted to balance the block at its geometric center
or towards the center of mass. The experimenter took hold
of the block before the child actually set it on the post so
children never observed the outcome of their balancing
attempts. The child was then shown the 3 familiarization
blue blocks, given a chance to explore the blocks for a few
seconds, and was then asked to point to the heavier side of
each block. Throughout the classification and
familiarization trials, the novel toy was on the table,
covered so as to be out of the child’s view, and off to the
right or left side (counterbalanced).
Children were classified as Center or Mass Theorists
based on where they attempted to balance the classification
block on at least two of the three trials. Center balances
included a 10% margin of error around the center of the
block (~1 inch radius from center.) All balances towards the
heavy side of the block that fell outside of this margin of
error were coded as mass balances. The experimenter then
randomly assigned children to either a Conflicting or
Confirming condition, (see Figure 1).

Methods and Design
Participants Fifty-seven six and seven-year-olds (range =
72 to 96mths, M = 85mths) participated.
Materials A short, 6-page storybook (unrelated to the
balancing task) about a girl who was looking for her teddy
bear was used as a pretest to ensure the children were
attentive. There were three theory-classification blocks,
each made of Styrofoam and covered with colored tape,
(see Figure 1).
Additionally there were three
familiarization blocks, identical blue blocks, each with a
larger, heavier side. Test blocks balanced by the
experimenter were identical to the familiarization blue
blocks; however, the two test blocks each contained a
magnet in the base located either in the center of the block
or off to the side where the block would actually balance.
The magnet was used throughout to make sure the stimuli
and balancing attempts were equivalent across conditions.
The balancing apparatus consisted of a rod inserted into a
rectangular wooden base. The novel toy was comprised of

114

theories than when it confirmed their theories (See Figure
2). To compare the amount of time playing with the blocks,
we ran a two-way-between subjects ANOVA with theory
and type of evidence as the between subjects variables and
time spent playing with the blocks as the dependent
measure. Comparisons between conditions revealed no
main effect of theory (averaging across the two conditions,
Center theorists and Mass theorists played for equal
amounts of time) and no main effect of evidence type
(averaging across the two conditions by theory, children
who saw the block balancing at the geometric center played
as long as children who saw the block balancing at the
center of mass).
However, comparisons revealed a
significant interaction: children spent more time playing
with the block when the evidence conflicted with their
theories than when the evidence confirmed their theories
(F(1, 53) = 5.38, p = .024).

Discussion of Experiment 1

Figure 2: Experiment 1 children’s total play with each
toy.

The results of Experiment 1 support the claim that
children’s prior beliefs shape their choices in play,
suggesting that young children’s spontaneous exploratory
play is sensitive not just to the perceptual novelty of an
object, but also to whether or not observed evidence is
consistent with the child’s theoretical predictions. Although
children observed identical evidence, they showed
distinctive patterns of exploratory play. Two variables
seemed to drive the effect: the initial theory and the
observed evidence.

The experimenter said, “I’m going to try to balance
my block here very carefully,” and ‘balanced’ the test
block either in the geometric center of the block or over
the center of mass. Then the experimenter uncovered the
novel toy and told the child, “Go ahead and play with
which ever toy you want until I come back.” After 60
seconds of free-play, the experimenter returned to the
table and covered up the novel toy. She returned the test
block to its original balanced position and asked, “Why is
this block staying up? How come it’s not falling over?”

Experiment 2: No-balance-theory
The results of Experiment 1 support the idea that children’s
theories play a pivotal role in their exploratory play.
However, what happens when children don’t have strong
theoretical commitments? In the original balancing studies
of Karmiloff-Smith and Inhelder (1974), the researchers
suggested that children between 4 and 6 have not yet
developed a theory of balance. If younger children do not
have robust theories of balance, neither a conspicuously
weighted block balancing at its center of mass nor a block
balancing at its geometric center should be particularly
surprising; children should show a novelty preference
throughout.

Results of Experiment 1
Three children were dropped from the study: one child for
failing the pretest; two for parental interference. Of the
remaining 54 children, 32 were classified as Center
Theorists and 22 were classified as Mass Theorists. Of
the Center Theorists, 87% of children attempted to
balance the block at the geometric center on all three
trials, the remaining 13% of children did so on two of the
three trials. Of the Mass Theorists, 59% attempted to
balance the block at the center of mass on all three trials;
the remaining 41% did so on two of the three trials.
Sixteen Center Theorists were randomly assigned to the
Confirming condition; 16 to a Conflicting condition; 12
Mass Theorists were assigned to the Confirming
Condition; 10 were assigned to the Conflicting Condition.
Children were counted as playing with the toys as long
as they were touching the toys and we coded the total
amount of time each child played with each toy. We
analyzed children’s play by looking at how long, on
average, children played with the balance block. Data
were coded by both the first and second author.
Children were more likely to explore the familiar toy
(the block) when the evidence conflicted with their

Methods and Design
Participants Thirty-five 4 and 5-year-olds (range = 51mths
to 68mths, M = 62mths) participated.
Materials Blocks, books, and novel toy were identical to
those in Experiment 1.

115

Secondly, the initial predictions of the No-Theory
children were significantly more variable than the Center
and Mass Theorists, with 69% of the No-Theory children
generating inconsistent predictions in the classification
trials (e.g., picking the same location on two out of three
rather than three out of three trials) compared to only 13%
of the Center Theorists and 41% of the Mass Theorists,
(No-Theory vs. Center: (χ2 (1, N = 59) = 20.3, p < .01); NoTheory vs. Mass: (χ2 (1, N = 49) = 5.37, p < .05)). When we
specifically coded for predictions that were inconsistent
with both Mass and Center theories (such as balancing
towards the lighter side of the block), we found that 34% of
the No-Theory children made such predictions at some
point in the classification trials, while only 1 of the 49 older
children made such a prediction.
As a final test of children’s theoretical commitments, we
looked at children’s explanations for why the block was
balancing after their free play period. Children’s
explanations uniquely and unambiguously fell into one of
four categories: Center Theory consistent explanations (e.g.
“It balances because it’s in the middle; there’s the same
length on both sides”); Mass Theory consistent, (e.g..
“There’s equal amount of weight on both sides”); appealing
to the hidden cause, the magnet, (e.g. “There’s something
sticky there holding it up, like a magnet”); or Other (e.g.
“It’s flat”; “You balanced it slowly and carefully”). After
the free play period, only 6% of the Center Theorists
offered a Center Theory consistent explanation for why the
block balanced; 28% offered a Mass Theory consistent
explanation; 53% appealed to the magnet; and 12% of the
explanations were classified as Other. The results were
similar for the Mass Theorists: 6% offered a Center Theory
consistent explanation; 41% offered a Mass Theory
Consistent explanation; 41% appealed to the magnet and
12% were classified as Other.
The scarcity of Center Theory consistent explanations
among the children classified as Center Theorists is perhaps
surprising. Clearly the magnet attracted many of the
children’s attention. However, we think it is also possible
that some of the children were at a liminal stage between
Mass and Center theories. The play period may have given
some of the children classified as Center Theorists more
familiarity with the way the weight was distributed in the
block. It is worth noting that in Karmiloff-Smith &
Inhelder’s study as well, many Center Theorists changed to
Mass Theorists over the course of the play period.
Critically however, while 88% of Center and Mass Theorist
explanations appealed to one of the first three classification
schemes, the majority of No-Theory (52%) children gave
explanations that were classified as Other. Children were
significantly more likely to give Other explanations in the
No-Theory condition than in the Center Theory condition
(χ2 (1, N = 59) = 10.9, p < .01) or the Mass Theory
condition (χ2 (1, N = 44) = 7.35, p < .01), suggesting that
the No-Theory children genuinely had less developed

Procedure/Design The procedure was identical to the
procedure in Experiment 1. However, because children’s
initial predictions were not seen as theory-driven, children
were randomly assigned to either the Geometric Center or
Center of Mass conditions.

Results from Experiment 2: No-balance-theory
Six children were removed from the study for failing the
pretest. Of the remaining 29 children, 15 were assigned to
the Geometric Center Condition; 14 were assigned to the
Center of Mass condition. Results for the No-Theory
children were analyzed as in Experiment 1. In both
conditions, children were more likely to explore the novel
toy by all measures. We compared how long the children
played with each toy in each condition by doing a 2 x 2
mixed ANOVA with play time on each toy as the withinsubjects variable and condition as the between-subjects
variable. Comparisons between the Conflicting Condition
and Confirming Condition revealed a main effect of play
time (averaging across the two conditions, children
significantly preferred the novel toy over the balance toy,
(F(1, 28) = 11.09, p < .01)), but no main effect of
condition (overall, children played for the same amount of
time in each condition), and no interaction: children spent
the same amount of time playing with the balance toy in
the Geometric Center Condition as in the Center of Mass
Condition. Additionally, individual children were no more
likely to prefer the balance toy in the Geometric Center
Condition than in the Center of Mass Condition (χ2 (1, N
= 28) = .05, p = ns).
Children were marginally more likely to play with the
novel toy than the balance in the Geometric Center
Condition (t(14) = 1.68, p = .057) and significantly more
likely to play longer with the novel toy than the balance
(t(8) = 2.09, p < .05) in the Center of Mass Condition. In
both conditions, a non-significant majority of children
played most with the novel toy.

Other measures of children’s theories
Several of the No-Theory children necessarily balanced
the classification blocks consistently on two of three
trials, so why believe that these children did not have an
initial theory that differentially predicted whether the
block would balance on the geometric center vs. the
center of mass? We suggest that there are three reasons to
believe these children were genuinely pretheoretical with
respect to the center/mass distinction. First, the ages of
these children align with the ages of children in the
original Karmiloff-Smith & Inhelder studies. In these
studies, the ‘non-theorists’ were classified between 46yrs, the Center Theorists between 6-7.5yrs, and the Mass
Theorists beginning at 7.5yrs. Our mean ages were
similarly 5;2 for the No-Theory children, 6;10 for the
Center Theorists, and 7;4 for the Mass Theorists.

116

beliefs about the relevant dimensions of this task than the
other groups of children.
Of course, it is unlikely to be the case that these younger
children have no theories at all about balance. These
children would certainly be surprised to see a block
floating in mid-air, or a block ‘balanced’ on an extreme
edge. In fact, the explanations of many of these children
seem to suggest that children might have a theory that
contact between flat surfaces is required for balance.
Many children gave explanations such as, “It stays up
because it’s flat”, and “You set it on the circle part which
is smooth”, and “It’s even on the bottom.” Importantly
however, both the geometric center and center of mass
evidence are equally consistent with this ‘flat surface
theory’ and thus equally uninteresting to the youngest
children, enabling exploration of the novel toy.
Additionally, work on children’s predictions about
balance scales (e.g. see Siegler, 1976) suggest that even
these younger children may be able to employ rules to
help make balancing predictions. Indeed, Siegler (1976)
found that 5-6-year-old children had difficulty attending
to more than one dimension of the blocks, but could at
least make the prediction that as more weight is added to
one side of the block, the balance may start to tip.
However, this task is importantly different from our task
because it draws attention to weight as a probable variable
which will lead to change. In our task the children must
notice that the block is weighted, and use this knowledge
to make a prediction about where along the fulcrum the
block will balance.
Overall, the findings of Experiment 2 support the wellestablished finding that children preferentially explore
novel objects over familiar ones. They also support the
idea that these younger children do not have a strong
(evidence differentiating) theory of balance. Contrasting
these results with Experiment 1 suggests the influence
that children’s theories can have in overcoming a
preference for stimulus novelty and affecting children’s
play. Not only do the older children have strong theories,
but these theories selectively support children’s
spontaneous exploration of theory-violating evidence.

suggested by the constructivist account)? Our experiment
does not address this directly, though other research does
suggest that children’s spontaneous play can generate
evidence that supports accurate causal learning (Schulz,
Glymour, & Gopnik, in press). Here, children were
arguably unable to learn much about their initial theories
because we provided children with an alternative
explanation for the evidence: the magnet. It is interesting to
note, however, that despite the fact that the magnet was
completely hidden (that is, it was observable only in its
effects), most children discovered it in the course of their
free play and almost half the children in Experiment 1
(49%) spontaneously appealed to it as an explanatory
variable.
It is also noteworthy that in Inhelder &
Karmiloff-Smith’s study (where there were no hidden
magnets) many children did change their beliefs in the
course of exploratory play. Future work may extend our
understanding of the relationship between children’s naïve
theories, patterns of evidence, and their learning.
These results may also appear to conflict with previous
work that argues that children have a relatively
impoverished ability to learn from evidence, revise their
beliefs, and construct informative interventions (e.g. see
Kuhn, 1989). However, the demands of the Kuhn et al.
studies required children to be meta-cognitively aware of
their theories. While children (and even lay adults) may
lack such metacognitive awareness (and thus be unable
to design controlled experiments), children may
nonetheless, at least implicitly, recognize when evidence
conflicts with their prior beliefs. This research suggests
that when children do perceive a conflict between their
theories and patterns of evidence, they are
motivated to explore.
Looking time paradigms (where infants look longer at
novel or surprising events) may also seem somewhat
analogous to the work here. For instance, one might be
puzzled by the finding that infants as young as 12 months
will look longer at an object whose center of mass is not
supported (Baillargeon, Needham, DeVox, 1992), yet our
subjects, who are more than 6 years older, do not seem to
perceive a violation. In this respect, our study is consistent
with many that have found a distinction between children’s
performance on looking-time and action-oriented tasks (e.g.
see Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005). One key difference
between the paradigms may be whether evidence is
surprising because it is novel or whether evidence is
surprising because it violates prior beliefs. An event might
be uncommon in the course of everyday experience and
lead to longer looking, without requiring the subject to posit
any theory of how things should be.
A complete understanding of the processes that support
theory development and theory change remains a challenge
to the field.
However, we believe theory-guided
exploration may play an important role in helping children
generate relevant evidence.
Although processes as
complex and noisy as children’s play have rarely seemed

General Discussion
Theories seem to play a critical role not only in
supporting causal inferences, helping make predictions,
and explaining the world, but also in guiding children’s
exploratory play. Such theory-guided play is arguably a
form of optimal exploration: it suggests that children may
play more where there is indeed something to be learned:
either a) there is a hidden variable that can explain the
surprising evidence, or b) something about the theory is
incorrect. If theories support effective exploration, then
children may spontaneously discover evidence that can
help them revise their causal beliefs.
Do children actually learn novel causal relationships
from the evidence of their own interventions (as

117

Halford, G.S., Andrews, G., Dalton, C., Boag, C., & Zielinski, T.
(2002) Young children’s performance on the balance scale:
The influence of relational complexity. Journal of Experimental
Child Pscychology, 81, 417-445.
Hutt, C. & Bhavnani, R. (1972). Predictions from play. Nature,
237(5351), 171-172.
Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking
from childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books.
Jansen, B.R.J., & van der Maas, H.L.J. (2002) the development of
children’s rule use on the balance scale task. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 81, 383-416.
Koslowski, B. (1996). Theory and Evidence: The Development of
Scientific Reasoning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. 1974, If you want to get
ahead, get a theory. Cognition, 3(3), p. 195-212.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists.
Psychological Review, 96(4), 674-689.
Normandeau, S., Larivee, S., Roulin, J., & Longeot, F. (1989).
The balance scale dilemma: Either the subject or the
experimenter muddles through. Journal of Genetic Psychology,
150, 237–250.
Onishi KH, Baillargeon R. (2005) Do 15-month-old infants
understand false beliefs? Science. 308(5719):255-8.
Pavlov, I.P. (1927) Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of the
Physiological Activy of the Cerebral Cortex. New York: Dover.
Piaget, J. (1951) Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. New
York: Norton.
Schulz, L.E., & Bonawitz, E.B. (in press) Serious fun:
Preschoolers play more when evidence is confounded.
Developmental Psychology.
Schulz, L.E., Bonawitz, E.B., & Griffiths, T. (in press) Can being
scared give you a tummy ache? Naïve theories, ambiguous
evidence and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Developmental
Psychology.
Schulz, L.E., Glymore, C., & Gopnik, A. (in press) Preschool
children learn about causal structure from conditional
interventions. Developmental Science.
Siegler, R.S. (1976) Three aspects of cognitive development.
Cognitive Psychology, 8, 481-520.

amenable to formal principles, we hope our work suggests
that even in play, there are rational relationships between
theory, evidence, and exploration. We hope future work
may help bridge the gap between formal theories of
learning and children’s play.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the participating daycares in Cambridge,
MA and to the Boston Museum of Science, to Irene
Headen, Noah Goodman, Darlene Ferranti, and members
of the Early Childhood Cognition Lab, and to the
Singleton Fellowship. This research was additionally
supported by a McDonnell Foundation and James H.
Ferry Fund grant to L.S.

References
Baillargeon, R., Needham, A., & DeVos, J. (1992). The
development of young infants' intuitions about support. Early
Development and Parenting, 1, 69-78.
Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, Arousal and Curiosity. New
York: McGraw Hill.
Bonawitz, E.B., Griffiths, T.L., & Schulz, L. (2006) Modeling
Cross-Domain Caussal Learning in Preschoolers as Bayesian
Inference. Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Vancouver,
Canada.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Chen, Z. & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal:
Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables strategy.
Child Development, 70(5), 1098-1120.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, thoughts and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L.E., Kushnir, T.,
& Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children:
causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological Review.

118

