UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Did That $2.5 Million Ad Buy Us? Cognitive Science Goes to the Super Bowl

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14r9f654

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Haverty, Lisa A.
Blessing, Stephen B.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Did That $2.5 Million Ad Buy Us?
Cognitive Science Goes to the Super Bowl
Lisa A. Haverty (haverty@alum.dartmouth.org)
Arnold Worldwide, 101 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02199 USA

Stephen B. Blessing (sblessing@ut.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Tampa
401 W. Kennedy Blvd., Box Q
Tampa, FL 33606 USA
Abstract

measures cannot even take the first step of determining
whether an ad can induce recall of the brand featured in
the ad. Even the most revered creative minds in the
industry cannot identify a concrete “magic formula” for
ad memorability. (Horovitz, 2006). The industry is
therefore spending billions of dollars on a trial-and-error
approach that does not offer a precise measurement of its
return on investment.
We propose the following argument. The purpose of
advertisements is to sell products. Ads are therefore
designed to at least raise awareness of a brand’s existence,
and at best to be persuasive and even likable. However,
awareness, persuasion, and likability will have no effect if
the brand being advertised is not remembered as
belonging to that ad. Indeed, any skillful persuasiveness
could be inadvertently attributed to a competing brand.
This would not have an advantageous impact on sales.
Therefore, the effectiveness of any ad should be
correlated with its brand memorability. Indeed, brand
memorability should be a predictive factor of the
economic success of any given ad.
In this study, we endeavor to assess the brand
memorability for specific ads and to thereby take the
evaluation of television advertising into the realm of
information processing. We employ a simple model of
cognition and apply it to the most sensational event of the
advertising year: the Super Bowl. In testing our model,
we examine memory for ads a year after the game aired.
To our knowledge, no empirical study of ad recall or
recognition after such a long interval has ever been
attempted. However, memory of the brand associated
with “that funny ad” a year later should not, perhaps, be
too much to ask for $2.5 million.
Our CogScore model is being developed in a modern
advertising agency by the first author. By way of giving
context to the development of this model, some personal
observations are of interest. First, people often assume
that ad agencies have psychologists on staff. While this
may have been true historically, it is not generally the
case today. Advertisers certainly have expertise in
influencing people, but they do so without scientific
expertise on human behavior. Indeed, the industry appears
to pay very little attention to the academic journals that
are devoted to the scientific examination of their field.

Advertisers spend a lot of money each year producing
commercials. Yet they have done little to incorporate sound
cognitive science into ensuring that their advertisements are
effective, particularly in terms of memory for the desired
brand. This research develops a metric, CogScore, that
attempts to predict the memorability of the brand from any
given ad. We show that our metric significantly predicts the
memory for brand, much more so than a traditional metric
on which advertisers currently rely.
Keywords: information processing; memory; advertising
effectiveness; gender differences; Super Bowl

Introduction
Advertisers spend billions of dollars every year in an
attempt to persuade the public to consume countless
products (Raine, 2005). Despite this demonstrated belief
in the power of advertising, the corporate world is
frustrated by a general inability to determine the return on
that investment (Neff, 2006). An oft-quoted remark
attributed to John Wanamaker, a 19th-century
businessman and a founding father of modern advertising,
is still relevant today: “Half the money I spend on
advertising is wasted; the trouble is I don’t know which
half.”
In fact, while today’s online and direct marketing
methods (e.g., direct mail, infomercials) lend themselves
to measurements of effectiveness and therefore to testing
and analysis of effective and ineffective features, the vast
majority of advertising can be assessed only at a very
broad level or with intrinsically unreliable consumer selfreports. Broad-level measures include the noisy economic
data of actual sales and ad-industry “tracking studies” that
purport to measure “brand awareness” (which correlates
nicely with “ad spend,” thereby encouraging further
advertising investment), while consumer self-reports of
“liking” and “purchase intent” are found via focus groups
or online surveys.
None of these measures can reveal the actual economic
impact of a particular ad. Nor have these measures been
shown to accurately predict how effective an ad will be
before it is put into market and has already cost the
company an enormous amount of money, both in
development costs and in “media spend.” Indeed, these

347

This is not due to a lack of interest in the topics, as
practitioners regularly pose questions to which these
researchers have answers. Yet the products of the Journal
of Advertising and the Journal of Consumer Research are
poorly applied, if at all. The successful endeavors of
advertisers are still based on a combination of trial-anderror feedback and creative instincts. Their instincts are
good, but science can certainly improve their success rate.

As ads are assigned scores for each principle, we call the
model CogScore.
Implicit affect (IA). This first principle is one that
advertisers regularly attempt to measure. Berridge and
Winkielman (2003) proposed this concept of an
“unconscious emotion,” a gut reaction to a stimulus that
can be positive or negative, and that can affect both later
consumption behavior with respect to the stimulus and the
quality of information processing for the stimulus (Ashby,
Isen, & Turken, 1999). As affect is heavily subject to
individual differences, assigning a score on this principle
generally requires some independent insight into the
tastes of the target consumer – something that advertisers
are constantly struggling to grasp. There has been recent
investigation of the use of fMRI as a way to infer
consumers’ subconscious reactions to advertising stimuli
(McClure, et. al., 2004; Mucha, 2005). Though costly,
cumbersome, and currently inexact, these endeavors show
promise of more accurate findings on subconscious
emotions than the standard approach of asking the viewer.

The SuperBowl. SuperBowl ads as a set have several
advantages for study. To handpick any other set of ads for
study would require extensive knowledge of their initial
air date, demographic target, popularity of shows
sponsored, number of weeks aired, and size of TV market.
This information is well guarded by advertisers and would
require a monumental (and likely ineffective) effort to
amass. Thus, the fact that these SuperBowl ads all ran for
the first time on the same day, all had an audience of
almost 91 million viewers (which covers show popularity
and TV market), and a fairly well-defined demographic is
incredibly fortuitous (Atkinson, 2006). In addition to this
wealth of advantages, USA Today publishes an annual
ranking of AdMeter scores for the Super Bowl ads, based
on consumer self-reports of “liking” (USA Today, 2006),
to which the advertising world pays a great deal of
attention (Klaasen, 2006). This will provide an excellent
comparison for the effectiveness of our model. Thus,
while there will be plenty of noise in any data for memory
of in-market ads, there is some margin of consistency for
this particular set of ads. It is unfortunate that we have no
way of measuring participant exposure to each ad during
the Super Bowl, or whether and how often participants
were exposed to each ad after the game. We can only
hope that our model will account for enough variance to
overcome this considerable noise.

Sensory processing (SP). Although the scientific
community knows a great deal about how visual and
auditory information is processed, the advertising world is
uninformed about these findings. Spots are full of stimuli
coming through multiple sensory channels and in multiple
formats per channel. In the auditory realm advertisers use
music, voiceovers, dialogue, and sound effects; visually,
they use copy, pictures, charts, and moving scenes.
Unfortunately, advertisers do not employ guidelines as to
when to use what modalities. Scoring of the SP principle
is intended to capture two somewhat competing aspects:
1) avoiding sensory overload in conveying the desired
information, and 2) maximizing sensory availability to
convey the desired information (Mousavi, Low, &
Sweller, 1995).
This principle is also one that can yield different scores
for male vs. female consumers. There is evidence to
suggest gender differences in sensory processing as well
as differences in the processing of ads in particular
(Darley & Smith, 1995; Meyers-Levy & Maheswaran,
1991).

The CogScore Model
Standard television ads are 30 seconds long and may
include music, voice over, written language (copy),
spoken language, sound effects, a story line, a punch line,
and even a “call-to-action”. Ads constitute multimedia.
As such, Mayer’s Cognitive Theory of Multimedia
Learning (Mayer, 2001) provided some useful guidance in
distilling cognitive science into a practical set of
principles for application to this domain. However,
Mayer’s theory is designed to inform effective instruction,
presumably of a time period exceeding 30 seconds. A
cognitive framework for evaluating the effectiveness of
individual ads requires a more intense focus on immediate
information processing and virtually incidental learning.
To simplify the application of cognitive science to such
complex real-world stimuli, we settled on six “cognitive
principles” to evaluate the effectiveness of an ad as it
relates to information processing. They are implicit affect,
sensory processing, working memory, knowledge
representation, elaboration, and cognitive engagement.

Working memory (WM). As with SP, much of what we
know about this important principle of cognitive science
is absent from the design of ads. The basic concepts of
limited working memory capacity (Baddeley & Hitch,
1974; Sweller, 1988) are violated on a regular basis in ads
for insurance, financial services, electronics, medicine,
and beyond. Advertisers cram a lot of information into 30
seconds, and although this practice may be somewhat
intentional in limited cases, their lack of awareness of this
principle hurts their cause more than it helps. In this
model we apply higher scores to ads that contain fewer
chunks of “take-home” information.

348

Knowledge representation (KR). Different people know
different things, and this difference in knowledge affects
how they acquire and think about new information (Chase
& Simon, 1973). This principle takes into account the
target audience for the ad and evaluates the information
the ad presents given the presumed knowledge of the
audience. We apply lower scores to spots that fall into the
expert blind spot trap (Nathan & Koedinger, 2000), and
higher scores to spots that respect the content knowledge
of the target consumer.
This principle is another for which males and females
may receive different scores, not due to any difference in
processing, but rather because in certain product
categories males are more frequent consumers than are
females, and vice versa. They will therefore have different
content knowledge in such categories. This is of course
true for any well-defined subset of consumers.

exit her row to use the restroom but falls face down on a
sleeping man when turbulence hits. Just then, the lights
come on and the other passengers gaze in horror at her
position. The ensuing voiceover says: “Don’t judge too
quickly. We won’t.” The Ameriquest insurance brand
then appears on screen with further voiceover.
To create a CogScore for turbulence, each cognitive
principle is assigned a rating from 1 to 4 (1 = poor, 2 =
neutral, 3 = good, 4 = very good). The average across
principles is then derived for the CogScore. Table 1 lists
the CogScore ratings for turbulence.
Table 1: CogScore example coding for turbulence.
Score
Brand

IA
4

SP
1

WM
1

KR
1

EL
1

CE
1

Ave.
1.5

For IA, we used the best approximation available to us:
the AdMeter scores. A rating of 4 on this principle is a
direct adaptation of the AdMeter scores into a 4-point
scale (turbulence made the AdMeter Top 10). Apparently
people enjoyed this spot. However, the remaining scores
are not so good. The brand is not mentioned until after the
interesting story has ended, and its connection to that
story is quite tenuous: “Don’t judge too quickly. We
won’t.” Unfortunately, that tag line could lead to many
different categories of products and services. This ad
completely disregards the capacity of working memory
and the serial aspects of sensory processing: all of the
pertinent brand information is put into the last five
seconds of the spot. Thus, the spot gets 1’s for SP and
WM. This spot also gets a “1” for KR, for four reasons: 1)
consumers are unfamiliar with this particular product
category, 2) the product category is not highly anticipated
in the Super Bowl environment, 3) the brand itself is not
generally salient (does not have intrinsically high brand
awareness), and 4) the category has nothing to do with a
plane. As for EL, the brand name is not elaborated at all:
it is simply appended to the end of the story. These types
of “piggyback” ads are everywhere: a 25-second ad
followed by a 5-second sales pitch that is entirely
divorced from the story and that would require 5 seconds
of super-human information processing to acquire the
information. Similarly, while CE might be great for the
first 25 seconds, consumers are likley to mentally check
out for the last 5 relatively boring and overloaded
seconds. EL and CE both get scores of 1. The turbulence
spot gets a Brand CogScore of 1.5 (the average of the six
principle ratings).
Advertising professionals will assert that this type of ad
will actually do well, because after many exposures to this
spot and its “sister” spots from the same campaign,
consumers will come to recognize the boilerplate format
of “Don’t judge too quickly” as belonging to the
Ameriquest brand. What these professionals fail to realize
is that if the brand name and that particular boilerplate are
never associated with one another in any of those

Elaboration (EL). Elaboration refers to how well
connected items are in memory; the more connections to
an item exist, the easier it will be to recall (Anderson,
1976). EL is separated here from KR because it measures
the structure and design of knowledge more than
knowledge content. The goal of a spot, then, is to not only
place itself within the viewer’s current KR, but to also
provide connections to existing memory structures and
between the memory structures created by the ad itself.
Elaboration is extremely useful in advertising. A joke is a
great elaboration, and in a world of trial-and-error, jokes
have been established as a good formula for making
people remember an ad. As is often the case, however, the
underlying principle for that success is poorly understood.
We have all seen and remembered ads for which we
cannot remember the brand. Unless the brand itself is
elaborated, it will not be successfully integrated into the
memory. Scores on this principle attempt to capture how
effectively the brand is incorporated into general memory
for the ad.
Cognitive engagement (CE). Cognitive engagement
(Mayer, 2001) is included here as a proxy for active
processing, which has been shown to improve learning
and memory (Chi, et al., 1994) and to result in increased
learner enjoyment. Indeed, there is evidence to suggest
that insufficiently active processing, or “mental
underload” can lead to a drastic decrease in performance
and learning (Parasuraman & Riley, 1997). This principle
also provides another interesting point for gender
differentiation, as men and women demonstrate different
implicit strategies for processing ad information (e.g.,
skimming vs. comprehensive processing; Meyers-Levy &
Maheswaran, 1991; Putrevu, 2004). For CE we assign
higher scores when the spot facilitates active processing
of the brand name.
A CogScore Example. The following example
demonstrates how CogScore is applied to individual TV
spots. In turbulence, a woman sitting on a plane tries to

349

instances, then they will not enjoy elaborate connections
to one another in consumers’ content knowledge, and
repeated exposures will do little to ameliorate the
problem.
It should be noted that it is not always the case that SP
and WM get similar ratings, or that EL and CE get similar
ratings. It is possible to present a large amount of
information to working memory without violating the
limits of sensory processing. It is also possible to elicit
cognitive engagement with a spot while failing to provide
it with the necessary elaboration to make it more
memorable.
There is one crucial aspect missing from the CogScore
model: getting a consumer’s attention. However, this
aspect is one for which advertising practitioners have
arguably more expertise than can be significantly
improved upon by the application of cognitive science.
Thus, on the premise that memory for a spot is
necessary for it to have a discernible effect on purchase
behavior, we devised the CogScore model to provide a
more accurate prediction of brand memory (and,
presumably, purchase behavior) than measures of liking.
In this study, we seek to first establish that the CogScore
model can accurately predict memory for a brand, as
demonstrated by accounting for a significant portion of
the variance in recall of Super Bowl ad brand names, even
a year after that event. We further predict that self-reports
of “liking,” as embodied in the USA Today AdMeter, will
not predict memory for brand as accurately as CogScore.

2007, at www.commercialsihate.com. We used 21 ads for
which USA Today published AdMeter scores. An
additional 4 ads did not have published AdMeter scores
for some reason, and will therefore not be included in
subsequent comparison analyses.

Results and Discussion
Fifty-four of 84 participants (64%) reported having
watched Super Bowl XL. However, only 18 of those 54
(33%) correctly recalled the two teams who played in the
game (Pittsburgh Steelers and Seattle Seahawks) and that
the Steelers won the game. By contrast, 25 out of the 54
participants (46%) recognized the “magic fridge” ad as a
Budweiser commercial.
There were no differences in recall or recognition based
on the ordering of the experimental stimuli, although we
did observe a slight but non-significant lift in performance
for the textual descriptions over the screen shots. The
number of participants who reported pure recall of spots
and their correct brand name is small (25% of
participants, with 18 spots total). In contrast, a substantial
number of participants reported recognition memory of
spots and were able to correctly recall the associated
brand. Our analyses will therefore focus on the percentage
of participants who correctly identified the brand
associated with a prompted spot (the Likert scale provided
no additional reliable information). Table 2 lists all
AdMeter scores, Brand CogScores, and percent Brand
Correct (percent of participants that correctly identified
the brand associated with the spot).

Method

CogScore vs. AdMeter

Participants

Our first step is to test the adequacy of “liking” as a
meaningful measure of advertising success. The
correlation between the 21 AdMeter scores and Brand
Correct is significant (r = +.55, p < .02, two-tails),
indicating that the likability of an ad does indeed
influence the probability that its brand will be
remembered.
The CogScore model improves on this measure
considerably: Brand CogScore is a better predictor of how
memorable an ad is, accounting for 19% more of the
variance (r = +.70, p < .01). This is a substantial
improvement in understanding the true effectiveness of an
ad, and the analysis, although it requires a relatively rare
type of expertise, is far less costly and time-consuming
than that of collecting the opinions of a representative
sample and providing incentives for those opinions. (The
correlation between CogScore and Brand Correct is
similarly significant when the four spots without AdMeter
scores are included in the analysis: r = +.65, p < .01).
There is another story in this data, however. As can be
seen in Table 2, this analysis includes 5 spots just for
Budweiser. Because Bud is the major sponsor of the
Super Bowl and has such enormous presence throughout
the broadcast, the noise around the recall for any Bud spot
will be far greater than that for other brands. Merely

Eighty-four undergraduate students at the University of
Tampa participated. Data collection occurred the week of
January 22, 2007, 51 weeks after the Super Bowl aired.

Materials
Each participant filled out a paper-and-pencil form that
contained four sections. The first section asked if the
participant had watched the 2006 Super Bowl, and, if so,
which teams played, and who won. The second section
asked them to recall and describe any spots they
remembered from that Super Bowl and to identify the
brand if possible. The third and fourth sections provided a
prompt for each of 25 spots, textually for the third section,
and with a single screenshot of the spot for the fourth
section. Participants indicated their general level of
recognition for the spot (Did you see the ad?: yes, no,
maybe), and reported the associated brand name along
with a Likert scale of their confidence in their brand
answer (1 = “It’s a total guess” to 5 = “I’m positive”). To
control for the order of the stimuli and for textual vs.
visual stimuli, we used four counterbalanced forms.
Each spot was assigned a CogScore as described
previously. All spots are listed in detail in Table 2 of the
Results section and can be viewed, as of February 1,

350

Table 2. Ads and scores used in experiment.
Brand
CogScore

% Brand
Correct

AdMeter
score

1.58

1.85%

5.95

spock

Aleve

Leonard Nimoy’s hand pain gets in way of an appearance.

1.50

0.00%

7.80

crash paddles

Ameriquest

Patient’s family walks in on medical misunderstanding.

1.50

0.00%

7.67

turbulence

Ameriquest

Plane turbulence creates awkward situation.

2.50

46.30%

8.39

magic fridge

Bud Light

A secret fridge stocks Bud Light.

2.50

31.48%

7.82

roof

Bud Light

Men pretend to work on rooftops, but relax instead.

2.25

24.07%

7.69

office

Bud Light

Office manager motivates employees with hidden bottles.

2.33

22.22%

7.64

grizzly

Bud Light

Man saves himself from scary bear.

1.92

20.37%

7.81

streaker

Budweiser

Sheep streaks at big game.

2.83

24.07%

6.24

whopperettes

Burger King

Whopperettes sing and dance.

1.50

0.00%

4.96

catwalk

Cadillac

New Escalade truck poses on the catwalk as fashion model.

1.92

0.00%

6.28

stuntmen

Degree for Men

People living on the edge in Stunt City.

2.33

14.81%

6.96

freckles

Dove

Dove promotes self-esteem fund for young girls.

2.42

22.22%

7.95

caveman

FedEx

Cave man uses prehistoric overnight delivery.

1.83

1.85%

6.40

kermit

Ford Motor

Kermit says green is good when he sees Escape hybrid.

1.67

3.70%

6.53

mudflap

Honda

Ad for Ridgeline pickup brings trucking icons to life.

2.50

7.41%

6.37

hummer

Hummer

Monsters marry and have a Hummer baby.

1.58

7.41%

6.59

macgyver

MasterCard

MacGyver buys lifesaving gadgets with MasterCard.

1.67

0.00%

7.03

touch football

Michelob

Touch football gets ugly.

1.17

5.56%

n/a

swing

Nationwide

Man pushes little son on swing, and son returns as big teen.

1.33

3.70%

6.73

fabio

Nationwide

Life moves fast for romance novel cover star Fabio.

2.17

0.00%

6.82

pirate

Sharpie

Pirate mascot uses retractable Sharpie to sign autographs.

1.33

12.96%

n/a

locker room

Sprint

Man in locker room demonstrates “crime deterrent” phone.

1.75

22.22%

6.16

ocean

Toyota

Tacoma pickup rides out the incoming tide.

1.50

9.26%

n/a

backyard

Vault

Man turns his backyard into football for son.

1.50

7.41%

n/a

scarecrow

Vault

Man builds uber-scarecrow that wreaks havoc.

Spot

Brand

USA Today Spot Description

recognizing the category of a Bud spot (i.e., “beer”)
should lead to a very high probability of identifying the
correct brand, if only via educated guess. For these
Brand Correct, while the CogScore model accounts for
41% of the Brand Correct variance (CogScore: r = +.64, p
< .01; AdMeter: r = +.08, n.s.). The Super Bowl saliency
for Bud can explain the Bud-specific predictive success of
AdMeter, but the utter lack of predictability for non-Bud
spots begs the question of whether likability can truly
predict brand memorability at all. This same test lends
strong support to the CogScore model, which retains
substantial predictive value.

reasons, we examined the data without the 5 Bud ads.
When the primary Super Bowl sponsor is removed from
the analyses, the AdMeter scores have no correlation to
competing product): locker room, swing, touch football,
mudflap, crash paddles, and catwalk (listed in increasing
order of Brand Fuzziness). Brand Fuzziness should
provide a valid test for the CogScore model, as CogScores
should serve as an indicator of how well a brand is
connected to its spot, and therefore have an inverse
relationship to Brand Fuzziness. In fact, Brand CogScore
is a significant inverse predictor of Brand Fuzziness (r =
-.679, p < .01, two-tails).

Brand Fuzziness

Gender

When a participant attempted to name a brand but got it
wrong, they would often name a competing product, at
least getting the category correct. We call the difference
between brand corrects and category corrects “Brand
Fuzziness.” For example, caveman (done by FedEx) was
sometimes confused with UPS (a competing package
delivery service). Of the full set of 25 ads, there were six
for which the Brand Fuzziness was over .50 (that is, over
50% of the time the viewer thought the ad was for a

We separately coded male and female CogScores due to
the potential processing and content knowledge
differences described previously. The resulting analysis
further demonstrates the predictive power of the
CogScore model, which correlates significantly with
gender-specific Brand Correct (p < .01), and provides a
slightly better fit for males (r = +.74; r = +.59). While we
do not know the demographics of the AdMeter sample, it
is possible that it was skewed to men and that our

351

AdMeter-derived IA scores are partly responsible for
CogScore’s lower predictability for women.
For a closer look at the ads recalled by men vs. women,
we examined only the nine spots for which at least 10%
of the sample got the brand correct, to avoid coincidental
results. Though only marginally significant, (t(48) = 1.66,
p < .1), males correctly identified more brands (M = 3.96,
SD = 4.22) on average than females (M = 2.28, SD =
2.79). While men did appear to be paying more attention
to the game - they were more likely to remember the
teams involved (48% v. 31%) and the winner of the game
(64% v. 38%) – the explanation for their greater recall of
the spots is more likely due to a deliberate attempt on the
part of the advertisers to target men. Indeed, the one spot
out of these 9 that was better recalled by women was for
Dove (female CogScore: 3.00, male CogScore: 1.83) and
was presumably designed to target the female audience
rather than the male.

Berridge, K. C. & Winkielman, P. (2003). What is an
unconscious emotion? The case for unconscious “liking“.
Cognition & Emotion, 17(2), Psychology Press, 181-211.
Chase, W.G., & Simon, H.A. (1973). The mind’s eye in
chess. In W.G. Chase (Ed.), Visual information
processing. New York: Academic Press.
Chi, M.T.H., DeLeeuw, N., Chiu, M. & LaVancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Darley, W. K., & Smith, R. E. (1995). Gender
Differences in Information Processing Strategies: An
Empirical Test of the Selectivity Model in Advertising
Response. Journal of Advertising, 24.
Horovitz, B. (2006, Feb. 3). Ten rules to make ads
magical. USA Today.
Klaasen, A. (2006, Feb. 6). Super Bowl ad victory not
as clear as Pittsburgh’s. Advertising Age. New York, NY.
Mayer, R. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K. S.,
Montague, L. M., & Montague, P. R. (2004). Neural
Correlates of Behavioral Preference for Culturally
Familiar Drinks. Neuron, 44, 379–387.
Meyers-Levy, J. & Maheswaran, D. (1991). Exploring
Differences in Males’ and Females’ Processing Strategies.
The Journal of Consumer Research, 18(1), pp. 63-70.
Mousavi, S. Y., Low, R. & Sweller, J. (1995). Reducing
cognitive load by mixing auditory and visual presentation
modes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 319-334.
Mucha, T. (2005, Aug. 1). This Is Your Brain on
Advertising.money.cnn.com/magazines/business2/busines
s2_archive/2005/08/01/8269671
Nathan, M. & Koedinger, K. (2000). Teachers’ and
Researchers’ Beliefs about the Development of Algebraic
Reasoning. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education, 31(2), pp. 168-190.
Neff, J. (2006, Dec. 4). Nielsen Tasks Mandel With
Proving Ads Work. Advertising Age.
Parasuraman, R. & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and
Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse. Human
Factors, 39.
Putrevu, S. (2004). Communicating with the sexes:
male and female responses to print advertisements.
Journal of Advertising, 33(3). 51-62.
Raine, G. (2005, March 10). Annual ad spending
exceeds $141 billion. San Francisco Chronicle.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem
solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257285.
USA Today (2006, Feb. 5). Super Bowl XL 18th
Annual Ad Meter.
USA Today (2006, Feb. 5). ‘Magic fridge’ of Bud Light
ices an advertising win.
USA Today (2004, Jan. 25). How Ad Meter works.

Conclusions
Memory of an ad, and of its brand in particular, should be
a criterion for assessing ad effectiveness, as it should
presumably be related to the economic success of an ad.
The CogScore model provides a strong measure of future
memorability for an ad’s brand, and performs
significantly better than a measure of “liking”. We do not
claim that “liking” is an unimportant factor, nor do we
claim that “liking” can be approximated via a cognitive
model. Certainly a consumer must like a product in order
to want to buy it. Rather, we claim that “liking” is not
sufficient. The CogScore model, in fact, provides a far
more descriptive and predictive assessment of ad
memorability, and provides a more detailed explanation
for why or why not an ad may be working. Indeed, a
follow-up examination of the power of each of the six
cognitive principles should help to further develop the
value of the model. In addition, future research to
examine the link between brand memorability and
inclusion in purchase “consideration sets” would test
whether CogScore is predictive of an ad’s ultimate
economic effectiveness. In the meantime, these results
suggest that the ad industry would do well to pay heed to
the lessons of cognitive science.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1976). Language, memory, and
thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, A. U. (1999). A
neuropsychological theory of positive affect and its
influence on cognition. Psychological Review, 106(3),
529-550.
Atkinson, C. (2006, Feb. 6). Super Bowl XL audience
ratings top last year. Advertising Age, New York, NY.
adage.com/mediaworks/article?article_id=48397
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. L. (1974). Working
Memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.) The psychology of
learning and motivation. New York: Academic Press.

352

