UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Determines the Acceptability of Deontic Health and Safety Rules?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85d7k9fx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Ball, Linden J.
Alford, David

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Determines the Acceptability of Deontic Health and Safety Rules?
Linden J. Ball (L.Ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, UK

David Alford (D.Alford@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, UK
deontic modal operators should, ought to, and must
(expressing obligation), and may (expressing permission).
Our interest in the present paper closely follows that of
Over, Manktelow, and Hadjichristidis (2004), who
questioned why someone might consider deontic rules as
being ‘good’ rules in the first place. In other words, what
determines the acceptability of some deontic conditionals
and the unacceptability of others? Our aim in the present
paper is to address such issues by focusing on obligations
and permissions that relate to H&S situations that pertain to
everyday, real-world activities such as using road vehicles.

Abstract
On what basis do people provide acceptability or ‘goodness’
judgements for deontic conditional rules of the form if p then
must q and if p then may q? Using a decision theoretic
analysis, Over et al. (2004) propose that such conditionals are
judged as acceptable to the extent that the p&q possibility is
preferred to the p&not-q possibility. Their empirical evidence
upholds this ‘conditional expected utility’ (CEU) prediction
for conditional obligations and permissions relating to
everyday activities (e.g., If you wash the dishes then you must
wear rubber gloves). We report two experiments examining
Over at al.’s CEU hypothesis in relation to real-world deontic
rules concerning everyday health and safety issues (e.g., If
you are in a moving car then you must have your safety-belt
fastened). We propose that Over et al.’s CEU hypothesis
provides a compelling account of our findings.

What Makes a Deontic Conditional a Good Rule?
In examining what makes deontic conditionals acceptable
we follow Over et al. (2004) in adopting a decision theoretic
perspective on this issue (cf. Perham & Oaksford, 2005),
which claims that it is vital to ascertain people’s preferences
for certain possible actions over other possible actions. The
importance of preference judgements in determining deontic
rule acceptability is, perhaps, best illustrated in relation to
the conditional obligation previously specified: If you have
operated a VPT for 15 minutes then you must have a break.
Why would a H&S inspector stipulate this rule about VPT
operation to members of the workforce? Under Over et al.’s
(2004) account, the answer depends on the inspector’s
preferences among the following four logical possibilities:

Keywords: Deontic reasoning; permission and obligation
rules; health and safety; conditional expected utility.

Introduction
The nature of deductive reasoning has long been of interest
to cognitive scientists, and one logical form—the
conditional—continues to attract considerable research
attention. It has become increasingly apparent that that there
are, in fact, two distinct types of conditional: ‘indicative’
and ‘deontic’. Indicative conditionals are rules that are used
to describe matters of fact. Take the case of medical studies
indicating that the hand-arm vibration (HAV) associated
with excessive, continuous use of vibrating power tools
(VPTs) can lead to the medical condition ‘vibration white
finger’. With such medical evidence in mind, a consultant
might assert the following conditional to a patient who uses
vibrating equipment as part of their work: If you use VPTs
excessively then you will damage your health. This latter
conditional is an indicative conditional since it expresses a
factual, cause-effect relation between an antecedent
condition and a consequent state of affairs.
In contrast to indicative conditionals, deontic conditionals
are used to direct people’s behaviour. For example, a
company-based health and safety (H&S) inspector who has
concerns about the health implications for workers of using
VPTs may assert the deontic rule If you have operated a
VPT for 15 minutes then you must have a break. Deontic
conditionals such as this are ‘proper’ rules, since they
provide strong guidance on what must be done by
specifying social regulations, laws and moral rules. Such
conditionals are easy to spot as they tend to contain the

(p&q)
(p&¬q)
(¬p&q)
(¬p&¬q)

The VPT is operated for 15 minutes and
the worker has a break
The VPT is operated for 15 minutes and
the worker does not have a break
The VPT is not operated for 15 minutes
and the worker has a break
The VPT is not operated for 15 minutes
and the worker does not have a break

A H&S inspector will clearly have preferences among
these possibilities, such that they are likely to prefer the p&q
situation to the p&¬q situation. Thus, the H&S inspector
sees the expected utility of 15 minutes of VPT operation
being reached and the worker having a break as greater than
the expected utility of 15 minutes of VPT operation being
reached and the worker not having a break. Without such a
preference there would be little point in the inspector
asserting the rule as an obligation for the workforce to
follow. Indeed, it is the very preference for p&q over p&¬q
that renders a conditional obligation acceptable in the first

791

conditional obligation rules. But how does the hypothesis
relate to the acceptability of conditional permission rules?
Consider the following permission rule: If you have
operated a VPT for about 15 minutes then you may have a
break. According to the CEU account, this conditional
permission would be acceptable for someone when either:
(1) they definitely preferred the p&q situation to the p&¬q
situation; or (2) they were indifferent between the two
situations (see Manktelow & Over, 1995). Consider an
occasion when an H&S inspector simply wanted to assess
whether workers might be inclined to take breaks from
VPTs if this was highlighted as a permissible action. The
inspector might perceive a small health benefit for workers
if they took a break after 15 minutes (the p&q situation) but
might also recognise the small benefit in productivity that
would arise from workers not taking a break (the p&¬q
situation). Preference judgements might be finely balanced
between these two possibilities, but such a state of near
‘indifference’ would still be an occasion when this rule
would be endorsed by the inspector (cf. Over et al., 2004). It
is important to note, however, that in general, it would be
pragmatically anomalous for someone like the inspector to
assert a relatively weak conditional permission when they
actually wanted to assert a relatively strong conditional
obligation. Thus a conditional permission would rarely be
stated if a conditional obligation was viewed as a better rule.
Over et al. (2004) not only present a compelling account
of the acceptability conditions for obligation and permission
rules, but they also report two experiments that support
predictions of the CEU hypothesis. In particular, they
demonstrate that deontic rules of the form if p then must q
and if p then may q are judged as good to the extent that the
p&q possibility is preferred to the p&¬q possibility. In
addition, they reveal an unexpected difference in the
evaluation of must and may rules, with the former being
judged as better rules. Intriguingly, this difference between
must and may rules was seen to generalise from contexts
where rules were presented as being self-imposed personal
rules (Over et al., 2004, Experiment 1) to contexts where
rules were being expressed by an agent in a position of
authority in order to regulate the actions of an actor who
was the target of the rule (Over et al., 2004, Experiment 2).

place. For Over et al. (2004) this is the crux of what it
means for a deontic conditional to be seen as a good rule.
Clearly, however, the preferences of individuals within the
workforce who actually use VPTs will be subjective, and
may differ from the preferences of the inspector. Some
workers may even have reversed p&q and p&¬q preferences
compared with the inspector, whereby they view the
expected utility of 15 minutes of VPT operation being
reached and not having a break as greater than the expected
utility of 15 minutes of VPT operation being reached and
having a break. Such reversed preferences may arise simply
because the operative places a high value on timely
completion of contracted jobs. For an individual who views
the p&¬q situation as having more expected utility than the
p&q situation, a conditional obligation rule will be seen as a
‘bad’ rule. Such differences in preferences may depend on a
person’s role or rank in the workplace (e.g., Manktelow &
Over, 1991, 1995) or on the perceived likelihood of various
consequences (e.g., Manktelow, Sutherland, & Over, 1995).

The Conditional Expected Utility Hypothesis
Over et al. (2004) refer to their decision theoretic analysis of
deontic rule acceptability as the conditional expected utility
(henceforth CEU) hypothesis, since people are considered to
accept such rules based on judgements of the likelihood (P)
and utility (U) of the rule’s consequent (q) given that the
antecedent (p) holds, that is, P.U(q|p). It is the ratio between
P.U(p&q) and P.U(p&¬q)—reflected in the preference for
p&q over p&¬q—that provides a value for P.U(q|p).
One key strength of the CEU hypothesis is that it
generalises the ‘suppositional theory’ of the indicative
conditional (e.g., Edgington, 1995; Evans & Over, 2004) to
the deontic domain. The suppositional theory proposes that
an indicative rule of the form if p then q imparts the belief
that there is a relation between p and q, and that this belief is
captured by a person’s judgement of the conditional
probability, q given p, that is, P(q|p). Take the indicative
conditional: If you use VPTs excessively then you will
damage your health. An individual who is interpreting this
rule is claimed to ‘suppose’ the antecedent by a process
dubbed the ‘Ramsey test’ (Ramsey, 1990), whereby they
hypothetically add the antecedent to their stock of
knowledge. They then mentally simulate the consequent of
the rule in the context of the antecedent. How much the
individual believes in the consequent under the antecedent
determines the strength of the conditional (i.e., its
acceptability) as is reflected in the conditional probability
judgement, P(q|p), such as the probability of damaging your
health given that you use VPTs excessively.
This suppositional account of the indicative conditional
has been well supported in recent studies (e.g., Evans,
Handley & Over, 2003; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003). Over
et al.’s (2004) account of how people determine the
acceptability of deontic conditionals reflects an ingenious
extension of the Ramsey test to deontic reasoning. So far,
however, we have only been considering Over et al.’s
(2004) CEU hypothesis as it relates to the acceptability of

Experiment 1
Despite its clear strengths, however, Over et al.’s (2004)
research focused almost entirely on fairly mundane
situations where rule violations are linked only with
relatively mild moral consequences (e.g., the potential for
being seen as a ‘free rider’ when meeting up with friends
without enough money). In contrast, our experimental work
is concerned with deontic rules pertaining to important, realworld H&S contexts that are associated with the possibility
of serious consequences for rule violation, including, in the
extreme case, the potential for loss of life.
Experiment 1 utilised the paradigm pioneered by Over et
al. (2004), and applied this to examine issues concerning the
acceptability of conditional obligations and permissions
792

few pages you will see a set of the kinds of rules that you
might be given. For each rule you will be asked to provide a
rating in terms of how good a rule you think it is. For
example, consider the following rule: If you go for a run
then you must take a shower. How good a rule is this?”
Following this question a 11-point scale was presented,
with 0 labelled ‘a very bad rule’, 5 ‘neutral’ and 10 ‘a very
good rule’. The instructions then asked participants to turn
over the page and consider each of the given rules.
The other task involved giving participants all four logical
possibilities for a particular rule (p&q, p&¬q, ¬p&q, and
¬p&¬q) and asking them to arrange these possibilities in
order of preference (where 1 was most preferable and 4 least
preferable). Presentation of the four possibilities for each
rule was randomised for all rules and for all participants.
The instructions for this task read:
“On the following pages you will see lists of four possible
situations. Please look at each list and give each situation a
number to show the order in which you yourself would
prefer these situations to occur. For example, here is a list of
four possible situations:

pertaining to real-world H&S situations. The experiment
manipulated two factors: (1) whether rules were obligations
or permissions; and (2) whether H&S content was present or
absent within rules. All scenarios asked participants to adopt
an actor’s perspective on rules that were being stipulated by
an individual in authority. Where H&S content was present
we used a rule-set involving prudential obligations and
permissions concerning physical well-being, protection and
safety. Examples of such rules are: If your are riding a
motorbike then you must wear protective clothing
(obligation) and If you are wearing a bicycle helmet then
you may ride your bike (permission). Note that none of these
rules was associated with a financial or legal penalty for
violation; they were all commonsense rules that prevail in
the UK. For the cases in which H&S content was absent we
mainly used Over et al.’s (2004) rule-set of prudential
obligations and permissions, although we had to replace
three of the original obligation rules as these had loose
associations to H&S issues. Examples of the rules from this
set that we used in Experiment 1 are: If you meet up with
your friends then you must have enough money (obligation)
and If you extend your overdraft limit then you may buy
some extra luxuries (permission).
Our detailed objectives were: (1) to replicate Over et al.’s
observation of a difference in goodness judgements for must
versus may rules; (2) to determine whether any must/may
difference in perceived rule goodness generalises to rules
where H&S content is present; (3) to examine the novel
hypothesis that rules where H&S content is present may be
judged as better than rules where H&S content is absent
(given the more salient personal costs in the former in terms
of well-being and safety); (4) to replicate Over et al.’s
finding that the preference for the p&q possibility over the
p&¬q possibility is greater for must rules than for may rules;
and (5) to validate the general CEU prediction that deontic
conditionals will be judged as good to the extent that the
p&q possibility is preferred to the p&¬q possibility.

The possible situations are:
Preference order:
You go for a run and you take a shower
......
You go for a run and you don’t take a shower
......
You don’t go for a run and you take a shower
......
You don’t go for a run and you don’t take a shower ......
If the best situation for you would be that you don’t go for a
run and don’t take a shower, give this a preference score of
1; if the next is that you go for a run and take a shower, give
this a preference score of 2; and so on”.
The instructions then directed participants to turn over the
page and begin. No time limit was set for the experiment.
The order of presentation of the two experimental tasks was
counterbalanced so that half received the rule-goodness task
first followed by the situation-preference task, whilst the
other half received these tasks in the reverse order.

Method

Results and Discussion

Thirty individuals volunteered via a local participant panel.
All were competent English speakers who were familiar
with UK culture. None had received prior training in
reasoning or logic. Participants were tested individually and
received £3 for tackling two tasks. One task involved
providing goodness ratings for each rule in a set of 12
obligation rules (6 with H&S content and 6 without H&S
content) and 12 permission rules (6 with H&S content and 6
without). Presentation order of these rules was randomised
for each participant. Response sheets for these rules
contained the following instructions (cf. Over et al., 2004):
“In everyday life we are often given rules by people about
what we must do, or what we may do, in certain situations.
An example of a ‘must’ rule might be: If you go for a run
then you must take a shower. And an example of a ‘may’
rule might be: If you go for a run then you may eat some
chocolate cake. One question we can ask about these rules is
whether we think they are good rules or not. On the next

Rule goodness scores Initial analyses of the rule-goodness
scores (see Table 1) related to our first three experimental
objectives: (1) to replicate Over et al.’s observation of a
difference in goodness judgements for must (obligation)
versus may (permission) rules; (2) to establish whether any
difference between must and may rules generalises across
rules where H&S content is present; and (3) to determine
whether rules where H&S content is present are judged as
better than rules where H&S content is absent.
Table 1 shows mean goodness scores for rules in
Experiment 1. A two-way ANOVA revealed a main effect
of Deontic Rule Form, F(1, 29) = 60.19, MSE = 0.99, p <
.001, replicating Over et al.’s finding that obligation rules
are judged to be better rules than permission rules. Our
mean goodness scores for must and may rules without H&S
content were nearly identical to those obtained by Over et
al. (2004, Experiment 2) for an essentially equivalent rule793

set. Our analysis also revealed a reliable main effect of
Content, F(1, 29) = 173.66, MSE = 0.69, p < .001,
indicating that H&S rules were judged as better than nonH&S rules. The interaction was not reliable, F(1, 29) = 0.61,
MSE = 0.58, p = .44. Thus, it appears that the effects of
Deontic Rule Form and Content are additive.

Table 2. Mean difference in the rating of the p&q situation
and the rating of the p&¬q situation in Experiment 1.
Deontic Rule Form
Obligation

Permission

M

SD

M

SD

H&S Present

1.63

0.68

1.07

0.53

H&S Absent

1.38

0.54

0.72

0.70

Content
Comparing goodness scores and preference scores Our
next analyses aimed to replicate Over et al.’s finding that the
preference for the p&q over the p&¬q possibility is greater
for must than may rules. Table 2 shows the mean differences
in preference ratings for the p&q and p&¬q possibility for
the various rule types used. ANOVA revealed a predicted
effect of Deontic Rule Form, F(1, 29) = 31.01, MSE = 0.37,
p < .001, with must rules showing a stronger preference for
the p&q possibility over the p&¬q possibility than may
rules. ANOVA also revealed a significant effect of Content,
F(1, 29) = 6.86, MSE = 0.40, p = .014, indicating that rules
where H&S content was present were associated with a
stronger preference for the p&q possibility over the p&¬q
possibility than rules where H&S content was absent. The
interaction was not significant, F(1, 29) = 0.36, MSE = 0.20,
p = .55, suggesting that the effects of Deontic Rule Form
and Content are, again, additive in nature. Indeed, the
pattern of effects for the present preference scores closely
parallels that for the rule-goodness scores, further validating
Over et al.’s CEU account of what renders deontic rules
acceptable: They are acceptable to the extent that the p&q
situation is preferred over the p&¬q situation. Moreover,
such acceptability judgements and p&q versus p&¬q
preferences appear sensitive to the form and content of rules
in ways that make sense in terms of associated utilities of
the p&q and p&¬q situations.
To validate the CEU hypothesis further we used our
dataset to test another of Over et al.’s predictions: that
irrespective of rule content (H&S present vs. absent) or rule
form (must or may), deontic rules will be judged as good to
the extent that the p&q possibility is preferred to the p&¬q
possibility. To test this prediction we computed Spearman
rank-order correlation coefficients for each individual’s
goodness ratings for a rule and their (p&¬q)-(p&q)
preference ratings for the situations associated with the rule.
This was done collapsing across Deontic Rule Form and
Content, to produce 30 correlations (one per participant). Of
these, 27 were in the predicted (positive) direction, which
was reliable with a binomial test, p < .001, two-tailed.

Notes. Difference scores for preference ratings are calculated in terms
(p&¬q)-(p&q). Ratings were subtracted in this way because of the
order manipulation, where higher numbers indicate a lower preference
(cf. Over et al., 2004). SD = Standard deviation.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 replicates key findings from Over et al.
(2004), such as the greater acceptability of must versus may
rules, and further supports the CEU account of the
acceptability of conditional obligations and permissions.
Experiment 1 also extends Over et al.’s research by
generalising the CEU theory to deontic rules embodying
H&S content, where personal costs associated with rulerelated situations are potentially high, extending beyond
mere vulnerability to the possibility of injury or death. We
observed that when H&S content is present in obligation
and permission rules then they are judged as better than
equivalent rules where H&S content is absent. Likewise,
H&S rules are associated with higher mean differences in
the rating of their associated p&q versus p&¬q situations
when compared to non-H&S rules. These effects all seem
readily interpretable in terms of the CEU hypothesis.
We note, however, that no rules in Experiment 1 were
associated with financial or legal penalties for violation. The
question that then arises is whether financial or legal costs
associated with rules might render them more acceptable.
Indeed, penalties are typically associated with rules that
authorities hold as particularly important for the protection
and safety of a society’s members. Thus, in the UK a H&S
rule such as If you are in a moving car then you must have
your safety-belt fastened would be expected to be judged as
highly acceptable and produce strong preferences for the
p&q over the p&¬q situation. Experiment 2, therefore,
examined the same CEU predictions as in Experiment 1, but
with materials encompassing fiscal or legal penalties for
rule violation. We also manipulated the same factors as
previously: whether rules were obligations or permissions;
and whether H&S content was present or absent.

Table 1. Mean goodness scores for rules in Experiment 1.
Deontic Rule Form

Method

Obligation

Permission

M

SD

M

SD

H&S Present

8.91

0.84

7.61

1.02

H&S Absent

7.05

1.18

5.54

1.25

Content

Participants were 30, English-speaking volunteers who were
familiar with UK culture. All were tested alone and received
£3. Equivalent instructions, procedures and controls were
used to Experiment 1. For the cases where H&S content was
present, the rule-set involved prudential obligations (six
rules) and permissions (six rules) concerning well-being,
protection and safety. Unlike Experiment 1, these rules were

Note. SD = Standard deviation.
794

that rules embodying H&S content are associated with a
stronger preference for the p&q over the p&¬q possibility
than rules without H&S content. The interaction was not
significant, F(1, 29) = 0.35, MSE = 0.26, p = .56, and thus,
for the present experiment, the preference effects do not
entirely parallel the rule-goodness effects. Notwithstanding
this slight anomaly, however, the experiment again provides
reasonable support for the CEU account of deontic rule
acceptability. Such rules appear acceptable to the extent that
the p&q situation is preferred over the p&¬q situation.

linked to the possibility of monetary or legal penalties for
violation. Examples are: If you are using a mobile phone
when driving then it must be a hands-free device
(obligation) and If you plan to take a taxi home from the pub
later then you may go out drinking alcohol for the evening
(permission). For the cases where H&S content was absent
we used a rule-set of prudential obligations (six rules) and
permissions (six rules) that were also associated with
financial or legal repercussions if violated. Examples are: If
your library book has reached its return date then you must
take it back to the library (obligation) and If your TV licence
is valid then you may watch your TV (permission).

Table 4. Mean difference in the rating of the p&q situation
and the rating of the p&¬q situation in Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion

Deontic Rule Form

Rule goodness scores The rule-goodness scores in
Experiment 2 (see Table 3) were marginally higher than in
Experiment 1, supporting the view that rules linked to
financial and legal penalties are judged as more acceptable
than those not linked to such penalties. A two-way ANOVA
revealed a main effect of Deontic Rule Form, F(1, 29) =
32.41, MSE = 1.19, p < .001, replicating the Experiment 1
result that must rules are judged as better than may rules.
There was also a reliable main effect of Content, F(1, 29) =
29.75, MSE = 0.46, p < .001, indicating that rules relating to
H&S were judged as better than those unrelated to H&S. In
addition, and unlike Experiment 1, the interaction was
reliable, F(1, 29) = 7.61, MSE = 0.74, p = .01, and appears
to arise because the separation in goodness evaluations for
must versus may rules is more marked on the H&S contents
than the non-H&S contents. This attests to the apparent
potency of conditional obligations embodying H&S content
and possible financial or legal costs for violation.

Permission

M

SD

M

SD

H&S Present

1.92

0.50

1.07

0.56

H&S Absent

1.73

0.52

0.98

0.67

Content

Note. All of the notes associated with Table 2 apply here.

We finally tested the prediction that irrespective of rule
content (H&S present/absent) or rule form (must/may),
deontic conditionals will be judged as good to the extent
that p&q is preferred to p&¬q. As in Experiment 1, we
correlated each participant’s goodness ratings for a rule and
their (p&¬q)-(p&q) preference ratings for situations
associated with the rule (collapsing across Deontic Rule
Form and Content). Of the 30 correlations, 24 were in the
predicted (positive) direction, which was reliable with a
binomial test, p = .002, two-tailed.

Table 3. Mean goodness scores for rules in Experiment 2.

General Discussion

Deontic Rule Form
Obligation

Permission

M

SD

M

SD

H&S Present

9.13

0.66

7.57

1.27

H&S Absent

8.02

1.15

7.32

1.18

Content

Obligation

This paper aimed to replicate and extend Over et al.’s
(2004) research on the issue of why some deontic rules are
more acceptable than others. Like Over et al., we focused on
conditional prudential obligations and permissions and
adopted a decision-theoretic stance, whereby we predicted
that: (1) people would judge a conditional obligation (if p
then must q) as a good rule when they preferred the situation
in which the antecedent and consequent co-occur (p&q) to
the situation in which the antecedent occurs but the
consequent does not (p&¬q); and (2) people would judge a
conditional permission (if p then may q) as a good rule when
either they preferred p&q to p&¬q, or when they were
indifferent between these two situations.
The key aspect of our experiments that went beyond Over
et al.’s research was the manipulation of rule content such
that H&S issues were either present or absent. The personal
costs associated with our H&S-related rules included risks
of injury or fatality. Whilst Experiment 1 used rules where
there was no financial or legal penalty for rule violation,
Experiment 2 used rules linked to such penalties. These
rules are of the type that authorities hold as especially
worthy of being followed for optimal functioning of

Note. SD = Standard deviation.

Comparing goodness scores and preference scores Our
next analyses examined the hypothesis that the preference
for the p&q possibility over p&¬q will be greater for must
than may rules. Table 4 shows the mean differences in
preference ratings for the p&q possibility and the p&¬q
possibility for the four types of rule used in Experiment 2. A
2 x 2 ANOVA revealed a reliable main effect of Deontic
Rule Form, F(1, 29) = 57.54, MSE = .33, p < .001, with
must rules showing a stronger preference for the p&q
possibility over the p&¬q possibility than may rules. The
ANOVA also revealed a near significant main effect of
Content, F(1, 29) = 3.30, MSE = .17, p = .08, which goes
some way toward supporting the finding from Experiment 1
795

one that psychologists are only beginning to grapple with
(see also Hilton, Kemmelmeier, & Bonnefon, 2005). Our
research represents another small attempt to examine issues
that are relevant to this endeavour. Our results suggest that
the concept of conditional expected utility as proposed by
Over et al. (2004) may have a valuable role to play in
progressing a theoretical understanding of why people see
some deontic rules as more acceptable than others.

organisations and societies, and—in the case of H&S
rules—for people’s personal protection and well-being.
Such rules should generally be acceptable to people, who
should be familiar with following them and well aware of
the associated benefits that derive from their adoption.
The predictions of the CEU theory were borne out across
both experiments. We observed an association between rulegoodness evaluations and preference ratings for p&q over
p&¬q situations. Both experiments also replicated the
strong propensity for people to evaluate obligation (must)
rules as better than permission (may) rules. Over et al.
(2004) express concerns that the differences between must
and may rules that they observed may have arisen because
of their sample (psychology students) and their rule
contents. The fact that we have generalised this effect to a
more representative sample of the adult population as well
as across new sets of materials attests to the validity of the
difference between must and may goodness evaluations.
Our data also provided some support for predictions that
deontic rules containing H&S content would be judged as
better than those not containing H&S content, and that
people’s preference ratings for H&S p&q situations over
p&¬q situations would mirror H&S rule-goodness
judgements. Moreover, the effects of H&S content on the
acceptability of rules as well as situation-preference ratings
generalised from Experiment 1 (where financial and legal
costs for rule violation were absent) to Experiment 2 (where
such costs were present)—attesting to the robustness of
predicted CEU effects across contents. Financial and legal
costs associated with rules (in Experiment 2) led to a
general increase in the acceptability of such rules compared
to Experiment 1 (where such penalties did not pertain).
Our research derives from a decision-theoretic approach
to understanding deontic reasoning, and closely follows the
work of Over et al. (2004; Manktelow & Over, 1991, 1995).
We acknowledge that there are alternative theoretical
accounts of reasoning with deontic conditionals (e.g., Almor
& Sloman, 1996; Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Cosmides, 1989;
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002; Oaksford & Chater, 1994).
However, such accounts are primarily focused on explaining
people’s responses with deontic variants of the Wason
selection task, where the key response measure concerns
people’s capacity to detect rule violators. The emphasis of
the CEU account is, of course, somewhat different to these
latter theories, in that it attempts to explain why deontic
conditionals are adopted or accepted by people in the first
place as appropriate rules for guiding behaviour in
organisations, institutions or societies.
The underlying assumption of the CEU account is that in
making everyday decisions people are trying to work out
which actions they must or may perform in the light of their
preferences (Over et al., 2004). Moreover, preferences will
be determined by a range of beliefs and desires that have
their basis in moral, legal and prudential value systems
acquired during people’s life and work experiences.
Explaining how people reason about rules in relation to such
preferences is a complex and challenging endeavour, and

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the EPSRC (EP/CO14677/1).

References
Almor, A., & Sloman, S.A. (1996). Is deontic reasoning
special? Psychological Review, 103, 374-380.
Hilton, D. J., Kemmelmeier, M., & Bonnefon, J-F. (2005).
Putting Ifs to work: Goal-based relevance in conditional
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
134, 388-405.
Cheng, P.W., & Holyoak, K.J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104, 235-329.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. E. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 29, 321-335.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford: OUP.
Johnson-Laird, P. N, & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inferences. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1991). Social roles and
utilities in reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition,
39, 85-105.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deontic reasoning.
In S. E. Newstead & J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.),
Perspectives on thinking and reasoning: Essays in honour
of Peter Wason. Hove: LEA.
Manktelow, K. I., Sutherland, E. J., & Over, D. E. (1995).
Probabilistic factors in deontic reasoning. Thinking and
Reasoning, 1, 201-220.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101, 608-631.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of
conditionals: Conditional probabilities, mental models,
and personal utilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 29, 680-693.
Over, D. E., Manktelow, K. I., & Hadjichristidis, C. (2004).
Conditions for the acceptance of deontic conditionals.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 96-105.
Perham, N., & Oaksford, M. (2005). Deontic reasoning with
emotional content: Evolutionary psychology or decision
theory? Cognitive Science, 29, 681-718.
Ramsey, F. P. (1990). General propositions and causality
(original publication, 1931). In D. H. Mellor (Ed.),
Philosophical papers. Cambridge: CUP.
796

