UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is Really Learned in Artificial Grammar Learning? Implicit Intention for Learning in the
Selective Attention Process

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fp3p6jw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Tanaka, Daisuke
Kiyokawa, Sachiko
Yamada, Ayumi
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Is Really Learned in Artificial Grammar Learning?
Implicit Intention for Learning in the Selective Attention Process
Daisuke Tanaka (dtanaka@ristex.jst.go.jp)
Center for Research on Brain-Science & Society, Research Institute of Science and Technology for Society,
Japan Science and Technology Agency, 1-1-2 Otemachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-0004, Japan

Sachiko Kiyokawa (kiyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, University of Tokyo,
Hongo 7-3-1 Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Ayumi Yamada (ayumi.yamada@gakushuin.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Faculty of Letters, Gakushuin University,
1-5-1 Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan

Kazuo Shigemasu (kshige@bayes.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive and Behavioral Science, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan
Abstract
S3

T

This study aimed to investigate what is really learned in
artificial grammar (AG) learning and how selective attention
influences AG learning. In the learning phase, depending on
the aspects of GLOCAL strings—chains of compound letters
that can allow two different AGs— participants were
presented with two different series of letter strings. Their
selective attention was manipulated by the experimental
instructions. The results of the grammaticality judgment task
following the learning phase revealed three findings. First, in
accordance with the literature, selective attention was
required for AG learning. Second, with regard to grammatical
judgment, there was no difference between novel and
presented strings, suggesting that grammatical judgment is
based not on the representation of the presented strings
themselves but on the AG extracted from them. Finally, there
is evidence that selective attention works positively for the
inhibition of the stimuli.

J
S2

S1

T

S5

V
V

X
X

S4

J

Y
S2

B
S1

F

B
L
S3
S5
B
F

F

S4

Z

Keywords: artificial grammar learning; selective attention;
implicit learning; global/local.

Background

Figure 1: AGs used in this experiment.
Top panel: Grammar 1; Bottom panel: Grammar 2.

The environment surrounding us contains almost infinite
information for growth. However, organisms can identify
only specific covariations as useful information for their
adaptation. What is particularly interesting is that human
beings, who tend to be interpreted as subjects controlled by
their consciousness, can also learn implicitly. This ability is
known as implicit learning (Reber, 1989). Since Reber
published a series of pioneering researches using the
artificial grammar (AG) learning procedure (e.g., Reber,
1967), many researchers have studied implicit learning,
using several types of procedures, for example, the serial
reaction time (SRT) and the AG learning procedures
(Buchner & Wippich, 1998; Reber, 1989; Seger, 1994;
Shanks & St. John, 1994, for reviews).

In the learning phase of the AG learning procedure,
participants are exposed to a series of letter strings that
follow complex rules—defined as the finite-state Markovian
rule system (e.g., Figure 1). For instance, “XVJTVX” is
presented as a grammatical string in the learning phase (see
Grammar 1, the top panel of Figure 1). In the test phase
following the learning phase, the participants are asked to
select grammatical strings from novel strings, some of
which follow AG rules and some violate them. For instance,
“XTTVJJ” is considered as nongrammatical since the
existence of the second letter “T” violates Grammar 1. The
results reveal that participants can correctly select novel
grammatical strings above chance level, even though they

1545

cannot satisfactorily answer questions related to the
selection criteria. Since they are unable to access the
selection criteria explicitly, it can be speculated that they
acquire the necessary knowledge implicitly.
One of the unique features of the AG learning procedure
is the abstraction of rules extracted from the presented
stimuli in the learning phase. In the SRT procedure,
participants’ responses to repeated patterns quicken
regardless of their awareness of learning. This phenomenon
can be interpreted as evidence that they can only store
repeated patterns implicitly. In the AG learning procedure,
however, participants in the test phase are able to
distinguish grammatical strings from nongrammatical ones,
even if they have never seen them before. It is considered
that in the learning phase, participants can implicitly learn
AG extracted from the presented strings, and they can
subsequently respond based on the AG learned in the test
phase.

What Is Really Learned through AG Learning
An alternative explanation about AG learning interprets
participants’ test phase performance as behavior based on
the representation of presented strings in memory in the
learning phase (e.g., Vokey & Brooks, 1992). This is
contrary to the view that AG learning differs from the SRT
procedure with regard to the extraction of rules from a series
of presented strings.
This explanation leads to the following assumption: If
participants’ behavior is based not on the knowledge of AG
but on the representation of presented individual strings,
their responses to presented grammatical strings differ from
those to novel grammatical strings. More specifically, it
seems that in grammatical judgment, the rates of correct
responses for presented letter strings are higher than those
for novel grammatical strings. No difference is predicted
between participants’ performances with regard to the two
types of strings if they can extract AG and use it in their
grammatical judgment.

Relationship between Implicit Learning and
Selective Attention
Jiang and Leung (2005) using visual search task as the
implicit learning about a sequential pattern revealed that an
unattended repeated pattern was accumulated as the
consequence of latent learning, though this is not manifested
in participants’ behavior. It is very difficult to distinguish
implicit learning from latent learning strictly with respect to
the cognitive process. However, selective attention is not
responsible for the simple storage of environmental
information and may therefore execute the selection of
information that is needed to behave appropriately, thereby
making inputted information inhibit actively.
Tanaka et al. (2006) investigated the role of selective
attention in AG learning using GLOCAL letter strings

(Figure 2). A critical feature of this stimulus is that while a
GLOCAL string can be read as one string by using global
letters (NVJTVJ in Figure 2), it can also be read as a string
using local letters (BYYFLB in Figure 2). In other words,
GLOCAL strings are chains of compound letters (Navon,
1977). A compound letter represents one large letter (i.e., a
global letter) composed of a set of small letters (i.e., local
letters). It is well known that when different letters are
represented in local and global aspects, there exists
interference between the two aspects during the preattention
process: the irrelevant as well as relevant aspects cannot
inevitably stop processing even if they are not attended to.
Further, the direction of interference is asymmetrical: the
effect of the global to local aspect is larger than that of the
opposite direction. However, when the presentation time of
stimuli is sufficiently long for recognition, bidirectional
interference occurred (Hibi, Takeda, & Yagi, 2002). Tanaka
et al. (2006) found that participants could learn only one AG
from the attended aspect of the GLOCAL strings, although
two aspects of GLOCAL strings provided enough
information to learn two different AGs. They concluded that
selective attention plays a critical role in AG learning.
B
B
BB
B
B B
B
B
B
B
B
B B
BB
B
B
B

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y
Y
YY
Y
Y
YY Y Y Y
Y

FFFFFFFFF
F
F
F
F
F
F

L
L
B
L
L
B
L
L
B
L L
B
L L
B
B
LL
B
B
L
BB B B B

Figure 2: An example of GLOCAL strings.
In the research on the mere exposure effect that has the
same paradigm with AG learning as implicit learning—
except that it uses preferential judgments as the
measurement of the test phase—Newell and Bright (2003)
revealed that the structural mere exposure effect disappeared
when the presentation time was brief, whereas the classical
mere exposure effect was intact. In other words, brief
presentation time interfered with the generalization of
grammatical information from presented strings. Some
studies, including Newell and Bright (2003), have shown
that the process of generalization from presented strings
differs from the process of storage for presented strings
themselves (e.g., Kramer & Parkinson, 2005; Zizak & Reber,
2004). The result of Tanaka et al. (2006) provided two
possible interpretations. First, selective attention affects the
extraction of rules from the presented strings. It is therefore
predicted that participants can make the representation in
memory of presented strings of the unattended aspect of
GLOCAL strings even if they cannot extract AG from them,
because during the preattention process, the unattended
aspect of GLOCAL strings should inevitably function as the
feature of compound letters. Second, in AG learning,
participants inhibit the unattended information positively
rather than process it automatically; therefore, it is predicted
that participants cannot even make the representation in
1546

memory of presented strings of the unattended aspect of
GLOCAL strings.
Although Tanaka et al. (2006) revealed the importance of
selective attention in the AG learning procedure, their
results could not discriminate between these two
possibilities—failure of the extraction of AG from the
unattended aspect and inhibition of the input from the
unattended aspect as the effect of selective attention. This
was because previously presented but unattended strings
were not used in the test phase in accordance with the
convention of AG learning literature. This experiment was
designed to clarify the ambiguity in the literature.

Experiment
Purpose
What is really learned in AG and how selective attention
works in AG learning are worth investigating because they
contributes not only to understanding the AG learning
mechanism but also clarify the position of AG learning in
implicit learning procedures represented by the SRT
procedure.

Method
Participants Forty undergraduates from University of
Tokyo participated in the experiment and received 500 yen
following the completion of the experimental session.
Assignments on attention conditions and GLOCAL strings
were counterbalanced.

Figure 3: A sample of the GLOCAL strings used to convey
instructions to the participants.
Stimuli The two AGs used were identical to those used by
Tanaka et al. (2006) (Figure 1). These two AGs were less
similar in their abstract structure according to the
calculation based on the graph theory. In addition, they were
constructed with the constraint that they did not share any
chunks (e.g., VX), by using five letters: J, N, T, V, and X.
Then, the letters B, F, L, Y, and Z were systematically
substituted for J, N, T, V, and X in the second AG. This
translation enabled each of these two AGs to hold unique
letters as well as bigrams at the superficial level. In other
words, the participants could not answer the question about
one AG by using the learned knowledge of another. In fact,
the results of the manipulation by Tanaka et al. revealed that
the participants could not make correct judgments with

regard to the grammar extracted from the unattended aspect
of GLOCAL strings.
Eighteen grammatical strings were constructed using 3–6
letters from each AG to create the GLOCAL strings (e.g.,
Figure 2). Two types of series of GLOCAL strings were
constructed from the strings following two AGs to
counterbalance them between participants: one type of
GLOCAL string followed Grammar 1 at the global aspect
and Grammar 2 at the local aspect, whereas the other type
followed Grammar 1 at the local aspect and Grammar 2 at
the global aspect. GLOCAL strings were presented as white
uppercase letters against a black background. Small letters
were used in MS Gothic 12 pt. Seven small letters were
arranged vertically to obtain one large letter. Eight small
letters were arranged horizontally to obtain F, J, L, and X;
nine, to obtain B, N, T, and Y; thirteen, to obtain V; and
seven, to obtain Z. The height of a letter on the screen was
about 3.2 cm and its width was about 1.8 to 3.0 cm. The
distance between the display and participants was about 60
cm. These GLOCAL strings were used in the learning phase.
Twenty strings following each grammar were constructed
for the test phase. These strings, composed of five or six
letters, were not GLOCAL but regular letter strings; half of
these were used in the learning phase and were referred to as
presented grammatical strings. The remaining strings were
not identical to any of the strings presented in the learning
phase and were referred to as novel grammatical strings. All
of these grammatical strings were used to construct
nongrammatical strings that violated both grammars by
placing one or two characters in nonpermissible locations. A
constraint in the nongrammatical strings was that they were
composed of the same letters as the grammatical ones.
Four types of string pairs were constructed for the test
phase. The first type, “PG,” paired a presented grammatical
string at the global aspect of GLOCAL strings in the
learning phase with a nongrammatical one based on the
grammar extracted from the global aspect of the GLOCAL
strings. The second type, “NG,” paired a novel grammatical
string at the global aspect of GLOCAL strings in the
learning phase with a nongrammatical one based on the
grammar that was extracted from the global aspect of the
GLOCAL strings. Similarly, the third type was termed as
“PL” and the fourth, as “NL.” It should be noted that the
difference between global and local was counterbalanced
since half the participants were presented with GLOCAL
strings that followed Grammar 1 at the global aspect and the
other half, with the second type of GLOCAL strings that
followed Grammar 1 at the local aspect in the learning
phase. Each type comprised ten pairs. Matching pairs were
randomized for each participant with the constraint that two
strings should have the same length.
Design This was a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed design. The first factor
was Attention. Whether the participants were instructed to
attend to the global or local aspect of the GLOCAL strings

1547

in the learning phase was manipulated. This was a betweenparticipants factor.
The second factor was Grammar. In the test phase, half of
the pairs required the participants’ judgment based on the
grammar extracted from the global aspect of the GLOCAL
strings, whereas the other half required their judgment based
on the grammar extracted from the local aspect. This was a
within-participant factor.
The last factor was Presentation, and it revealed whether
the grammatical strings of the pairs used in the test phase
were presented as the aspect of the GLOCAL strings in the
learning phase. This was also a within-participant factor.

++++++++++
++++++++++
++++++++++
++++++++++
Y FFFFFFFFF L
L
B
B
B Y
Y
Y
L
L
B
BB
B Y
Y
F
Y
L L
B
B B B Y Y
F
Y
L
L
B
B B B Y Y
F
L L B
B B B Y Y Y
Y
F
B
LL
BB
YY
F
B
B
B
Y
Y
F
L
BB B B B
B
YY Y Y Y
B
Y

1s
6s

being presented six times. A mask stimulus comprising
many “+” signs in the area where the GLOCAL strings were
intended to be displayed was presented for 1 s during the
interval between the presentation of two GLOCAL strings.
The learning phase was followed by the test phase.
In the test phase, the participants were informed that two
strings would be presented in the upper and lower regions of
the display; that the GLOCAL strings followed some rules;
and that while one string of a pair followed these rules, the
other did not. They were required to press either of two
specific keys to identify the strings. Forty pairs were
presented to each participant in random order. A pair of
strings remained on display until each participant pressed
one key. The presentation of the strings of a pair in the
upper region was also randomized for each participant with
the constraint that the grammatical strings of pairs be
presented an equal number of times in each region. The 40
pairs were presented twice; in other words, the participants
had to provide answers for 80 pairs.

++++++++

++++++++++
++++++++++
++++++++++
++++++++++

++++++++
VJTVTV
NVXTVJ
2s

Figure 4: The flowchart of the learning phase. Note the
white letters on the black background.
Procedure This experiment comprised learning and test
phases. At the onset of the learning phase, the participants
were informed that the stimuli comprising some large letters
composed of small letters would be presented on the display.
The participants were presented with a sample stimulus that
was not used in our experiment (see Figure 3). This sample
could be read as “dog” when the participants paid attention
to the local aspect of the GLOCAL strings, and as “inu”
(Japanese for “dog”) when they attended to the global aspect.
The participants in the global attention condition were
instructed to globally write the string on a sheet with ruled
lines and read the sample as “inu”; the same instructions
were provided for the presented series of GLOCAL strings
(Figure 3). Conversely, the participants in the local attention
condition were instructed to locally write the string on the
sheet and read the sample as “dog”; the same instructions
were provided for the presented strings.
During the learning phase, 18 GLOCAL strings were
presented on the display for 6 s, with each GLOCAL string

Until any
specific key
is pressed

++++++++
++++++++

Figure 5: The flowchart of the test phase. Note the white
letters on the black background.

Results
Figure 6 shows the means of the selection rates of the
grammatical strings of each condition in the test phase. All
chance levels were 0.5: if the participants could not acquire
any knowledge of each grammar, the selection rates of the
grammatical strings were 0.5 in the test phase.
First, the selection rates of the grammatical strings were
submitted to a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with Attention (attended to the global or local
aspects of the GLOCAL strings in the learning phase:
between participants) and Grammar (extracted from the
global or local aspect of the GLOCAL strings) and
Presentation (presented or novel as an aspect of the

1548

selection rates of grammatical strings

GLOCAL strings in the learning phase). The main effect of
Attention was significant, F(1,38) = 6.06, MSE = 0.0295, p
< .05. The mean selection rate of grammatical strings at the
global attention condition (0.63) was higher than that at the
local attention condition (0.56). The main effect of
Grammar was also significant, F(1,38) = 9.31, MSE =
0.0185, p < .01.

0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4

PG

NG

PL

NL

global
local attention
attention
attention conditions in the learning phase

Figure 6: Means (±SE) of the selection rates of
grammatical strings of four types of pairs: presented global
(PG), novel global, (NG), presented local (PL), and novel
local (NL).
The selection involved in the global aspect of GLOCAL
strings (the mean selection rate was 0.63) was more correct
than that in the local aspect (0.56). The interaction between
Attention and Grammar was significant, F(1,38) = 67.62,
MSE = 0.0185, p < .01. The results of the simple main
effect revealed that the effects of Attention influenced the
global and local grammars, F(1,76) = 49.50 and 10.08,
respectively, MSE = 0.0240, p < .01. Similarly, the results
of the simple main effect revealed that the effect of
Grammar influenced the attended aspect as compared to the
global and local aspects, F(1,38) = 63.55 and 13.38,
respectively, MSE = 0.0240, p < .01. In the global attention
condition, the mean correct rate of global grammar was
significantly higher than of local grammar, whereas the
relationship between global and local grammars with regard
to the mean correct rates was inversed in the local attention
condition. The main effect and interaction with respect to
Presentation factor were not significant (Fs < 1).
In order to examine whether the participants can learn AG
from the unattended aspect of GLOCAL strings, using t
tests (two-tailed), we compared the selection rates of the
grammatical strings with the chance level in each condition.
However, there was no significant difference with regard to
the chance level in the four conditions (ts < 1).

Discussion
The interaction between Attention and Grammar reveals that
the participants could learn AG more from the attended
aspect than from the unattended one. In fact, there are no
differences between unattended selection rates and the
chance level in all conditions. This result shows that
selective attention is necessary for AG learning.

What Is Really Learned in AG Learning
In terms of the comparison between presented and novel
strings, there is no significant difference in the main effect
and interactions with regard to Presentation. This suggests
that in the test phase, the participants judged grammaticality
based on their grammatical knowledge rather than their
representation of presented strings. This may be interpreted
as counterevidence against the viewpoint that participants
could not extract AG as the abstract structure from the
presented strings (e.g., Kinder, Shanks, Cock, & Tunney,
2003). This result cannot deny the existence of the
representation of presented strings in memory. It is possible
to consider that participants’ representation of presented
strings will be generalized through repeated presentation.
Conceivably, the extraction of AG may precede the storage
of presented strings. In any case, as per the objective
interpretation of this result, participants’ behavior could not
be interpreted solely based on the trace of presented strings
since there was no significant difference between the
presented and novel grammatical strings.
In the context of the mere exposure effect (using
preference judgment instead of grammaticality judgment),
some literatures discuss the difference between presented
and novel grammatical strings. For instance, in the condition
of relatively short time presentation (Newell & Bright,
2003) or in one using low familiarity characters (Zizak &
Reber, 2004), the preferences for novel grammatical strings
disappeared, whereas those for presented grammatical
strings still remained.
However, in this experiment, there was no significant
difference between presented and novel grammatical strings,
whereas there was a clear difference between grammatical
and nongrammatical strings. This is because in this
experiment, grammatical judgment was used as a more
direct measurement to investigate the existence of AG than
was preference judgment. On the whole, as far as observed
behavior is concerned, the finding that participants can learn
AG from presented strings seems to be appropriate for the
interpretation of their behavior in the AG learning procedure.
Future research on this topic should control for similarities
between novel grammatical strings and nongrammatical
strings based on some outer standard, although it is difficult
to define the similarity between strings with psychological
validity.

1549

Relationship between Implicit Learning and
Selective Attention
With regard to selective attention, the present results reveal
that the participants could not select the presented but
unattended strings as well as the novel and unattended ones.
This is interesting because it is known that during the
preattention process, the unattended aspect of compound
letters interferes with the processing of the attended aspect.
This finding can be interpreted as evidence for input
processing independent of the subjective intention for
seeing. Some studies in the context of the mere exposure
effect have also revealed the existence of representation in
memory of presented strings themselves. Given such
findings, the present results could postulate that information
on the unattended aspect of compound letters is inevitably
processed and stored as its representation in memory. Thus,
the present results can be interpreted as evidence that for
experimental tasks, the participants could inhibit the
information of the unattended aspect. Note that participants
were not instructed that the presented stimuli shared some
rules in the learning phase. Therefore, these processes were
not modulated by participants’ conscious intentions. It could
be interpreted that for the sake of selective attention, a series
of attended strings were generalized and other series of
unattended strings were inhibited.
The finding that the acquisition of very complex rules is
caused by only controlling what to see and not orienting the
goal as the purpose of behavior is suggestive. It is possible
to consider that the learning systems investigated using the
implicit learning paradigm are the same as the substrate of
the acquisition of various skills, including the acquisition of
a mother tongue without a definite goal.
Furthermore, with regard to the selection rates of the
grammatical strings for the attended grammar, the rates in
the global attention condition were higher than those in the
local attention condition. This global advantage propensity
is important since it is known that global processing
antecedes local processing in various contexts (Navon, 2003,
for a review). The asymmetry based on different aspects of
the GLOCAL strings may suggest that AG learning, which
seems higher cognitive processing than visual processing,
also depends on the input process of visual information
processing. In fact, participants in both the conditions could
write almost all strings of the attended aspect of the
GLOCAL strings regardless of global or local conditions.
The perceptual load theory (Lavie, 1995) enables us to
explain this asymmetry. The difference in the correct rates
of the grammatical judgment task between the global and
local attention conditions can be interpreted as the
difference of perceptual load between two visual aspects.
The ease of perception of the global aspects compared with
that of the local aspects could cause the higher correct rates
of the global condition than the local condition at the
attended aspects. It seems that the interaction between

selective attention and visual input as the environment
variable also plays an important role in AG learning.

References
Buchner, A., & Wippich, W. (1998). Differences and
commonalities between implicit learning. In M. A. Stadler
& P. A. Frensch (Eds.), Handbook of implicit learning.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hibi, Y., Takeda, Y., & Yagi, A. (2002). Attention level and
negative priming in hierarchical patterns. Japanese
Psychological Research, 44, 241-246.
Jiang, Y., & Leung, A. W. (2005). Implicit learning of
ignored visual context. The Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 12, 100-106.
Kinder, A., Shanks, D. R., Cock, J., & Tunney, R. J. (2003).
Recollection, fluency, and the explicit/implicit distinction
in artificial grammar learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 132, 551-565.
Kramer, R. S. S., & Parkinson, B. (2005). Generalization of
mere exposure to faces viewed from different horizontal
angles. Social Cognition, 23, 125-136.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human, Perception, and Performance, 21,
451-468.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology,
9, 353-383.
Navon, D. (2003). What does a compound letter tell the
psychologist’s mind? Acta Psychologica, 114, 273-309.
Newell, B. R., & Bright, J. E. H. (2003). The subliminal
mere exposure effect does not generalize to structural
related stimuli. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57, 61-68.
Seger, C. A. (1994). Implicit learning. Psychological
Bulletin, 115, 163-196.
Shanks, D. R., & St. John, M. F. (1994). Characteristics of
dissociable human learning systems. Behavioral and
Brain Science, 17, 367-395.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 77,
317-327.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219235.
Tanaka, D., Kiyokawa, S., Yamada, A, & Shigemasu, K.
(2006). Role of Selective Attention in Artificial Grammar
Learning. The 28th Annual Conference of Cognitive
Science Society, 2615.
Vokey, J.R., & Brooks, L. R. (1992). Salience of item
knowledge in learning artificial grammars. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 328-344.
Zizak, D. M., & Reber, A. S. (2004). Implicit preferences:
The role(s) of familiarity in the structural mere exposure
effect. Consciousness and Cognition, 13, 336-362.

1550

