UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Skunks are Similar to Giraffes and When They Are Not: Grammatical Gender Effects
on Bilingual Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9964v8c9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Kousta, Stavroula-Thaleia
Vinson, David P.
Vigliocco, Gabriella

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Skunks are Similar to Giraffes and when they are not:
Grammatical Gender Effects on Bilingual Cognition
Stavroula-Thaleia Kousta (s.kousta@ucl.ac.uk),
Department of Psychology, 26 Bedford Way
London WC1H 0AP United Kingdom

David P. Vinson (d.vinson@ucl.ac.uk),
Department of Psychology, 26 Bedford Way
London WC1H 0AP United Kingdom

Gabriella Vigliocco (g.vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 26 Bedford Way
London WC1H 0AP United Kingdom
Abstract
We investigate how second language learning affects ‘thinking for speaking’ in the first and second language by examining the semantic effects of grammatical gender (present in
Italian but absent in English). In an error-induction experiment we first establish a baseline, showing that gender affects
the semantic substitution errors made by monolingual Italian
speakers compared to monolingual English speakers. We then
show that Italian—English bilinguals behave like monolingual English speakers when the task is in English, and like
monolingual Italian speakers when the task is in Italian, hence
exhibiting appropriate ‘thinking for speaking’ for each language. These results have implications for linguistic relativity/determinism and models of bilingual semantic memory
and processing.
Keywords: bilingualism; linguistic relativity; thinking for
speaking; grammatical gender; speech errors

Introduction
In order to speak any language, one has to pay attention to
the distinctions obligatorily expressed in the language, and
in this way every linguistic community differs from every
other. In other words, there is linguistic relativity, since
speakers of typologically different languages are required to
verbalize different aspects of reality when constructing linguistic messages. What are the cognitive consequences of
linguistic relativity? For Whorf (1956), to whom the linguistic relativity hypothesis is attributed, linguistic relativity is
closely linked to linguistic determinism, that is, the proposal
that language determines the way the external world is perceived, categorized and acted upon.
Nowadays virtually nobody would like to claim that language has such a deterministic role on cognition as Whorf
originally envisioned it. It is, however, still a matter of intense debate to what extent language affects (rather than
determines) cognition. According to one hypothesis, the
linguistic classifications imposed by language affect only
those aspects of cognition that are actively engaged in the
processes of speaking. This “thinking for speaking” proposal has been put forward by Slobin (1996), is currently
1187

more or less uncontroversial, and evidence in support of it
abounds in the literature (see Vigliocco, Vinson, Paganelli,
& Dworzynski, 2005).
A stronger version of the linguistic determinism hypothesis argues that language also affects non-linguistic cognition, above and beyond the processes involved in speaking
and comprehending a particular language (e.g., speakers of
different languages perceive the world in different ways due
to linguistic differences). Data in support of this claim have
been provided in numerous behavioral experiments (e.g.
Imai & Gentner, 1997; Levinson, 1997; Lucy, 1992), but at
the same time there is a substantial body of evidence that
argues against this claim (e.g. Gennari et al., 2002; Li &
Gleitman, 2002; Vigliocco et al., 2005). In other words, the
main debate in the field focuses on the extent and pervasiveness of the effect of language on cognition.
Up to the present, investigations of the link between language and thought have concentrated on monolingual populations, with very little work carried out with bilingual
speakers. Bilingualism, however, offers a unique test case
for the potential role of language in shaping cognition, especially when focusing on highly proficient bilingual speakers
who acquired a second language after their first language
was largely in place. If learning a first language affects cognition beyond ‘thinking for speaking’ for that same language, then bilingual speakers, even when they are highly
fluent in their second language, should show evidence of
transfer of linguistically motivated semantic/conceptual
categories from their first language into their second, despite
their high proficiency in their second language. In other
words, their ‘thinking for speaking’ in their second language
should be, at least to some extent, dependent on ‘thinking
for speaking’ in the first. This prediction is based on the
assumption that language, by means of its lexical and
grammatical structure, habitually directs attention to a number of conceptual distinctions.
In this paper we investigate bilingual cognition in relation
to a phenomenon, grammatical gender, which has attracted
considerable interest in the literature on linguistic relativity/determinism. The crucial questions are whether the bi-

lingual speakers’ behavior in each of their languages converges or diverges, how it relates to the behavior of monolingual speakers, and whether any effects in linguistic tasks
extend to non-linguistic tasks. These questions have not yet
been satisfactorily addressed in the literature, but they are
extremely important in order to understand the extent and
nature of the influence of language on cognition.
In many languages, grammatical gender is a formal category: nouns are marked masculine, feminine, neuter etc..
Italian, for instance, has two genders, and all nouns are either feminine or masculine; while in English gender is not a
formal category. Does the grammatical gender of words
affect their semantic representation and the conceptual representation of their referents? Is the meaning of giraffe more
similar to the meaning of skunk for Italian speakers than
English speakers just because the words share grammatical
gender in Italian (giraffafem—puzzolafem)? And are zebras in
Italian perceived as being feminine and leopards perceived
as masculine just by virtue of the grammatical gender of the
words used to refer to them (giraffafem—leopardomasc)?
Early work with monolinguals suggested that grammatical
gender affected both the semantic representation of words
and the conceptual representation of their referents (see Sera
et al., 2002 for discussion). More recent research, however,
has suggested that grammatical gender effects are substantially constrained. Sera, et al. (2002) asked speakers to assign male or female voices to pictured objects, and observed
gender effects with speakers of languages such as French
and Spanish, but not German, despite the fact that all three
languages have formal gender. The reason for this was proposed to be the fact that Spanish and French have a twogender system (masculine-feminine) which exhibits a high
correlation between grammatical and natural gender, and
gender is morphologically marked across several grammatical categories. German, on the other hand, has a threegender system (masculine-feminine-neuter) with a less
straightforward relationship between grammatical and natural gender, and gender is marked in fewer grammatical categories. It is possible, however, that gender effects were observed in Spanish and French where speakers could successfully utilize gender as a strategy to assign male and female
voices to pictures, while with German speakers the strategy
fails with nouns that are marked neuter, hence leading to a
null result.
Using tasks less susceptible to the strategic use of gender,
Vigliocco et al. (2005) replicated the difference between
two- and three-gender languages and showed that gender
effects are even further constrained: apart from being limited to languages with two genders and with a close correspondence between grammatical and natural gender, grammatical gender was shown to affect the semantic representation of words referring to sexuated entities (e.g. animals) but
not the representation of words referring to entities that lack
natural gender (e.g. artifacts). Moreover, this constrained
semantic effect did not generalize to a non-linguistic task
(triadic judgments with pictures).
In the present study we explore a domain in which lan-

guage-specific semantic effects of grammatical gender have
been clearly observed (Italian words referring to animals), in
order to investigate to what extent bilingual speakers adapt
to ‘thinking for speaking’ that is appropriate for their second
language; to what extent ‘thinking for speaking’ in a second
language is affected by the first; and to what extent ‘thinking for speaking’ in the first language is affected by learning
a second language. To address these questions, we focus on
semantic errors arising during continuous naming, an online methodology that is not subject to the use of strategies
related to the effects of gender (see Vigliocco et al., 2005).
We contrast the errors that are produced in Italian to those
produced in English, a language without grammatical gender. Comparing a gendered to a non-gendered language allows us a) to focus specifically upon whether grammatical
gender actually affects semantic representations in processing (since the monolingual English data provide a baseline
of semantic/conceptual/visual similarity that is shared
among speakers of the two languages) and b) to determine
whether this semantic effect is transferred to a language that
lacks the specific grammatical category.
We ask monolingual Italian and monolingual English
speakers to name pictures of common land animals that are
presented at a fast rate. Bilingual Italian-English speakers
are also asked to carry out the same task in both their languages. The aim of the task is to elicit semantic substitution
errors (e.g. saying ‘eye’ when ‘ear’ is intended), which are
assumed to arise as a result of competition between semantically related lexical candidates in a conceptually driven
lexical selection process during production (Garrett, 1984).
In the literature on language production, it is commonly
assumed that grammatical gender, a lexico-syntactic property, affects the production of phrases, but not the production of single words (Schriefers et al., 2002). However, for
languages like Italian and semantic fields like animals
(which have natural gender), Vigliocco et al. (2005) have
shown that gender is also a lexico-semantic property, affecting the production of single words. In order to investigate
whether grammatical gender effects are only due to the activation of syntactic information necessary for computing
agreement, we compare errors in naming single words to
errors in producing simple noun phrases (determiner+noun;
Italian determiners are marked for gender).
If grammatical gender increases the semantic similarity
between nouns that share gender, then the errors produced
by Italian speakers should reflect not only the similarity in
meaning that is evident in the errors produced by monolingual English speakers, but also additional effects of grammatical gender (as found by Vigliocco et al., 2005). In Experiment 1 we replicate the results of Vigliocco et al.
(2005), and conduct additional analyses in order to establish
whether gender effects are still observed when multiple,
fine-grained measures of phonological similarity are also
taken into account. In Experiment 2 we investigate the behavior of bilingual speakers to see if grammatical gender in
their first language affects performance in their second language; whether the effect is restricted to their first language

1188

tal blocks were presented. Participants pressed a key to begin each block, and then the 10 items in the block appeared
in sequence at randomly-selected positions on the screen,
with time parameters as determined in the practice session.

only; or whether learning a second language without formal
gender has consequences for first-language processing.

Experiment 1: Monolingual error induction

Results

Method
Participants Twenty-six native English speakers were recruited through the UCL psychology subject pool, and were
paid at a rate of £6/hour. Twenty-five native Italian speakers
(psychology students at the Università degli Studi di Trieste,
Italy) also participated and were paid at a rate of €9/hour or
received course credit. No English participants reported
moderate or higher competence in any gendered language;
no Italian participants reported moderate or higher competence in any second language.
Materials and design The set of items consisted of pictures
depicting common land animals. They were the same items
used for Experiment 2 in Vigliocco et al. (2005): pictures of
27 animals (11 marked feminine in Italian; 16 masculine).
Forty-one blocks of ten pictures were created by randomly selecting pictures, observing the following constraints: first, a picture appeared no more than once within a
block, and second, a picture never appeared as the last item
in one block and the first item in the next. Each picture appeared either 15 or 16 times in each condition and each participant saw a different random order of blocks for each part
of a session.
Procedure Participants were told that they were taking part
in a study of speech patterns under time pressure, and that
they would be asked to name pictures depicting animals as
they appeared on screen. The experiment was carried out in
two parts: in one part participants were asked to name the
pictures using only a single word, while in the other part
they were asked to produce noun phrases consisting of a
definite article and noun.
Speakers were asked to attempt to keep up with the rate of
presentation, i.e. naming pictures as they appeared, rather
than retaining them in memory, skipping items if necessary
to recover from difficulty. All spoken responses were digitally recorded and later transcribed and scored.
The experiment began with an untimed name agreement
phase, in which each picture was presented, and participants
were asked to name them without time pressure. After this,
participants performed a set of practice blocks. These practice blocks were intended not only to familiarize participants
with the task, but also to allow the experimenter to adjust
the rate of presentation according to each participant’s performance. After each block of 10 pictures, the experimenter
altered the rate of presentation in order to make the task
difficult but manageable for each speaker. Final presentation
rates ranged between 400 and 900 ms display time for English (average=633ms) and between 500 and 1200 ms for
Italian (average=688ms).
Once the practice session was completed, the experimen-

The data were transcribed and each response was scored as
belonging to one of the following categories: correct: the
intended noun was produced in its entirety (85.0% of all
responses); different label: participant consistently produced
a different noun than intended by the experimenters, but
which could be considered an acceptable response (4.3%);
lexical error: a label was produced that did not qualify as
correct or a different label (2.7%); omission: no response
was made for a given picture (6.5%); self-correction: participant started producing an incorrect word, but changed
their response to a different word before it was complete
(0.4%). These were treated as lexical errors if the incorrect
word was produced completely before the correction was
made; miscellanea: dysfluencies, incomplete/inaudible responses, etc. (1.1%). Only responses classified as lexical
errors were included in the analyses reported below.
The likelihood of substituting one word with another is
increased if target and intruder share phonological, in addition to semantic, similarity (the mixed error effect; Dell &
Reich, 1981). It is important to exclude such errors from the
data set, because there are clear phonological correlates of
grammatical gender in Italian. In order to eliminate the confounding effect of phonological similarity, we carried out
the following procedure. First, we phonologically transcribed all the animal nouns using standard British English
and standard Italian pronunciations. We then excluded all
target-intruder pairs that shared more than 33% of their
phonemes in the same position (onset, nucleus, coda of the
first syllable, middle syllable(s), and the final syllable). This
was also done individually for participants with accents that
differed from the standard. After applying these procedures,
there remained 393 English errors and 344 Italian errors.
These errors can be considered semantic, rather than mixed.
For each participant and item we calculated the proportion
of these errors for which the target and the intruder shared
Italian gender.1 Table 1 presents the average proportion of
target-error pairs sharing gender in the two languages and
response types.
Table 1: Mean proportion of gender-preserving errors by
monolingual English and Italian speakers in single word and
noun phrase naming conditions (95% CI in brackets).
Language
English
Italian
1

Single word
.32 (.21-.44)
.66 (.55-.78)

Noun phrase
.38 (.26-.49)
.61 (.49-.73)

1189

English words were assigned gender based on their translationequivalent words in Italian. Because English does not have grammatical gender, the English “gender preservation rate” indicates
the rate of gender preservation that would be expected in Italian if
gender had no language-specific effects on the resulting errors.

We performed 2 x 2 ANOVAs with participants (F1) and
items (F2) as random factors, investigating the effects of
language (English, Italian—between subjects, within items)
and response type (single word, noun phrase—within subjects and items). There was a significant main effect of language in both analyses (F1(1, 45)=19.009, p<.001,
MSe=.065; F2(1,19)=13.300, p<.01, MSe=.057), with Italian
errors sharing gender more often than English errors (Mdifference=.28, 95% CI=.13). There was no main effect of response
type or interaction. These results show that grammatical
gender affects the perceived semantic similarity between
different animals for Italian speakers as compared to English speakers (replicating Vigliocco et al., 2005).
However, it is possible that the selection of an arbitrary
criterion of phonological similarity, based only on shared
segments all treated equally, may not rule out all aspects of
phonological similarity that are correlated with shared gender among the items tested. Therefore we conducted an additional analysis, using multiple regression to consider
whether gender actually affects the errors produced by Italian speakers once a number of potential confounding phonological factors are taken into account. Because the vast majority of lexical errors were also from within the response
set, we began by creating a confusion matrix by pairing all
targets with all possible errors, assigning a value of 1 for
target-error pairs that were observed in the dataset (120 distinct target-error pairings), and 0 otherwise. The Italian errors treated in this manner served as the dependent variable
in this analysis.
The regression included three steps. In the first step, the
presence or absence of errors in the English dataset (121
observed target-error pairings) was used to predict presence
or absence of errors in Italian. This takes into account those
aspects of similarity among animals that are common between English and Italian, such as conceptual similarity and
visual similarity among the pictures used in the experiment.
The residuals from this model were then passed to a second
step: a variety of predictors related to phonological similarity in Italian. These included whether the two words shared
the same number of syllables, stress pattern, onset phoneme,
final phoneme, and also the continuous measure of form
similarity described above (% of phonemes shared in the
same position between target and error). Finally, the residuals of this second step were passed to a final step, in which
only shared grammatical gender was used as a predictor.
Taking such an approach, common variance due to correlations between gender and morphophonological similarity,
semantic similarity or visual similarity has been separated
out in the initial steps. Therefore, if gender remains a significant predictor in the final step, it can be said that gender
per se is predicting the presence of errors.
Unsurprisingly, the presence or absence of errors in English was a strong predictor of Italian errors; rpartial = .336, t =
9.409, p < .001. In the second step, only the fine measure of
phonological similarity (% segments shared by position)

was a significant predictor; rpartial = .107, t = 2.843, p = .005
(all other form predictors p > .3). Crucially, in the final step
gender remained a significant predictor of errors; rpartial =
.137, t = 3.645, p < .001 (final model R2 = .157). This
shows that the gender effect observed in the ANOVA is not
simply a product of the arbitrary cutoff at which errors were
decided to be "phonologically similar".

Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrates that grammatical gender affects
perceived semantic similarity in Italian as compared to English (a language with no formal gender), replicating the results in Vigliocco et al. (2005). The monolingual Italian
speakers’ pattern of errors differed from that of the monolingual English speakers: a significantly higher proportion
of gender-preserving errors even after semantic and phonological correlates of gender were factored out. Grammatical
gender, essentially a lexico-syntactic property, appears to
have acquired semantic status in Italian (at least for words
referring to animals); words’ meanings are affected by their
grammatical specification (masculine vs. feminine).
One result still requires explanation: the proportion of
gender-preserving errors in Italian was the same for single
words and noun phrases, in contrast to previous work (e.g.
Paganelli et al., 2003) where higher gender preservation
rates in Italian have been reported for noun phrase production. According to one account (e.g., Costa & Caramazza,
2002), grammatical gender effects in noun phrase production are due to determiner selection which occurs during the
phonological encoding of the noun phrase in languages like
Italian. Because determiner selection occurs so late it has
little effect on lemma selection. Alternatively, gender preservation effects would arise as a result of monitoring at the
morphophonological level: lemmas competing for selection
also activate syntactic frames specified for gender (see Vigliocco et al., 2004). When competition is high, a frame
might be selected before a lemma is selected. Gender mismatch between frame and lemma would then be more easily
detected by a monitoring system. In the present experiment,
the high level of competition among same-gender lemmas
(being more semantically similar because of shared gender)
may cause fewer ill-formed syntactic frames to be generated
in the first place. At any rate, resolving this issue is beyond
the scope of the present paper and it does not affect the main
purpose of this data set, which is to serve as a baseline for
bilingual speakers.
This leads to the main question addressed in this paper:
the extent to which bilingual speakers adapt to thinking for
speaking appropriate for their second language and the extent to which the representations of their mother tongue are
affected by learning a second language. This is addressed in
Experiment 2, in which bilingual speakers are asked to
name pictures in Italian and in English.

1190

Experiment 2: Bilingual error induction
Method
Participants Twenty-nine native Italian speakers, all highly
proficient in English, were recruited for the experiment. All
had learnt English after the age of 6, had an average of 7.4
years of formal instruction in English, and all had been resident in the UK for at least 9 months prior to the time of testing (mean length of stay in the UK = 4.6 years). Volunteers
were paid at a rate of £12/hour for their participation.
Materials, design and procedure These were the same as
those in Experiment 1, with the following exceptions. Bilingual speakers did the same experiment in English and Italian
(on different days). The order of the two language sessions
was counterbalanced across participants to avoid any order
effects. The order of the single word and the noun phrase
conditions was also counterbalanced across participants.

Results
The data were recorded and transcribed as before. Correct
responses made up 86.6% of all responses; different label,
3.9%; lexical error, 2.5%; omission, 7.0%; self-correction,
0.6% and miscellanea, 1.2%. Once again, in order to make
possible the comparison between English and Italian, English words were assigned the gender that translation equivalent items have in Italian. The proportion of genderpreserving lexical errors as a function of language and response type appears in Table 2.

same gender intruders when they were carrying out the task
in Italian than the same task in English.
As in Experiment 1, we explored this grammatical gender
effect with regression analyses. We tested the Italian bilingual errors using the English bilingual errors as a predictor
in the first step. Italian form similarity was also included as
before, and gender in a final step. Errors in English were a
strong predictor in the first step (rpartial = .388, t = 11.106, p
< .001). In the second step, fine-grained phonological similarity was the only form-based predictor to reach significance (rpartial = .108 = 2.857, p = .004). Gender was also a
significant predictor in the final step (rpartial = .399, t = 3.778,
p < .001; combined model R2 = .198), showing that bilingual
speakers' errors preserved grammatical gender when they
were responding in Italian.
Finally, to determine the extent to which the performance
of the bilingual speakers was equivalent to that of the monolingual speakers, we carried out two further sets of
ANOVAs assessing the effects of language (bilingual and
monolingual—between participants but within items) and
response type (single word and noun phrase—within participants and items) for each of the two languages. None of
the main effects or interactions reached significance in these
analyses (also largely confirmed by regression analyses),
indicating that bilingual speakers’ semantic representations
for these items do not differ from those of monolingual
speakers, depending on the language in which the task is
carried out.

Discussion
Experiment 2 showed that bilingual speakers made more
same-gender errors in Italian than for the same items in
English. Moreover, we did not find any significant difference between the bilingual and the monolingual populations. We interpret these results as evidence for the fact that
the bilingual speakers in these studies demonstrate ‘thinking
for speaking’ behavior that is appropriate for each of their
languages. In other words, there is intra-speaker linguistic
relativity and the behavior of bilingual speakers in a given
language is predicted by the behavior of monolingual
speakers.
Evidence for linguistic relativity based on comparisons of
monolingual speakers has clearly different consequences for
claims of linguistic determinism than evidence for linguistic
relativity with bilingual speakers. In the monolingual literature, differences between linguistic groups on a specific
semantic/conceptual variable have been interpreted as indicating the potentially central role language has on shaping
cognition. Evidence for linguistic relativity within the same
speaker (the bilingual individual) can only have the reverse
interpretation: if proficient bilinguals who acquired their
second language after their first show evidence of adaptation to monolingual norms for their second language, their
first language has a very limited effect, an effect on ‘thinking for speaking’ just for that language.

Table 2: Mean proportion of gender-preserving errors by
bilingual speakers in English and Italian, in single word and
phrase naming conditions (95% CI in brackets).
Language
English
Italian

Single word
.35 (.22-.49)
.59 (.47-.71)

Noun phrase
.35 (.22-.47)
.62 (.48-.77)

We analyzed all lexical errors in the same manner as in
Experiment 1, including the exclusion of mixed errors. We
also excluded errors from both languages in which the target
and the translation of the error shared 50% or more of their
phonemes in the same serial order, disregarding syllable
boundaries and structure.
After mixed errors had been excluded, there remained 347
Italian errors and 283 English errors, which we analyzed in
the same manner as in Experiment 1. Only participants who
contributed observations to both conditions in both languages were included in the analyses. The analyses yielded
the same pattern of results as for the monolingual speakers:
a significant main effect of language (F1(1,23)=13.292,
p<.001, MSe=.070; F2(1,20)=7.499, p<.05, MSe=.042), with
more gender-preserving errors in Italian than in English
(Mdifference=.25, 95% CI=.14). There was no main effect of
response type or interaction (all Fs<1). Bilingual speakers in
this experiment were significantly more likely to produce
1191

General Discussion

References

Our aim has been to determine to what extent proficient
bilingual speakers adapt to ‘thinking for speaking’ that is
appropriate for their second language or not and to what
extent learning a second language affects ‘thinking for
speaking’ in the first. The results obtained show that bilingual L1 Italian-L2 English speakers’ performance was significantly different in each of their languages, thus demonstrating relativity in their ‘thinking for speaking’. Moreover,
we did not find any evidence of transfer from L1: there was
no significant difference between the monolingual and the
bilingual English data. Finally, learning a second language
without grammatical gender does not seem to affect semantic representations in the gendered first language, since there
was no significant difference between the monolingual Italian and bilingual Italian data.
Evidence of transfer from one’s native/most proficient
language into a second language has been interpreted as
evidence for the pervasive effect of language on cognition,
especially when highly proficient bilinguals are involved
(Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips, 2003). We found no evidence of transfer from Italian into English of the semantic
effects of gender and interpret this lack of transfer as evidence for the constrained role grammatical gender has on
bilingual cognition. If bilingual speakers are able to adapt to
‘thinking for speaking’ that is appropriate for a second language, even when they are not as proficient in their second
language as in their first, this constitutes evidence for a limited cognitive effect of the particular variable both in the
first and the second language.
Bilingualism and multilingualism are the norm rather than
the exception around the world (Harris & McGhee Nelson,
1992). Despite this, research on language-specific effects on
cognition has focused on monolingual populations, not addressing how two or more different ways of talking about
the world are accommodated within a single mind/brain.
Such research is essential not only in order to understand the
cognitive consequences of bilingualism but also in order to
determine the extent of the effects of language on cognition.
One test of the pervasiveness of language-specific effects on
cognition is its effect on the representations of a second language. The present paper addressed this question and concluded negatively, at least for the specific phenomenon studied. These results also make it highly unlikely that Italian
grammatical gender has an effect on the non-linguistic, conceptual representations of bilingual speakers. Future investigation will need to address a wider variety of linguistic phenomena in order to determine the nature of the link between
linguistic variability and bilingual cognition.

Acknowledgments

Boroditsky, L. Schmidt, L.A., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex, syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow
(Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the study of language
and thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Costa, A. & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of noun
phrases in English and Spanish: Implications for the scope of
phonological encoding during speech production. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 153-177.
Dell, G.S., & Reich, P.A. (1981). Stages in sentence production: An analysis of speech error data. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 611-629.
Garrett, M. F. (1984). The organization of processing structure
for language production: Application to aphasic speech. In
D. Caplan, A. R. Lecours and A. Smith (Eds.), Biological
perspectives on language. Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Gennari, S.P., Sloman, S., Malt, B., & Fitch, T. (2002). Motion
events in language and cognition. Cognition, 83, 49-79.
Harris, R.J. & McGhee Nelson, E.M. (1992). Bilingualism: Not
the exception any more. In R.J. Harris (Ed.), Cognitive processing in bilinguals. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Imai, M. & Gentner, D. (1997). A crosslinguistic study of early
word meaning: Universal ontology and linguistic influence.
Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Levinson, S. C. (1997). From outer to inner space: linguistic
categories and non-linguistic thinking. In J. Nuyts &
E.Pederson (Eds.), Language and Conceptualization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Li, P. & Gleitman, L.R. (2002). Turning the tables: Language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83, 265-294.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Grammatical categories and cognition: A
case study of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Paganelli, F., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Siri, S. & Cappa, S.
(2003). An investigation of semantic errors in unimpaired
and Alzheimer’s speakers of Italian. Cortex, 39, 419-439.
Sera, M., Elieff, C., Forbes, J., Burch, M.C., Rodriguez, W.,
Dubois, D.P. (2002). When language affects cognition and
when it does not: An analysis of grammatical gender and
classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
131, 377-397.
Slobin, D.I. (1996). From "thought and language" to "thinking
for speaking". In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D., Indefrey, P., Levelt, W., & Hellwig,
F. (2004). Role of grammatical gender and semantics in
German word production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 483-497.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Paganelli, F. & Dworzynski, K.
(2005). Grammatical gender effects on cognition: Implications for language learning and language use. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 501-520.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, Thought, and Reality: selected
writing of Benjamin Lee Whorf, ed. J.B. Carroll. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council of Great Britain (Grants RES000230038 to
G. Vigliocco and RES620286001: Deafness, Cognition and
Language Research Centre).

1192

