UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Where Syllogistic Reasoning Happens: An Argument for the Extended Mind Hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5225t3j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Theiner, Georg

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Where Syllogistic Reasoning Happens
An Argument for the Extended Mind Hypothesis
Georg Theiner (gtheiner@indiana.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 1033 E. Third St.
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

constitutes a single, extended cognitive system is
determined by the level of duration, reliability, and
functional integration of the coupling between biological
on-board and environmental off-board resources assembled
for the performance of specific cognitive tasks (Wilson &
Clark, forthcoming). In return, critics such as Adams and
Aizawa (forthcoming) have branded the “couplingconstitution fallacy” as “the most common mistake
extended mind theorists make” (p.2) when they infer, on the
basis of showing that an external resource is coupled in
some principled fashion to a cognitive agent, that this
resource constitutes a mereological part of the agent’s
cognitive apparatus. Contested by their criticism is a tacit
premise which would close the suggested logical gap:

Abstract
Does cognition sometimes literally extend into the extraorganismic environment (Clark, 2003), or is it always
“merely” environmentally embedded (Rupert, 2004)?
Underlying this current border dispute is the question about
how to individuate cognitive processes on principled grounds.
Based on recent evidence about the active role of
representation selection and construction in learning how to
reason (Stenning, 2002), I raise the question: what makes two
distinct, modality-specific pen-and-paper manipulations of
external representations – diagrams versus sentences –
cognitive processes of the same kind, e.g. episodes of
syllogistic reasoning? In response, I defend a “division of
labor” hypothesis, according to which external representations
are dependent on perceptually grounded neural
representations and mechanisms to guide our behavior; these
internal mechanisms, however, are dependent on external
representations to have their syllogistic content fixed. Only
their joint contributions qualify the extended computational
process as an episode of syllogistic reasoning in good
standing.

The A-B PRINCIPLE: In certain cases where an
understanding of A’s relation to B is significantly relevant
to our understanding of A, we should posit a single system,
A-B, as a single unit of study1.

Keywords: Philosophy of Psychology; Extended Mind
Hypothesis; Situated Cognition; Diagrammatic Reasoning

Extended or Merely Embedded Cognition?
In recent years, the development and use of epistemic
artifacts – tools for thinking – have come to play a central
role in the evolutionary and psychological explanation of
human intellectual prowess. We deploy them to access new
kinds of information (e.g. compass, sextant); to off-load, rerepresent, and return information (e.g. pen and paper,
writing systems); and to introduce new active sources of
information-processing (e.g. abacus, pocket calculator,
neural implants). They allow us to accomplish cognitive
tasks that would otherwise remain beyond the ken of our
“naked” biological brains.
How should we characterize these intriguing capacityenhancing interactions? Proponents of the Extended Mind
Hypothesis (EMH) view them as episodes of cognitive
processing which literally stretch beyond the head to include
elements of the organism’s local environment among its
proper parts (Clark & Chalmers, 1998; Clark, 2003; Wilson
& Clark forthcoming). From the perspective of a more
conservative competitor, which Rupert (2004) calls the
Hypothesis of Embedded Cognition (HEMC), cognitive
processes are safely encased within the brain, but sometimes
“depend very heavily, in hitherto unexpected ways, on
organismically external props and devices” (p. 393).
Underlying this border dispute is a question about how to
individuate cognitive systems. According to EMH, what

1551

As a theoretical hypothesis in cognitive science, EMH
should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis in terms of its
empirical and methodological credentials. Consequently, if
we can enumerate conditions under which psychologists are
profitably committed to specific applications of the A-B
Principle for demarcating the boundaries of a cognitive
system, we have good reasons to prefer EMH over HEMC
as a theoretical gloss of what’s going on in these cases. In
this paper, my defense of the A-B Principle within the
psychology of deductive reasoning is predicated on showing
two things: first, that it is befitting to characterize pen-andpaper performances of syllogistic problem-solving as
products of a single hybrid computational system realized
by parts of the brain, body, and elements of the locally
scaffolded environment; second, which insights we can only
obtain by treating the extended system as a single cognitive
system.

The Argument from Modality
The dominant naturalist approaches to the psychology of
so-called “mental” (i.e. in-the-head) syllogistic reasoning
exhibit various reflexes of the traditional belief that logical
competence is a fixed part of human nature. For instance, it
is widely assumed that human subjects are essentially
homogeneous in what kind of internal representation system
they use; that the main theoretical role of external
1

A stronger, unrestricted version of this principle is discussed and
rightly criticized by Rupert (2004).

formalisms is to analyze these already pre-established
systems; and that learning how to reason is a matter of
tapping into a universal, biologically predisposed inferential
mechanism. These fundamental assumptions are shared by
otherwise competing theories of the cognitive architecture
supposed to underlie our basic inferential capacities, such as
Mental Models (Johnson-Laird 1983), Mental Logics (Rips
1994), Euler Circles (Stenning & Oberlander 1995), or the
innate modules of evolutionary psychology (Cosmides
1989). Surprisingly little attention has been paid to how
subjects actually go about finding and using external
representations to solve syllogistic problems, and individual
differences in their ability to employ sentential versus
diagrammatic modalities.
In Seeing Reason, Stenning (2002) has outlined an
alternative constructivist approach that highlights the active
roles of representation selection and meta-representational
knowledge in learning how to reason, as well as the
cognitive re-organization that occurs within a learner upon
exposure to a specific formalism. His findings suggest that
“[…] there is more than one mental representational
approach to syllogisms" (p.128), and that the received
assumption of homogeneity is no more warranted in the
psychology of internal representations than it is in logic,
which recognizes a wide variety of external representation
systems. Instead, Stenning advocates the need for a
comparative theory of the cognitive effects of
representational modalities.
As Stenning points out (p.17f), it is clear that such a
theory logically requires that there is some relation of
invariance under which the compared cognitive processes
are semantically equivalent, in the sense that they all
involve the representation of the same logical properties and
relations characterizing the syllogistic target domain. Within
naturalist frameworks, the presumed semantic invariance of
variegated acts of cognition can be explained in terms of a
universal class of “distilled” syllogistic representations in
the brain on which the dedicated inferential processor gets
to operate after all extraneous, modality-specific features of
external information displays have been stripped away. But
if there is no single, universal representational mechanism
in the brain which underlies our manifold attempts to solve
syllogisms, as Stenning’s research indicates, what, if
anything, about our cognitive machinery explains why they
are all instances of syllogistic reasoning? A standardized
presentation of this meta-theoretical “problem of modality”
will facilitate our subsequent discussion.
Suppose that HOLIST and SERIALIST2 belong to
different student populations whose modality preferences
systematically vary with respect to their background skills
and cognitive styles. HOLIST gets taught to use Euler
Circles (EC) which suit her reasoning style, while

SERIALIST gets taught to use Natural Deduction3 (ND)
which suits her distinct style. When they are given
syllogisms (in English) to solve using pen and paper,
HOLIST deploys a modality-specific computational
mechanism M1 which operates on EC, utilizing a class IR1
of internal representations; SERIALIST deploys a different
modality-specific computational mechanism M2 which
operates on ND, utilizing a distinct class IR2 of internal
representations. M1 is an agglomerative mechanism which
is differentially sensitive to topological and quasimechanical features of EC, but incapable of processing
information presented in ND. Likewise, M2 is a discursive
mechanism which is differentially sensitive to the
syntactically mediated concatenative features of ND, but
incapable of processing information presented in EC. What
makes our supposition that SERIALIST and HOLIST both
engage in syllogistic reasoning true?
Providing an affirmative solution to our problem of
modality suggests the following (compressed) argument for
EMH:
1.

SERIALIST and HOLIST both engage in syllogistic
reasoning.
2. That SERIALIST and HOLIST both engage in
syllogistic reasoning is best explained by the fact that
they manipulate mental representations which have the
same syllogistic content.
3. The only relevantly available representations are {IR1,
EC} for HOLIST, and {IR2, ND} for SERIALIST.
4. Tokens of IR1 and IR2 are semantically type-distinct
when considered in isolation.
Therefore, the mental representations which have the same
syllogistic content are external tokens of EC and ND4.
I shall take our supposition in premise (1) at face value,
and suggest granting premise (3) at least for the sake of the
argument. The remainder of this paper is dedicated to a
defense of the critical premises (2) and (4).

On the Domain-Identity of Cognitive Processes
Premise (2) calls upon the content of mental representations
to explain the domain-identity of cognitive processes. It is
based on the principle that the domain D of a cognitive
process carried out by some psychological mechanism M is
determined by the informational content of the mental
representations on which M operates. A process of
syllogistic reasoning must thus involve the execution of a
mechanism operating on mental representations capable of
tracking the relation of logical consequence for a welldefined sub-domain of monadic first-order logic.
The best defense of this principle is to consider an
alternative behavioral criterion based purely on input-output
equivalence. Suppose we held that two cognitive processes

2

See Pask (1975). Monaghan and Stenning (1998) report strikingly
symmetrical aptitude-by-treatment interactions between HOLISTS
and SERIALISTS in their assessment of teaching/learningeffectiveness with diagrammatic versus sentential methods; see
also Monaghan et al. (1999).

1552

3

Stenning and Yule (1997) present a case-based algorithm for
syllogistic reasoning which uses only the sentential fragment of the
natural deduction calculus.
4
For the time they are actually utilized to solve a syllogistic task.

are domain-identical just in case they both map the same
classes of sensory inputs on the same classes of behavioral
outputs. Such a criterion requires that we be able to define
the relevant classes of inputs and outputs on logically
independent grounds without referring to mental
representations. One way this could in principle be done is
by using the Ramsey-Carnap-Lewis method (Lewis, 1972)
for defining theoretical terms. It employs a meta-language
in which classes of external stimuli and behavioral
responses are treated as observationally primitive, and
mental states are interdefined functionally as states that
causally interact with each other and sensory stimuli to
produce observable behavior. To see whether this
behavioral criterion defeats the present argument for EMH,
let us reflect on what the relevant “inputs” and “outputs”
would be.
According to a first proposal, we take the class of
syllogisms in English as our inputs, and either ‘NVC’5, or
‘VC’ plus conclusions in English, as our outputs. If M1 and
M2 are input-output equivalent in this sense, the behavioral
criterion does indeed entail that HOLIST and SERIALIST
are both reasoning syllogistically, but also validates EMH
by definition. For both subjects, the hypothesized subprocesses of forward-translating the input into external
formalisms, their manipulation, and the backwardstranslation play an integral causal role in computing the
overall input-to-output mappings. But the behavioral
criterion decrees under which conditions two causal
processes are domain-identical qua being cognitive. Hence
any internal or external intermediary states that are causally
relevant parts of the mechanism deployed to achieve the
desired mappings would appear as Ramseyfied theoretical
terms in our psychological theory, and therefore be part of
the cognitive process in question.
It is presumably in recognition of this very consequence
that critics of EMH, in particular Adams and Aizawa
(2001), have rejected the largely behavioral criterion of the
cognitive at play in the Parity Principle invoked by Clark
and Chalmers (1998). Meant to offset our vernacular
prejudice in favor of the skull as a theoretically relevant
boundary to delimitate cognitive processes, Parity says that
if, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions as
a process which, were it to go on in the brain, we would
accept as part of the cognitive process, then that part of the
world is (for that time) part of the cognitive process. Far
from implying any deep functional similarity between inner
and outer processes, Parity is equally compatible with their
often disparate, but complementary and synergetic
contributions in producing behavioral outputs. It only
requires that the overall behavioral profile of an extended
cognitive system displays enough of the central features and
dynamics of brain-bound cognitive systems (Clark 2003;
2005). A purely behavioral criterion for the domain-identity
of cognitive processes should thus be fairly unattractive for
the HEMC-theorist on independent grounds.
5

‘VC’: ‘valid conclusion’, ‘NVC’: ‘no valid conclusion’.

1553

As a second proposal, the HEMC-theorist might suggest
to break down the overall input-output mapping into a series
of simpler mappings6, but insist that during each step,
certain inputs are “caught” by the brain, cognized only in
the brain, and then “tossed” back to paper as outputs. If
taken literally, this catch-and-toss-redescription clearly does
not help to solve our current predicament. By hypothesis,
M2 is not differentially sensitive to graphical features of
EC, hence M2 could not compute any of the required
mappings after translation; mutatis mutandis for M1. It
follows that HOLIST and SERIALIST would not engage in
cognitive processes of the same domain.
This problem can be remedied by defining semantically
relevant equivalence classes between specific operations
afforded by EC and ND. For instance, the case-based
method of ND presented by Stenning and Yule (1997) is apt
to reveal representational homologies between sentential
and diagrammatic methods in their ability to track critical
individuals, i.e. individuals which are fully determinate with
regard to all three properties. This is an important feature to
share, because any syllogistically valid inference can be
captured by a single critical individual.
However, the resulting criterion of domain-identity would
thus be representational and not behavioral, as we can see
from applying Marr’s (1982) three-level computationalist
framework for understanding cognition. The main goal of a
level-1 analysis of the behavioral task to be performed is to
pin down a precise input-output function. Giving a
computational specification of an external representation
system rather corresponds to a level-2 analysis, because it
provides explicit schemes for representing syllogistic inputs
and outputs, together with a sequence of mechanical steps to
carry out the relevant subtasks. But in Marr’s framework,
level-2 explanations of information-processing systems
traffic in mental representations. Hence if we rely on level-2
analyses of the beyond-the-head parts of M1 and M2 to
ground their semantic domain-identity, the second proposal
also ends up supporting EMH. I conclude that the HEMCtheorist is well-advised to accept some stronger
representational criterion of cognitive domain-identity,
similar to the one proposed in premise (2).

Division of Labor among Inner and Outer
When mental representations are posited as theoretical
entities in psychological explanations of behavior, they are
expected to do double-duty: first, to be semantically
evaluable, i.e. to serve as stand-ins which are about or refer
to certain things; second, to play a causal role in the
determination of behavior. These two requirements
constrain the kinds of states apt to play the role of mental
representations. Considering aboutness as a true mark of the
6

For the case of HOLIST, this decomposition might look like this:
input_1 = class of syllogisms in English, output_1 = two separate
premise diagrams in EC; input _2 = two separate premise diagrams
in EC, output_2 = agglomerated premise diagram in EC; input _3
= combined premise diagram in EC, output_3 = ‘NVC’, or ‘VC’
plus conclusion in English.

mental, some critics of EMH have argued that external
representations are never cognitive because their semantic
content is always merely derived from the representational
properties of neurally realized mental states (Adams &
Aizawa, 2001). Challenging this intuition, I maintain that
neither internal nor external resources by themselves have
the right functional profile to satisfy both requirements at
once. External representations are dependent on perceptualmotor and neural mechanisms to guide our behavior. But as
I suggest in premise (4), these internal mechanisms are
dependent on external representations to have their
syllogistic content fixed. Only their joint contributions
qualify the extended causal process as an episode of
syllogistic reasoning; hence the A-B Principle applies.
I shall offer two sources of evidence in support of my
division-of-labor hypothesis: for the computational part, I
highlight some features of EC as a graphical algorithm; for
the cognitive part, I then take a look at some of the leading
theories of mental content-determination.
Syllogistic in-the-head reasoning is hard because of the
high task-demands it places on working memory. It requires
the temporary binding of properties into specifications of
individuals, grouping these individuals into models, and
often comparing several alternative models. These bindings
have to be effected anew for each task, without reliance on
previously established bindings stored in long-term
memory. The direct semantic interpretability of spatial
relations in EC dovetails nicely with the problem-solving
capacities of HOLIST’s resource-limited brain to facilitate
the processibility of syllogistic inferences (Stenning &
Oberlander, 1995).
First, taking spatial containment of a point in a curve to
denote set-membership, the topology of EC enforce a fully
determinate representation of an individual’s properties,
since every point in a plane is either inside or outside any
closed curve. Assigning mnemonic linguistic tags to
indicate that distinct circles denote distinct properties, EC
provide perceptually stable representations of the required
bindings which are easy to attend to. Assuming that all
closed curves are continuous and refer uniquely to
properties, EC are self-consistent insofar no single diagram
can represent an inconsistent set of propositions.
Second, to distinguish individuals that must exist from
those that only may exist, HOLIST uses the cross-notation
as an “abstraction trick” to represent only minimal models
of each premise. To combine two premise diagrams,
HOLIST registers the B-circles, and chooses the
arrangement between A- and C-circles which creates the
most subregions. If a cross-marked region is bisected during
this agglomeration, it is excised. A persisting cross the final
diagram indicates a valid inference. Since we further know
that syllogistic logic is case-identifiable in the sense that
there is only a single critical individual (i.e. a unique
minimal model) on which any valid syllogistic inference
depends, EC are well-suited to make this meta-logical
property of syllogisms particularly transparent to a HOLIST
learner.

1554

Third, by allowing the brain to treat circles as “hoops”
and crosses as “nails”, EC acts as a mechanical device that
mirrors logical constraints imposed by the premises. For
instance, if a nail prevents the A- and C-circles from being
pulled apart, a positive conclusion follows; if a nail prevents
a complete alignment, a negative conclusion can be inferred.
HOLIST can thus bring her prior mechanical knowledge to
bear on syllogistic tasks. Fourth, comparing the meta-logical
properties of EC and ND, we can show that they are both
sound and complete as syllogistic proof procedures, and
that there are close representational homologies between the
modality-specific operations afforded by the two formalisms
(Stenning & Yule, 1997).
In sum, EC are well-designed epistemic tools because
their geometrical and mechanical properties effectively
mirror the logical constraints of the syllogistic domain.
They act as external computational resources which allow
HOLIST's brain to accomplish syllogistic feats by
performing much simpler visuo-spatial tasks. But the
semantic content of the cognitive processes underpinning
these visuo-spatial tasks is not inherently syllogistic in
nature, as I shall now argue. Considered in the context of
our argument, this means that the only relevantly available
mental representations with intrinsic syllogistic content
must be EC, even though they are located outside the
organism. As a case in point, let us consider the crossmarked region in a final EC-diagram as a putative mental
representation ER of the unique minimal model (UMM)
capturing a syllogistically valid inference.
According to Dretske’s (1988) indicator account of
mental content, ER represents UMM because it has an
acquired causal role within the behavioral economy of the
larger computational system (e.g. the presence of ER leads
HOLIST to emit ‘VC’, its absence leads to an ‘NVC’response), and it acquired that function because it reliably
indicated the presence of UMM. According to a modified7
teleo-semantic account (Millikan, 1984; Papineau, 1987),
ER represents UMM since EC have been culturally selected
by HOLISTS as their preferred syllogistic representationproducing device because ER indicates UMM. According to
Cummins’ (1996) structuralist account, ER represents
UMM because it structurally mirrors the three-property
specification of UMM, and this isomorphism is exploited
for behavioral control.
EC bring about their desired behavioral effects only
relative to a fixed, ecologically normal backdrop which
includes an organism’s on-board capacities to construct and
manipulate external symbols. But this kind of causal
context-dependence is in fact common to many familiar
examples of “encodings”. It equally applies to neural
structures prescribing bodily motions, genes affecting
developmental outcomes, or even pieces of C++ code
controlling traffic lights. Whenever we single out specific
parts of an extended process as the relevant causal
difference-makers coding for a certain outcome of that
7

The modification concerns the requirement that EC have been
selected as a result of cultural instead of biological evolution.

process, we implicitly assume (and/or ensure) that the
requisite reading environment for the code is in fact in
place, such that ceteris are indeed paribus (Clark, 1998).
This does not make inner representations simple
duplicates of outer representations, though. Stenning (2002)
notes that “at the very least one would expect external
representations to obviate the need for some internal
memory representations, replacing them by perceptualmotor processes with their own ephemeral representations”
(p.124). Following Barsalou (1999), I take the relevant inner
vehicles to be perceptually grounded working memory
representations that reflect the brain’s previous sensory and
proprioceptive experience of interacting with external
objects. Generated to specify efficient behavioral routines
for an embodied agent’s pen-and-paper manipulations, the
neural second-order representations are perceptually finetuned to various modality-specific aspects of external firstorder representations which do not have any syllogistic
significance at all. According to my conjecture, these inner
second-order representations are “action-oriented” (Clark,
1997) representations which depict outer first-order
representations partly in terms of typical manipulations to
be performed on these outer representations.
For instance, the precise shape, distance and positional
placement of an A-circle vis-à-vis some B-circle on paper is
logically insignificant as long as (say) A is properly
contained in B. However, the neural representation of their
exact spatial configuration might determine whether it is
easier for a subject to “move” the first premise diagram on
the second diagram when she redraws their compounded
diagram, or vice versa. In the course of reasoning, M1
deploys neural tokens representing “PIN-PREVENTSSMALLER-RIGHT-HOOP-FROM-BEINGHORIZONTALLY-PULLED-APART-FROMUNDERLYING-BIGGER-LEFT-HOOP”,
while
M2
deploys neural tokens representing “SHAPE-OFSMALLISH-B-SPACED-PRETTY-CLOSE-TO-'→'-

B

MATCHES-SHAPE-OF-MUCH-BIGGER- -IN-LINEBELOW”. The domain-generality of these perceptually
grounded inner vehicles is beneficial from a computational
point of view, because subjects can partly co-opt preexisting skills when they learn how to manipulate novel
formalisms. But from a semantic perspective, it reveals our
current theoretical predicament. If we abide by our
representational criterion of individuating cognitive
processes, the within-the-head parts of M1 and M2 are two
distinct perceptual-motor processes, and not two instances
of syllogistic reasoning.
We can bring out the informational asymmetry between
ER and IR qua syllogistic representations more clearly if we
employ the notion of a proprietary domain. The proprietary
domain D of a cognitive mechanism M is the type and range
of information M has been designed8 to process, because it
8

I shall leave it open whether the design of the cognitive
mechanism is a result of biological evolution, learning, or cultural
evolution.

1555

involves the manipulation of mental representations whose
proper function is to carry information about properties of D
(Millikan, 1984). For our purposes, I shall leave it open
whether the design of the cognitive mechanism is a result of
biological evolution, learning, or cultural evolution.
According to this definition, the within-the-head part of M1
is not proprietary to the syllogistic domain. We acquire our
cognitive abilities to understand overlaps, detect bisections,
and recognize constraints on the movement of physical
objects in the context of carrying out a motley of quite
unrelated spatial and mechanical tasks. Accordingly, the
syllogistic content of IR during pen-and-paper
manipulations is only derived from the syllogistic content of
ER. Consider, once again, the same theories of mental
content to which we have appealed before. In Dretske’s
terms, IR acquired the causal role within M1 to detect
UMM only because ER reliably indicates the presence of
UMM. In teleo-semantic terms, IR has acquired the function
of representing UMM within M1 only since EC have been
culturally selected by HOLISTS as their preferred
syllogistic representation-producing device because ER
indicates UMM.
But the proprietary domain of a cognitive mechanism is
defined in terms of the intrinsic semantic content of the
mental representations on which it operates. Therefore, it is
only because we consider the within-the-head part of M1
together with its beyond-the-head part to constitute a single,
extended cognitive system, that the instantiation of M1
becomes a cognitive process of syllogistic reasoning in
good standing; the same sort of considerations apply to M2.
That HOLIST and SERIALIST both engage in syllogistic
reasoning is therefore best explained by the fact that they
manipulate
semantically
type-identical
mental
representations (EC and ND) located outside their respective
heads.

Conclusions
In this paper, I have presented an argument meant to serve
as a "tie-breaker" in favor of EMH over HEMC. It is based
on a meta-theoretical problem in the psychology of
reasoning: what makes two distinct, modality-specific penand-paper-manipulations of external representations –
diagrams versus sentences – cognitive processes of the same
kind, namely episodes of syllogistic reasoning? As a
solution, I have proposed a “division of labor” hypothesis,
according to which external representations are dependent
on perceptually grounded neural representations and
mechanisms to guide our behavior; these internal
mechanisms, however, are dependent on external
representations to have their syllogistic content fixed. Only
their joint contributions qualify the extended computational
processes as episodes of syllogistic reasoning in good
standing. I argue that my solution constitutes an explanatory
context where psychology is profitably committed to the AB Principle, because it requires that we consider organismic
and environmental resources as part of a single, extended

cognitive system. It follows that cognition sometimes
literally extends beyond the head into the world.
My analysis also sheds some new light on a residual
naturalist bias underlying the original formulation of Parity,
in which a process completely carried out in the brain is
assumed to provide our default intuition of a cognitive
process, which is then used to set a bar for any external
process that also ought to count as such. But according to
our constructivist approach, many of our most prominent
cognitive technologies start their life outside the human
brain, and only gradually disappear behind the skull as a
result of intensive learning and repeated practice. Doesn’t
my argument entail that an expert’s fully internalized
manipulations of EC aren’t episodes of syllogistic reasoning
in good standing, because the deployed neural
representations have their syllogistic content in a derived
manner only? To block that inference, we should also apply
Parity backwards: if, as we confront some task, a part of the
brain functions as a process which, were it done using
environmental resources, we would accept as part of the
cognitive process, then that part of the brain is part of the
cognitive process.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by the Robert H. Ferrell
Endowed Fellowship and a Louise McNutt Graduate
Fellowship which have been awarded to me by the College
of Arts and Sciences at Indiana University Bloomington. I
have benefited greatly from discussions with Colin Allen,
Jonathan Weinberg, Robert Goldstone, Kenneth Aizawa,
and David Landy about extending the mind.

References
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2001). The Bounds of Cognition.
Philosophical Psychology, 14, 43-64.
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (forthcoming). Defending the
Bounds of Cognition. In R. Menary (Ed.), The Extended
Mind. Aldershot, Hants: Ashgate.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1998). Twisted Tales: Causal Complexity and
Cognitive Scientific Explanation. Minds and Machines, 8,
79-99.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: minds,
technologies, and the future of human intelligence. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2005). Intrinsic content, active memory and the
extended mind. Analysis, 65, 1-11.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The Extended Mind.
Analysis, 58(1), 7-19.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: has

1556

natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies with
the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Cummins, R. (1996). Representations, targets, and
attitudes. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. I. (1988). Explaining behavior: reasons in a
world of causes. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Lewis, D. (1972). Psychophysical and Theoretical
Identifications. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 50,
249-258.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision : a computational investigation into
the human representation and processing of visual
information. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Millikan, R. G. (1984). Language, thought, and other
biological categories: new foundations for realism.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Monaghan, P., & Stenning, K. (1998). Effects of
representational modality and thinking style on learning
to solve reasoning problems. Proceedings of at the 20th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
716-21. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Maweh, NJ.
Monaghan, P., Stenning, K., Oberlander, J., & Sönstrod, C.
(1999). Integrating Psychometric and Computational
Approaches to Individual Differences in Multimodal
Reasoning. Paper presented at the 21st Annual Cognitive
Science Society Conference, 405-10. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Maweh, NJ.
Papineau, D. (1987). Reality and representation. New York:
B. Blackwell.
Pask, G. (1975). Conversation, cognition and learning: a
cybernetic theory and methodology. Amsterdam; New
York: Elsevier.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof: deductive
reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Rupert, R. (2004). Challenges to the Hypothesis of
Extended Cognition. The Journal of Philosophy, 101,
389-428.
Stenning, K. (2002). Seeing reason: image and language in
learning to think. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University
Press.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A Cognitive Theory
of Graphical and Linguistic Reasoning: Logic and
Implementation. Cognitive Science, 19, 97-140.
Stenning, K., & Yule, P. (1997). Image and language in
human reasoning: a syllogistic illustration. Cognitive
Psychology, 34, 109-159.
Wilson, R. A., & Clark, A. (forthcoming). How to Situate
Cognition: Letting Nature Take its Course. In M. Aydede
& P. Robbins (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of
Situated Cognition.

