UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why is "Quite Certain" More Informative Than "Slight Possibility"? Information Theoretic
Analysis of the Informativeness of Probability Statements

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6zq7r2qm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Nakamura, Kunininori

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why is “Quite Certain” More Informative than “Slight Possibility”?
Information Theoretic Analysis of the Informativeness of Probability Statements
Kunininori Nakamura (knaka@ky.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
Graduate School of Decision Science & Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology
2-12-1, Ohkayama, Meguro-Ku, Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan
incompatible with the formal probability calculus. A series
of studies on calibration (Fischhoff, Slovic, & Lichtenstein,
1977; Lichtenstein, Fischhoff, & Phillips, 1982) examined
whether people are good probability assessors, or the extent
to which people can quantify uncertainty. Although there
have been several attempts to detail the psychological
aspects associated with probabilistic statements, the main
research interest in probability judgment has concerned the
formal (normative) probability calculus.
Keren and Teigen (2001) dealt with a different issue in
probability judgment; they investigated whether people
evaluate the informativeness of a probability statement. In
their experiments, they showed participants pairs of
probabilities, for example, “20% vs. 40%, and asked them
which of the two probabilities in each pair was more
informative.” Using this procedure, they examined the
preference for probability under conditions in which no
context was provided (Experiment 1) and wherein both
positive and negative contexts were provided (Experiment
2). In addition, they investigated the preference for the
probabilities by employing a Bayesian belief revision
framework (Experiment 3) and a calibration paradigm
(Experiment 4).
They found that participants preferred higher or lower
probabilities to medium probabilities. For example,
participants judged “20%” and “90%” as more informative
than “40%” and “70%,” respectively, because “20%” and
“90%” are extreme as compared to “40%” and “70%.”
Second, they found that participants preferred higher
probabilities to lower probabilities. For example, when
participants were asked to choose the more informative
probability between “10%” and “90%,” although both
probabilities were equally extreme, they perceived “90%” as
more informative than “10%.”
Based on the results of the four experiments, Keren and
Teigen proposed that people’s perception of the
informativeness of probability statements adhere to “the
search for definitive predictions” principle. According to
this principle, relatively high or low probabilities are
preferred to medium ones, because high or low probabilities
denote the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a single outcome
more strongly than do medium ones. In addition, high
probabilities are often favored over complementary low
probabilities based on their capacity to predict the
occurrence of single outcomes.
Keren and Teigen (2001) positioned “search for
definitive predictions” principle as a lay theory of
probability, similar to the lay theories of physics (e.g.,
McCloskey, 1983) or implicit personality theories (e.g.,

Abstract
This research aims to establish a quantitative relation between
probability statements and their “informativeness.” Keren &
Teigen (2001) proposed the “search for definitive predictions”
principle. According to this principle, relatively high or low
probabilities are preferred to medium ones because high or
low probabilities denote the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a
single outcome more strongly than they do medium ones.
This research formalizes the judgment of the informativeness
of probability statements in terms of the information theory
and argues that the search for definitive predictions principle
can be interpreted as rational information estimation under the
rarity assumption (Oaksford & Chater, 1994). The results of
two empirical studies supported this argument.
Keywords:
probability
statement;
information theory; the rarity assumption

informativeness;

Introduction
Suppose that you have written a research paper.
Although you believe your paper to be worthy of
publication, you are not confident to submit it. Therefore,
you show the paper to five of your colleagues and ask them
whether they think your paper would be published in a
journal. Their comments are as follows:
“I am quite certain.”
“I have some doubts.”
“I am not sure.”
“About 90%”
“Fifty-fifty”
As is evident, your colleagues’ responses vary. Whose
comment do you then consider the most informative?
This question concerns the manner in which people
obtain information from probability statements. In everyday
life, we communicate information about uncertainty by
using probability statements. Probability refers to a
numerical index ranging from 0 to 1, representing the
degree of uncertainty of a future event. Probability
statements provide information about such uncertainty.
Thus, people estimate how informative probability
statements are and make decisions based on the most
informative probability statement. Then, how do people
estimate the “informativeness” of probability statements?
The purpose of this research is to answer these questions.
Psychological studies on probability judgment have
focused on whether people understand the axioms of
probability. A majority of the findings in Tversky and
Kahneman’s heuristics and biases research program (e.g.,
Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982) suggested that under a
wide range of circumstances, human intuitions are

521

q

KL

Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997). However, we present one
empirical question: Is this principle really a lay theory of
probability?
This paper formalizes the amount of informativeness in
terms of information theory. In this formalization, this paper
also proposes that the “search for definitive predictions”
principle is the result of rational estimation based on the
amount of information when one assumes the rarity of the
target event (rarity assumption: Oaksford & Chater, 1994).
Two empirical studies were performed, and both the studies
supported this proposition.

The rarity assumption, Kullback–Leibler
divergence, and “search for definitive predictions”
principle

p

Consider the following two scenarios in which you
observe the results of a coin being flipped. You assume the
coin to be fair and observe ten coin flips. In one scenario,
both heads and tails appear five times. In the other scenario,
heads appears eight times; tails, twice. Which result do you
perceive as more “informative”?
Perhaps the latter is more informative because it does
not correspond to your belief that the coin is fair. In the first
scenario, the results match your belief perfectly, and thus,
you need not change it. Thus, this result is not informative
because you already knew the outcome. In the second
scenario, however, your belief cannot explain the result.
Thus, this result is informative because it reveals the
incompleteness of your previous belief.
These two scenarios show that the amount of information
can be represented as the difference between one’s previous
belief and the actual outcome of events. In fact, the amount
of information is quantified as the difference between two
probability distributions: one corresponds to prior
knowledge; the other, to the distribution of the outcomes. In
other words, when outcomes match your expectation, they
are not informative because they do not require you to
change your prior opinion about them. In contrast, when
outcomes contradict your expectation, they are very
informative because they point out the inadequacies of your
prior belief. Thus, the amount of information can be
represented as how “surprising” the information is in terms
of prior knowledge.
One of the indexes that can represent this “surprisingness”
quantitatively is the Kullback-Leibler divergence (Kullback
& Leibler, 1951; hereafter, KL divergence). It is expressed
as
n

D( P || Q) = ∑ pi log
i =1

pi
,
qi

p=0. 1
p=0. 2
p=0. 4
p=0. 5
p=0. 6
p=0. 8
p=0. 9

0

1

KL
2

3

(a)

3

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
q
(b)

Figure 1: KL divergence as a function of p and q. (a) is a 3D
plot of KL divergence, and (b) illustrates a 2D plot of KL
divergence; the vertical axis denotes KL divergence and the
horizontal axis denotes the q value. The thick dashed line in
Figure 1b shows the performance of KL divergence as a
function of q when p is 0.4.
occurrence of the event, while other information might
denote low probability. How then does the amount of
information vary according to your prior knowledge and the
probability indicated by the information? In this case, a
binomial event can be assumed with regard to your
prediction. Thus, KL divergence is expressed as:

D( P || Q) = p log

p
1− p
,
+ (1 − p )log
q
1− q

(2)

where p denotes the prior probability for the occurrence of
the outcome and q denotes the observed probability.
Figures 1a and b demonstrate how KL divergence
would vary with p and q. Figure 1a shows a 3D plot of KL
divergence: the x-axis denotes p; the y-axis, q; the z-axis,
KL divergence. Figure 1a indicates that KL divergence
would increase with the difference between p and q; when p
= q, the value of KL divergence is zero, and it increases
with the difference between p and q.

(1)

where P and Q represent probability distribution; pi, and qi
represent the probabilities of the events that P and Q predict;
and i denotes the number of events.
Next, consider a situation in which you are gathering
information in order to predict the outcome of an event. You
have prior knowledge about the occurrence of the event.
Some information might indicate a high probability for the

522

Figure 1b displays how the relation between KL
divergence and q varies according to the value of p. It also
shows that a principle for definitive prediction emerges
when p is relatively low. For example, see the line when p is
0.4. When q is 0.4 in this line, the value of KL divergence is
zero. In addition, it increases as the value of q deviates from
that of p. This trend appears to correspond to the preference
for extreme probability. In addition, overall, the value of KL
divergence is larger when q is larger than p, than when q is
smaller than p. This trend appears to reveal the preference
for high probability. Thus, the trend of KL divergence when
q is relatively low appears to represent a principle for
definitive prediction. This discussion shows that the search
for definitive predictions emerges when p is relatively low,
that is, below 0.5.
Further, if we assume the rarity assumption proposed by
Oaksford and Chater (1994), we can interpret the principle
for definitive prediction as a rational information calculation.
The rarity assumption entails that people believe in the
rarity of the target event. It holds that when estimating the
informativeness of a probability statement, one assumes low
probability for the occurrence of the target event being
referred to. In other words, the rarity assumption denotes a
low value of p.
Several empirical studies have supported the
psychological validity of the rarity assumption. For example,
McKenzie, Ferreira, Mikkelsen, McDermott, and Skrable
(2001) provided empirical evidence supporting the rarity
assumption. They found that participants tend to phrase
conditional statements (or hypotheses) in terms of rare,
rather than common, events. Thus, people might regard
mentioned confirming observations to be the most
informative, or they may consider turning over the
mentioned cards most informative, because they usually are
most informative, at least from a Bayesian perspective. In
addition, Klayman and Ha (1987) proposed the “minority
assumption,” according to which one presupposes a low
probability for the target hypothesis when performing
hypothesis testing.
In sum, the above discussion shows that the “search for
definitive predictions” principle might result from the
normative computation of information under the rarity
assumption. The purpose of this research is to test this
assertion. We examine whether people’s assessment of the
informativeness of a probability statement would follow the
information theory under the rarity assumption.

To examine this possibility, we measured the
informativeness of both numerical and verbal probability
statements and examined whether the assessment of
informativeness might differ between these two kinds of
probability statements.
Overview of this study
This research comprised two empirical studies. Study 1
aimed to establish a quantitative relationship between
probability and informativeness. Keren and Teigen (2001)
used the pair-comparison method; hence, they could not
establish such a relationship between informativeness and
probability statements. Study 1 required participants to
estimate both the informativeness and subjective probability
denoted by probability statements.
Study 2 explored the relation between informativeness
and the rarity assumption. This paper states that the “search
for the definitive predictions” principle would emerge under
the rarity assumption about the outcome. Thus, we can
predict that the “search for definitive predictions” principle
might not hold when the rarity assumption is manipulated.
Study 2 intended to investigate how the judgment of
informativeness would vary when the rarity of the outcome
was manipulated.
We used three types of response scales as dependent
variables throughout the two studies: “how valuable,” “how
informative,” and “how surprising.” The first two scales are
used in the study by Keren and Teigen (2001). The third
scale can also be considered as an index of the
informativeness of probability statements because KL
divergence is often considered to be a measure of how
“surprising” the information is.

Study 1
The purpose of Study 1 is to investigate the relation between
the estimated probabilities and the informativeness of the
probability statements. In Study 1, participants were
required to evaluate the informativeness of the probability
statements on 8-point scales. They also simultaneously
estimated the subjective probability of the probability
statement.
Participants One hundred and forty-nine Japanese
undergraduates participated in Study 1 as a course
requirement.
Stimuli We used 16 verbal probability expressions and 11
numerical probability statements as stimuli. The verbal
probability statements are shown in Table 1; the 11
numerical probabilities statements used were 0%, 10%, 20%,
30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, and 100%.

Numerical and Verbal probability
We use both numerical and verbal probability statements as
stimuli in this research. In daily life, probability information is
stated through verbal expression, by using phrases like “very
certain” or “quite impossible.” Many studies (e. g., Budescu,
Karelitz, & Wallsten, 2003) have pointed out that verbal
probability possesses features that numerical probability
(“50%”) does not. Thus, it is possible that the informativeness
of verbal probability statements does not follow the same
principle as numerical probability statements do.

Procedure The participants were tested in a group setting.
Each participant was given a booklet containing instructions
that described the experimental task and the
abovementioned probability statements.

523

Never
Almost impossible
Not likely
Not very likely
Uncertain
A little uncertain
Not certain
Slightly uncertain

2

Faint possibility
Slight possibility
Slight chance
A possibility
Possible
Quite possible
Good possibility
Quite certain

0. 0

0. 2

0. 4
0. 6
Probabi l i t i es

0. 8

1. 0

0. 4
0. 6
Probabi l i t i es

0. 8

1. 0

0. 4
0. 6
Probabi l i t i es

0. 8

1. 0

(a) Valuable

Verbal
Numeri cal

2

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

The participants were required to read the verbal probability
statements shown in Table 1. The participants were required
to read these and answer the following three questions by
using an 8-point scale: (1) “How valuable do you consider
this statement?”; (2) “How informative is this statement?”;
and (3) “How surprising do you find this statement?” After
evaluating the 16 verbal probability statements, the
participants estimated the probability of each statement by
answering the question “In your opinion, what degree of
probability does this expression denote?” Finally, the
participants estimated 11 numerical probabilities by
answering the same three questions, using an 8-point scale
for each.

0. 0

0. 2

(b) Informative

Verbal
Numer i cal

2

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

Results and discussion Figure 2 shows the results of Study
1. It illustrates that the relation between the estimated
probabilities and each of the three scales appears to be
nonlinear. This trend appears to correspond to the prediction
from information theoretic analysis. To test our prediction,
we constructed a descriptive model of the informativeness
judgment expressed by the following equation:

⎛
p
1− p ⎞
⎟ + e,
Inf = a + b⎜⎜ p log + (1 − p) log
q
1 − q ⎟⎠
⎝

Verbal
Numer i cal

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

Table 1: The 16 verbal probability statements used in
Studies 1 and 2.

(3)

0. 0

0. 2

(c) Surprising

where Inf denotes the estimated informativeness of the
probability statement; a, b, and e are free parameters—each
denoting the intercept and weighting parameter,
respectively; p is the prior probability; and q indicates the
estimated probability of the probability statement. We fit
equation (3) to the results of both the numerical and verbal
probability and estimated p and the fit of the model. When
we fit equation (3) to the verbal probability data, we input
the mean estimated probabilities as q and input the values of
the numerical probabilities themselves (0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4,
0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1) as q for the numerical
probability data.
The results shown in Table 2 supported our hypothesis
that informativeness judgment can be interpreted as a
computation of the amount of the information under the
rarity assumption. The p parameters for both the numerical
(0.00–0.05) and verbal probabilities (0.17–0.19) indicate
relatively low values. Although the p values differed
between the numerical and verbal probability statements,
these results correspond to the rarity assumption that people

Figure 2: Results of Study 1. (a), (b), and (c) show the
results for “valuable,” “informativeness,” and “surprising,”
respectively.
Table 2: Results of the parameter estimations in Study 1.

a
b
p
R2

Verbal

Numerical

Valuable Informative Surprising

Valuable Informative Surprising

3.18
1.94
0.19
0.74

3.36
1.84
0.19
0.77

2.91
1.10
0.17
0.76

3.38
1.45
0.05
0.96

3.06
1.38
0.00
0.94

2.82
1.20
0.05
0.96

believe in the rarity of the target event. In addition, the
descriptive model achieved a good fit of the data for all
three scales. Thus, we can conclude that the results of Study
1 consistently supported our hypothesis that the
informativeness judgment can be interpreted as a
computation of the amount of the information under the
rarity assumption.

524

Table 3: Results of the parameter estimations in Study 2.
a
Minor Serious
Valuable
3.39
3.57
Informative 2.93
3.26
Surprising 2.43
3.98

Verbal

3.96
3.13
3.70

3.89
3.46
4.67

p
Minor Serious
0.41
0.31
0.30
0.23
0.91
0.53

R
Minor Serious
0.83
0.51
0.82
0.53
0.81
0.80

0.34
0.75
0.72

0.00
0.00
0.96

0.62
0.95
0.76

Mi nor
Ser i ous

0.92
1.12
0.57

0.00
0.00
0.42

0.94
0.93
0.94

Mi nor
Ser i ous

2

2

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

Numerica Valuable
Informative
Surprising

2

b
Minor Serious
2.41
2.60
2.12
2.33
2.42
2.17

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

Study 2
We formalize informativeness judgment as a
computation of the information number represented by KL
divergence and argue that the principle of definitive
prediction emerges under the rarity assumption of the event.
Our formalization entails that informativeness judgment
depends on the belief about the target event. Thus, if the
background belief about the target event changes, the
informativeness judgment might also vary according to the
change in the belief.
Study 2 aims to test this possibility. To accomplish this,
the participants in Study 2 were assigned one of two
conditions in which the prior probabilities of the target
events were manipulated. The first condition was the “minor
disease” condition, wherein which participants estimated the
informativeness of the probability statement, supposing that
they were told about the possibility of their recovering from
a cold. The second condition was the “serious disease”
condition,” in which they were required to imagine the
possibility of their recovering from the GerstmannSträussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS), which is known to be
a serious disease. We can assume that the first condition
implies a high probability of recovery, whereas the second
condition implies a low probability of recovery. Study 2
examines the effect of this manipulation of the prior
probability on the judgment of informativeness.

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
Pr obabi l i t i es

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
Pr obabi l i t i es

Mi nor
Ser i ous

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

2

Participants and procedure Two hundred and fifty-one
undergraduates participated in Study 2. The procedure was
almost the same as that in Study 1, except that Study 2
comprised two conditions. In both conditions, the
participants were required to perform the same task as in
Study 1. However, the 121 participants assigned to the
“easy disease” condition were instructed to imagine that the
verbal probability statements referred to the possibility of
their recovering from a cold, and the 130 participants
assigned to the “hard disease” condition were told that the
probability statements referred to the possibility of their
recovering from GSS.

Mi nor
Ser i ous

2

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

(a) Valuable

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
Pr obabi l i t i es

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
Pr obabi l i t i es

Mi nor
Ser i ous

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

2

Result and discussion Figure 3 presents the results of
Study 2. We performed the same analysis as in Study 1 and
examined whether the p values would differ between the
two conditions. The results shown in Table 3 demonstrate
that the estimated p values were lower in the serious disease
condition (0.00–0.53) than in the minor disease condition
(0.00–0.93). Specifically, the result of the surprisingness
judgment matched our prediction very well. These results
supported the prediction that the judgment of
informativeness reflects the prior probability of the
occurrence of the target event.
These results reveal two interesting findings. The first is
that there is a difference in the shape of the function among
the dependent variables. The p value estimated from the
surprisingness data was remarkably different from those for
informativeness and valuableness. The second is a
difference in the trend between the verbal and numerical

Mi nor
Ser i ous

2

Mean est i mat es
3
4
5
6

(b) Informative

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
Pr obabi l i t i es

0. 0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1. 0
Pr obabi l i t i es

(3) Surprising

Figure 3: Results of Study 2. The plot shows the mean
rating for the informativeness judgment measured by the
three questions. The graphs on the left-hand side show the
results of the verbal probabilities; those on the right show
the results of the numerical probabilities.
probabilities in the judgment for valuableness and
informativeness. These findings suggest the uniqueness of
the surprisingness judgment and a difference between the
verbal and numerical probability statements. However, the
effect of the manipulation of the rarity of the target event
itself appeared consistently through all the conditions. Thus,

525

knowledge such as the rarity assumption, can help to
explain the rationale behind people’s behavior.

we can conclude that the informativeness of the probability
statements depends on the prior belief about the occurrence
of the target event.

Acknowledgments

Conclusion
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized
in the following two points. First, it establishes the
quantitative relationship between probability statements and
their informativeness. Although Keren and Teigen (2001)
proposed the principle of definitive predictions, their
proposition was based on the results of a pair-wise
comparison of the probability statements; thus, the amount
of informativeness that people estimate for each probability
statement is not so clear. This study measured the
informativeness of each probability statement by using a
Likert-type response scale and showed that the relationship
between informativeness and probability appears to be
nonlinear. In addition, this research shows that informative
judgment for both the verbal and numerical probability
statements follow the same principle.
Second, this paper demonstrates that people’s
perception of the informativeness of the probability
statements obeys information theory. This research fitted the
model that represents a computation of KL divergence, and
the results consistently provided a good fit to the data. In
addition, we found that the pattern of the informative
judgment varies according to the rarity of the event. The
results of this research consistently support the proposition
that participants’ judgments of the informativeness of
probability statements followed information theory.
An important assumption in this research is the rarity
assumption (Oaksford & Chater, 1994). Various studies on
human reasoning, such as hypothesis testing (Klayman &
Ha, 1987), deduction (Oaksford & Chater, 1994), and
covariation assessment (Mckenzie & Mikkelsen 2007) have
supported the validity of the rarity assumption. This
research also reveals the normative sense underlying the
principle of definitive predictions under the rarity
assumption. It is clear that, in future research, the validity of
the rarity assumption must be considered more precisely.
However, this research can be cited as another example that
supports the rarity assumption.
In conclusion, this paper uncovers the rationality
underlying people’s intuition toward probability information.
Previous studies on judgment and decision-making (e.g.,
Gilovich, Slovic, & Kahneman, 2002) have emphasized
people’s deviation from the normative axiom of probability.
However, recent approaches have revealed that seemingly
irrational behavior makes normative sense when the usual
environmental contexts are taken into account (e.g.,
Mckenzie, 2005). This research is consistent with these
approaches. Informativeness judgment is justifiable as
optimal data selection (Oaksford & Chater, 1994). We are
certainly not claiming that people do not deviate from
normative rationality, nor are we providing a process model
of informativeness judgment. However, we propose that the
normative theory, if it is combined with background

526

This study was supported by a grant from the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science. I would like to thank Akiko
Sakamoto for her help in collecting the data, and the
members of Kimihiko Yamagishi’s lab for their helpful
comments.

References
Budescu, D.V., Karelitz, T. M., & Wallsten, T. S. (2003).
Predicting the directionality of probability words from their
membership functions. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 16, 159–180.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. (1997). Lay dispositionism
and implicit theories of personality. Journal of Personality
& Social Psychology, 73, 19–30.
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1977). Knowing
with certainty: The appropriateness of extreme confidence.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 3, 552–564.
Gilovich, T., Slovic, P., & Kahneman, D. (2002) Heuristics
and biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keren, G., & Teigen, K. H. (2001). Why is p = .90 better than p
= .70? Preference for definitive predictions by lay
consumers of probability judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 8, 191–201.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y.-W. (1987). Confirmation,
disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis testing.
Psychological Review, 94, 211–228.
Kullback, S., & Leibler, R. A. (1951). On information and
sufficiency. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 22 79–86.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. D. (1982).
Calibration of probabilities: The state of the art to 1980.
In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.),
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp.
306–334). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCloskey, M. (1983, February). Intuitive physics. Scientific
American, 122–130.
McKenzie, C. R. M. (2005). Judgment and decision making. In
K. Lamberts & R. L. Goldstone (Eds.), Handbook of
cognition (pp. 321–338). London: Sage Publications.
McKenzie, C. R. M., Ferreira, V. S., Mikkelsen, L. A.,
McDermott, K. J., & Skrable, R. P. (2001). Do
conditional hypotheses target rare events? Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 85, 291–309.
McKenzie, C. R. M., & Mikkelsen, L. A. (2007). A Bayesian
view of covariation assessment. Cognitive Psychology, 54,
33–61.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101, 608–631.

