UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why Externalism is Not Part of Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zz86961

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Asoulin, Eran

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why Externalism is not part of Cognitive Science
Eran Asoulin (e.asoulin@student.unsw.edu.au)
Program in Cognitive Science
School of History & Philosophy of Science
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW, 2052, AUSTRALIA.
Abstract

Internalism

I will compare the Internalist and Externalist approach to
meaning, and show that, given empirical scientific
inclinations, the Externalist approach is somewhat misguided
and that parts of it can be reinterpreted via Internalism. I give
a brief overview of the nature of the problem of meaning or
intentionality; I then sketch out the nature of Internalism and
how it deals with meaning, and conclude with a discussion of
Externalism and the ways in which Externalism can be recast
in terms of Internalism without loss of explanatory power. I
will argue that the foundations of Externalism and Internalism
are similar, and it is the Externalists, contrary to the
Internalists, who feel that these foundations are not sufficient
for explaining meaning and intentionality.

Internalism is not so much a particular thesis or a specific
claim as it is a research program that articulates a certain
conception of the study of language, language use, and the
structure of the representations of linguistic objects inside
the minds of competent users of a particular language.
Those who adhere to Internalism hold that, for the purposes
of scientific inquiry into the aforementioned areas of
language, the internal properties of the human brain are
overwhelmingly the ones that are the relevant and fruitful
areas of scientific research. Internalism has thus recast the
ordinary everyday notion of language, a notion that is
arguably at the core of Externalism, into a form that
Internalists believe is susceptible to empirical scientific
inquiry. This is not to say that Internalism ignores the
external environment in which an organism is embedded. As
is evident in the case of language acquisition, on the
Internalist conception the environment plays a crucial and
necessary role of triggering and shaping the path that the
internal processes of the language faculty take.
The linguistic enterprise spawned by the writings of
Noam Chomsky since the 1950s is a particular instantiation,
probably the most well known and influential, of the
Internalist approach to meaning, thus I will use mainly his
writings to illustrate the research program that is
Internalism1.
In order to understand Chomsky’s take on Internalism,
one must become familiar with the basic framework of
Chomsky’s linguistic enterprise, which can be summarised
as follows:
A person who has learned a language has acquired a
system of rules that relate sound and meaning in a certain
specific way. He has, in other words, acquired a certain
competence that he puts to use in producing and
understanding speech. (Chomsky, 1972, p. 11)
There are numerous issues, some more controversial than
others, raised in this short quotation that require elucidation,
for, in many cases, Chomsky utilises a term in a technical
sense that is often divorced from its normal everyday
usage2. Perhaps the best place to start, then, is the language
acquisition process, in which any normal healthy child free

Keywords: Philosophy of Mind; Semantics; Internalism;
Externalism; Linguistics.

The Problem of Intentionality
The problem at the crux of the Internalism/Externalism
debate concerns intentionality, or the problem of how some
entities can be ‘about’ something. That is, sentences,
thoughts, or symbols, among other things, display
intentionality in that they are about something else; they are
a representation of something. (The thought ‘I would like to
see a giant squid’ is about giant squid.) The notion of
intentionality can be traced back at least as far as Aristotle
(Brentano, 1874/1973, p. 88), though Franz Brentano is
generally credited with introducing the notion to
contemporary philosophy.
While Brentano used such a definition of intentionality to
argue for a distinction between physical and mental
phenomena (he did not believe that anything physical could
display intentionality), both the Externalists and Internalists
attempt to solve the intentionality puzzle within a purely
physicalistic framework. It is a puzzle because, assuming
materialism and wanting a purely scientific explanation,
there has been a spirited dispute over what, if anything,
distinguishes the nature of some physical entities (for
example, thoughts, symbols, sentences, etc.) that display
intentionality from other physical entities that do not (for
example, sea shells, leaves, wooden doors, etc.). The
Internalists claim that intentionality is practically a
brain/mind-internal matter, whereas the Externalists claim
that in order to explain intentionality some kind of relation
(perhaps a causal one but not necessarily so) must be
postulated to exist between objects outside the brain/mind
and the brain/mind itself.

1

For other authors who take an Internalist approach, see, for
example, Jackendoff (2002) or Pietroski (2005).
2
This is true of Chomsky’s notion of the ‘knowledge of
language’, for example, which has caused much confusion and
misunderstandings.

773

from specific brain damage is said by Chomsky and his
followers to acquire a language (this is in contrast to the
traditional or everyday notion of the child ‘learning’ a
language). Furthermore, it will become obvious by looking
at the language-acquisition process that, contrary to a
superficial reading, Internalism does not ignore or neglect
the external environment; the brain/mind and the external
environment are distinct and are both essential in the
Internalist conception of language and meaning.
In other words, it is the story of the connection of mind to
world that distinguishes Internalism from Externalism; as
opposed to the uncharitable reading in which Internalism
ignores the outside world and only focuses on brain/mindinternal processes.
The language-acquisition process that a child undergoes
early in life arguably stands at the crux of Chomsky’s
linguistic enterprise (at least in terms of evidence for the
theory). This rapid and seemingly effortless process that the
child undergoes en route to acquiring the ability to produce
and understand speech is explained by Chomsky via the
postulation of an inner (probably an innate and mostly
unlearned) mechanism he calls the language faculty. Such a
mechanism, Chomsky argues, must exist to mediate the
language acquisition process, for the child, at such a young
age, does not seem to be exposed to all the necessary
stimulus that would be required to acquire the ability to
produce and understand speech were the child utilising
general cognitive learning capacities (induction, deduction,
imitation, rote memory, etc.). This claim is known as the
‘poverty of the stimulus’ argument. Furthermore, a
Chomskyan would argue, even if the unlikely case could be
made that the child is exposed to sufficient linguistic data
that allow the general cognitive learning capacities to infer
the syntax and semantics of a particular language, children
acquire their first language at a remarkable rate that is
entirely disproportionate to the other tasks that these general
cognitive learning capacities perform.
Chomsky claims that a person inherits a Universal
Grammar that provides the foundations for language to
develop. What is inherited is a universal, non languagespecific, framework for language3. The current formulation
of the theory of Universal Grammar holds that ‘the speaker
knows a set of principles that apply to all languages, and
parameters that vary within clearly defined limits from one
language to another’ (Cook & Newson, 1997, p 2). In the
presence of the appropriate stimuli (that is, in the presence
of, usually auditory, linguistic data of a particular language,
say, Zulu) the generality of Universal Grammar is focussed
into the grammar of the language of the linguistic
community to which the child is born. So, if a child grows
up in a French linguistic community, this linguistic
community would in a sense mould the child’s Universal
Grammar (assumed to be represented in the language
faculty in the brain) into the particularities of the French

syntax and semantics. Thus, the child’s innate principles of
Universal Grammar would be set to the specific parameters
of the French grammar. This process of environmental
triggering of the innate mechanism, however, cannot occur
at any other time but during the appropriate critical time of
cognitive development.
The proposed innate mechanism that mediates the
acquisition of language is the language faculty, which is,
crudely speaking, a (probably computational) system that
relates form and meaning.
It must be understood that this linguistic hypothesis (of
the internal and/or innate mechanism) is not as strong as has
been claimed or as may be plausible following an
uncharitable reading of Chomsky. Apart from triggering, the
environment also determines the arbitrary sound-meaning
relationship of words and the reference of words (in the
benign sense that a particular word is used by a linguistic
community to point out an object in the world), there is
nothing innate or internal that specifies that the word ‘squid’
must refer to a squid and must be pronounced the way it is
in English. Furthermore, the rules (or parameters) of
specific grammars are arbitrary in the sense that it is an
historical accident that Spanish has its particular
grammatical constructions whereas Mohawk has different
grammatical constructions. The internal and/or innate
Universal Grammar makes specific human languages
possible not by prescribing particular rules (or linguistic
parameters) but by constraining the possibilities that are
available for the construction of specific languages.
The language faculty, as delimited by Chomsky, is further
refined by distinguishing it from both c o n c e p t u a l intentional systems and p e r f o r m a n c e
systems
(predominantly the perceptual/articulatory systems). That is,
according to Chomsky, the language faculty constitutes the
computational aspects of language, or ‘the generative
procedure that forms structural descriptions (SDs), each a
complex of phonetic, semantic, and structural properties’
(Chomsky, 1992, p. 211). These internal computational
processes form the building blocks of language use: they
generate linguistic (syntactic) objects that are employed by
the conceptual-intentional systems and performance systems
to yield language production and comprehension. In this
sense, then, there is only one generative engine of
language4: this is the syntax that constitutes the language
faculty and which is submitted for sound and meaning
interpretation within systems that are distinct from, though
clearly closely related to, the language faculty.
Chomsky does not claim his theory fully explains how
sound and meaning are interpreted from the syntax; he
believes those problems are as yet unsolved, especially
when compared to the relatively straightforward study of the
syntactic component. Still, it is useful to briefly examine the
kinds of things that fall into the category of conceptualintentional systems and performance systems. Conceptualintentional systems involve ‘object-reference with all of its

3

As we shall see later on, this framework is arguably part of a
more encompassing framework of cognitive functioning that is
Fodor’s ‘language of thought’.

4

See the interesting though somewhat controversial Marantz
(2005).

774

Externalism

subtleties and complexities, thematic structures, aitiational
factors5, and the like’ (Chomsky, 1980, p. 58). Performance
systems, on the other hand, include the sensorimotor
systems that are responsible for the perceptual and
articulatory capacities.

Jerry Fodor is a major figure of Externalism (along with
Hilary Putnam, Fred Dretske, and Tyler Burge), but due to
space constraints I will use mainly Fodor’s writings to
illustrate the approach to explaining meaning that is
Externalism. Even though Fodor’s approach to explaining
meaning in language is somewhat different to that of
Chomsky’s, I believe that both Fodor and Chomsky (and
probably both the Externalists7 and the Internalists) assume
the same computational and syntactic building blocks, but
unlike Chomsky, Fodor does not believe that these building
blocks are sufficient to explain meaning and intentionality8.
Fodor conceives of semantics somewhat more abstractly
than Chomsky; for example, Fodor seeks an answer to:
… the metaphysical question of the place of meaning in
the world order. How can anything manage to be about
anything; and why is it that only thoughts and symbols
succeed? (Fodor, 1987, p. xi, emphasis in original)
That is, it appears that Fodor sees the explanation of
meaning to be a metaphysical one. An Internalist attempts to
deal with meaning via a computational/syntactic (largely
mind-internal) approach, whereas Fodor’s attempt
postulates a metaphysical nomological relation between the
brain/mind and the external world in addition to the
computational/syntactic mechanisms.

Meaning in Internalism
In the Internalist approach to meaning, the semantic features
of an expression can be thought of as mental instructions
that interface with, and thus give information to, the
conceptual-intentional systems. This approach mirrors the
approach to phonology in which phonetic features of an
expression are mental instructions that interface with, and
thus give information to, the performance systems.
Chomsky writes:
… it is reasonable to suppose that a generated expression
includes two interface levels, one providing information
and instructions for the articulatory-perceptual systems,
the other for the conceptual-intentional systems. One
interface is generally assumed to be phonetic
representation (phonetic form, PF). The nature of the
other is more controversial; call if LF (‘logical form’).
(1992, p. 213, emphasis in original)
In other words, a linguistic expression has two interface
levels: one that provides information to the performance
systems to be used in the movement of the lips, tongue, etc.
(PF), and one that provides information to the comparatively
poorly understood conceptual-intentional systems (LF)6.
Thus the expression gains its form and meaning pairing (PF,
LF).
The detailed nature of the semantic and phonological
interfaces remains a mystery, though presumably not a
permanent one. Chomsky has always stated that it is an
empirical issue, to be validated or refuted via scientific
means, as to the nature of the language faculty. Though the
overall framework of how this particular form of
Internalism deals with meaning is clear enough: the
(brain/mind internal and probably computational) syntax is
the only generative engine of the grammar and it is
subjected to phonological and semantic interpretations. So,
in a loose sense, the semantic and phonological components
of language are not distinct, they both have the syntactic (or
computational) component at their foundations. It is in this
sense that Chomsky believes parts of semantics should
properly be labelled as a part of syntax. This does not mean
that the language faculty is completely detached from the
environment outside of the brain/mind (it’s not), it merely
means that whatever connection the brain/mind has with the
outside world, that connection does not constitute the
content or meaning of mental representations or linguistic
expressions. As will now be discussed, those who adhere to
Externalism beg to differ.

The Language of Thought
The main reason for my belief that the foundation blocks of
Internalism and Externalism are similar (or at the very least
that the building blocks of the approach to meaning of
Chomsky and Fodor are similar) is Fodor’s (1975)
postulation of a ‘language of thought’ (LOT). Fodor (1975)
reasons that since cognitive psychology (and the generative
grammar approach to linguistics) proposes that mental
processes inherently consist of computations, and since the
postulation of computations presupposes a medium in which
to compute, the medium in which these mental processes
occur is an internal (most probably an innate and mostly
unlearned) ‘language of thought’, an internal
representational system, akin to an internal language, in
which the computational cognitive processes occur. The use
of the word ‘language’ in the ‘language of thought’ is
somewhat misleading, however, for hypothesising a
language of thought in this way is not the same as
hypothesising an additional internal natural language;
rather, the hypothesis is of an underlying internal
mechanism, a representational system that spans and
underlies many cognitive capacities, including language.
7
I refer here specifically to semantic Externalism to distinguish
it from language Externalism. The former is the view to be
discussed here; the latter view denies that languages are objects
that supervene on the physical inner states of a person’s brain/mind
(see Bezuidenhaut (2006)).
8
There are of course other Externalist and Internalist approaches
to explaining meaning; though for current purposes Fodor and
Chomsky are sufficiently indicative of each approach to warrant a
focus on their ideas.

5

See Moravcsik (1982) for elucidation of this concept, referred
to there as ‘Aitiational Frames’. Roughly, ‘Aitiational Frames’
refer to the way in which humans form concepts.
6
See also Chomsky (2000, p. 90-91) or Stainton (2006, p. 934935).

775

Fodor states, and rightly so, that the range of cognitive
capacities to which the LOT hypothesis applies is an
empirical question.
I believe that Fodor’s LOT hypothesis is consistent with
Chomsky’s Universal Grammar for I think it is plausible
that the computations required to implement Universal
Grammar are made possible via the underlying
computational mechanisms of the LOT. If this is so, and
granting that one is sympathetic to the Internalist approach
to semantics, it would appear Fodor should agree with
Chomsky in regard to syntax being the sole generative
engine of language. In other words, since Fodor’s LOT
hypothesis is a computational/syntactic approach to
studying certain parts of the mind, and since Chomsky takes
the same approach (which is cited favourably by Fodor) to
studying language production and understanding (including
meaning), it would appear that Fodor should agree with
Chomsky on the nature of meaning. But this is not the case.
The motivation for Fodor’s disagreement has two fronts:
firstly, he sees the syntactic computational processes and
their semantics as disparate entities, and he thus seeks a way
to integrate the claim that mental states are computational
with the claim that mental states are characteristically
intentional. Secondly, he believes that a
scientific/naturalistic description of (linguistic)
representations must account for the truth of the content of
the representations (linguistic or otherwise)9 and
consequently that syntax (or purely mind-internal events)
cannot adequately account for truth10.
Even though I believe that the first reason is a spurious
distinction, for mental states are arguably intentional in
virtue of their computational/syntactic properties, a proper
expository account of Fodor’s ideas is necessary before any
criticisms of them can be made.

truth and reference are exhibited by formulae in the
representational system. (Fodor, 1975, p. 32)11
Imbuing mental representations with reference and truth12
is symptomatic of Fodor’s (and the Externalists’) belief that
even though mental states (the symbols in our heads) are
defined entirely in terms of internal, physical and
computational relations in the brain, the intentional
properties of mental states are defined in terms of the
relations of mental states to the external world. Burge
(1986), for example, states that
… mental states and events may in principle vary with
variations in the environment, even as an individual’s
physical… history, specified non-intentionally and
individualistically, remains constant. (p. 6)
It is this conception of mental states that sets the
Externalists apart from the Internalists; the Internalists
state13, roughly, that the intentional properties of mental
states exist in virtue of their brain/mind internal (syntactic or
computational) properties. The Externalists, however, want
to separate the syntactic/computational properties of the
mind from its semantic or intentional properties: I will argue
that this is due to, among others, their insistence
(exemplified here by Fodor) that truth be assimilated into a
computational, naturalistic, and scientific account of the
brain/mind.
The details of (2), as well as the details of (1) and thus the
Externalist conception as a whole, are very clear in Fodor’s
discussion of the disjunction problem. The disjunction
problem arises when Fodor attempts to amalgamate a
version of Dretske’s informational account of semantics14
with the computational/representational theory of mind.
Considering the disjunction problem is an excellent way to
comprehend the schism between Internalism and
Externalism.

Is Truth a Semantic Property?

The Disjunction Problem

The additions to the syntactic/computational theory of mind
that Fodor proposes (i.e., to the LOT) in order to explain
meaning and truth naturalistically, and this is what
distinguishes Fodor’s (and most, if not all, of) Externalism
from Internalism, are as follows:
(1) Fodor’s insistence that truth is a semantic property,
and thus should somehow be part of an organism’s internal
representational system; and
(2) that meaning is distinct from content in Dretske’s
sense that a particular utterance has a particular meaning but
carries additional (and perhaps different) pieces of
information (content).
In regard to (1) Fodor states that:
… the notion that the agent can represent to himself
salient aspects of the situations in which he finds himself
presupposes that such familiar semantic properties as

Fodor is sympathetic to the fact that informational semantics
separates meaning from content. This separation is
necessary, he reasons, because equating the meaning of a
symbol with the information its tokens carry falls prey to the
disjunction problem for it cannot explain misrepresentation.
The solution to the disjunction problem lies at the heart of
Fodor’s theory of content, for he believes that the solution
suggests sufficient conditions for intentionality. However, it
should be noted that the disjunction problem is only a
problem to those who take the Externalist approach to
meaning (that is, those who worry not only about the nature
11

More recently, and in a different but related context, Fodor
(2000) states that ‘there is nothing in the ‘evolutionary,’ or the
‘biological,’ or the ‘scientific’ worldview that shows, or even
suggests, that the proper function of cognition is other than the
fixation of true beliefs.’ (p. 68, emphasis in original)
12
I believe that the Externalist notion of reference can be
rephrased in terms of Internalism but that truth is merely a secondhand or meta-notion.
13
For more discussion see, for example, McGilvray (1998).
14
See Dretske (1981; 1994).

9

See, among others, Fodor (1987; 1990; 1994).
See also Fodor (2000), in which he argues (for reasons not
unrelated but distinct from intentionality) that the computational
theory of mind cannot comprise ‘more than a fragment of a full
and satisfactory cognitive psychology.’ (p. 1)
10

776

of the mental representation itself but also about whether a
particular mental representation is true or false, or whether it
is a valid representation or a misrepresentation).
The disjunction problem can be construed as follows15:
suppose that the tokenings of the symbol for ‘kangaroo’ are
nomologically dependent on the instantiations of kangaroos
so that only kangaroos would cause the symbol ‘kangaroo’
to get tokened. Hence, it is a counterfactual supporting law
that only kangaroos cause ‘kangaroo’ symbol tokens and
thus the ‘kangaroo’ symbol has kangaroos, and only
kangaroos, in its extension. The disjunction problem arises
when one ponders the status of non-kangaroo-caused
‘kangaroo’ symbol tokens, as is the case, perhaps to an
observer’s untrained eye, in which the instantiation of a
wallaby causes the tokening of the symbol ‘kangaroo’. This
is a problem because, on the informational semantics
account of content ascription, any instantiation that would
cause a tokening of a symbol is by definition in that
symbol’s extension. Therefore, instead of the symbol
expressing the property of being a kangaroo, the symbol
expresses the disjunctive property of being either a
kangaroo or a wallaby.
But if the ‘kangaroo’ symbol expresses the property
kangaroo or wallaby, as opposed to just kangaroo, then
tokenings of the ‘kangaroo’ symbol that are caused by the
instantiations of a wallaby are true (they are not a
misrepresentation). So kangaroo-caused ‘kangaroo’ symbol
tokens are true and wallaby-caused ‘kangaroo’ symbol
tokens are true. So the symbol ‘kangaroo’ does not mean
kangaroo, it means kangaroo or wallaby. Fodor reasons that
if this is the case that arises by following informational
semantics then error and misrepresentations have not been
explained; he states that it follows from informational
semantics:
… that every token of a symbol is caused by something
that belongs to its extension; hence that no token of a
symbol can ever be false. This is, to put the case mildly,
not satisfactory. (1990, p. 60, emphasis in original)
Nevertheless, Fodor would like to keep the part of
informational semantics that conjures nomic relationships
between brain/mind-internal symbols and the external
world, so he augments informational semantics with what he
calls ‘Asymmetric Dependence’ in order to both retain the
nomic relationships and explain error or misrepresentation.
Fodor holds that informational semantics is sufficient for
psychology to explain what a particular symbol represents,
but:
… if we’ve already used up all that to establish
representation, what more could be required to establish
truth? (Ibid., p. 42)
In other words, informational semantics has trouble
distinguishing:
… the conditions for representation from the conditions
for truth. The trouble is intrinsic; the conditions… are
such that, when they’re satisfied, misrepresentation
15

cannot, by that very fact, occur. (Ibid., p. 34, emphasis in
original)16
Thus, Fodor believes that content/meaning is constituted
by a nomological relation between particular internal mental
symbols expressed in the language of thought and the
instantiation of their corresponding properties in the world.
Furthermore, it is important to realise that Fodor’s theory of
content states that:
… all that matters for meaning is ‘functional’ relations
(relations of nomic covariance) between symbols and
their denotations. In particular, it doesn’t matter how that
covariation is mediated; it doesn’t matter what
mechanisms (neurological, intentional, spiritual,
psychological, or whatever) sustain the covariation.
(Fodor, 1987, p. 56, emphasis in original)

The Internalist Fence has been Painted with
Externalism
Both Internalism and Externalism claim that intentionality
(or meaning) can be explained naturalistically within an
empirical scientific framework; though Externalism
(specifically Fodor) goes one step further by claiming that
‘such familiar semantic properties as truth’ can be explained
within the bounds of science. I believe that it is this step that
sees Externalism fall off the tightrope of naturalistic inquiry
and cognitive science. This, however, does not mean that
Externalism is not a valid pursuit; it merely suggests that the
Externalist approach to meaning is unhelpful, perhaps in a
different discipline altogether, to the pursuit to scientifically
explain meaning in language production and in language
understanding. Chomsky seems to concur with such a
conclusion when he states that:
If ‘cognitive science’ is taken to be concerned with
intentional attribution, it may turn out to be an interesting
pursuit (as literature is), but it is not likely to provide
explanatory theory or to be integrated into the natural
sciences. (Chomsky, 1992, p. 209)
The Internalist approach to the explanation of
intentionality is the most, perhaps the only, promising
endeavour to couch meaning within a naturalistic (or
cognitive science) framework. The nomological relations
and asymmetric dependences that characterize Externalism
are too vague or under-defined to be properly integrated into
the natural sciences (at least for the moment, though I would
argue that this predicament is an intrinsic property of these
Externalist notions). In addition, it is arguable that many
Externalist notions, such as reference or public language,
can be rephrased in terms of Internalism17; this gives further
support to the claim that Internalism should be favoured
over Externalism in terms of a scientific approach to the
explanation of meaning in language. There are numerous
examples of how Externalist notions can be rephrased in
16
Note, however, that Fodor assumes that misrepresentation is a
valid notion, an assumption that is neither obvious nor
straightforward.
17
See, for example, Jackendoff (2002).

As discussed in Fodor (1987, p. 101 ff.; 1990, p. 59 ff).

777

terms of Internalist notions; I will outline just one here:
reference.
In opposition to the nomological relations (of reference
and meaning) and mind-world (or word-world) relations of
which the Externalists speak, the Internalists do not divorce
the act or cognitive mechanism of referring from the
reference relation itself. Thus, Chomsky maintains that
The terms themselves do not refer, at least if the term
refer is used in its natural language sense; but people can
use them to refer to things… (1992, p. 221)
In other words, Chomsky is sceptical that the Externalist
notion of reference (called R` in the context of the following
quotation)
… can be given a coherent and useful formulation as a
relation holding between expressions and some kind of
things, divorced from particular conditions and
circumstances of referring. If that is so, there will also be
no reasonable inquiry into a notion of ‘sense’ or ‘content’
that ‘fixes reference’ (R`), at least for natural language,
though there is a promising (syntactic) inquiry into
conditions for language use (including referring). (Ibid., p.
226)
In closing, Externalism appears to have different goals
and methods of studying language, goals and methods that
are arguably unhelpful to the scientific study of language
use, production, and comprehension (some Externalist
questions are altogether irrelevant to science). Internalism,
on the other hand, is a much better candidate for the
scientific study of language for it focuses on brain/mind
internal processes.
Most probably there are Externalists who agree with this
dichotomy, but Fodor is not one of them, for he believes that
his theory of content is naturalistic in the same sense that
Chomsky claims his theory to be a naturalistic study of the
mind. I would argue, however, that Fodor’s theory of
content, while likely to be useful in other disciplines such as
Epistemology, is not a scientific theory (in its current form,
and perhaps intrinsically) for it relies on such obscure
concepts (from a scientific perspective) as metaphysical
nomological relations and asymmetric dependences.
It should be clear, however, that I am not claiming that
Externalist notions (specifically the commonsense notion of
semantic reference) do not exist. What I am claiming is that
such notions are intrinsically intractable from a scientific
perspective of language because they involve concepts that
are alien to science. As Stainton (2006) states, these notions
are ‘as ‘real’ as governments, townships, by-laws, nearness,
corporations, national dishes, and so on… but, like
townships and nearness, they are invisible to the working
scientist… [and] cannot be ‘seen’ from the scientific
perspective.’ (pp. 925-926)

Brentano, F., (1874/1973). Psychology from an Empirical
Standpoint, McAlister, L. L. (ed.), Routledge &
Kegan Paul, London.
Burge, T. (1986). ‘Individualism and Psychology’. The
Philosophical Review, 95 (1), pp. 3-45.
Chomsky, N. (1972). Studies on Semantics in Generative
Grammar, Mouton, The Hague.
Chomsky, N. (1980). Rules and Representations, Columbia
University Press, New York.
Chomsky, N. (1992), ‘Explaining Language Use’,
Philosophical Topics, 20 (1), pp. 205-231.
Chomsky, N. (2000). ‘Minimalist Inquiries: The
Framework’. Step by Step: Essays on Minimalist
Syntax in Honor of Howard Lasnik. Cambridge,
Martin, R., Michaels, D., & Uriagereka, J. (eds.),
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, pp. 89-155.
Cook, V. J., & Newson, M. (1997). Chomsky’s Universal
Grammar: An Introduction, Blackwell Publishers,
Massachusetts.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information,
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Dretske, F. (1994), ‘The Explanatory Role of Information’,
Philosophical Transaction: Physical Sciences and
Engineering, 349 (1689), Artificial Intelligence and
the Mind: New Breakthroughs or Dead-Ends?, pp.
59-69.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The Language of Thought, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Fodor, J. A. (1987). Psychosemantics : The Problem of
Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Fodor, J. A. (1990). A Theory of Content and Other Essays,
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Fodor, J. A. (1994). The Elm and the Expert: Mentalese and
its Semantics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Fodor, J. A. (2000). The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way: The
Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology,
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language: Brain,
Meaning, Grammar, Evolution, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Marantz, A. (2005). "Generative Linguistics within the
Cognitive Neuroscience of Language." The
Linguistic Review, 22, pp. 429-445.
McGilvray, J., (1998), ‘Meanings Are Syntactically
Individuated and Found in the Head’, Mind and
Language, 13 (2).
Moravcsik, J. M. E. (1982). ‘Aitiational Frameworks and
the Structure of Meaning’, Acta Linguistica
Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 32, pp. 3-26.
Pietroski, P. M. (2005) ‘Meaning before Truth’, in
Contextualism in Philosophy, Preyer & Peters
(eds.), Oxford University Press.
Stainton, R. J. (2006). ‘Meaning and Reference: Some
Chomskyian Themes’. The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Language, Lepore, E. & Smith, B.
C. (eds.), Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 913-940.

References
Bezuidenhout, A. L. (2006). ‘Language as Internal’. The
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language,
Lepore, E. & Smith, B. C. (eds.), Clarendon Press,
Oxford, pp. 127-139.

778

