UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why Children Make "Better" Estimates of Fractional Magnitude than Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73z7s05g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Opfer, John E.
Thompson, Clarisaa A.
DeVries, Jeffrey M.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why Children Make “Better” Estimates of Fractional Magnitude than Adults
John E. Opfer (opfer.7@osu.edu)
245 Psychology Building, 1835 Neil Ave. Mall
Columbus, OH 43210

Clarissa A. Thompson (thompson.1345@osu.edu)
125 Psychology Building, 1835 Neil Ave. Mall
Columbus, OH 43210

Jeffrey M. DeVries (devries.19@osu.edu)
255 Psychology Building, 1835 Neil Ave. Mall
Columbus, OH 43210
Abstract

graders tested by Siegler and Opfer (2003) generated
logarithmic distributions of estimates (e.g., estimating 150
to be closer to 1000 than to 1), suggesting that children
initially use a representation of numerical value that is
consistent with Fechner’s Law and that is widespread
among species, human infants, and time-pressured adults
(Dehaene, Dehaene-Lamberts, & Cohen, 1998; Moyer &
Landauer, 1967). In contrast, a large majority of sixth
graders and adults in the same study produced linear
distributions of estimates (e.g., estimating 150 to be closer
to 1 than to 1000), and about half of fourth graders produced
estimates that were best fit by each function (Siegler &
Opfer, 2003), suggesting that the use of a linear
representation of number becomes more widespread with
age and experience.
Although evidence of young children’s poor estimation
accuracy and logarithmic representation of numeric value
has been drawn from a wide range of tasks (see Siegler &
Booth, 2005, for review), all of the tasks share an important
property—accuracy could be attained either from
representational changes (Siegler & Opfer, 2003) or from
improving estimation strategies (Dowker et al., 1996;
Hiebert & Wearne, 1986). To address this issue, we sought
to provide a particularly strong test for the representational
change hypothesis by examining development on an
estimation task that favors the logarithmic representation at
the expense of the linear one. Our reasoning was that if
people learn to perform more accurately the task simply by
improving general estimation skills (e.g., estimation
strategies), estimation on such a task should also improve.
However, if people learn to perform more accurately on the
task by automatizing use of a linear representation,
estimation on this task should suffer with age and
experience.
One case in which an automatic linear representation
would be misleading is the estimation of fractional
magnitudes. Specifically, we propose that adults’ success in
using a linear representation of number has an unintended
negative consequence: by automatizing that 150 is closer to
1 than to 1000, adults are subject to a powerful cognitive
illusion in which 1/150 seems closer to 1/1 than to 1/1000;
in contrast, children’s belief that 150 is closer to 1000 than

Development of estimation has been ascribed to two sources:
(1) a change from logarithmic to linear representations of
number and (2) development of general estimation skills. To
test the representational change hypothesis, we gave children
and adults an estimation task in which an automatic, linear
representation is less adaptive than the logarithmic
representation: estimating the value of salaries given in
fractional notation. The representational change hypothesis
generated the surprising (and accurate) prediction that when
estimating the magnitude of salaries given in fractional
notation, young children would outperform adults, whereas
when estimating the magnitude of the same salaries given in
decimal notation, adults would outperform children. Further
support for the representational change hypothesis came from
a training study, in which children were given feedback on
their estimates of numerical magnitude; as expected, children
who improved their estimates of the value of whole numbers
subsequently harmed their estimates of fractional value.
Keywords: cognitive development; numeric representations;
magnitude estimation

Development of Estimation Accuracy
Numerical estimation is a pervasive process, both in school
and in everyday life. Because it plays a central role in a
wide range of activities in the lives of children and adults,
educators have assigned a high priority to improving
estimation for at least the past 25 years (e.g., Geary, 1994).
Despite this prolonged effort, estimation remains a process
that children find difficult. Whether estimating distance,
amount of money, number of discrete objects, answers to
arithmetic problems, or locations of numbers on number
lines, 5- to 10-year-olds’ estimates are highly inaccurate
(see Booth & Siegler, 2006, for review).
Recent findings suggest that an important source of
children’s difficulty with numerical estimation is their use
of an inappropriate representation of numerical value.
Specifically, children often use an immature logarithmic
representation in situations where accurate estimation
requires use of a linear representation (Opfer & Siegler, in
press; Siegler & Opfer, 2003). For example, when asked to
estimate the locations of numbers on number lines with 0 at
one end and 1,000 at the other, the large majority of second

1361

Study 1: Age Differences in Fraction
Estimation

to 1 protects them from this illusion. Thus, if the
representational change hypothesis is correct, young
children—despite their poor understanding of fractions and
poor estimation skills generally—would perform more
accurately on a fractional magnitude task than would adults.

Method
Participants Participants were 24 second graders (M = 8.4
years, SD = 0.40) attending a suburban school in a middleclass neighborhood, and 24 undergraduates (M = 19.4 years,
SD = .77) enrolled in an introductory psychology course at a
large Midwestern university in the United States. Two
research assistants (male and female) served as
experimenters.

Estimation of Fractional Magnitude
Far from suggesting that children would perform more
accurately than adults when estimating fractional
magnitudes, previous work has indicated that fractions pose
enormous difficulties for both children and young adults,
leading them to provide grossly mistaken answers to simple
addition and subtraction problems (Carpenter et al., 1981).
One reason for this difficulty is that the majority of children
and young adults fail to represent the whole magnitude
denoted by fractions and instead represent only the
magnitude of the denominator or numerator.
This interpretation of young adults’ approach to fractions
led us to make two predictions about how they might make
estimates about the value of quantities expressed in
fractional notation, such as when estimating the placement
of a salary (e.g., $1/60 minutes) on a line that begins with
one salary (e.g., $1/minute) and ends with another (e.g.,
$1/1440 minutes). The first prediction was that if adults
ignore the fractional context and compare only the value of
the denominators in the salary, their linear representation of
the denominator would lead them to make radically
incorrect estimates of monetary value. This inaccuracy is
predicted by the fact that the relation between the numeral
expressed in the denominator and the magnitude denoted by
the whole fraction is provided by a power function rather
than by a linear function. For example, although 60 is closer
to 1 than to 1440, k/60 is closer to k/1440 than it is to k/1.
The second prediction was that if children also ignore the
fractional context, their logarithmic representation of the
denominator would have a correcting effect and thereby
lead to more accurate performance on the task than
performance of adults. This prediction stems from the fact
that the power relation between the value of the
denominator and the magnitude of the fraction is somewhat
similar to that of a logarithmic function, where differences
at the low end of the range are very high and differences at
the high end of the range are very low. Thus, for example,
the natural logarithm of 60 is closer to the natural logarithm
of 1440 than to the natural logarithm of 1, much as k/60 is
closer to k/1440 than it is k/1.
Although the combination of ignoring the fractional
context and having a logarithmic representation of number
could lead children to outperform adults, this is not a trivial
prediction: “’Performance improves with age’ is as close to
a law as any generalization that has emerged from the study
of cognitive development” (Siegler, 2004, p. 2). On the
other hand, if shifting from logarithmic to linear
representations is the source of improvements in estimation
rather than the development of general estimation skills,
performance in estimating fractional values would decline
with age.

Tasks On two different tasks, participants were asked to
estimate the total amount of money a person would make at
a given salary (e.g., $1/hour) by placing a mark on a 20 cm
“money line”. The monetary value of the salaries to be
estimated were held constant across the two tasks, but we
varied the notation for expressing these salaries. On the
fractional units task, both the value of the salaries to be
estimated (e.g., $ 1/60 minutes) and the endpoints of the
money line ($1/1 minute, $1/1440 minutes) were expressed
in fractional units. On the decimal units task, salaries and
endpoints were expressed in decimal units (e.g., $.0167 per
minute, $1 per minute, $0.0007 per minute).
Design and Procedure Participants were told that they
would receive a series of “money lines” and that values on
the money line represented an amount of money that a
person might make. For each problem, the experimenter
indicated the two endpoints of the money line, indicated the
target salary above the line, and asked the participant to
make a hatch mark on the line to indicate where the target
salary would go. For example, in the fractional units task,
the participant was asked, “If this is $1 per minute and this
is $1 per 1440 minutes, where would $1 per 60 minutes
go?” The order of tasks was counterbalanced over subjects,
and the order of problems within each task was randomized.
Half of the participants solved problems with the smaller
salary on the left; the other half solved the same problems
with the smaller salary on the right.

Results and Discussion
We first converted all estimates (i.e., hatch marks) to a
numeric code (0 – 1) by measuring the distance between the
endpoint of the scale and the student’s estimate (0 – 20 cm)
and dividing by the total length of the scale (20 cm). To
assess estimation performance across the two tasks, we
examined the mean absolute error for each subject, which
was calculated using the formula,

| actuali " estimatei |
7
i =1
7

MAbsErr = !

We then conducted a 2 (age group: 8-year-olds, adults) X
2 (task: fractional units, decimal units) repeated-measures
ANOVA on the mean absolute error scores for each subject
(see Figure 1, where accuracy reflects the inverse of the
mean absolute error). As predicted, the decimal units task

1362

elicited fewer errors (MAbsErr, M = .27, SD = .16) than the
fractional units task (MAbsErr, M = .57, SD = .17), F (1,
138) = 64.58, p < .001. Age and task also produced
interactive effects on mean absolute errors, F (1, 138) =
21.0, p < .001, leading us to analyze each task separately.
On the fractional units task, both adults and children were
less accurate (p’s < .05) than random responding (modeled
in three Monte Carlo simulations), but adults’ overall errors
(MAbsErr, M = 0.65, SD = 0.16) were even greater than
children’s (MAbsErr, M = .48, SD = .13), t(46) = 4.16, p <
0.001, d = 1.23. To determine whether the large errors in
both age groups came from ignoring fractional context, we
first compared estimates on the present 1/1-1/1400 fraction
line to estimates provided on a number line task without any
fractional context (i.e., the 0-1000 number line used by
Siegler and Opfer [2003]). As Figure 2a illustrates, the
fractional context had no effect on estimates, whereas the
value of the denominator had a large effect on estimates. To
examine this more closely, we regressed median estimates
against the value of the denominator using the logarithmic
and linear regression functions. As predicted, the
logarithmic function (R2 = .99) provided a much better fit to
children’s estimates than to all three sets of randomly
generated data (average log R2 = .18), and the logarithmic
function also provided a better fit than did the linear
function (R2 = .75). In contrast, the linear function (R2 =
.94) provided a better fit to adults’ estimates than to
randomly generated data (lin R2 = .12), and the linear
function provided a slightly better fit than did the
logarithmic function (log R2 = .90).
To determine the link between the fit of the two functions
and overall accuracy, we fit each function to individual
participants’ estimates, and then compared the performance
of those participants (regardless of age) who used a
logarithmic representation of the denominator (71% of
participants in total) versus those who used a linear
representation. As expected, the linear group (71% adults)
provided substantially more errors (MAbsErr, M = .68, SD =
.13) than the logarithmic group (41% adults) (MAbsErr, M
= .52, SD = .13), t(46) = 3.28, p < 0.001, d = .97.
Thus, when making estimates of fractional magnitude,
both children and adults tended to ignore the fractional
context and to focus exclusively on the value of the
denominator. This focus on the denominator, however, had
different effects on accuracy, depending on whether
participants’ underlying representation of the denominator
was logarithmic (mostly children) or linear (mostly adults).
This difference in underlying representation explains why
children provided more accurate estimates than did adults
on this task.
A number of alternative explanations for the superior
performance of children in the previous task might be
proposed. Perhaps the children we found just happened to
be more mathematically capable, more attentive, or more
motivated than the adults we recruited, thereby undermining
the developmental trajectory we proposed. Alternatively,
children may have been better at reasoning about money,

rates, time, or the specific salaries involved than were
adults, thereby limiting the developmental trajectory we
proposed to one concerning these variables rather than to
one concerning fractional magnitudes. To rule out these
alternative explanations, we examined performance on the
decimal units task, which also involved money, rates, time,
the same specific magnitudes, and the same subjects,
thereby offering children all of the possible benefits that
they might have obtained on the previous task save one: the
fractional notation, which was the variable we hypothesized
to elicit their superior performance.
On the decimal units task, children’s overall errors
(MAbsErr, M = 0.35, SD = 0.13) were indeed much greater
than adults’ (MAbsErr, M = .19, SD = .15), t(46) = 4.03, p <
0.001, d = 1.19, indicating that previous effects did not
result from our finding extraordinary children or children
being generally better at reasoning about money, rates, time,
or the specific magnitudes tested. Further, adults’ accuracy
was better than that of randomly generated responses,
whereas children’s accuracy was not. To determine whether
adults’ superior performance on this task resulted from their
hypothesized use of a linear representation of the decimal
units, we regressed their median estimates against the actual
value (Figure 2b). As predicted, the fit of the linear function
(R2 = .92) was better than the fit of the logarithmic function
(R2 = .86), and the linear function also provided a better fit
to adults’ estimates than to random responses (average R2 =
.51). We performed the same analysis on children’s
estimates by regressing their median estimates against the
value of decimal units. As predicted, the fit of the
logarithmic function (R2 = .54) was slightly better than the
fit of the linear function (R2 = .51), though clearly neither
function provided a very good fit, with only the logarithmic
providing a better fit to children’s estimates than to
randomly generated data (average log R2 = .38, average lin
R2 = .51). (Possibly some children interpreted decimal
values as analogous to whole numbers; normally children do
not encounter decimals until well after first and second
grade.) Finally, when we compared the performance of
those participants (regardless of age) who used a linear
representation of the decimal versus those who used a
logarithmic representation, participants who used a linear
representation provided substantially fewer overall errors
(MAbsErr, M = .19, SD = .15) than those who used a
logarithmic one (MAbsErr, M = .34, SD = .13), t(46) = 3.66,
p < 0.001, d = 1.08.
Last, we attempted to examine the processes by which
participants generated their estimates. We had hypothesized
that adults’ poor estimation in the fractional units task
would be produced by an automatic linear representation of
the denominator, but an alternative view is that it was
produced by a poor strategy. Specifically, in Siegler and
Opfer (2003), adults’ linear estimates were seemingly
produced by their use of a landmark strategy, in which they
mentally subdivided the line into quartiles (e.g., from 0-250,
250-500, 500-750, and 750-1000). Consistent with this
strategy use, adults’ estimates in Siegler and Opfer (2003)

1363

Study 2: Relation between Integer Estimation
and Fraction Estimation

became increasingly variable with the distance between
quartiles and the numbers-to-be-estimated (r = .63), whereas
no such relation was observed for children’s estimates. To
examine whether children and adults used a similar strategy
in our tasks, we also regressed the standard deviation in
estimates against the distance of the number in the
denominator from the nearest quartile. As in Siegler and
Opfer (2003), children did not appear to use the quartile
strategy on either of our tasks (rs < .24, ns). For adults on
the fractional task, distance from quartile also did not
account for a significant amount of variability in estimates
(r = .00); however, distance from quartile did account for a
significant amount of variability in adults’ estimates on the
decimal units task (r = .79, p < .01). Thus, while adult
accuracy on the decimal units may have stemmed from
strategic performance rather than automatic use of a linear
representation, their inaccurate performance on the
fractional task did not seem to be strategic.

Results of Study 1 suggested that learning to generate
accurate, linear estimates of numerical quantity (as adults
do) comes at the cost of accurately estimating fractional
values (as children do). We tested this hypothesis directly in
Study 2, where we trained children to generate accurate
estimates on a number line task and examined their
subsequent performance on a fraction line task.

Method
Participants Participants were 32 second and third graders
(mean age = 7.98 years, SD = 0.85) attending a suburban
school in a middle-class neighborhood. Twelve of these
students (38%) were excluded from further training because
their pretest estimates were already best fit by the linear
function. There were 7 boys and 13 girls (M = 7.66, SD =
0.61) who received training. Two female research assistants
served as experimenters.
Number Line Estimation Task All number line problems
consisted of a 20 cm line with the left endpoint labeled “0,”
the right endpoint labeled “1000,” and with the number to
be estimated appearing 2 cm above the midpoint of the
number line. Participants were asked to place the following
numbers on a number line by making a hatch mark: 2, 5, 18,
27, 34, 42, 56, 78, 100, 111, 122, 133, 147, 150, 156, 162,
163, 172, 179, 187, 246, 306, 366, 426, 486, 546, 606, 666,
722, 725, 738, 754, 818, 878, and 938. These numbers
maximized the discriminability of logarithmic and linear
functions by oversampling the low end of the range,
minimized the influence of specific knowledge (that 500 is
halfway between 0 and 1000), and tested predictions about
the range of numbers where estimates would most differ
between pretest and posttest.

Figure 1: Accuracy for both age groups on each task: a)
fractional units and b) decimal units. Dashed lines represent
the levels of accuracy obtained in three Monte Carlo
simulations. Asterisks represent the number of simulations
differing reliably (p < .05) from observed responses.

Fractional Units Task The fractional units task used in
Study 2 was the same as the fractional units task used in
Study 1.
Design and Procedure Children were randomly assigned to
one of two groups: one group received feedback during
training, whereas the other group did not receive feedback.
Children in both groups completed the number line
estimation task at pretest, over three training trial blocks,
and at posttest. On pretest and posttest, children in both
groups were presented the same 22 problems without
feedback. For children in the feedback group, each training
trial block included a feedback phase and a test phase. The
feedback phase included either one item on which children
received feedback (Trial Block 1) or three items on which
they received feedback (Trial Blocks 2 and 3). The test
phase included 10 items on which children did not receive
feedback; this test phase occurred immediately after the
feedback phase in each training trial block. Children in the

Figure 2: Median estimates for children (left) and adults
(right) on each task: a) fractional units, shown with Opfer &
Siegler’s (2003) 0-1000 number line data and b) decimal
units.

1364

(see Figure 4). As expected, the logarithmic function (R2 =
.95) provided a much better fit to non learners’ estimates
than to all three sets of randomly generated data (log R2 =
.00 - .16), and the logarithmic function also provided a
better fit than did the linear function (R2 = .68). In contrast,
the linear function (R2 = .87) provided a better fit to
learners’ estimates than to randomly generated data (lin R2 =
.00 -.12), and the linear function provided a slightly better
fit than did the logarithmic function (log R2 = .85).

no feedback group received the same number of estimation
problems, but they never received feedback.
On the feedback problems, children were told to make a
hatch mark indicating where they believed the numerosity
was supposed to go, and then the experimenter would show
him/her how close the mark was to the actual location of the
numerosity by making a second hatch mark on the number
line. Children’s answers that deviated from the correct hatch
mark by less than 10% were described to the children as
being “really quite close”, whereas children’s answers that
deviated by more than 10% were described as “a bit too
high/too low”.

Results and Discussion
Our principal analysis was to compare the performance of
“learners,” those children who were best fit by the linear
function on the posttest number line estimation task, to “non
learners,” those children who were best fit by the
logarithmic function on the posttest number line estimation
task, on the fractional units task.
As predicted, children who learned to provide linear
estimates on the number line task were less accurate (p’s <
.01) than random responding (modeled in three Monte Carlo
simulations), whereas children who continued to generate
logarithmic estimates on the number line task were not
different from random responding. Learners’ overall errors
(MAbsErr, M = .57, SD = .02) were greater than non
learners’ overall errors (MAbsErr, M = .41, SD = .01), F (1,
19) = 7.499, d = 10.12. As predicted, children who
continued to generate logarithmic estimates on the number
line task provided more accurate estimates of fractional
magnitude (M = .59, SD = .02) than did children who
learned to provide linear estimates of integer magnitude (M
= .43, SD = .01), F (1, 19) = 7.499, p < .05, d = 10.12 (see
Figure 3).

Figure 4: Median estimates for learners and non learners on
fractional units task.

General Discussion
We tested the general claim that age-related improvements
in estimation are caused by the development of linear
representations. Previous support for this hypothesis came
from age-differences in performance on tasks in which a
linear representation necessarily yields accurate estimates
(Opfer & Siegler, in press; Siegler & Opfer, 2003), which
has left it unclear whether the development of
representations (Siegler & Opfer, 2003) or improvements in
general estimation skills could be responsible for estimation
improvement (Dowker et al., 1996; Hiebert & Wearne,
1986). In these studies, we sought to provide a particularly
strong test for the representational change hypothesis by
examining development on an estimation task that favors
the logarithmic representation at the expense of the linear
one (i.e., estimation of fractional magnitudes). An
interesting prediction generated by the representational
change hypothesis was that children would outperform
adults when making estimates of fractional magnitudes.
The results of the present studies supported this
hypothesis. When estimating the value of a salary by
estimating its place on a scale expressed in fractional
notation (i.e., on a scale where a logarithmic mental scaling
of salaries provided a more accurate gauge than a linear
mental scaling), children outperformed adults. Clearly this
difference did not stem from children having greater
mathematical skills than adults. Rather, it appears that
children used a logarithmic representation of the

Figure 3: Accuracy for learners and non learners. Dashed
lines represent the levels of accuracy obtained in three
Monte Carlo simulations. Asterisks represent the number of
simulations differing reliably (p < .01) from observed
responses.
To determine whether the large errors in both the learner
and non learner groups came from ignoring fractional
context, we regressed the value of the fractional
denominator against the median estimate of fractional value

1365

denominator’s value as a guide for placing their estimates,
whereas adults used a linear representation of the
denominator’s value as a guide for placing their estimates.
The clearest evidence for this hypothesis came from a
comparison of estimates on our 1/1 – 1/1440 task and
Siegler and Opfer’s (2003) 0-1000 task: as Figure 2a
illustrates, the two sets of estimates are nearly
indistinguishable, with the fit of the logarithmic function
being very high in both tasks for children (this study, log R2
= .99; S&O, log R2 = .95) and the fit of the linear function
being very high in both tasks for adults (this study, lin R2 =
.94, S&O, lin R2 = 1).
In contrast, when estimating the value of a salary by
estimating its place on a scale expressed in decimal notion
(i.e., on a scale where a linear mental scaling provides a
more accurate gauge than a logarithmic scaling), adults
outperformed children. Adults’ superior performance on this
decimal units task also suggests that children’s superiority
on the fractional units task did not stem from children being
smarter than adults, paying more attention, taking more
time, being more motivated, or having a superior
understanding of money, time, rates, or the specific
magnitudes assessed. Rather, adults’ superior understanding
of the decimal system was an advantage on the decimal
units task, though a hindrance on the fractional units task.
The consequences of training, in Study 2, provided still
more direct evidence for the hypothesis that short-term, as
well as long-term, changes in estimation accuracy stem from
changes in numerical representation rather than independent
changes in estimation skills or general mathematical
knowledge.
How might we generalize our findings across other
fractional magnitude tasks? One interesting class of k/n
problems (e.g., comparing 1/1 vs. 1/1000) are those where k
> 1 (e.g., comparing 10/10 vs. 10/1000). Previously, a ratiobias has been observed (Denes-Raj, Epstein, & Cole, 1995),
wherein people judge the occurrence of an event of low
probability as less likely when its probability is represented
by a ratio of smaller (e.g., 1/100) than of larger numbers
(e.g., 10/1000). On these problems, the representational
change hypothesis predicts much worse performance from
children owing to their linear representation of the 1-100
increment. If correct, this finding would highlight that
children’s inaccuracy—like adults’ inaccuracy—can stem
from correct representations being applied inappropriately.
Finally, we should emphasize that we do not interpret
these findings as a challenge to the truism that “performance
improves with age” (which of course it does), nor to argue
that children are better estimators than adults are (normally
they are not). Rather, we believe that the finding of children
outperforming adults in these tasks is significant for a very
different reason: alternative hypotheses are most usefully
distinguished when they are tested against events with a low
base-rate of probability. We believe that this principle is a
particularly important one for making causal inferences in
the development of mathematical cognition and in
developmental psychology more broadly. Finally, on the

basis of this type of event, we believe that we have provided
strong evidence for children and adults possessing different
representations of numerical magnitude.

References
Booth, J. L., & Siegler, R. S. (2006). Developmental and
individual differences in pure numerical estimation,
Developmental Psychology, 41, 189-201.
Carpenter, T. P., Corbitt, M. K., Kepner, H. S., Lindquist,
M. M., & Reys, R. E. (1981). Results from the second
mathematics assessment of the National Assessment of
Educational Progress. Washington, DC: National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics.
Dehaene, S., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., & Cohen, L. (1998).
Abstract representations of numbers in the animal and
human brain. Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 355 - 361.
Denes-Raj, V., Epstein, S., & Cole, J. (1995). The generality
of the ratio-bias phenomenon. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1083-1092.
Dowker, A., Flood, A., Griffiths, H., Harriss, L., & Hook, L.
(1996). Estimation strategies of four groups.
Mathematical Cognition, 2, 113-135.
Geary, D. C. (1994). Children's mathematical development:
Research and practical implications. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1986). Procedures over concepts:
The acquisition of decimal number knowledge. In J.
Hiebert (Ed.), Conceptual and procedural knowledge:
The case of mathematics (pp. 199–223). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Moyer, R. S., & Landauer, T. K. (1967). Time required for
judgments of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 15191520.
Opfer, J. E., & Siegler, R. S. (in press). Representational
change and children’s numerical estimation. Cognitive
Psychology.
Siegler, R. S. (2004). U-shaped interest in U-shaped
development--and what it means. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 5, 1-10
Siegler, R. S. & Booth, J. L. (2005). Development of
numerical estimation: A review. In J. I. D. Campbell
(Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp 197-212).
New York: Taylor and Francis.
Siegler, R.S., & Opfer, J.E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science, 14, 237-243.

1366

